A3218 15747015 104618
Fides Catholica OR, THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholick Church: In Eighteen Grand Ordinances. Referring to the Word, Sacraments and Prayer, In Purity, Number and Nature. Catholically maintained, and publickly taught against HERETICKS of all Sorts. With the Solutions of many proper and profitable Questions sutable to to the Nature of each Ordinance treated of. By WIL. ANNAND M. A. late of Univer∣sity Col. Oxon. Now Minister of the Gospel in Leighton Beaudezart, in the County of Bedford. Thus saith the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good old way and walke therein, Jer. 6.16. State cum eo, & stabitis: Requiescite in eo, & quieti eritis, Aug. Con. l. 4. c. 12. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Edward Brewster, at the sign of the Crane in St. Paul's Church-yard, Anno Dom. 1661.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir Francis Norreys Knight, &c of Weston upon the Green, in the Coun. of Oxon. Right Honourable, WHen first the wise Disposer of all States and Persons called me into his Vine∣yard, he apointed me my splace and task, (during my residence in the uni∣versity) by your honours Patronage and meanes. There were two noysome weeds with which the Garden of the Lord, which is his Church, was then overspread, men being (as if the last
times had been come,) lovers of themselves: and having (to colour that) a form of Godli∣nesse, which to pluck up so far as I was able was my purpose and resolution at my entry. What was done in order to the formr is yet in the closet, but what was done in reference to the latter is now brought to the house op, my affections leading me still for the good of that people, whose teacher, in those days of er∣rour and darknesse,  by Gods designment was, and whose attention to the truth of what was then taught, did generally appear unto my comfort, and (I hope) their own good by their conforming thereunto, though contrary to the practise of that age, wherein these follow∣ing Doctrines were delivered, men generally giving up themselves to be shaken to and fro by every wind of doctrine, speaking evil of, & devising devises against those that either stood to, or taught the truth of the good old way. Which last made your honor once merrily shew me, that if I continued so preaching, I should get the whole country about my eares; but, Sir, you know I did and still do continue so preaching, that is preaching down the sins of the times; and
my eares, though sometimes they have glowed, are yet untouched, for I never feared, nor valu∣ed the tongues of men, and against their vio∣lence the Kings laws protected me. Sir, My design was to maintain the power, dignity and purity of these three grand ordi∣nances, the Word, Sacraments and Prayer, which were trod underfoot by the unreasonable men of that age, who like swine rooted up all things though establish'd of God, that were but tend∣ing to order, decency or uniformity, that their own opinions, though contrary to all Scripture and their own practises, though contrary to all Saints, might alone be nourished and followed; so highly did they love themselves. The doctrine of the word was throughly handled, and also that of the Sacraments, though here it be impres'd with some addition; Prayer was not at all touched upon, God casting me providentially upon subjects of another na∣ture, untill I gave a farewell to your honour and that people. Knowing with what the inhabitants of that place was most affected, I was zealous, after three years divertisment, to fall upon that or∣dinance
of prayer, and more largely in some par∣ticulars go through the nature of the Sacra∣ments, and to publish all unto the world. And since Epistles Dedicatory in this kind are usual, unto whose patronage can I better come then unto your Worships, being assured alrea∣dy of your good will, both to the Doctrine taught, and to the Teacher of it, as appeared by those many noble favours which your bounty was pleased to throw upon him. Accept then, Right Honourable, into your hand, what for the most part you heard by the ear, for should I say all, I am perswaded your Honor would not believe me, here are only the main pillars upon which the doctrine stood, with some small addition in the questions, the rest are enlargments as they dropped from my pen in my Christmas and Lent meditations. Hoping for your Honours acceptance, I close this Epistle, assuring your Honor that he is not unmindful when he is before God of your self and family, who once was and still desires to be, From my study at Leighton July 23. 1661. Right Hourable, Yours, to serve you in the Lord Iesus, WIL. ANNAND.
TO THE READER. IT being my lot to be called and separated unto the work of the Gospel, when He∣reticks had covered the Land, as once the Frogs did Egypt, no greater service could be done to the Church, then to hold up the old truth, in its splendour & pu∣rity, that men might not be drawn from it in the darknesse of heresie and novelty, and comparing the old with the new lights, they might straightway say that the old was better. At that time I stood with these following truths to keep my people from defection and Apostacy, delivering tha doctrin that was anciently given to the Saints, that upon knowing principles they might the more earnestly contend for the same, and now the same is published, (amongst other cogent reasons) for Buttresses, confirming them in that faith where∣in they were taught in those days of error, especially in regard that they may live to see the ordinances advanced according to what is here asserted, since our late reformation from Athe∣isme.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and by consequence we are subject to failty. If I had (for my own particular) no error, I were not a man, and if I did not confesse them, I were no Christian, yet I trust thou shalt find in this book no errour so great, for which I should deserve stoneing, and if there be, let him that is without er∣rour cast the first stone, and the Author shall have time to re∣ctifie his mistakes particularly for trusting too much to his me∣mory in the matter of the Emperor Charles his motto, pag. 37. which should have been decem praeceptorum decalogi custos est Carolus, & the Printer to repent of his over sights, and omitting some marginal citations necessary to have been inserted. However it be, if thou read these lines with approbation, thou shalt be respected, if otherwise, no less honoured: but if thou raile a them, or their composer, thy words shall be slight∣ed. William Annand.
IN DIGNISSIMUM, elaborati hujusce operis, Authorem summum suum, . ITe! ite erroris Tenebrae! Ad Stygias merito umbras descendite Ubi nox aeterna habitat. Jam satis umbrarum, dirae{que} caliginis; Vester b Orco terris emisit Pater. Christi laborat Sponsa. Eclipsin patitur Ecclesia. Ite (malum!) Solitis incumbite remis, Saxa{que} Sisyphi, Juditer delabentia, Frustra revolvite. En Phoebus oritur; cujus matutinum vel jubar Ad fugandas valet Fanatici erroris nebulas. En Phoebus oritur; acutis armatus radiis Ad extirpandam foseresin, deleudam{que} funditus
Hercules strenuus! qui clava Biblica Hydram a fronte adorieris Tantum ab est, ut, ad strepitum Hujus Draconis horridum, expavescas. Plaudite Togatae Gentes, plaudite, Invictus in arenam jam nunc descendit Agoni∣sta. Nec de frivolis quibusdam nugis. Sed pro, Aris & focis dimicatur. Veritatis causa agitur. Fide{que} Catholica ab infandis Erronum contumeliis vindicatur. Aspiret studiis divina caelitus gratia Favonius. Ut in sui nominis gloriam Ecclesiae imolumentum, & Reipub. tutelam Tendant omnia. E D. H. A. M. e Col. in Oxon.
THE AUTHOR TO HIS BOOK. SHake off this panick fit, there is no fear poor heart to cause a fear. Englan's not what it was, its Holy Ground, since CHARLES was crown'd, The Bores, the Wolfs, the Foxes, and wild men, are chain'd or watch'd in den. The Crown, the Mitre, Cassock and the ✚ Hath purifi'd the land, remov'd the dross Of Schisms, Factions, Errors, Heresie. Truth's got her palace, Church her Armoury. Then shake off dull Dely, and now at lengh, With man-like srengh, Go thou the rounds of Albions soyl, and view Phanatique Crew, And with thy plainer Rhtrock, cause them say, This Old is the best way. That they may learn an love, both fear and serve Gods Laws, Christs Church, and from them never swerve, Yea leaving Satans Syagoges may turn Into our Temples, there the incense burn.
So with thy faithfull Optick, digitate and shew The way that's new; Make known that Via, Lactea, Heavenly path, Cal'd Catholick Faith, In which our Fathers walk'd, and walking were Secur, d by Angels care: Fear, nor the Frowns, nor surly looks of those, Who Truth and Order's Popery doth oppose. Inform the Quaking sinner to his face There's Revrence due to Person, Time and Place. Hold out thy Lamp, present thy spiced Wine, They'r both Divine. And thy Baptismal water make appear As Jordan's clear. A ✚ is there, 'tis true, declare its loss Was to the Church a ✚. Salute each house with Peace, and to each eye, Of all thy Treasure make discovery. If any sume, bite lip, or wag their head, Abide not there, the Son of Peace is fled: Put on this Pilgrimes weed, poor Baby mine, And Heavens shine Upon thy weak endeavours: by success much, Add daily to the Church. Thy Fathers Blessing thou hast also got, and now Go forth, and prosper thou.
AN INDEX Directing to the ORDINANCES AND QUESTIONS Contained and discussed in this TREATISE. Of the Church, page 1. Questions. I. WHether the single Testimony of the Church be to be received in matters of faith. pag. 19 II. Whether the Church hath power to ordain Ceremonies, not ordained of God. p. 18 III. Whether the Church hath power to compel any irregular person to her Ordinances. p. 24 IV. Whether the Civil Magistrate hath power over, or in the Church of Christ; And if he have, whether his Law be binding to the Consciences of men. p. 30.
V. Whether the Segregated Churches now in England, be true Churches. p. 40. VI. What may justifie a mans separation from a true Church. p. 75. VII. Whether more religions then one are to be tollerated, where the true Church is established. p. 84. VIII. Wherein consists the individuality, or singlenesse, unity or onenesse of the true Church. p. 87. IX. Why is the true Church called holy. p. 90. X. Why is the true and holy Church called Catholick. p. 91. XI. Whether the Elect only be true members of the Church. p. 93 XII. What are the markes of a true Church. p. 95. Of the Scripture. p. 99. Questions. I. Whether the Scripture be the word of God. p. 143. II. Whether the Scripture ought to be mans only rule. p. 148. III. Whether men may come to a saving knowledge of God with∣out the Scripture. p. 150. IV. Whether pefection may be attibuted to the Scripture. p. 152. V. Whether salvation may be had by single knowledge of the Scripture. p. 154. VI. What may perswade one that doubts to believe the truth of the Scriptures. p. 156. VII. How fr the Saints may be our rule besides the Scripture. p. 158. VIII. Whether the bookes called Apocrypha be not Scripture. p. 160.
IX. Why would God comunicate his to his Church by writting of the Scripure. p. 162. X. Whether men be bound to believe all that is in the Scripture. p. 164. Of Reading the Scripture. p. 165. Questions. I. Whether there be a God as is declared in Scripture. p. 175. II. Whether God be a spirit. p. 178. III. Whether there be but one God. p. 180. IV. Whether there be three persons in the Godhad, and how these persons do agree. p. 181. V. Why are Kings and Magistrates called Gods, and Rebellion to be like witccraft in Scripture. p. 191. VI. What was that Image wherein God made man, and why was man created naked. p. 194. VII. Whether the reading of the ceremonial law be profitable to a bliever? or whether any part of that law be established under the Gospel. p. 196. VIII. Why would God suffer his dearest Saints to lye under such sad fflictis as are mentioned in Scripture, and whether the book of Jo be a reall hicty. p. 211. IX. Whether there be any diffece betwixt the old and new tament, and why the Scriptures are called a Testament. p. 215. X. W are there some things in Scripture hard to be understood, and whether the Scripture can dwel richly in ose that cannot reade. p. 218.
Of the Sabbath. p. 221. Questions. I. Whether the keeping of a sabbath be a ceremony and abolished by Christ. p. 235. II. Whether it be lawfull to make feasts on the sabbath. p. 236. III. Whether sporting or gaming is to be followed upon the sab∣bath. p. 273. IV. Why did God give charge concerning the resting of beasts upon the sabbath. p. 239. V. Why did not God give Charge concerning a wifes resting up∣on the sabbath. p. 240. VI. Why is not the change of the sabbath in Scripture mentioned. p. 241. VII. Whether the Church may command any other day to be rested on beside the sabbath. p. 243. VIII. Why doth God put a Remember before the Commandment of the sabbath only. p. 245. IX. Whether the first day of the week may be termed sabbath or sunday. p. 247. X. Why is the sabbath called Holy. p. 251. Of a Fast. p. 252. Questions. I. Whether the fasts of the Church of Rome differ from those of the Church Catholick. p. 249.
II. Whether fasting be not a ceremoniall or Iewish Rite. p. 251. III. Why is the fast of Lent observed by the Christian Church. p. 252. IV. Why are the fast of the weekes of Ember observed by the Church. p. 255. V. Whether it would bring advantage to the Church to have those dayes again observed. p. 257. VI. Whether it might not be an acceptable service to have an annuall fast for the crimes lately acted in England. p. 259. Of a Feast. p. 260. Questions. I. Whether the feasts of the Church Catholick differ from those of the Church of Rome. p. 270. II. Whether the Festivals of the Church of England may law∣fully be observed. p. 271. III. Why are bonefiers made in England, upon the feast of the fifth of November. p. 174. IV. Whether the time of a martyrs death, be a proper time for feasting. p. 275. V. Whether the feast of Philip and Jacob be not prophaned p. 276
Of Church or Temple. p. 279. Questions. I. Whether those places may be consecrated. p. 287. II. Whether those places may be termed holy. p. 289. III. Whether such Churches as have been erected by Romanists may be used by Catholicks. p. 290. IV. Whether at a Christians entry into those place, he may per∣forme his devotion. p. 292. V. VVhether it be lawfull to have musick in our Churches. p. 294. Of ministerial ordination. p. 290. Questions. I. VVhether ordination may better a Ministers gifts. p. 300. II. VVhether a Minister may renounce his ordination. p. 301. III. VVhether the ministerial office be to continue alway in the world. p. 302. IV. VVhether it be lawfull to hear an unordained man preach. p. 304- V. VVhether an ordained person may have an office in the Com∣mon-wealth. p. 306
Of Catechising. p. 309. Questions. I. VVhether or how catechising differs from preaching. p. 315. II. Whether preaching be to be preferred before it. p. 316. Of preaching. p. 319. Questions. I. VVhether Gosel preachers ought to have a setle mainten∣ance. p. 325. II. VVhether an Heretical or upstart Teacher may be known from the true. p. 330. III. VVhether a preacher once setled in a place, may leave that place. p. 332. IV. VVhether it be expedient to permit one to preach constantly or weekly in a place that hath neither orders from the Church nor charge of the people. p. 339. V. VVhether he that is a Gospel Teacher may lawfully own civil titles of honour. p. 336.
Of a conferrence. p. 329. Questions. I. VVhether private or night meetings may lawfully be upheld. p. 344. II. VVhether it be lawfull for Christians when they meet to make merry one with another. p. 344. III. VVhether the conferences or private meetings lately used in England, were agreeable to the power of Godlinesse. p. 349. Of Admonition. p. 351. Questions. I. VVhether a heathen may not be admonished. p. 359. II. VVhether admonition be alike to be given to all. Ibid. Of Excommunication. p. 360. Questions. I. VVhether reformed Churches are legally excommunicated by the Pope. p. 366.
II. VVhether Kings ought to be excommunicated. p. 367. III. VVhether Excommunication debars from all society of the Church. p. 371. Of Singing. p. 373. Questions. I. VVhether it be lawfull to sing Davids Psalmes in a publick congregation. p. 377. II. VVhether those Psalmes containing direfull Imprecations ought to be sung, or how with a conscience they may be sung. p. 379. Of the Sacraments. p. 380. Questions. I. Whether these five Sacraments added by the Church of Rome be Sacraments. p. 381. II. VVhether the effects of the Sacraments depend upon the worthinesse of the Minister. p. 384. III. Whether or how the Sacraments differ from the scriptures. p. 386. IV. VVhether the Sacraments of the old differ from those of the new Testament. p. 387. V. VVhether two Sacraments be sufficient under the Gospel. p. 388.
Of Babtisme p. 389. Questions. I. VVhether Dipping be essentiall unto Baptisme. p. 400. II. VVhether Infants ought not to be baptised. p. 404. III. VVhether baptisme is or ought to be readministred. p. 412. IV. VVhether witnesses at baptisme according to the Law of the Church of England be to be approved. p. 413. V. VVhether the Cross at baptisme according to the Law of the Church of England be to be approved. p. 415. Of Conformation. p. 420. Questions. I. VVhether confirmation be a standing Ordinance in the Gospel. p. 426. II. VVhether the Church might not be advantaged by the re∣storing of confirmation. p. 429. Of the Communion. p. 431. Questions. I. VVhether the Communion ought often to be received, or how often. p. 447.
II. VVhether the Church of Rome hath reason to keep the Communion cup from the people. p. 448 III. VVhether kneeling be a gesture lawfull to be used at the Communion. p. 451. IV. VVhether it be expedient to keep prefixed times for Admini∣stration of the Communion, and if offerings be lawfull. p. 453. V. VVhether it be a sin to receive the Communion in a mixed congregation, and if private examination be necessary. p. 455. Of Prayer. p. 471. Questions. I. Whether men by Industry may obtain a promptnesse in prayer. p. 512. II. VVhether the wicked be bound to pray. p. 515. III. VVhether the set forms of Prayers used by law in the Church of England be lawfull. p. 516. IV, VVhether there be not vain repetitions in those formes. p. 529. V. VVhether it would be convenient to alter any part of those formes. p. 532. Of an Oath. p. 535. Questions. I. Whether swearing be an ordinance of, or under the Gospel. p. 538. II. Whether the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy required by the King of England, &c. May lawfully betaken. p. 540.
Curteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these bookes following are Printed for and sold by Edward Brewster, at the signe of the Crane in St. Pauls Church yard. 1661. Bp. Williams Right way to the best Religion, wherein at large is explained the Principle heads of the Gospel. in foll. Dr. Iermin Chapline to King Charles the first his phrastical Meditations by way of Commentary upon all the Proverbs. foll. Mr. Elton his Commentary upon 7.8.9. Romans. foll. Mr. Prinnes Hidden works of Darknesse brought to Light foll. Mr. Ball of the Nature and life of faith. 40. —his large and small Catechise. 80. Mr. Bentharns Christian conflict, shewing the difficulties and duties, armor and speciall Graces to be exercised by every Christian Souldier. 40. Mr. Baxter of Crucifying the world by the Crosse of Christ. 40. A Collection of severall Sermons preached before the Parlia∣ment. 40. Mr. Cawdrey of the inconstancy of the Independent way, with Scripture and it self. 40. Severall Sermons of Mr. Paul Bayns. Mr. Calamys Sermons Compleate. Mr. George Newton his Elaborat exposition on Iohn 17. foll. Mr. Randoll on the Church. 40. — on 8. Roman. 40. Mr. Stalham against Quakers. 40. —against Anabaptists. 40. Dr. Sclator on 4. Romans. Mr. Vdall on the Lamentations. Mr. Ieremiah Whittakers Sermons. 40. A vindication of the Presbyteriall Goverment and Ministry.
CHAP. 1. Of the Church. 1 Thes. 1.1. Paul and Sylvanus and Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessaloni∣ans, &c. INtending to speak of the nature of some despised Ordinances of the Church of Christ, we hold it expedient, if not ne∣cessary to take our Rise from hence, by unfolding the nature of that Church, whose practice we are providing our selves to defendin points of grand con∣cernment, and as a preliminary discourse to the following truths, we shall preface upon that Subject. Every Heretick stands confident in his errour, and each se∣ducer pleads for a belief of his Doctrine, by imposing the name Church upon those whom they have so seduced and made Proselytes to their Hereticall Tenets, by which means the glo∣rious Fabtick of the Catholick Church is like a lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers▪ sleighted and disesteemed of many; we shall stand therefore a short season upon this holy ground,
and take a true survey of her large dimensions. Da Domine perficere, qui dedist velle. For her height or Altitude, by the Scripture I see, that she is higher then the Heavens, her Head who is above all princi∣palities and pows, is Christ the Lord. Ephes. 5.23. He is at Gods Right hand, and in her affections she is at the same place. Col. 3.2. Behold, see you her not going up to heaven like Pillars of smok, leaving the Wildernesse of this World! Can. 3.6. Her hasty departure occasion'd betwixt Love and fear, longing to be with her beloved, and fearing to be devoured by faith∣lesse and unreasonable men, who like Foxes have encompassed her about, purposing to tear her in pieces, from whom that she may be delivered, she assumes the wings of a great Eagle, and maketh her nest above the stars. For her breadth or Latitude, by my Creed I see her of an infinite and inconceiveable extension. I believe that the Church is catholick; she is as broad as the World, as old as the Creation; her age you may suppose to be attended with weaknesse, but it is not; the last visit that Christ her Hus∣band made her, renewed her strength like an Eagle, so that shee walks and is not weary, she runs yet is not faint, holds pace with eternity it self. Perceive you not Christ the everlasting Son of the father, to be the corner stone of this glorious buil∣ding? 1 Pet. 2.6. And untill he cease being, it shall never know dilapidations. By the same Perspective or Fiduciary Optick Nerve, I see her of a comely and beautifull proportion, and holy uniformi∣ty. I believe that the Catholick Church is holy. The Kings Daughter is glorious within, Christ her Spouse is ravished with the beauty of her eyes. Cant. 4 9. Therefore she shall ever be Reverenced in mine. He, whose eyes are Ten Thousand times brighter then the Sun, hath shined upon her garments of wrought Gold, and protests that there is no spot in her. Cant. 4.7. Let me therefore never cast a blot upon her. He that is her Husband hath made her so. Ephes. 5.27. Therefore let
me that am her son, ever hold her so; but for the clearer un∣derstanding of this matter we shall 1. See the Nature of the Church in Generall. 2. Resolve some questions concerning her. The nature of the Church of Christ, by a due weighing of this description through faith and Scripture, may be fully ma∣nifested and known. It is First, The Whole Society or Company of Beleevers. 2. Elected and appointed by Gods Eternall decree. 3. Called by the Word of the LORD. 4. From amongst the rest of Mankind. 5. For the bringing of glory to his own Name, and giving unto them Eternal lfie. In this Description take notice 1. Of the Members of the Church, they are the whole So∣ciety or Company of Believers, in what age soever they lived, in what place soever they aboad in, however dispersed, where e∣verscattered, whether far or near, old & young, male & female, High and Low, Rich and Poor, All that ever were and all that ever shal be; all that ever lived upon the Earth, with all that ever dyed in the Womb, from Adam, the first man that ever was known, with, and until the last man that shal ever be born, makes up this Temple of God, and all of them are but severall Members of that body whereof the Lord Jesus is the head. 1 Cor. 1.2. Rom. 12.5. 2. Of the Causes of the Church, and they are either 1. The efficient cause, Gods Eternal decree. There are none made members of the Church by chance, nor by their own care and industry; who by taking thought can adde one Cubit to his Stature; and he is high with a witnesse, who hath his head above the clouds. None shall sit in the Kingdome of God. but they for whom it is prepared of the Father. Matth. 20.23. And it is prepared for them before the Foundation of the World. God by his decree must separate Believers from
among▪ men or faith shall never purifie the hearts of men, and Election must precede Vocation. Gal. 1.15. The least blos∣some of true holinesse will never grow, nor never was seen to bloom upon that stem whose root was not Predestination. Ephes. 1.4, 5. 2. The Instrumentall cause, which is their Call, by the Word of the Lord: this is the means used for the bringing of many Sons and Daughters into glory. It is the charge of Al∣mighty God to the Apostles, to hear his Son. Iohn 17.5. It is the charge of the Son, that the Apostles preach to the World. Matthew 28.18, 19. And by the benediction of the Spirit, by that there is added to the Church dayly such as shal be saved Acts 2.47. None shall be glorified but such as are called with a holy calling: we must hear the joyfull sound of his Word, before we can see the glory of his countenance: for whom he glorifieth he justifieth, and whom he justifieth them he also calls. Rom, 8.30. This Call is so necessary to the Churches being, that the Greek Word for Church comes from the word  from their being called: and indeed none shall be crowned with the Lamb, but such as fight with him, and none shall fight under him, but such as are called, chosen and faithfull. Revel. 17.14. We have those that pretend a call in this generation, but we have cause to suspect it is not by the word of the Lord; for if so, they would be holy without blame before him in love, Ephesians 1.4. They would be full of love (were they full of the Spirit) and of joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, Galathians 5.22. Bitternesse, wrath, anger, clamor, and evill speaking should be far from them with all malice. Ephesians 1.31. The word of Christ we are to look after, if we seek to obtain glory; for that leads unto it. Revelations 22.7. And we are to entertain it in our hearts if we would have that to shine upon our heads; the same Doctrine is taught us by the Church of England, Art. 17. Yet we must understand this calling of or by the word, to
be onely necessary, First, when God is pleased to give the word. Secondly, to those persons, who are of years, wit or discretion, to understand the word; or Thirdly, where God hath given the naturall meanes for the hearing or read∣ing of his word. 3. The formal cause, remotely described, Separated from amongst the rest of mankind; by consequence, these be∣lievers have a union among themselves, by which they are constituted a Church; for in that union (of which more shall be spoken afterwards) that they have among themselves, and that conjunction that they have with Christ, conssts the formality of their so being. Let the world or reprobate be doing what they please, they are doing good works which God hath ordained they should walk in, knowing that they are created in Christ Jesus for that very end and purpose. Ephesians 2.10. As Mathew was called from the receipt of custome, so God by his word calls this elected company from all other; and they denying all ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, live soberly towards themselves, righteously towards their neighbours, and holily towards God, Titus 2.12. doing for him, suffering for him, and by all opportunities bringing glory to his name, which brings us to the last branch of our di∣scription. (viz.) 4. The finall cause, which is twofold; either the prin∣cipall for the bringing of glory to his own name; or subordinate for to give them eternall life, these two are not separated in the decree and therefore I shall not separate them in paper; for he purposes to get glory to his name by, in, with and through their salvation; whom he prodestinates he calls, and whom he calls he justifies, whom he justifies he glorifies, so that the Churches salvation was the very designe and end of Gods contrivances, purposes, decrees, undertakings, since and before the foundation of the world, and that out of all nati∣ons, kindreds, tongues, and people, he might have some to praise his name and stand about his throne, Revela∣ions 7.9. For this end, even for this was Christ born, and for this end
he came into the world; for this end did the Apostles preach to the world; nay for this end did God create the world, for this end he preserveth the world, and for this end he shall put an end to the world, This world shall remain no longer, at least as to its Phy∣sicall use, then this glorious company is gathering together; when they are all met, then Christ himself resignes the king∣dom of his Mediatorship, and delivers up the power that is called authority into the hands of the Father. 1. Corinthi∣ans 15.24. (That of omnipotency being inseparable from the Godhead he still retains) and shall present those called and sanctified ones as worthy to sit with him in his throne, as he sits with the Father upon his throne, Revelations 3.8. Then Adam shall see all his Grandchildren the sons of Enos together. And Abraham all his faithfull seed; Job shall see his Children, Moses his true Israelites, Aaron his spirituall posterity. Then shall John the Baptist see his penitents, Peter his converts, Paul his followers, the prophets of the Lord see all the Lords people. Then shal the Angles see their Wards, God all his sons, and Christ all his members. What a glo∣rious appearance will there be, what a ravishing heavenly Quire, what an Anthem shall there harmoniously be sung when the gates of Heaven shall as it were be shut (their be∣ing no more to enter,) and these be made welcome by the mutual, admirable and ineffable embracements of God and Christ; me thinks I see Christ and his believers like Joseph and Benjamin, falling upon each others necks, not weeping but shouting for joy; and what will the Cherubines and Sera∣phines those ministers of God, who pitched their Tents about the Saints, think and say, when the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the prophets, the whole Army of Martyrs, the holy Church throughout all the world, with palmes in their hands, and crowns on their heads, going to fill those seats prepared for them, and to raign as Kings with the Lamb for ever and ever! Hallelujah Hallelujah.
Further this holy Church is usually divided into the Church Triumphant and Church Militant, First, Triumphant; the Prophets, do they live (that is on earth) for ever? no they are gone to Heaven before us; they have run their race and finished their course, and they are gone to receive, yea they have already obtained their Crown, 2 Timothy 4.7. They have been called, they have fought, they have conquered, and now they triumph. They have suffered, they have laboured, they hoped, and now they have received their inheritance. They have run and have not been wearied, they have heard and never doubted, they have wait∣ed and never discontented, and now they have received the kingdome promised. Secondly, Militant; some part of the Church is yet upon the earth; there is a party yet singhing, praying, watching against spiritual wickednesse in high places. And yet these two are but one Church, differing as one part of an Army that has conquered, routed, and shouted, doth from ano∣ther party, yet in the valley, fighting, striving, and con∣tending. Again, this Militant Church, that is yet under the crosse and fighting against Principalities and Powers, is either in∣visible or visible. First, Invisible; and this comprehends the whole number of them who are not onely outwardly called but inwardly qualified for Heaven; they have true faith that none can see, they have that new name that none knowes but he that hath it. Revelations 2.17. They are redeemed from a∣mong men, though they dwell with them▪ and are become the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb, Revelations 14.4. Their bodyes are Temples of the holy Ghost, and from the
altar of their broken hearts, they are offering Sacrifices to God alway; these are they whose names are in the Book of life, Revelations 20.12. known onely to him that knoweth all things, yea the hidden things of the heart. Secondly, Visible; and this comprehends those who are outwardly called to the Lambs Supper, by the sounding of the Gospel in their ears, and own it in their profession, believes what the word holds out, and embrace the Sacraments it commands, expecting salvation from Christ, the substance of the Law and Prophets, that Christ hath ascended up on high and led Captivity Captive, having received gifts for men, that he might give gifts to men, Ephesians 48. which gift of God through Jesus Christ, he hopes shall lead him to eternal life. Romans 6.23. Now this visible Church is either personall, or nati∣onall. First personall, and so it signifies one that professeth the most holy faith, disowning all Heathenish and Jewish wor∣ship, (so far as it is abolished) desiring to dye; as for the present, he lives in that Faith given to the Saints, and so eve∣ry particular Christian is a personal Church, and in that indi∣viduality is the Lambs Spouse. Secondly National, and so it comprehends all Believers living in such a Country, Place, or Province, holding up the profession of the Gospel, by holy Laws, as a City set up∣on a Hill, that they that are like to turn into the flocks of the companions, may know whether to turn and sets up the light of the Gospel, that all may know what God it is that they worship, and may learn by their order to believe in the same Christ. To this kind of Church did the Apostle Paul write most of his Epistles, to the Romans, to the Corinthians, to the Galathians, and as in the text to the Thessalonians, that is to the company of believers that lived in and about those Cities and Countries, called to be Saints. 1. Cor. 1.2. This National Church as the case now stands with us, and for the better understanding of some things hereafter to be hand∣led, must be divided into the Romish Church and Refor∣med.
First, The Romish Church: by this we understand all those Christians that hold the new invented Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that believe as that Church believes, and in all points conform thereunto, either in point of practice or in point of doc∣trine. Secondly, The reformed Church: by this we understand those believers whether Nationall or Provinciall, that have forsaken the Church of Rome, so far as she hath forsaken the truth of the Gos∣pel, and cleave to the Ancient Doctrin taught in the Catholick Church, whether by the Lord or by his Apostles or by Ministers sent from them, whether taught at Jerusalem, Antioch, Athens, or at Rome it selfe, disowning the Doctrine of Purgatory, pray∣ing for the dead, worshiping of Saints, or what ever as is contra∣ry to true Doctrine, such are the reformed Churches of France, Helvetia, Basil, Bohemia, Belgie, Auspurge: Wittemburge, Saxony, Scotland, or England, whose Doctrine in these and such other points opposing Rome, as may be seen in their publick confessions. Now know that all these together are but one and the same Church diversly considered, for as the great Se which is but one, sends out her Branches and Rivers, which receive names ac∣cording to the Countries they pass through, and become as it were distinst Seas, as the British Sea, the Germane Sea, the Atlan∣tick Sea; Even so the Church sending her Doctrine through the Kingdome and Nations of the Earth, receives a denomination from the place where she is received, and from them whom she washes with water in the name of the Lord, and so of old were the Churches of the Corinthians or Thessalonians, and so now the Churches of France or England, which yet made not severall Churches, (for as there is but one head, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one Bridegroom, one God, and one way to eaven, so there can be but one Church) but severall considerations of that one Church, which we believe to be holy and Catholick, and is the whole society and company of Believees, Elected and appoin∣ted, &c. And now we have seen her whom the Lord loves. This is the Spouse of Christ only, and besides her we know no other; this is she
whom Men, and Devils, Hereticks, and Infidels, for the present labour to destroy, and alwayes did desire to root out; but all in vain. Mathew 16.18. This is she whom Iohn saw as a Bride come down from Heaven, adorned for her Husband, Revelations 21.2. who is jealous over her, and rejoyceth over her as a Bridegroome rejoyceth over his Bride. Isa, 62.5. He rejoyceth over her with singing, Zepha. 3.17. This is the body of Christ, Ephesians 1.8. which from Christ as from the Head, receiveth Life and Spirit; by his Spirit she is go∣verned in all things, and of whom also she receiveth increase that she growes up. Ephe. 4.16. This is she that for her justification by faith in Christ, and her mystical union with him is in name and nature a Queen, Christs Spouse; for her Nobility the new Jerusalem, the Brother, Sister, and Mother of our Lord, the first born of God; for her illumi∣nation, perfection, defence of Evangelical truth, is called the light of the world, a Golden Candlestick, a Pillar of truth, and for her Sanctification of life, a peculiar People, a vessel of Honour, a Garden inclosed, the Temple of the holy Ghost. Sancta Dei Ecclesia est mater, virgo Spousa. This is she who from her fruitfulnesse in bringing forth many Children unto God, is called a Mother; and that is by keeping her Chstity pure from the embracements of the world and Sathan is known and esteemed a Virgin; and from those engagements that she hath given to the Lord of constant fidelity to him, she is honou∣red as the Lambs wife. This is the Vineyard of the Lord, which he hath planted in this world, warred with his Blood, fenced it about with holy Angels, builded the winepress of his passion in the midst of her, and is dayly gathering out the stones that do offend her. This is she whose property it is to vanquish when she is hurt, to understand when she is reproved, to be in safety when she is for∣saken, to obtain victory when she is almost over-thrown, to be strongest when she is weakest, to grow highest when she is most
crushed, to be most glorious when she is most reproached, to be honourably acquitted when she is scornfully condemned, to be crowned when she is dishonoured, to be rich when she is im∣poverished, to be illustrous when she is despised, then she is ne∣rest life, when death is nearest to her. A small Concell being called and gathered at Spir. March 15. 1629. decreaed severall things against the Catholick Doctrine, to maintain the Tenets of the now Church of Rome, as the Communion un∣der one kind, &c:He that is a member of this Church, ought not to be calle a Lutheran, nor a Cal∣vinist, nor a Protestant, no more then to be called a Petrir, or a Paulis, or a Nicean, for following the doctrin of Paul or Peter, or for adhearing to the positions of the Councels of Nice; or Paphnutians, for approving the opposition of Paphnutius in reference to the coelibat life, motioned in that Councell: since it is the doctrine of no private Person he believes in,Which decree was opposed by severall of the German Princes wht cast in a Pro∣testation against it in wri∣ting; those that subscribed that, were called Protestants, whence the pose of the word came to be given to all that protest or decla∣re against the errours of the new Church of Rome. but of that that hath taught by the Spirit of God to the Saints in all ages, & therefore he is to be called a Ca∣tholick, laying the ground of his Salvati∣on on the foundation already and long agoe laid by the Prophets, Apostles, or Evangelists; the opinion and invention of men being no part of his Religion, or Articles of his Creed. It is true the members of the Church of Rome, subscribe them∣selves Catholicks, but falsely; many points of the Doctrin of that Church which they have made necessary to Salvation, were not known by the Fathers and Teachers of the old Churches. Unknown to the Apostles, and to their Successors for severall ages, when the fire of Purgatory first kindled. We know; and what Spirit, or whose Breath first blew, as it hath been demonstrated by Catholick Champions of this Nation, and other reformed Churches. Their own Histories discover that it hath neither the Spirit nor the word of God for its entry, but the Bishop of Romes pollicy, the peo∣ples simplicity, the Emperours inadvertency, and Phochas's trea∣chery; for unto these causes may we reduce his Holinesses; Supro∣macy,
and infallibility, the foundation and Basis of all their other errors; the Doctrin of Purgatory, of Pardons, of Auricular con∣fession, of Venial sin, of Merit, of Transubstantiation, of Ado∣ration of Saints, Communicating under one kind, of private Masse, of the Pax, of the Agnus Dei, of Hostly or Ghostly processions, we know to be but yesterday: so that whosoever takes hold of this Doctrin, deserves the name of a Catholick no more then a theife when he gets into a House, deserves the name of a true Heire; for by their new fangled toys, brought in by the keys of the Pope, (a new word also) the true antient and Catholick faith is robbed of her gracefull purity, yea the antient Church of Rome is divested of her glorious Apparel, by which those Popish impostors passe the better undiscovered, and Romish Polititians make the better show; but set them passe; Are all the members of the Catholick Church holy? No; All are not Israelties, that are of Israel, Rom. 9.6, Would all the Lords people were Prophets: Christ hath some Branches in his Body that bring not forth fruite, and therefore shall bee taken away. Iohn 15.2. There are some that by profession are members of his vi∣sible Church, yet are dead Branches, not having in them the sap of the Spirit to bring forth the fruits of Holinesse and good Works, which alone makes them members of his invisible. There are Prophane and Hypocritical sinners, which are part of Christ, but so as Mos or dead Branches are of the Tree; accounted so of God, and by Christ esteemed so to be. Yet they professing the Doctrine of the Gospel, owning the Sa∣craments of our Lords institution, must be looked upon as mem∣bers of the holy People. There were prophane men no doubt in Israel, yet by outward profession they were all the Lords people, there were in our Saviours time those whom he threatnd, should be cast out, and with the same breath acknowledges them Chil∣dren of the Kingdom. Mat. 8.12. It could not be that a Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem; and the whole multitude, with the high Priests and Elders of that City, having seen the man that was Gods Fellow, cryed out away with him, away with him, Crucify him, Crucify him; in her God found (as in a common slaughter house) the blood of all the Pro∣phets,
and the Blood of the Son of God was charged upon her, yet at the sef same time the holy Ghost acknowledges Jeru∣salem to be a holy City. Matthew 27.53. For there the law of God was read, the worship of God performed, and outwardly the people of God dwelt, and the house of God was frequented. There were divisions among the Corinthians, contentions, Law suits, Fornication, great haughtinesse of mind, great prophane∣nesse and loosenesse in the administration of the Lords-Supper, yea some receive it drunk, and for all this the Apostle call them Saints, prefacing the Epistle he sends to them for the redressing of those disorders thus (viz.) unto the Church of God which is at Co∣rinth. 1. Corinthians 1.2. Their profession made them outward∣ly holy, and by their owning the Gospel ordinances, it is manifest that they were outwardly called, though their sins did demonstrate that they (even those whom he had called before Saints) were carnal. 1 Cor. 3.3. If we in this age could but learn or see that the gate of the Church is wider then the gate of Heaven; we should have less noise amongst us and more charity for each other. Laodicea, had lost her first love, and was wretched, miserable, blind and naked, nigh to be spued out, yet the true and faithfull witnesse beares this record of her, that she is a Church, and her Pastor or Bishop is an Angel. Revelations 3.14. In a word, pro∣fession of the most holy faith, and beleiving of fundamental Doc∣trine is sufficient among men, to own any man as a member of the visible Church, and to denominate him there from, but not to give them interest or Title to the invisible, or to make them fellow Ci∣tizens with the Saints in the new Jerusalem, for without holinesse no man can see the Lord, Hebrews 12.14. And therefore the Church is compared to a draw-net which draweth up Fishes of all sorts; both good and bad. Matthew 13.47. And to a field where∣in is found both darnell and good corn, both tares and wheat, and they must not be plucked up before the time: If Saul had been plucked up as a tare, we should never have had such a pretious Paul, To this Doctrine consent the reformed Churches, Art. 17. of the Church of Helvetia, Art. 8. of the Church of Bohemia, Art. 26. of the Church of France, Art. 27. of the church of Bel. Art. 7. of the Church of Auspurge, &c. It is now time to come
2. To resolve some Questions concerning the Church Question 1. WHether the single Testimony of the Church, be to be received in matters of Faith? Quest. 2. Whether the Church hath pwer to Ordain Ceremonies that are not Ordained f God? Quest. 3. Whether the Church hath Power to compell any ir∣regular person to her Ordinances? Quest. 4. Whether the civill Magistrate hath power in, or over the Church? Quest. 5. Whether the segregated congregations now in England be Churches? Quest. 6. What may justifie a Separation from a Church? Quest. 7. Are there more Religions then one to be celebrated where the true Church is established? Quest. 8. Wherein consists that individuality, singlenesse, unity, or Oxenesse of the true Church? Quest. 9. Why the true Church is called holy? Quest. 10. Why is the true and only Church called catholick, Quest. 11. Whether the Elect be onely Members of the true Church? Quest. 12. What are the Marks of a true Church? Quest. 1. Whether the bare and single Testimony of the Church to be received in matters of Faith or Salvati∣on. The Church of Rome defends the necessity of her Members yielding to the simple Testimony of the Church in matters of faith; but very unsoundly; for
1.Every particular Member of the Church hath erred, and therefore the whole Church; may for what ever be the quality of the parts, the whole must be of the same; as the simples are, so is the E∣lectuary that is made of them, hot ingredients can never make a cooling plaister. It is dangerous, to make it the ground of my faith, of which I have no surer testimony then he or they sayes so. The Popes we know have sinfully erred, whom they would make the Church virtual, & Councels have erred whom they would make the Church representative; the Councels of Basil and Constance cannot both be true. Peter erred, Demas may fall back, Laodicea may lose her first love: Its hard to make a sound Christian believe he shall be damned for not doing that, or not believing that, which God hath nowhere commanded, or spoken of. Certainly to make the precepts of men, equally binding to Scripture, is against that text, Deut 12.33. What thing soever I command you, observe and doe it; thou shalt not and the reto nor diminish therefrom; why then should I believe that there are pains in purgatory, (which I must undergo) with as strong a faith as to believe there are joyes in Heaven? And why must I be damned if I believe not that the Pope is as re∣ally head of the whole Univarsal Church, as to believe that Christ is risen from the dead? The reason is the Church (it is himself and his Cardinals) saies it, a poor bolster God knows for a man to place his rest, his confidence, his assurance, the unchangable estate of his eternal soul upon; And why must I believe it because they say it? Because they cannot erre; and why must I believe they cannot erre; because they say so? thus may they impose upon mens con∣sciences the very doctrine of Devils as they do, 1 Tim. 4.12, 3▪4. and the poor people are taught that they must believe that, o her∣wise they are no members of the Church, (out of which indeed there is no Salvation,) or of Christ, though no Scripture be brought in the least to confirm it. 2.We were not baptized in the name of the Church; this ar∣gument Paul brings against the divisions of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.3. there were some that would stick to the Doctrine of Paul, some hold to that of Cephas; what sayes he, was Paul Crucified for you, or were you baptized in the name of Paul, that you should sup∣pose
to be saved by me? we were baptized in the name of the Triun God, and we expect only, and we believe throughly to be saved by him alone, without the aid of men or Angels, for if an Angel should come down, and perswade us, or teach to us a necessity of believing in him, without or against the Scripture, as frequently Rome doth, he were to be accursed. I say again, he were to be accursed: 1 Gal. 9. 3. The Catholick Church calls upon her members not to do that, and good reason too; the Son of God would not (though he might urge his own authority) plead for a beliefe but upon a Scripture account, Iohn 5.39. and Paul desires to be followed no further than he follows Christ: 1 Cor. 11.1. and those Bereans are made noble for searching the Scriptures, whether the things that were spoken by Paul were true or no, Acts 17 11. And we have a charge given us to hear the Son: the same teacheth the reformed Chur∣ches, as of France Art 2. Belg. Art. 7. Art. 20. of the Church of England, Art. 1. of the Church of Bohem, In which Article there are two reasons given for this truth: 1. because the Scriptures were inspired and taught by the holy Ghost, confirmed by heavenly testimonies, which spirit discovers to men how it ought to be un∣derstood; for Prophecie came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost: 2 Pet. 1. ult. Besides the Lord himself saieth Search the Scriptures, And again, Ye are deceived not knowing the Scriptures, &c. 2 Because that is a true and sure testimony, and a clear proof of Gods favou∣rable good-will which he hath revealed concerning himself, such things as are necessary to doctrine, to discipline and government of the holy Church, are all fully and absolutely so comprehended, then which no Angel can bring any thing more certain, and if he should, he ought not to be believed. For which cause saies that con∣fession in our Churches, the Scriptures are rehearsed to the hearers in the vulgar tongue, and especially (according to the ancient cu∣stome of the Church,) those portions of the Gospel in Scripture, which are wont to be read on solemn daies out of the Evangelists and Apostles writings, and are usually called the Epistles and Gos∣pels: The whole stream of the confessions of reformed Churches runs against Rome in this.
4. Our Creed which is the rule of things to be believed, as the ten Commandements are of things to be done, and the Lords Pray∣er of things to be asked, calls upon him that reads it, or hears it, to believe only in God the Father, and in God the Son, and in God the holy Ghost, and not to believe in, but to believe the Catholick Church, (i e) to be perswaded, that there ever was, is, and shall to the end of the world be a company of men Elected and called unto life; by which confession we acknowledge our selves one of them. Now to believe in the Church, were to set her in as high dignity, to rule over the consciences of men as Christ himself, or any other person in the Trinity, which were a giving his glory to a∣nother. 5. Men should by this never be assured of their Salvation, nor of their good estare; it might be necessary for thy Salvation to do that this day, which might not be done if I would be saved the next; for as the Rulers of the Church uttered their judgments upon the light of reason, I must judge my self in a happy or in a forlorn con∣dition; which is contrary to that Catholick doctrine: Make your calling and Election sure: 2 Pet. 1.10. which could never be done, did it lye upon the fine flourishes of an Oratour, or distinction of a Canonist sitting in counsell. And indeed this may be one cause why the Church of Rome denies the possibility of a firm assu∣rance of future glory, contrary to the text above named. 5. There are but four false religions in the world, Heathnism, Turcism, Judaisme, and Papism: the Heathen possibly may reason the case for his religion, against an Opponent, though perhaps as soundly as Cyrus reasoned with Daniel concerning the dignity of Bel; Thinkest thou not hat Bel is a living God? (said the King) seest thou not how much he eateth and drinketh every day? The Jew he will direct thee to the Scriptures; see and try if his religion be not according to that most sure word of Prophesie. The Turk is stubborn, and it is death to dispute or search the truth for the confir∣ming of the faith in the matters of the Alchoran. The same it is with the Papist; the bell will ring, and candle will be put out, and the book opened, if the authority of the Bishop of Rome be once questioned, though in matters of faith: Let the Turk and Romanist therefore go together; give me that religion that may be tryed, and
hold out in tryal; yet let the Romanist remember, that as Mahomet said he found the hand of God seven times colder than ice, he may find it seventy times hotter than Purgatory for either adding or taking from the word of God, and imposing any thing upon the people as necessary to be done in point of Salvation. Syn. Trip. pag. 51. Thes. 10.Illi ergo potius parendum monenti ut omnia exploremus, & quod bonum est retineamus, quoe certe  instituti non po∣test nisi ad manum sit Lydius ille Scripiucarum lapis, cujus ope aurea ab aereis, humana á Divines internoscantur. Notwithstanding that the restimony of the Church is not to be taken singly in matters of faith, yet the testimony of the Church is of great weight and concernmnst in matters of fact. For 1, it may prepare our hearts and move them to believe the thing the surer that the Church hath affirmed. This made King Charles the first of glorious memory strongly to assert, that what could not be proved by the word of God to be unlawfull,His Maje∣sty. pag. 5. to M. Hen. the practise of the Church was warrant enough for him to follow, and obey that custome, whatsoe∣ver it were, and to think it good: and that he would believe that the Apostles Creed was made by them, (such reverence I bear to the Churche; tradition, they are his Majesties own words) untill other Authors should be certainly found out: and 2. it is of all humane testimonies the greatest, in respect of the Wisdome, Gravity, Lear∣ning, Prudence, Godliness of those men that lived about the first centuries, and were Governours in the Church of Christ: but no waies is their authority to be taken or ought to be taken as the ground of a mansfaith and assurance, since it is but the testimony of men. Quest. 2. Whether the Church hath power to ordain ceremonies upon her members, that are not ordained by God? For the cleering up of this Question wee shall premise, 1. That the Church hath no power to impose any ceremonies that are in
their nature impious. Exe. 20.18. nor 2ly. such as may cumber men and hinder them in the cheerefull execution of the essentiall parts of worship, like the Jewish constitutions: there is a rule against that. Luke 11.46. But if the rulers of a Church impose Ceremonies which are not contradictory to the Canon of faith, or rule of the Word, they have a power that will defend them in their so doing, and no private person in the least ought to speak against the execution of that pow∣er. In generall, what ever may tend, or what ever in their judgements will tend, 1. To the edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.26. there is a power given to put that in Execution. Let all things be done to edifying. Or, 2. whatever in their judgements may be comely in the Church, they have a Power to put that in execution. 1 Cor. 11.13. Iudge in your selves; Is it comely that a Woman pray unto God uncovered? By this Text, whatever is by the Officers judged to be uncomely, may be removed: and whatever is comely in their judgements, by this power may be enjoyned in & to the Church. Or, 3. What may in their judgements be orderly or make for an uniformity, they have a power to put that in execution. 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order. Now that ceremonies of this nature may be imposed by Church officers, upon her members, and that lawfully and religiously, may be pro∣ved in particular, by these following Arguments. 1. From the Apostles practice in the Church, who besides other things, as the changing of times and places, for their assembling to∣gether, and touching the administration of the Lords Supper, some∣times at midnight, and then at daytime, we find in particular, that Paul injoyned, that in the Church women should be covered. 1 Cor. 11.6. Which one might think a ceremony, that might have been forborn. And indeed in imposing of it, the Apostle is not au∣thoritative, but persuaive. He leaves it to the Officers themselves and to their own judgements. A ceremony possibly that gave as great offence to some coy and fine Dames, as &c. And so be ap∣pointed a known Tongue in the Congregation, (if he had been in England, he would have found some to have told him that he took away their Gospell liberty) in the time when strange tongues were
not an unusuall gift. Now from this very action, we may conclude the truth of that position now under defence; for by the prohibition of the one it should seem to be practised, and by enjoyning the other it should seem to be neglected. The former might seem a needlesse ceremony: what matter were it whether women are covered or no? the other might be thought in some sence hurtfull, that they might not speak with those tongues which God by his Spirit (that bloweth where and when it listeth) did furnish them withall in the Church: but the Apostles had power, and they give the Officers of the Church power to rectifie that errour, or in any other that in their judg∣ments should have a tendency to the robbing of the Church of that order that ought to be in it. But further, 2. From the Apostles Counsells and warnings to the Officers of the Church. There are generall precepts given to the Officers of the Churches, which are gravidated with this power, and demon∣strates that they have a commission to impose such ceremonies as they shall think fit, for the good of that Church whereof they are Governours. Saint Paul not knowing what should befall him at Ierusalem, whether he was going from Miletus, sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and charges them (when he was gone) to take heed to the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them O∣verseers; soreseeing that grievous Wolves should enter the flock. Act. 20.28. From which precept or caution given by this holy A∣postle I may truly argue without offence to any, that whatever these Elders thought, or in their judgments supposed might tend to the good of their Churches, though not particularly commanded in the Word, might be injoyned by them, and the church of Ephesus was bound to obey them in that particular: And a sin that was or would have been in any private person to have murmured, grumbled a∣gainst, much lesse oppose the practice of and usage of them. So from that precept to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things b done in decency and in order, we may truly draw the same argu∣ment, that what time was thought fittest, what gesture was thought fittest by them to preach in, to pray in, to receive Sacraments in, or to administer Sacraments in; what garments, what gestures, to give or to receive them in, might be imposed on the people of that place
by the Church governours, through vertue of this generall precept. Moreover Paul writing to the church of Philippi, with it's Bi∣shops, and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. Among other directions, as Bewar of dogs, beware of evill-workers. chap. 3.2. comes and desires them, chap. 4.8. that whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, what∣soever things are of good report, Think on these things. Now here is such an Epitomy of all good works as none are comparable to it. It may be called an abstract of the whole Bible, and this written to the Bishops and Deacons (let none be offended at the name Bishop, I mean no body hurt) Shall it be understood that this full pithy Ex∣hortation reached only to their own private capacity as Christians, and not to their publick, as Deacons? without question, what in their judgements were lovely, and of good report, if used in the Church, might be commanded by those Deacons to the Church, by vertue of this precept, as Church officers. In that Epistle to Titus, Paul shews him the end of his leaving him at Crete. chap. 1.5. That he should set in order the things that are wanting &c. Concerning the Ordination of Elders, the Apo∣stle had given him in charge at the first: but let Churches be never so well planted, there may be some that will be irregular, especially where there are Lyars, evill beasts, and slow bellies, of which sort Crete was full of. chap. 1.12. And therefore Titus is further char∣ged, that what is wanting, that may conduce to the Edification of the Church, (having a respect to the people) they should make such as may curb the veay beastlinesse or irreverence in the House and Worship of God. We might insist longer on such Texts; but these are sufficient to cause the unprejudiced Christian to consent to the truth that we are now pleading for. 3. From the power and practice that was in the Jewish Church, touching ceremonies not commanded, may we draw arguments for holding the same lawfull in the Christian. Did not David bring in Ceremonies, Musicians, Qiresters, Organists, Violers, Lutinists, with many more into the Worship of God, which he had no com∣mand nor precept of God? and though God had his Prophets, Priests Messengers there, in and about Davids Court; yet never gave he
one of them Commission in the least to check David for this his chargeable presumption, nor to no King, nor to no age after him; my Christ himself did never mention it; neither do we find any of Gods people scruple at it in his time nor after; possibly those sons of Belial that rebelled against his sons, might: (for Rebellion is so gly-faced, that it never durst appear in the World without a Mask; generally, it takes that of Religion;) but seeing God was silent, what needed they care? We have heard some say that Musick might bee under the Law, but nor under the Gospell; (not that I plead for Musick in the least, but using it as a sutable Medium, to prove the truth, it is now under demonstration) ignorantly, for it was not un∣der the Law nor mentioned in the Law; but a pure invention of Davids own; He conjecturing that Musick might tend to the ends be∣fore specified. From the liberty therefore that was given to the Jewish Tabernacle, Synagogue, or Temple (for we may judge, there were after Ceremonies brought in, as there occurred necessity or conveni∣ency) we may argue the power of the Christian Church (even in reference to ceremonies) whose liberty is by Christs death more large then theirs, in all respects, and surely not diminished in this. His Mj∣sties De∣clar, for f∣fais, Eccl.4. From that Decorum, that decent Ceremonies, (of which still we say, the Governours are Judges) makes the Ordinance of the Church appear withall. Let his soul be bound up in the bun∣dle of life, and made higher then the Kings of the Earth; who de∣clares, that he bears a greater reverence to the Ceremonies of the Church of England, by being in those places and seeing those Con∣gregations, wherein they were not used or spoken against. And indeed, Reverent gestures, grave Vestments, decent and comely Deportments may be compared to that cloathing of Gold with which the Kings daughter is habited, Psal. 45.13. making them exceeding beautifull in the eyes and ears of the Beholders, and more esteemed of her members, and reverenced of all that are par∣takers. 5. It is the Doctrine of all reformed Churches. Confes. of the Church of Helve. Art. 25. of Belg. Art. 3. Ausp. Art. 15. of France, Art. 32. of the Church of England, Art. 20. Church of Bohem.
Art. 15. with this advice, that however such Ceremonies had their beginning, whether from Bishops or from Councills or of any other, the people were not to care for it, nor be disquieted, but to use them, to good, because they are good. So the Church of Wittemburge. Art. 35, holds it lawful to appoint days for to hear and preach Ser∣mons, and any other Rites not contrary to Scripture. So Sueve. Art. 14. and withall confesses, that they reckon no traditions for mens traditions, but such as are condemned in Scripture, contrary to the Law of God: but for such as agree with Scripture, and were ordained for the good of men, although they be not expressed in the Scripture; yet in that they proceed from the commandment of love, which ordereth all things to be done in decency, they are worthi∣ly to be accounted rather of God then of man; and closeth up their Article, by showing from Scripture, that the more willing a man obeys the civill Laws which are not repugnant to Religion, the more fully he is enduced with the faih of Christ. In the mouth of these witnesses let this truth be justifyed. And Quae non prosunt sin∣gula, multa juvant. Since my writing this going through the Har∣mony of confessions and other Authours, we find the Church wil∣ling to show her own power, limiting herself in the eyes of her own people in cases of Ceremony, (viz.) 1. She hath no power to impose any thing contrary to the written Word of God. 2. Nor none that are insignificant. 3. None that are troublesome. 4. Nor with any opinion or thought of necessity, as to lay salva∣tion upon them. 5. Without all conceits of merit,In an in∣diect sence she may preach and teach thei ne∣ccesity: for he that re∣sisteth law∣full com∣mands ∣neth a∣gainst Co. as to deserve Heaven by them. 6. Not laying them down as parts of Divine worship. 7. Or to conceit that the observance of them will make us the more perfect before God. If the Church that imposeth those Ce∣remonies, teach not the necessity of their observance, directly or ex∣actly by these arguments, she may impose what ceremonies she wil, according to the doctrine of most of the Protestant Churches in Christendome: yea, all of them that have declared their opinions upon that Subject.
Quest. 3. Whether the Church hah power to compel any irregular Person to her Ordinan∣ces? For the opening of this Question, we must note, that when the Church is said to compell, it is neither to imprison nor to fine, those being altogether out of their Verge and dominion, excep you imply that the Church-Officer be likewise in civill authority, and ex∣ercise Jurisdiction in that capacity; or if you consider the civill Of∣ficer a Church member, and in that sence the Church some way may be said to do it. We shall consider the Church-Officer abstractly as no civill Officer, but in that capacity that he bears toward the the Church; and by compelling we hold out or mean no other thing then the utmost of the Churches power and largest extent, and the execution of that highest Act of Justice, wherein her Lord and Husband hath invested her, to free both him and herself from contempt, by which she hath authority to command and to punish those who wilfully absent themselves from her service, without such reasons as the Church her self shall be satisfied withal; for who ever went to hell without a reason? And let none quarrel with the word Compel, to omit the Gram∣mer of it, which holds out the sence before spoken of, we finde in the great Supper, Luke 14.6. the Master giving a charge to his servants to call his Guests; some excused themselves, yea all gave reasons for their absence, to flesh and blood satisfactory. Then they were to go to the Streets and Lines of the City, chief places possibly affording Guests sufficient for the filling up of the House, and eating of the Supper, for it was now ready, and yet the Table was not filled. (I dare say the Son of Ieffes place was not empty; None who is like Gods own heart but will appear frst in ods House, and at his Worship.) Probably many might excuse them∣selves, or pretend other businesse at this invitation; but the Ser∣vants could not help it, onely rold their Lord that what had been concluded of him, was performed by them. The Master being
herewith provoked, charges the Servants the third time, to go to the High-wayes and Hedges and compell them; they had bidden and invited, and exhorted, and perswaded them before, now they must take no excuse but Compell, and by some circumstances in the text, he that wanted a wedding garment, appears to be of the num∣ber so forced; and by this was the house filled, and the Lord con∣tented. The guests were clean, but not all, one was found unfitted for such a table, he is charged with it: He had nothing to say for himself, he knew that the servants told him they must do it, and that by their Lords direction, and therefore he urges not their compul∣sion as a reason of his own unpreparation; they were to bring him in, but he must fit himself for so noble a company, and plentifull entertainment. Now that the Master here is the Lord Jesus or Christ the Kings Son, and that the feast are those ways and Ordinances by which Christ feeds both Jew, Gentil, them were first bidden, and them that lay in the lanes and hedges, and that the servants are the Ministers of the Church, by whose Preaching and Doctrine they are called to come to the Lord Christ for Salvation, is granted almost by all, and how often the man without the wedding garment, in chains, is set at the Chancel door, to perswade Communicants to a worthy receiv∣ing of the Lords Supper, is knovvn to all. So that there is no need to quarrel with the Word, but rather fear the thing, and not put the Church to compulsion; which denotes the utmost of her power (of which afterward) to reduce her members, family or children to o∣bedience, and compell them to come in to her Ordinances. For we are not speaking o her compelling those that are not, or were not members of her body; as the Spaniards and Iesuites are said to have done with the poor Indians, driving them like droves or flocks to the Font or Baptistery, and then brag of the multitude of their Converts. Let us now come to the point; and that the Church hath power to compell any that is of her body, (I mean such as ne∣ver were cast out by her, for all others are, their own Apostacy from her, takes not away her relation from them) to come to her Ordi∣nance, seems to be true doctrine by these Arguments follow∣ing.
1. From that spiritual and powerfull efficacy and blessing that she knoweth goes along with her ordinances, God will go along with his own institution, and the Spirit may and often doth in the ordinance, melt the heart that is otherwise cold and hard, that conscience that may be pretendeded against the Ordinance, may be broken or enlightned, if it be real, and that rancor against the Preacher may be slain with the sword of the Spirit. Those that came to take Christ, Iohn 7 47. and he that was sent to insnare him, were both so taken with his words, that they were almost, if not al∣together made his Disciples. 2. From that danger that may incur to her whole body, if she suffer one to fal off at his own pleasure, for that one may open a door to another and both go several waies, and each draw Proselytes af∣ter them. Similitudo & exemplum maxime movent; and againe, quod exemplo fit, id etiam jure fieri putant homines. She is therefore to appear with her rod in her hand (as it were) to correct the saw∣ciness or stubbornness of any of her Children, lest others take ex∣ample and write after the copy, or walke after their steps. Once make it lawfull for a man to fall from the Church Ordinances, with∣out a real cause, (and that is to be discovered afterward) and we shall quickly see others following after him, out of wilfulness or malice, for what Governour, Government, Preacher or Sermon can there be in the world that will please even all good men? 3. From that power that Christ hath left to his Church in his last Will and Testament. Die Ecclesiae, tell it to the Church; is the last refuge for an offended Brother, Tell it to the Church, Mat. 8.17. if that will not bring him to an acknowledgment of that real of∣fence that he hath given, (for a zeal is only there supposed) let him be to thee as a Heathen; the Church hath here and elsewhere, (as in its own time shall be discovered) a power to excommunicate out of the Church, (which is a delivery over unto Sathan, 1 Tim 1.18.) any of her body that gives a real and just offence to any of her members, and will not make satisfaction so much as by repen∣tance. Now what greater offence can there be given to a Christian faithfull man than to see the ordnances, the feals of the covenant, that which is the power of God to save him that means that God hath appointed, ordained, instituted as standing Laws ne∣ver
to be repealed to the end of the World, slighted, raied at, cared at, believe it, if ever the Church did hear a cause she must hear this especially when she understands, that not an Enemy hath done this, but one that saies he hath affinity with Christ, yea, is a part of him; if this tongue cannot be perswaded to say, I repent, the Church ought to deliver it over unto Sathan, that it may learn not to blas∣pheme, so that she may either compel him or thrust him out, either make him learn or turn him out of her Schoole; and that excom∣munication is no stingless Bee shal be discovered in its own time and place. The like also teacheth the reformed Churches particularly the Church of Helvet. Art. 23. where speaking of publick places set a part from the worship of God, declares, that so many as do despise them, and separate themselvee from them, they are contemners of true Religion, and are to be compelled, by the Pastours, and Godly∣Magistrates, (In this case the Church officer may repair to the civil Magistrate, if he be a Church member for redress) to surcease stub∣bornly to separate and absent themselves, from sacred assemblies, by which they understand the publick temples of the Church. It may be easily foreseen that the man who thus separates himself, will pretend conscience for his separation. The mixt congregation possibly will defile his holy heart, and his conscience perswades him that the doctrin generally approved by the Church of England, is not according to Godliness; and he verily believes, that our Churches being builded by Papists are Dens of theives. And if he be made to come, the sinne hee supposes shall be theirs, not his. For the removing of this obstacle, (not to follow this man in his long wild Goose chace) we must know, that the servants are not blamed for the bringing him in that wanted the wedding garment, in regard, they did but that which their Lord commanded, neither did he make any excuse for himself, so farre was he from laying the blame upon others, that he had nothing to say for his own vindicati∣on. Who ever compels or forces the Minister or Magistrate, to come to the ordinances, fear thou God, when Christ comes to take a walk in his Garden, or among his Candlesticks, and he see thee not act∣ing those graces sutable to the Ordinance thou art about, thou maist
meet with a curse and not a blessing, for the Church will never be blamed, but thou mayest be condemned. Moreover, whereas Conscience, by which we shall presume men walk (taking no notice at all of Pride, Spleen, or Stomack) is of∣ten pretended to justifie their separation, we must note, that consci∣ence is no sufficient warrant to stop the Church in her Judicial Pro∣ceedings. From some filth without, and from some naughty hu∣mour from within, men may have their eye-sight quite or near ex∣tinguished; she knows there are some in her Family whose very consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. It may anger such to have her look in their eyes, and pain them to be turned up against the light of the Sun, that she may give them eye-water; but all tending to the good of the body, the Church goes on with her cure, by bring∣ing her diseased Members to those Ordinances that are proper for their distemper. If Kings and Prin∣ces do to∣lerate such it were best not to let them know it; meekness never do∣ing good to their humour. If they be suffered by Law, they will have lawless meetings; as appea∣red whereever they were.Queen Elizabeth of glorious Memory, Anno 1561 put forth a Proclamation, enjoyning and commanding all Hereticks, and par∣ticularly Anabaptists (who had flocked into England, being banished their own Countries) to depart the Realm within twenty days, whe∣ther they were Natural born, or Forreigners. This Civil Excom∣munication might have been prevented, if they had obeyed the Laws of the Church then in force; there being no ground that an established Church should suffer Hereticks upon the account of con∣science. Besides, she hath learned, and our ears have heard, that consci∣ence is not an absolute rule; her Husband at his going told her, tht the time was coming, that whosoever should slay her children, should think (that is, be perswaded in his conscience) that he doth God service, Iohn 16, 2. This is strange, that any that feareth God, should be perswaded in their minds it were an acceptable ser∣vice to kill them whom his Son by his Word had begotten into a lively hope. One of her Governors testifies of himself, Act. 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many thngs con∣trary to the Name of Iesus of Nazareth; that is, (as he after∣wards speaks) he thought he was bound in conscience to  son,
persecure, slay, stone, and compel the Saints to blaspheme the Name of Christ; and in this time no man could say, but he was a good, honest, moral man, Phil. 3.6. And what he did in oppositi∣on to Christ, God knows it was neither out of spight or malice that he bore to him, nor ill will that he bore to any that professed him, but out of a zeal to promote Gods Glory and Honor; this being known, the testimony of a mans own conscience will, by knowing Christians, be made a rule of walking. For indeed, as to live by Reason, will never make a Christian: so to live by Conscience in this sense, will make a Devil; what iniquity may not be defended, and abomination perpetrated, if Conscience be the sole Judge? To conclude therefore, the Church knows that her Husbands last Will, revealed in the Word of God, is the prime Principal, and ordinary Rule, that she and all her children are tied to, and to walk by, and this of conscience is onely a secondary and subordinate Rule to that; and where this would assume the Authority of the for∣mer, and the child do what is good in its own eyes, agreeable to his judgement, suitable to his understanding, write what shapeless Letters he will, taking no heed of the Copy; there she may law∣fully use her Authority, by perswasion or compulsion; that is, ei∣ther make them come to her Ordinances, or punish them for their not coming; she in that case being the sole judge, nor they. If it here be objected (for this age is witty) that we never read that Paul or Peter compelled any? It may be answered, That Paul both did himself, and gave order to excommunicate offendors: And when they shew me, that the Christian Religion planted by Paul, was authorized by the Civil Magistrate, and a Church plan∣ted and maintained by Law, and by that Law compulsion forbid∣den, then they say somewhat, otherwise nothing; the Law of the Civil Magistrate in Paul's time, generally running against the truth of the Gospel. Witness that Proclamation of Nr, who be∣headed Paul, published anno Christ. 67. Qusquis Christianum se esse confitetur is tauquam generis hvmani convictus hostis sine ulteriori sui defensione, capite plectnor; the English of which amounts to this, That whatever man was known to be a Christian, without fur∣ther ri, he should be condemned to death as a common enemy to mankind. In such times as these there was no going to the Civil
Magistrate for maintaining of the Church in her dignity, against contumarious, refractory and stuhborn backsliders: but now I think of it, it is time to come to the Quest. 4. Whether the civill Magistrate hath power over, or in the Churches of Christ and if he have, whether his Laws be binding to the Consciences of men. For the ease of the Reader, and that we be not forced to make many distinctions; we shal suppose our Magistrate owning the faith of Christ, and a Member of the Church; we shall suppose him to be the chief Magistrate in, or over a place or Kingdome, whether by Succession or Election: we shall also suppose this Magistrate to be either Man or woman. We defend, that one so ruling hath power both in, and over the Church. For 1. All good, godly and holy Magistrates that we read of, whe∣ther in common or in holy History, did in a great measure meddle (for that is the Word in this age) with the Church, and exercised authority over it and in it, as Magistrates, by their Royal mandates, and holy Proclamations; yea, by the mouth of the Holy Ghost com∣mended for their so doing; as might be made out in many instances from David, Solomon, Iehosaphat and Hezekia: and from him we may draw a remarkable passage for the affirming of the question. It is said 2 Chron. 29.3. He, in the first year of his Reigne, in the first Month he opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and brought in the Priests and Levites▪ and gathered them tohether, &c. comman∣ding them to sanctifie themselves, &c. Here was both zeal and speed: his zeal, in that he did it in the first Year of his Reign, his speed, in that he did it in the first month of his Reign, nay more, he did that in the first day of that first Month, as may be collected from verse 17. of that Chapter: he speaks to the Levites, and calls them sons, vers 11. by which he acknowledged himself t be their Father: and we are informed that they gathered
themselves together at the commandment of the King, (some in our days would have questioned his authority) by the words of the Lord, vers. 15. (a King commanding things lawfull, is a comman∣dement of the Lord.) They set the Temple in order, sanctifie both it and themselves, and informs the King thereof, vers. 18. The King rises early himself, and gathered the Rulers of the City toge∣ther, (but be will see the people worship God) and goes to the House of the Lord, and sets the Levites (marke, the King sets them) that is, orders them to stand in their places, with Cymballs, Psal∣teries and Harpes, according to the Commandements of David, and of Gad the Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, &c. vers. 25. In the di∣stribution of the Levites in their places, Courses and Offices: these three consulted, but that instruments of Musick was Davids own Ordinance, appears both by the 27. ver. of this Chapt. and also by Ezra 3.30. Where at the building of the second Temple, these things were practised, as from Davids authority; with severall o∣ther places; all being in order at the Kings appointment. Heze∣kiak commanded to offer the burnt-offering upon the Altar. ver. 27. And he with his Princes commands the Levites to sing Praise with the words of David. ver. 30. (Here is medling with the Church, if there be any medling in the World) But further, God hath ap∣pointed that the Passeover should be kept in the first Moneth of the Year; yet Hezekiah with his Princes, takes Councill and agrees to keep it in the second Month; & a Proclamation made accordingly Chron. 30.5. If the Sun it self had not hasted to have gone down, or at least gone back ten degrees upon the Temple of Ierusalem, to have beheld this holy Kings zeal, in meddling with Church affairs, it had been no wonder. Iosiah is famous for this, even for meddling with the Church, (let the expression be excused, the times forceth me so to speak) whose Father Manasseth being dead (who also had commanded his people to serve the Lord their God, in reference to the duties of the Temple. 2 Chron. 33.16) at Twelve years of age, began to purge Iudah and Ierusalem from Idolatry▪ makes a Covenant with the Lord, before the Lord, to walk in all his ways and statutes, and caused (marke all his authority and medling) all that were presnt in Iursalem and Beniamin to stand to it. 2 Chron. 34.32. (For the people to make a Covenant among themselves, and make their
King to stand to it, or &c. is not good Divinity) nay, this King made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. vers. 33. Further, He keeps a Passeover  first Month, and sets the Priests in their charges, (What a  here is? would some of our English had said) I should  weary my Reader in a point so clear, if I should insist on the practises of Zernbabel, or other famous Princes who cast an eye to the Church of God, and put out their hands to help her, and how much they helped her, so much their honour, their grandure, and their safety was augmen∣ted and confirmed, both by God and man; and indeed, how shall their memories be blessed if they do it not! It is sometimes a blot in good Kings, and a dead flye that makes their anointing Oyl to send forth no good savour, that the High places were not taken away. Let Conastntine the great be honoured by the Christian World; and King Edward the 6th. of glorious memory, be ever esteemed among the best of Princes, and his Parliamentum Benedictum be of all generations called blessed. 2. From that confusion and disorder that would inevitably besal the Church of Christ, if Kings and Magistrates did not meddle with with it, may this be proved. What disorders fell upon the Church of Israel, when their Kings and Princes took no notice of it, is clear. How God was worshipped, is known, and what in our days will be∣fall her, if Magistrates act, not is easily to be conjectured. Diversi∣ty of judgements would breed diversity of Doctrines, and that will bring forth contention, and that would produce confusion, All Laws though made never with so good advice, would be by turbulent spi∣rits trode under foot, if in the least they were crossed in their pee∣vish opinions. It were dangerous to leave all men to their own practices and o∣pinions in matters of Religion; Heresie might passe for Divinity, and the doctrine of Divells might passe for that of God; And how could it be restrained? By a meeting of the Clergy or Presbytery, you may say: Who shall call that meeting? Themselves: Which of them? Any one: If any one call them together, Then any one may chuse to meet; but suppose a meeting, by what authority will you make Laws? By our own (this is excellent doctrine at Rome) Who
would rehearse those Laws, when you have made them? Mum. There is no such power in the Word Presbytery so met (that I know off) as to ham-string any man from entering the Pulpit, or Tongue-tye him when he is in it: so that either the civill Magistrate must be medling, or there will be no obeying. 3. Either the civill Magistrate must meddle with the Church, or there will be some that will be medling with his Throne. The great Turk knows how necessary this is. Pharoah King of Egypt knew it. All Histories witnesse it; the German Emperour sub∣scribes to the truth of it: and those among us that can but number 20. or 30 Years, cannot be ignorant. Murder, Rapin, Rebellion, Trea∣son, Sedition, Fire and Sword have been the direfull consequences of suffering men to preach and pray what they saw good, without controul or constraint. So long as there be men, there will be fail∣ings: so long as there are sinners, there will be irregularities; and therefore there must be Laws and bridles; either the civil Magistrate must be medling, or there wil be no living. 4. From that contempt and reproach that would befall the Church, if Magistrates did not meddle with her. I am perswaded that it is for fear that Church, or Church-Officers should be regarded that makes many deny the Magistrates authority in it: if Solomon in all his glory, honour the Priest he shall be respected in all Solo∣mons Court. The Church hath Noble Titles given her in Scripture, and good Laws, wil give her in the sight of men dignity thereunto: there is honourable mention made of all the Ordinances of the Church, and through faith they have got a good report: it is fitting that their mouths be stopped that would defaine them, and do slan∣der them in the face of her own people. There were some lately that by a most prophane and Impious Ca∣tachresis, brought the Church to be compared to horses in Pharaohs Chariot, as Cant. 1 9.) to her glory and dignity it is spoken) they wickedly made her only to serve to draw them into High-places; which opinion hath so far infected this age that the gray hairs of our holy Mother the Church is scorned, mocked and derided by the basest of the people, which evill we hope to see removed by good Laws from the Magistrates, and the Church to receive her due de∣voir by penal statutes.
5. Because the Magistrate himself is appointed of God to be a Minister for the peoples good. Rom. 13.4. To be alogether for the good of the State, is but a partial good; to command that none steal my goods, and yet another kill me with false Doctrine, will not pro∣fit me much. Is he a Minister of God for good? then by all ways and means he is to do good; and what greater good conducing thereunto, then to see the Ordinances of the Church maintained in purity, number and nature, to see that sound reaching be in the Pulpit, as well upright judgeing upon the Bench, he is to see so far as possibly his Subjects prosper, both soul and body; and when he doth so, then is he a Minister to them for their good; and indeed if he be no for the spiritual good in the right managing of the Church, he cannot be for their good in the ordering of the State; for people seldome change Religion only: but as of∣ten as this sacred Anchor is weighed, so often the Ship of the Com∣mon-Wealth is tossed; and no wonder; for Heresie being the School of Pride, by little and little, while it shakes the mind from Gods Yoke, it shows us in like manner how to defame and shake off hu∣mane Government. It is plain, that the wisdom of Hereticks aims at this point; and taking away, or preaching down such things as put an outward Majesty upon the face of Religion, it brings them to be hail fel∣lows with God, to be of no Religion; and he that is once so per∣swaded, will easily expel all thoughts of reverence to him whom God hath made his Lord, and revolt from their King with as little reluctation as they turned from God; and what may be the issue of these things, is not much to be questioned; even every man to do that that is right in his own eyes. And what good that will bring the Common-wealth, I cannot understand. But 6. Kings, Magistrates, and Princes, have a particular charge gi∣ven them to kiss the Son, Psal. 2.12. Kissing was anciently an act of homage; one King that acknowledged himself Tributary, or promised Fidelity to another, performed it by kissing him whom they promised it unto; so far as I remember, they generally per∣formed it kneeling. For this reason the hands of Kings are at this day kissed, by which their Subjects declare their subjection; that they shall be ready to wait upon him, at the putting out of his hand; and by it they tacitely promise, to be as faithfull to him as his own
right arm. To kiss the Son therefore, is, to acknowledge subjection to him, that they owe and hold their Crowns of him, and withall to be faithfull to his Crown and Service; and that in their publick as well as private capacity; not onely as he is a Christian, but as he is a King; that as a Master in his House, and as a Father over his Children, by his Authority to keep his Subjects in subjection to the King of Kings. Now what more immediate way can the Son be honoured than by taking care of his Spouse for to preserve her in Honor, and maintain her in the full enjoyment and free possession of those things which her Husband left her, until the second coming? for the Church is the Lambs Wife. Let us not imagine, that a King is onely to regard his owu soul, or to look after nothing but his Sb∣jects bodies; both Scripture, Reason, and Conscience, and all good Christians, would have the fear of God taught in a Regal way (not Ministerial) by him, to all that are about him, with him, and under him. It is not for a show onely that Kings wear Crosses upon the top of their Crowns; but signifies that the Honour of him that died upon the Cross, is to be maintained by him that wears it. In a word, let's abhor and excommunicate the thoughts, even deliver them over unto Sathan, that would make a distinction between a Kings publick and private capacity; when it is done to smite him with the tongue, and divest him of that power, which as King is given him of God; especially since we know what cursed acts, and blasphemous words were the consequences of them in late years. 7. God hath in a peculiar and special way promised to bless his Church, even as a Church with Kings and Queens, Isa. 40.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mo∣thers, &c. Whatever Peace and Plenty the Church enjoys by the Civil Laws and Statutes of that place wherein she lives, yet if she be not blessed and fed as she is a Church, and in that capacity, this promise is not fulfilled; for all those outward things she may enjoy under a professed Turk; but to suck, and grow, and be fat, and nur∣sed, and swadled, and that in the nature of a Church, is the nature of this promise. There is a distinction made by some, that Kings have nothing to do to meddle with things Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, but with things
Temporal or Politick; and that under the Law Magistrates might have power, but they have none under the Gospel. I woold have those that suppose o, to reade this one Text, they will find it a Gospel-promise, it being made touching the access of the Isles and Nations of the Gentiles in a National way to the Church of God; as is clear in the following words. And the ground both of this and the other distinction, considering the Arguments before given, is onely ignorance of the Scripture, and the malice of the oppo∣nent both to the Magistrate and Church; the one would rob him of half his Dominion, and the other, under God, of her greatest protection, that they might reign with the one, and trample upon the other, under a pretence of serving God. And yet, now I re∣member, it hath another ground, the very same that the Popes Chair stands upon (viz.) That Magistrates have no power over Churches nor Church-men; by which Principle the Popes Supre∣macy stands firm; and Indeed there are two opposite parties of Po∣pery and P. who though they have no agreement with each other, yet they meet in  Draconis, to darken the Authority of Gods Anointed. 8. Kings and Magistrates, as they are Church-members, have a power to act for the good of the Church, and to exercise what∣ever power they have, for the good of the whole body; and what∣ever Talent God gives them, they are to lay it out for his Glory; and how can they, or what means can be imagined that they can glorifie God more by, than by seeing his Word and Ordinances kept in that Dignity, and used with reverence, and received in that form that may most conduce to the Honour of God, and keep up the Dignity of his Institution? 9. The very Being and Power of Magistrates is erdained of God, Rom. 13.1. Now shall we suppose that God would constitute a Po∣wer on Earth, which in no age, time, nor place, he would have to meddle with the great Concernments of his own Glory, and to have nothing to do to preserve his Name from blasphemy, his Or∣dinances from indignity, and his Worship from contempt? When I see a Text that holds out that limitation, I assure them I shall be∣lieve it; but not before. 10. Kings have been accounted, and ought to be esteemed, C∣stodes
utriusque Tabulae Decalogi, keepers of both Tables of the Law. They are not onely to keep down murtherers, adulterers, stealers, which belongs to the second Table, but swearers, Sab∣bath-breakers, which are sins against the first Table. For where is the Magistrate limited, that he may meddle with the fifth or sixth Commandment, and forbid to meddle with the third or fourth? or if he be not limited to the third or fourth, but he must see to the keeping of them, where is he forbid to meddle with the second, which is the Precept for the whole Body and Substance of his Wor∣ship? We are sure it hath been the practice of all pious Princes since the Creation (if not hindred by Rebellion within, or from Invasion abroad) to make good Laws for the preservation of the Churches Honour; and, as a means to it, to have care of Schools and Universities, which are Nurseries out of which to take Plants to put into the Garden of God (which is the Church) as God was pleased to gather old into his Garner, which is Heaven. 11. We shall scarce reade of any, or talk with any that de∣nie this Question, but in other points are either Schismatick, He∣reticks, or Rebels, who to justifie their Heresi, or maintain their Rebellion, sound their Trumpet with Sheba, that man of Belial, saying, We have no part in David, 2 Sam. 20.1. 12. It is the judgement of all the Reformed Churches in the Christian World; Confession of the Church of France, Art. 39. of the Church of Belg. Art. 36. of Sax, Art. 23. of the four Ci∣ties, Art. 23. of Bohem. Art. 16. of Basil, Art. 7. of Helvet. Art. 30. of Scotland, Art. 24. Church of England, Art. 37. Generally the Anabaptists by name in the several Confessions are condemned for denying of it. By this Jury of Witnesses let this pass for truth, they are so unspotted in their natures, that I can imagine no know∣ing nor loyal Christian will except against one of them. Rebels will except all, for if they stand, they know that they shall be condemn∣ed and fal. Let that be written, maugre Rebels, upon the Gates of our Soveraign Lord the King, wh was written upon the Sword of that famous Prince Charles the Great, Custos utriusque Tabulae est CAROLUS.
And now we come to the second part of the question (viz) whe∣ther the Laws made by the civil Magistrate for governing of the Church, be binding to the consciences of men. Notwithstanding it hath been above proved that Magistrates have power given them by God, by which without more trouble we must urge obedience, yet we shall spend some words touching this and in order to it shall premise, 1. That the Consciences of men directly, properly, and im∣mediately, are not, neither can be tyed to any Laws, but those of Almighty God. The Lawes that flow from his eternall reason, are propely the tye of Conscience. 2. So far as Law urgeth and enjoynes those things that make for the better conservation of Divine Laws, as that, Let every thing be done in decency and in order, they do indirectly and secundarily bind and tye the conscience; and the reason is not because such Laws are made by the lawfull Magistrate only, but chiefly because such Laws as such do participate of the nature of divine Laws which are ab∣solutely binding. We answer then in the Affirmative; whatever Laws are made by the Christian Magistrate for the better conservation of Divine, Tyes and Binds the Conscience of their Subjects. This appears upon these grounds. 1. God hath absolutely commanded obedience to be given by every soul to the higher powers sor conscience sake. Rom. 13.5. He hath not left it as a thing indifferent to obey or not; to say that this is in temporal things onely, is to say nothing, except the ground of this distinction be holy; for as I finde no limitation of the Magistrates power, but it reaches the first as well as the second Table, so I can finde no restriction of my obedience, but it is to be given to Lawes of either kind; know then, where Laws are not con∣trary to Gods Law, and by me resisted, I resist the power (not personall but) authoritative, for which I shall receive damnation.Rom. 13.2. So that the w of God, this Law that you presume you keep, through your resisting the power, condemns you for so do∣ing. Let every soul, and therefore let thy soul submit to the High∣er Power; and make no distiction where God hath made none, left when he comes to distinguish the Sheep (which is tractable to the
Shepherd) from the Goates, (a nature apt to wander,) thou stand at his left hand. There is no minutula legis; until thou finde a little God, and a little or tolerable Hell, never act wilfully a little sin. It is a Text that Titus must preach upon to his hearers, that they forget not to be subject to powers (they might think that Christian Religion freed them from subjection; but it is nothing so; that plucks not the Scepter out of the hand of the Rulers, but keeps it in,) and and to be ready to every good work Tit. 3.1. (i.e.) be prompt and cheerfull for every thing that hath a tendency to good, or that may be good to others, though in all points we stand in no need of it our selves. It is part of that honour that God hath engaged us to give Princes; for honour is their due. Rom. 13.7. They are Ministers, Rulers, Kings, Powers; Nay, they be Gods. Psal. 82.1. Hence it is that Fear God, Honour the King, goas together in the Scripture: Then next God, I am to honour my King. Sure unto whom God hath given such Honourable Titles: I am to give sutable respect, and of that this Obedience is a great part, and to do it not out of a civil choice, but for conscience sake; but possibly this may be no great Argument, Therefore 2. We are to yield obedience to the Civill Magistrate in all things lawfull or expedient for the Lords sake. 1 Pet. 2.5. Where a duty is pressed upon the sake of our Lord, it both shews how much we are concerned to do it, & how earnest or desirous they are to have us to do it that adjure us. The Institution of Magistrates being from the Lord (though the constitution of them be of man) calls loud for obedience; and that danger that might attend the Gospell of the Lord, if believes should not obey, is possibly the ground of this high charge. For indeed whatever Government be set over us though (possibly disaffected by us) ought in such things to be yiel∣ded unto, if not for his sake who is in the Throne, yet for his sake who set him in. But by this time I conjecture, I see some in this Generation af∣firming that by this & some passages mentioned before, I take from them all liberty, and the death of Christ advantageth them nothing, and therefore they condemn me as Antichristian. Having heard
so much of that, and seen it used so often (by those that did not un∣derstand it) as a proper shield against the Magistrates commands, I shall in a word discover the severall parts of Christian liberty that consists 1. In our being delivered from the curse of the Law. Galat. 3.23. 2. From the Law of sin and death. Rom. 8.2. 3. From all Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, as such. Acts 15.24. 4. From all humane Ordinances and Traditions whatsoever when they are imposed upon the Consciences of men, to be obser∣ved under the pain of damnation, Col. 2.8. This is the whole of Christian liberty; from these Christ hath made us free; but as touching the Observation of Laws and Ordinances, such as were before spoken of, Christ's death hath tyed us to them; so farr are the Thrones of Princes or Church Governours seats from being shaken by Christs bowing down his head (at which time our liberty began) that they are much strengthned by it, as appeared by his own life, before he dyed: and by his Apostles Doctrine when he was ascended. The same reach the Reformed Churches in the Articles above mentioned. Quest. 5. Whether the segregated Churches now in England, be true Chur∣ches? For the resolving of this Question, we must consider the members of these Churches 2. ways. 1. Either as holding the same fundamentall Doctrine that is by Law professed in England, under the Guardship of an Ecclesiastick person, by him taught in all necessary and saving truths, though dif∣fering from the Church of England in other smaller points: these must and ought to be accounted of our body, and are indeed real and true Churches. However, if they would take counsell, it were to be wished that they would go no further in this separating way. For
though I am perswaded they are not the real Fathers of that Bastard brood of Hereticks, that now lies at every door, yet they have gi∣ven and still do give too much occasion by their wanton dalliance to be suspected for the reputed Father of them all, as could be pro∣ved most clearly from the exercises of those Churches at their meet∣ings. But I forbear. 2. Or we shall consider them as holding the same fundamen∣tall Doctrine with us, as the authority of the Scriptures, the necessi∣ty and utility of the Sacraments, and the like; and these gather them∣selves together, and Ordain a Mechanick or Lay-person to be their Teacher in Ordinary. We shall take no notice of his Learning, whether he have any or no; or if you will suppose him to have all learning, acquainted in all the Mysteries of Art, wanting nothing to compleat a Scholar, yet a Trades-man, Mechanick or secular per∣son, either not Ordained or Ordained by the people; and by vertue of that Ordination, whether assumed by himself, or imposed by the people, dispenseth the word and Sacraments, exerciseth the power of the Keys, and as a Minister sent them of God to perswade them in an Authoritative way to be reconciled to God. And these we must also consider 2. ways 1. In their private or civill capacity, as they are Christians live∣ing about or among us, and so both their Teacher and themselves are Members of the same Church with us. (viz.) the Catholick; Or, 2. In their publick, formal or supposed Ecclesiastick capacity, as they have formed themselves, having appointed Mechanicks for their Teachers, whether certain or not, whether Male or Female, exercising worship among themselves by such, or receiving Sa∣craments at the hands of such. Let me now lay down and open one distinction, which well con∣sidered, will answer all objections that in the handling of the Que∣stion may arise in the Readers judgement, that is this. We must note there is a vast difference between a Church con∣stituting, and a Church constituted. This holds not only in Chur∣ches, but in other things; when a government is going to be ere∣cted, some things extraordinary may be done through necessity, which necessity being removed by the thing competed, those extraordinary acts cease being; as at the creation, in constituting the World,
God made trees, herbs, plants, fishes, beasts, yea man, in an ex∣traordinary way, being necessitated to do upon the account of his natur,Those that reason our no be∣ing gospel. Ministers, because we are not called as the Apo∣stles were; may argue that we are not men since we were not made as Adam was. that admitting no creature to be from eternity; but having once made these, he ceased that extraordinary act of creating, and appointed the conservation of the species of the creatures to be in the successive generation of the Individuals: Man is not now made out of the ground, nor the woman made at an instant out of man; God hath put an end to creation, and constituted now generation for the means of keeping man upon the Earth. So in his constituting of the Sacrament of circumcision to be a stan∣ding Ordinance to the Church of the Jews, we know by Gen. 17.24, 25. that Abraham was Ninety nine years old, and his Son Ishmael 13, and the servants of his house, some elder, some younger; but being in their flesh constituted, it was from them to all posteri∣ty to be given at Eight days old: Ishmael was thirteen years, but his sons must be circumcised sooner; because when the Ordinance was constituted, he was not to look to that age wherein God did in∣stitute that Ordinance. So in setling the Priesthood upon Aaron, Levit. 8. Moses was the man that sanctified him, and sprinkled the blood on the Altar seven times, and other Levitical Rites, which in after-ages was not law∣full, save by the Priests, because God having instituted Aaron, he had appointed a natural Succession; and by that Succession was he to be found out, whom the Lord would make to offer upon his Altar. So in setling the Crown of Iudah upon David, he was anointed by the Prophet when he followed the Flocks; but having constitu∣ted him, and by that extraordinary act deputed the Son of Iesse to be the Captain of his People, he will now have us to look no more after that, but among David's Sons, and after Solomon the First∣born, the ordinary way that God hath now appointed for bringing forth one to rule that People. So Christ in constituting a Church for himself upon earth, took from Boats and from the receipt of Custom men, and immedi∣ately ordained them to preach Repentance to the People: now they being constituted, these extraordinary calls are no warrant for men in our dayes, to assume that office; for Christ now and after∣wards
more plainly appoints them to give power to others for the execution of those things, having made it an Ordinance, and from them and by them to continue to the end of the world. And now as these people have constituted themselves a Church, and have in that notion by man or woman, received the Ordinan∣ces of the Church, cast out and took in (in the times of a Church long agoe constituted,) we pronounce them to be no Churches, but nurseryes of Faction, and prusumptuous Boasters; That they are no Churches, we shall endeavour to prove so clearly as we hope any indifferent or unprejudiced reader will not long halt between two opinions. They appear to be no Churches. For, 1. They have no Bishops, Preists, Ministers, or Teachers, (call them what they please) deriving their authority from the A∣postles of Christ. The Apostles were the masters of our Israel, ordained by Christ to preach the Gospel to all Nations; and where they Taught, they Ordained and appointed Ministers, for the Ruling and Govern∣ing of that Church, and gave them power also to Ordaine others. For this cause saies Paul to Titus, I left the in Crete, (the same place now called Candy,) that thou shouldest set in order things that art wanting, and ordain Elders in every City as I had appointed, Tit. 1.5. The word Elder in the original is , Presbyters or Priests; he must ordain Priests, he cals them Bi∣shops, v. 7. Titus was therefore left in Crete to Ordain Bishops or Priests in every City, that the Gospel might be purely taught,From that chari∣ty & love that burn∣ed always in him to∣wards Christ and his Church he was cast to hungry Lyons by Trajan. and the Sacraments administred. Thus holy Polycarpus, Saint Iohn's Disciple, was placed by him in the Church of Smyrna; Ignatius (that had his name given ab igne charitatis, he was also called , as being born of God) was the second Bishop of Antioch next Pe∣ter. For Peter ruled that Church 7. years; and afterwards came to Rome, An. Christ. 71. The succession of Bishops (I would have none offended at the word; suppose what other name they will, only this is the antient Word) from Peter or any other Apostle, was a certain sign of a true call into Holy Orders among the Anti∣ents.
Let us suppose a man Ordained by the present Bishop of Canter∣bury, and let it be inquired what power he had to do it; he shews it from Abbot Whitgift, and so upward, for a thousand Years (the Records of that Sea being known) until you come to Augustin, the first Bishop of Canterbury. Then ask who gave him power to Or∣dain for that Office, he names you, Gregory a holy Catholick Bishop (Rome not yet being Antichrist) servus Serverum Dei, as he cal∣led himself. He again was Ordained by Pelagius, he by Benedictus, he by Iohn, he by Pelagius, the First, he by Vigilius, he by Sylveri∣us, he by Argapetus, Anno Christi 535. and so upward for 400. years or more, until you come to Alexander the great. An. Chr. 121. He was Ordained by Evaristus, he by Anacletus, he by Cle∣mens, he by Cletus, he by Linus, and he by Saint Peter the Apostle of our Lord, the First Bishop of Rome, who after he hd ruled the Church of Antioch 7. year (in which City the Apostles and Disci∣ples were first called Christians. Acts 11.26.) came An. 67 in the 14. Year of Nero the Emperours Reign to Rome, by whom he was crucified with his head downwards; and all the Bishops after him, until Elutherius, were put to death by Heathen Emperours: for he was the first of 13 Bishops that dyed a naturall death. It is said of him, Est Primus Episcoprum Romnorum qui non perjit morte vi∣olenta. By this Bishop Lucius who Reigned in England, Anno Chri∣sti 180. had some knowledge of the faith and Doctrine of the Gos∣pel. Bring this succession down again from Peter to Linus, from him to Cletus, from him to Clemens, and so down for 400 years to Gregory, who sending Augustin into England, set up his Bishops seat first at Dover, then removed it, as the Gospel prospered, unto London, whence he was removed to Canterbury, where his continued succession remains unto this day. In all those places he taught the Gospel and Ordained Priests or Ministers, and gave them power to Ordain others: Planted Teachers in Winchester, York, Carlisle, and from these again as from fountains, came the Authority of Or∣dination, to water other dry parts of the Nation about them; and so from age to age was it delivered,August. An. Cl. 1556. untill it came upon the Authours head by unquestionable Authority.
Now let us ask one of these Mechanicks, By whom were you constituted and appointed a Church-Officer, to exercise the power of the Keys? if you say from Christ, we deny it; for he Ordained none but his Disciples; if from his Disciples, show or produce your Warrant; for Ordination was given to them, and by their hands given to others, that the succession might be preserved unto the end of the World. So Saint Iames the Apostle, sate Bishop in the Church of Ieru∣salem; Evodius was Bishop of Antioch next Peter, next to him Ig∣natius, and to Theophilus and downward. If we had the Register of the Church of Crete, in which place Titus was set to Ordain Elders in every City, and then ask one, By whom were you appointed to dispence the Word and Sacrament, and exercise the power of the Keys? by such a one, he by him, and he by him, and so you should fal on Titus himself. And Timothy who was Ordained by the same Apostle, the First Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, had a charge in the Epistle sent unto him, to commit the Doctrine to faithful men, that they might be able to teach others. 2. Tim. 2.2. Which Commitment is by laying on of hands, that being the Ceremony for translating the power, viz. the Authoritative of Teaching from one person to a∣nother, as afterwards shall be discovered; which Commitment Ti∣mothy must not be too rash in, but weigh and examine what manner of man he is. 1 Tim. 5.22. For a Bishop must be blamelesse, sober, apt to teach, 1 Tim. 3.2, Or if it be a Deacon, that Tim. so Ordain the lowest authoritative Office in the Church, he must be grave, 1 Tim. 3.8. Which Office of Deacon-ship, if they use well, they may be through their faith in God receive a higher Office, called a purchasing to themselves a good degree. 1 Tim, 3.13. Which may truly bear this construction, that good degree (though a low one) shall make them esteemed of God, and esteemed so wel of his Church, as to make him a Presbyter or a Bishop; for that that Of∣fice was made a step to that of the Priest-hood, is clear both in gos∣pell and Church-History; A Deaconship being only a Probatio∣ners place for it: and according as the Church gave them a Bene∣gessit for the one, they received the degree of the other.
But what authority had Timothy to do all this? (viz.) to ordain Bishops and Elders? because he himself had the power given unto him, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Tim. 4 14. at which Ordination, or laying on of hands, Paul had his hand up∣on Timothy's head, with the Priests or Presbyters, 2 Tim. 4.6. suita∣ble to the practice of the Church of God unto this day, where there are Clergy-men or Presbyters; and these with the Bishop or Superintendent, ordain Ministers by Prayer, and using the Ce∣remony of laying on of hands in that time; the Bishop laying on first, as chief; and by that Ordination they have power to ordain others, and they others, to keep up the Apostolical Succession in the authoritative way of teaching. Now let us go to the Church of Ephesus, and ask those Elders or Presbyters that were in every City, what power and Authority they have to dispense the Word and Sacraments, &c? Since there is a Church constituted, by what Authority therefore do you, you, you? The Answer will be, I had it from such a one; he from him, and he from him, and he from him, and he from such a one, and he from Timothy, and he from the Presbytery, where Paul was present. But now we call to mind, What Authority had Paul to ordain? for Christ ordained none but his Disciples; could Paul therefore give that Power to another, which he never had himself? Is not Paul in this irregular, presuming to ordain Timothy a Church-offi∣cer, he having no such power given unto him by Christ? For the understanding of this, cast your eye upon Acts 13.1, 2. in which place we finde, that after Saul, or Paul, hath given good experi∣ence of the truth of his conversion (for the Church was at first afraid of him, Acts 9.26.) we finde a meeting of the Church of Antioch, and as they were ministring to the Lord, or exercising their Mini∣stry (let it be in preaching and praying, for the Text will hold it out) the holy Ghost calls, saying, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fast∣ed and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away, &c. These two were called before by God for the Work of the Ministry, that the holy Ghost witnesseth in these words, for the work where∣unto I have called them. In a word, qualified they were for that
work, and of their Abilities the Church had sufficient experience; but now that that order might not be subverted, which in the Church by Christ and his Apostles had been constituted, Separation, that is, a solemn setting of them apart from all other Members, by consti∣tuting them Church-officers, is required by the holy Ghost, that in their going thorow the World, they might have power to consti∣tute others; and also be looked upon by the Church, as men sent of God in an authoritative way, for preaching of the Word, deli∣vering the Sacraments, and exercising the power of the Keys, not onely by their inward Qualification, but by external Ordination, that Law being established. When a gifted-Brother, who boasts of an inward Call, can give as good testimony to the Church as Paul is able to do touching his power, none but beasts will move their tongues against them; and when they can shew their Abilities to the Church to be deserving, I dare promise to any, that they may have Ordination; which Paul (though I suppose as well qualified as they) after trial received and had, and that by especial order (the Church it seems being backward, by reason of his former be∣ing a persecutor, and desirous of further trial) from God, to pre∣vent irregularity, or any breach (though in so eminently a gifted person) of that Law, which Christ had appointed in his Church. Thus Timothy can make good his Ordination to be Apostolical in each part. Bring this line down again; By the Ministers and Pro∣phets of Antioch was Paul ordained; he ordains Timothy, and Timo∣thy again gave this power to other faithfull men, sometimes ordain∣ing them Deacons, and sometimes Priests; and so throughout the fa∣mous Church of Ephesus, though afterward it languished, Rev. 2.9. and whether Timothy be the Angel that that Epistle is sent unto, is uncertain; but certain, that all the Presbyters and Deacons in the Church of Ephesus are able to produce their power as Church-officers from the Apostles; who were, as before was said, the Masters of our Israel; and he that would be owned a Church-officer, shall be owned by me, producing his power from them, or deducing that power from them to himself, according to that Apostolical way constitu∣ted in the Church of Christ, and in all the Churches of the Saints. But of Ordination, by Gods help we shall speak more at large, when we come to that Ordinance in particular.
For the present, know that by this succession of Ministers, Priests or Bishops, were the Hereticks known from Catholicks (the antients knew no other division in the Church) and whence they derived their power to administer the seales by putting them to show their succession from the Apostles, who instituted the way of Ordina∣tion to be a standing Ordinance for ever in the Church. Thus Ireneus confuted Valentinus, Cerdon, and Marcion; we are able saith he, to reckon up those that were appointed Bishops by the A∣postles in their severall Churches unto our time; he then reckons up such as succeeded Peter and Paul,Altare Christia, num. pag. 8. Ex. ren. lib. 3. c. 3, , 5. in the Church of Rome; to them succeeded Linus, who sat eleven years in that Chair, to him suc∣ceeded Cletus, who sat twelve years, to him Clemens, who sat nine years, &c. By this Ordination which from the Apostles is re∣ceived in the Church, the publishing of the faith hath come even to us, which being able to show, consundimus omnes cos qui ququo modo vel per suam placentiam, &c. we put to silence all that through vaine glory, or ignorance broach new Doctrin in the Church; for none of the Hereticks can derive their succession from the Apostles, nor show how their doctrines were received by tradition from them. And indeed the rise both Old and New Hereticks, and the time that they were first received, and oftentimes the first broacher or Authour of them is known. The Doctrine of the Nicholaitans was not for 50. Years after Christ. The Menandrians for 68. The E∣bionites in the year 71. were first heard to preach their Doctrine: the Millenaries or Fifth Monarchy men did frame theirs, An. 108. The Valentinians theirs. An. 130. the Manicheans theirs, An. 275. the Arrians theirs, An. 310. this did almost drown the World. The Donatists theirs, An. 315. the Photinians theirs, An. 350. the Ma∣cedenians theirs, An. 360. the Pelagians theirs, An. 415. the Eu∣tycheans their, An. 447, with an infinite number more; The Ana∣nabaptists first broke out. An. 1520. the wildest Hereticks of all that had gone before them. The Ubiquitaries, An. 1580. the Armini∣ans, An. 1612. All these, having their Rise in the Church, from their several Patriots, after the Apostles had confirmed and decla∣ed the doctrine of Christ; and appointed a way for the publishing of that, viz. by Ordination, were known not to be Catholical.
As the Church grew, by her continued succession of Teachers, she found Heresies to grow by her side; and by casting her eye back, by succession she found them to be no Teachers; and finding by Tra∣dition no such Doctrine taught by the Apostles, as those men held out, still as they appeared, condemned them as heretical, having no Disciple for the Author of their Doctrine taught, nor no Apo∣stolick man whom they did succeed as Teachers. The Church usually spoke to those upstarts in appearing, in this or the like language, Quando & unde venistis! quid in meo agitis, non mei? shew when and whence you came; what make you here, since you are none of my Sons? none of my Teachers knows you; no such Doctrine hath been taught them by the Apostles, who put them in their places and Offices. Polycarpus was placed Bishop in the Church of Smyrna by S. Iohn, unto whom no such Doctrine was taught as is by you Valentinians and Anabaptists.Those in some points teach one and the same do∣ctrine. Linus was made Bishop by Peter of the City of Rome, who was taught no such Doctrine as you Novatians, Arrians, and Quakers do teach; and from them downward, in a right moral succession, they were found but starcups by the way side; God suffering in every Age some He∣resie to grow, whereby the faith and stedfastness of the Saints might be known and tried. This Succession was one thing amongst many,Epist. con. Manich. c.4. tom. 6. that kept S. Augu∣stine in the bosome of the Catholick Church. Multa (saith he) in Ecclesiae gremio me justissime tenent; The succession of Priests from S. Peter's Chair, keeps me of right in the Church; Tenet Ca∣tholic ae nomen; For whereas all Hereticks would be called Catho∣licks, yet if they be demanded by a stranger, where the Catholick Church is at which they meet, that is, where is that Catholick Church that teacheth as you do, and where had it beginning? they having neither Doctrine nor Teacher of hers, (all being upstarts) there is none that dare undertake to do that. In a word, Catholick Ministers in all Ages could shew the very Places, Chairs, wherein there was not onely a moral succession in purity of Faith and Doctrine, but a local Succession of Priests or Ministers from the Apostles themselves, who were immediately called by Christ as the Church was in constituting; and by him di∣rected to be given to others by them as they did, and enjoyned those
to give it to others (as in the Epistles of Timothy and Titus) and so to keep it in the Church constituted until the end of the World: He himself not once offering to alter that estblished Rule, as in the case of Saul; though he was furnished with all inward Graces, and naturl Abilities for the Work, yet he must have an external Call by Ordination; and those seven men that were of good re∣port, full of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, Acts 7.3. could not, or did not, exercise the Offices of Deacons (the lowest Offices of the Church, and therefore by our upstart-Preachers never medled withal) without Ordination or Imposition of Hands. Now Reader, weigh but with indifferent judgement the above-named Succession, and let me ask thee, if any Mechanick Trades∣man, or every Ly-person, ought or should assume to themselves the Power of exercising in an authoritative way any Office in the Church, in the least degree of it, without this external Call of Or∣dination, now the Church is constituted that way? Or ought they to receive that power from the People? For from the beginning the Church had never such power given to her. Ordination is an act of Authority; and the power of ruling was never in the People, but in her Officers. Every one, or any two or three gathered, had no power to constitute Elders, but Timothy onely, and such as were deputed by him. Ought then according to the Scriptures, any of our Hereticks to be looked upon as Gospel-Ministrs, not having this Gospel-call? Or ought he so to look upon himself, because of his Holiness, Parts, Abilities, Graces, Gifts? doth he finde the Spirit prompt him, call him, furnish him with whatever belongs to that Office in an inward way, and the Spirit to assist him at all times in an eminent way? so had Saul, so had the seven Deacons, yet they must be ordained, and by those that had the power given unto them, from Church-Officers of an Apostolical nature, (viz.) by Or∣dination. And though some few Members of the Church should out of their over-much zeal choose one to be a Teacher to them, to be rled, guided, taught and instructed; yet this can never give them autho∣rity to dispense the Sacraments, or exercise the Keys, or make him to be owned as a constituted Minister, no more than when two or three give up themselves to be advised, ruled, commanded by
another man; which their so doing, makes him not a Constable, Judge, or Justice; in respect the power of making such Officers was not given at all to them: So here, though their rash zeal will have a Lay-person to teach them, yet they ought not to own him, nor he to esteem himself as a Church-officer, since Ordination makes onely that; which the People had never in their power, and therefore cannot give that Office unto any. When Christ was taking his leave of his Apostles, and going to the Father, Matth. 28.20. he promised to be with them to the end of the world. Now Peter and Thomas, and the rest being dead, it cannot be personally understood of the Apostles, but successively in their followers; and they were to teach whatever Christ com∣manded. But the Apostles never taught such Doctrine to their im∣mediate Successors, as our Hereticks teach now; particularly this, That people might ordain; or that men, by reason of their Gifts or Graces, might assume to themselves the authoritative Act of rea∣ching, binding and loosing; nay, of exercising a Deacons Office, which is the lowest, which I cannot remember any of our Hereticks to go about once to touch, though it be the passage to the oher Offi∣ces of the Church by Apostolical Constitution; but jumps imme∣diately from the Shop into the Pulpit by his Gifts, judging himself sufficiently qualified; and, because of the peoples call, sufficiently ordained for such an Office, unto whom that power was never given. Neither do I envie any mans gifts; would all the Lords People were Prophets; let these men shew me their Succesion, and let me perish if I give them not the right hand of fellowship. And seeing they give out themselves for lawfull constituted Teachers in the Church, as Paul, as Timothy, as Titus, or as the seven Deacons, give me leave to ask them how they came in, and how they got tht power? if they came not in by this door, they must pass for thieves and robbers, and therefore no Teachers; and those people that or∣dain them, for rebels and traytors, for setting up Governors, and appointing Officers in another way than he hath designed and cau∣sed to be delivered to the Church, which is his Kingdom; to take no notice of those railing accusations which they bring against, and cast upon such as are Officers by Apostolical Authority, which in the
end of their days may heighten their punishment, as it doth now their rebellion. From all that hath been said we conclude these to be no Churches, as they are now constituted: for they have now no Gospel Priests, Ministers, or Teachers; no Ministers, because no Apostolicall succession; bring the line downward, from the Apostles, and these men as they are now constituted are not to be found; they have no succession, because no Ordination; and no Ordination, because not Apostolical: and not Apostolical, because it is not come to them from the Apostles, who were the first Ordained Gospel Ministers, and immediately qualified and impowered for the work, and bring∣ing in of many to the Gospel; and from their hands did the same power issue into others, that as every age came up after another, so there be those fitted to teach it unto all generations; and so the Apostolical succession now the Church is constituted, must, ought, and shal continue to the end of the World; whatever Opposition, men or Devils, Hereticks and Persecutors (the two beasts that Sathan useth to destroy the Church) canmake against, or what ever weapon they can form against it, or whatever rayling accusation they can bring against it, or whatever contumelious and reproaching spec∣ches they can cast upon it. Reader, It is not to be passed over in silence, that Peters sitting in Rome as Bishop thereof, nay of his being at Rome at all, is doubt∣ed by some: though famous Historians and antient Fathers, that li∣ved near and under these times, do in their Histories and Writings affirm it: yet Calvin that was almost of that judgement, is brought to acknowledge that he dyed there:Calv. Inst. lib. 4. S. 15. Quia tamen pleri{que} Scriptores in eo consentiunt, ne pugnemus quin ibi moriuns sit. Only how long he was there is uncertain: the Church of Rome say 25, year, but that is most improbable. The Reasons that they bring against it, are not so strong as to cause a man to call in Question ancient History: his Apostleship no more hindering him at Rome, then it did in Antioh; those of the Cir∣cumcision being scattered from their Country. And when it is af∣firmed he was Bishop, it is not to be understood that he always resi∣ded
and constantly abode in Rome; perfection and Apostleship might keep him from that, which might be the ground of Pauls not mentioning him in Scripture; in regard also of Peters being with the Lord in the body, and of his seeing of the Lords glory in the holy Mount, might he by the Church at Rom, who were beloved of God. Rom. 1.7. be chosen to be Bishop (possibly not by any for∣mal instalment) that is the chief Teacher or Ruler of that Society, nothing reflecting to disparage Paul, he being also frequent in jour∣nies. However Eluselius that lived An. 180,For Act. & mon. p. 34, Ex Eus. lib. 3. c. 3. writes in his Church-History, that Peter and Paul, in their going abroad to preach the Gospel to other Nations, appointed Linus to Rule the Church of Rome, (they not tying themselves to any one people, since the whole World was their Diocesse.) After whom succeeded Clesus, and then Clemens, as before; onely with this difference that Euse∣bius make Anacletus the same with Cletus, which other Authors make two different persons, making Cletus to Rule 12. year, An. Chr. 81. and Anacletus to Rule 9. year, An. 103. according to Alsteads Chronology, which as is above, was followed: the Reason of this disagreement might be the identity of their names: possibly the distinction of first and second, either through persecution, or through inobservance of Authors, being not observed or not thought necessary. This Linus that the Historian records to have been made Bishop of that Church by Peter & Paul, during their being a∣broad, may nor unlikely be supposed to be that Linus who is men∣tioned by Paul, 2 Tim. 4. ult. during his second and closer Im∣prisonment at Rome, immediately before his death. Most of them that question these Histories of Peters being Bishop of Rome, by which we understand the supream Teacher and Gover∣nour of that Church, are fearful that, should it be granted, they might gratifie the Pope too much; then it would appear that he was Peters successor: which to grant, advantages him no more, then it would do Demas that ever he followed Paul, when he Apostatized from him; or that it should be an honour to Ierusalem, that Iames the Apostle was Bishop there, which is granted: nay, that Christ who
was chief Bishop ever lived there: it is known that the Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God. 2 Thes. 2.4. Then it may be in Peters chair; he hath therefore little reason to brag of either, since his destruction is certainly to come from thence. It is to be imagined that before this time the ignorant will won∣der, the Phanaticks smile the Schisinatickslaugh to hear so much spo∣ken of Rome; let all know, that the Faith and Grace of the Church of Rome was spoken of throughout the whole World. Rom. 1.7, 8. It was a holy and pure Church, as Ierusalem once was. And Ordina∣tion being an Ordinance of God, is no more to be contemned for it's coming from Rome to Canterbury, then it is to be contemned for it's coming from Ierusalem to Rome, though that was the slaughter∣hose of the Prophets. yet Ordination is no bloody Ordina∣ence, though Rome now be the Whore,Carnifrira na Prophe∣tarum. drunk with the blood of the Saints; yet Ordination is none of her Bastards. Rome was pure from Idolatry from Linus to Silvester the first, that was until the year 300. It was somewhat defiled from Silvester the 1. unti Eonis face, the third, that was until the year 606. It was Antichrist from Boniface the third, until Alexander the seventh, who is this present year Bshop of Rome, 1660. We might show that before Rome was Antichrist, Gregory the great sent Austin over into England; but it needs not: Ordination being none of Romes brats when she is at worst; nor none of her bringing forth when she was at best. From Christ it came first, from Ierusalem, that spread over all the World; through Rome it came to England; he therefore that despiseth this, despiseth an Or∣dinance of Christ, (come whence it pleaseth) for he enjoyned it, and in no Ordinance of God, ought we to separate from the Church of Rome, neither do we, but hold, as we ought, Communion with her. The bright Orient Pearl and Jewel of the Church of England, in his Apology for the separation of the said Church from Rome, de∣clares, as touching that we have now done, to depart from that Church, whose errours were proved and made manifest to the world, which Church hath already evidently departed from Gods Word; and yet to depart not so much from it as the Errours thereof. &c.
2. The segregated Congegations in England are not Churches constituted: for they have no Sacraments: this follows upon the for∣mer, and rises morally from it: where there is no Minister or autho∣ritative Officer, there can be no Sacraments, they being the Seals of the Covenant of grace which is made unto believers, either when they are incorporated or confirmed in the body of Christ, which is the Church. Ephes. 1.23. Thy are also called broad seals of heaven (that of the spirit being the private) by which the receiver is as∣sured of the pardon of his sins; Now to the private Christian did Christ never give the keeping of, or the power of delivering those seals. The People were never Lord-chancellours of these things, whether singly or collectively taken: therefore they cannot give nor dispence them to another. Iohn the Baptist was called from God immediately to baptize, so were the Apostles, by Christ, who Ordained none, nor Baptized none but them: while the Church of Christ was constituting, God was pleased so to do; but after the Baptists death, and the Apostles call, no such extraordinary acts, but all must receive now that power from the hands of the Apostles by Ordination. The Church may say to those men, when they come to dispence the Seals, Peter I know, Paul I know, Stephen I know, Nicanor I know, Timothy I know, Titus I know; but who are you? if you say you were, or are Ordained by Christ, he Ordained none but his Disciples: if you were Ordained by his Disciples, show it by your Commission: wee shal know whether Baptisme be from Heaven, that we may believe, or from men, that we may not be mistaken in it. Possibly the peo∣ples Election and deputation is produced for this authority, which is to be equally regarded, as he who should come with a Commissi∣on from a mans own son for the Father to execute the power or Office of Justice of the peace; which is to be scorned, his Son having no power to grant such Orders or give such Offices. The power of Ordination, search the Scriptures, was never granted to the people, neither in the Old nor New testament. We find in∣deed Micha, Iudg. 17. having a House of Gods, and an Ephath and a Teraphim, consecrating one of his sons for a Priest, though of the tribe of Ephraim, of which tribe Moss spoke nothing touching the Priesthood. He afterwards Consecrated a Levite to be his Priest.
verse 12. which was an Office peculiar to the Sons of Aaron, not to the Levites in common; but who gave Micha the power of con∣secration? how can he consecrate any Priest at all? this moved him, vers. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did what was right in his own eyes; there being no Magistrate or Governour to keep the people in awe; An Ephraimite may con∣secrate and offer Sacrifice; and the Worship of God being con∣temned through the disorder of the times, a Levite is forced to wander for a place, and assume the Priesthood. The want of Go∣vernment was the cause of this, and other evils that followed upon it: The self-same cause is the reason of the irregularity that hath lately been in England, touching Micha's (even Peoples) ordina∣tion of Priests, which power was never given to him nor them. In one thing Micha is to have his due applause, he would have none to offer Sacrifice in his House (a priestly Office) before he were consecrated, i.e. before he were ordained Priest; he had read in the Law what Sacrifices & Duties were appointed in the designa∣tion of men into that Office; his Son, nor the Levites not being of that line, unto whom by a natural succession the Office belonged, he saw a necessity of making them Priests; for he must worship God; and if they be Priests, they must be consecrated; he knows nor how or where to procure another;  therefore takes the Autho∣rity to himself of Consecration. And truly such Priests as he made, and himself that made them, and the Worship they gave by him, and the gods they worshipped too, were suitable to each other. Even such are they, though in this particular worse, who will offer to design or depute any to be their Priest or Minister who are not of that line, to whom by a moral Succession that Office onely belong∣eth, by their being deputed and set apart for that Office by the Sa∣crifice of Prayer and Supplication, and with the ceremony of Im∣position of Hands by those who have received that power by Apo∣stolical Tradition. Possibly he may produce his own Gifts of Holiness, Utterance, Aptness to teach, Courage, Zeal, with all other Gifts that are pos∣sible to qualifie men inwardly for that Office; and indeed may shew a Call from God, which he supposes ought to be sufficient to testifie that his Baptism is not of men, or to demonstrate that he is a man
sent from God, authoritatively to teach and administer the Sacra∣ments to his Church. But the Church values not those in this na∣ture: for so Paul was qualified also, and Barnabas qualified, and called of God for that Office; yet God will have them to be consti∣tuted authoritative teachers in the sight of the Church, by the Laws that were by him appointed for the Church, viz. by Ordination or Imposition of hands. Act. 13.3. So Stephen, Nicanor, Philip, &c. Acts 6. were men of honest report, full of the Holy ghost and wisedome: yet the lowest Office in the Church cannot they, nei∣ther do they offer to perform in that Ordination from the Apostles. Upon this ground the Church hath reason to deny their Authority, and we deny that they have power to administer Sacraments: the bread that they brake, is not the body of Christ; the cup they offer is not the Communion of the blood of Christ, shed for the remissi∣on of sins; they have not received this power of the Lord (because not from his Apostles) of causing Bread to be by faith beheld as the body of Christ, nor Wine to represent the blood of Christ. In a word let us see how or when they received power from the Apostles; o∣therwise they must passe for counterfeits and cheats, and the offence so much the more hainous, as it's a counterfeiting the Great Seal of Heaven, to bring Christs Spouse and her children in an errour in matters of so gat concernment as the Seal of the Remission of their sins: but she knows his hand, and though they should come with never so much show of humility, nay confirm their calling by mi∣racles, she is not, she will not believe it. Christ her Husband hath forewarned her that such should come, and charged her not to heed them, not follow them, but shun them, and avoid them. 3. Should we Church those segregated Congregations, as now constituted, we must and are to un-Church all the Churches that now are, or that ever have been in the Christian World. They taught and teached the contrary; they maintained and dyed for the con∣trary: they walk Autipodos to one another: there is a great diversity in their walking (thus constituted) as between the Summers heat, and the Winters Frost. All the Christian Churches in the World have been or are Synagogues of Sathan, if these segregated Congre∣gations be the Churches of Christ: the Church of Ierusalem was no Church, the Church of Antioch was no Church, the Church of Crete
was no Church, the Churches of Corinth, of Galatia, of Philippi, of Ephesus, of Smyrna, of Philadelphia, of Sardis, were no Chur∣ches, if these be. See the Confession of Faith of all Reformed Churches now in Christendom; of Helvetiae, Bohemia, of France, of Basil, of Bel∣giae, of Auspurge, of Saxony, of Wirtemberge, of Swedeland, of Scotland, of England; all of them do with one joint consent teach the contrary Doctrine of Separation, of Ordination, of Sacra∣ments, of the Keys, unto those Congregations. Cast your eye upward, to the Writings, Sermons, Expositions, Epistles, Disputes, of the most Ancient, Worthy, Learned, Godly Patriarchs, Martyrs, Fathers, that lived in any age of the Church, or in all the Centuries of the purer times, that immediately fol∣lowed the Apostles, and you shall by the whole Body of the Church see these mens practises and Doctrine, as they have constituted themselves, to be doomed, judged, sentenced, as schismatical or heretical; there being no such Doctrine touching those points they maintain, in reference to the Ordinances above named, taught by the Apostles or their immediate Successors. Saint Iohn the Apostle taught no such Doctrine to Polycarpus, whom he ordained Bishop of Smyrna, Anno Christ 71. about forty years after Christs death; nor Peter to Linus, whom he made Bishop of Rome, Anno 70. Neither did he teach any such Doctrine to Evodius the Second, nor to Ignatius the Third, nor to Theophilus the sixth Bishop of Anti∣och after himself, who lived Anno 170. These would have been faithfull in delivering that Doctrine, if they had received any such command frm the Apostles. But they teach the contrary, and to Posterity deliver the contrary; and from Generation to Generati∣on it hath been taught, until it came to the very Age wherein we live. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who lived anno 240. Atha∣nasius Bishop of Alexandria, anno 376. Hilarius Bishop of Poict∣tiers in France, anno 355. Optatus Bishop of Millaine, anno 365. Basilius the great Bishop of Caesarea, anno 370. Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum, anno 370. Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, anno 370. Ambrose Bishop of Millain, anno 374. Gregory Bishop of Nssa, anno 380. What shall I do? I might weary myself in copying out the worthy Champions of the Church that lived in
other times, as Hierom the best of Presbyters, Chrysostome, Au∣gustine, Cyrill, who all (before a Papist was heard of) taught the very self-same thing that we are now proving, (viz.) That such as separate themselves from the Catholick Church upon the account of mixture, and assume to themselves the power of executing in an authoritative way the Ordinances, Seals, Censures of the Church, upon what account soever, be irregular persons, unlawfull As∣semblies, and ought to be curbed, suppressed, and punished by all in authority; unto which consent the Reformed Churches. To Church these men, and to sentence their Doctrine for truth, at the same breath we must unchurch all Churches that are, that have been in the Christian World, and before we condemn them, let us sentence these: And we do by these Presents censure them, as proud, boasters, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, (the Church is their Mother, whom they ought not to forsake because she is old) unthankfull, unholy, to be without natural affection, to be truce∣breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good (all the Army of the noble Worthies that have gone be∣fore us) traytors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. And Lord have mercy upon their souls. This may be thought a harsh censure; yet it is no other than up∣on my own knowledge I am able to justifie, having an unhappy cu∣riosity a long season to be frequently at the meetings of several sorts of Hereticks, where I saw more and heard more than ever I should have believed from any other. 4. Should we hold them to be rightly constituted Churches, we should never be sure of a right Church in the World; which is ex∣presly contrary to the ninth Article of our Creed; for there we be∣lieve the holy Catholick Church; that is, that there is, was, and shall be a Chrch, whereof we believe our selves to be Members. For that with us may be accounted as the true and onely Church this day, and wherein we intend to live and die, and by prayers and tears seek its preservation. The next offence we take at some party or other of that Church, or next turn or new Religion that is turned up, we are of another mind; and we conclude that the
Church of Christ is onely those that hold that opinion which for the time past we have spoken against; and if we would walk in the mind, and agreeable to the will of God, we mst be of that society that holds such an opinion; and so from one Congregation to ano∣ther (still keeping from the Doctrine of the Catholick, od in ju∣stice suffering few of them to come back) until through pride we be puffed up, That we hold it needless to be of any Congregation, or create our selves one; which the better to procure, some new opinion is broached; the novelty whereof the giddy heads of men being taken withal, brings disciples in a short time to that teacher; which is the very cause that scarce shall we finde one Heretick maintaining one heresie, but hath with that some other mingled. There being therefore such a mixture of Religions in every one, that its hard from which to give him his name; yet for a mark of distinction, he gets a denomination from some opinion that he prin∣cipally holds; hence one is called a Quaker, though in many points he agree with the Anabaptist, and the Anabaptist with him, and the Millenaries or Fifth Monarcy men with them both; and each He∣resie maintaining stifly that that is the Church, makes him that goes from the Catholick, to doubt of the very being of a Church; which doubt is the immediate parent of those turnings and windings in points of Religion and opinion; as the looseness and iniquity of late years hath clerly discovered to any understanding Christian. Of all those Congregations or Opinionists, that have revolted from the Apostolick Catholick Church, I should chuse to be of that society known by the name of Seekers; they know that there is no Church visible in the World, no Ordinance at all; and therefore they spend their days in seeking one out, and enquiring after one, which makes them of all Opinions the most uncertain; and yet there is great hopes that for the future they may be of some certain∣ty. Some of them affirm the Church to be in the Wildernesse, o∣thers are seeking her in the smoak of the Temple; where lest I lose my self (says my Author) I will leave them: yet since the New year is so near, and having now a fit opportunity, I am loth to leave my Reader without a New-years-gift: a small pack of Re∣ligions that may if well Husbanded, carry him through the whole Year, without want.
I intend to discover the naked truth, and therefore I will present the first with a sound-limbed Adamit; he wil save the buying of clothes (thats something) and assure thee that thou hast no sin; he'll shew thee, nay perhaps conduct thee to Paradise before the year go round. If thou like not him, Here is a Familist; he will have thee to obey all Magistrates, though never so tyrannical, be they Jews, Gentiles, or Turks, (a good Religion for some of this age;) when thou art served of him sufficiently, lend him thy neighbour. That there is no Heaven nor Hell but upon Earth, is a note that thou shalt hear constantly from him; fall but out with thy wife, and accuse her for a whore, he will give thee a Bill of divorce, and give thee a new one. If there be any that will not believe this Doctrine, they shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. I am perswaded (if this be true) thy wife will finde it a hard matter to come to the Kingdom of Heaven. Put up this Religion close, and use it not often, left the good woman hate thee. But Here is a grave Socinian; he will bind thee to nothing that is commanded in the old Testament; That eternal death is nothing but a continual lying in the grave, is his judgement. Upon this ground thou mayst live merrily all the year long. Or if you please you may entertain This pretty Traskit; as long as he knows thee, thou shalt know it is not thy duty to keep the Christian Sabbath. I cannot affirm it, but possibly he will circumcise thee shortly; his nail appear as if he were good at such an act. If neither of these please you, Here is an Antinomian; he thrusts both Tables of the Law from himself, and will affirm that they are of no use at all to thee; by which meanes thou needst neither fear God nor regard man; It is a sin for thee if thou wilt credit him, to beg from God a forgiveness of thy sin, because he knows thou hast none; good works will neither further thee to Heaven, nor bad works keep thee from it; So that thou mayest live as if there were no King in Israel but thy self. But what say you to this Millenary or fifth Monarchy man? he'd have thee expect that Christ will core Reign a thousand years up∣on the Earth, and for that purpose all the wicked must be slain; and
know that if a wicked man live by thee, it he be rich, thou mayst make him a begger: for the wicked you must note have no right to the creature. He wil take very great offence if he hear thee, or thy Fa∣mily sing any one of Davids Psalmes. All the time of Christs Reigning shall be spent in Eating, Drinking, and other Fleshly delights, (so that though thou be poor now, thou mayst live in hope) sutable to the appetite of Cernithus who first broached it. An. C. 7. (For Tares in all Ages grew up with the Wheat.) who was a Person given to Gormandizing and lustfull Sports; the same Doctrine taught Ebion, and withal that Iesus was not born of a Virgin, and that Christ as it were another Person came into Iesus after his Baptism; hence by these two the Gospel of Saint Matthew was only Canonical, and the Epistles of Paul rejected, and by consequence thou may now refuse them. In this box lies a painted Anabaptist: you may see some part of him, all you must not; for he is a monstrous Creature: you have heard of a Man that had another growning out of his side: it may be, this is the Anabaptist, he is not a single Person. I have read of a Countesse of Cracovia, that was delivered of 36. Children at once. An. C. 1270. of another of Holland, that was delivered of 365. at a Birth, An. 1276. Neither of these are to be com∣pared to this Anabaptist for fruitfulnesse: in his Belly is contained all the Spawn, Seed, Roots, of all the Heresies that ever molested or troubled the Church: no opinion that is destructive, no prin∣ciple that is abominable, no doctrine that is infective, no Seed that is hellish, but he hath a Wombe to contain it, all coloured o∣ver with a painted Skin, which if once uncovered would amaze my Reader, that he should not know what Religion to choose of all those that I have presented before him. But know that our Mo∣dern Anabaptist denies this: he is ashamed to own the old Ger∣man Anabaptist the very Father that begot him: like a Begger he will deny his Father to get a peace of Bread: and when he hath got it on him, trust me nor, if these we have in England, would not appear to be the very sones of their German Father, if they had but that which they wish for, long for, and gape after. Religion, Humility, Fasting and Praying was his practice untill he got the Prey; are not their Cloaths of the same colour now.?
We must note that he is not so much painted over, or Cloathed, but we can see something of his wickednesse. I shall uncover but a little of him, and you shall see 21. severall mouths, gaping out of one of his sides, haveing Tongues of Error and Blasphemy, and though privately (like true Envy) they hate and speak against each other, yet they all agree to spit venome and poyson against the members of the Catholick Church, and cast and shake their fil∣thy drivel upon the Officers, of the same; To give each of these blabber-lips their peculiar name, might infect my Paper. I shall name but a few: this Map that he holds in his hand, is a Map of Germany and Munster, once his Fathers Metropolis, and at his ba∣nishing out of Germany, A. 1535. brought it over into England which by his posterity is wrapped that none should get a sight of it; but so far as we are willing; let us see the Monsters that grow and live about this Creature. This is called a Melchiorist, the first thing that he Teacheth, or as soon as it learned to Speak, it Teacheth, and learned to Curse and execrate the Body and Flesh of the Virgin Mary, and that Christ came onely through her Body, as the Sun comes through glass, without receiving any thing from it. This is caled Puer: he cals upon the Christian to ride on sticks and hobby horses, and other Childish, brutish, uncivill actions, af∣firming withall that unless you learn like little Children, you shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: so that what is to play or act the beast with others, is to act the part of a Saint with him: for save in this literall sence that text is onely true. Mat. 10. 3. This is called Hulit: Christ with him is not God: and it is an errour so to believe: and all that are of this judgement are Sons of God. This is distinguished from the rest by the name Denkian: he speaks out aloud that all may hear him, that all the Devils, and all the damned Soules shall at last be brought out of Hell, and reign with God in glory. This is called a Benckeldan: Polygamy he affirmes to be per∣mitted in the Gospel of Christ; it is a mighty holy thing to have many Wives. You must note that it is the proper Language of e∣very one of those severall Sects, arising from the Spawn of this
creature; wherein also they inveigh against and are ashamed each of other; but yet there is one Roman speech that is used by all these together, and is the Dialect of them all in common. Well we may cal it their mother tongue, since we know she who suckled them, taught them also to speak. They hold it unlawfull to take an Oath before the civil Magistrate, though lawfully called thereunto; and hold it not unlawfoll to cut the throat of that Magistrate, holding it a sin in any man to be a Magistrate; most of them believe an earthly Monarchy after the day of Judgement, and free will in spirituall things, and account themselves onely the true Church. They rebaptise, and deny Baptisme to Infants, maintain that there is no original sin, with all Heresies more that have but a tendency to the overthrowing of all Kingdoms, Nations, Churches, Common-wealths and States, as hath been made manifest to the world by those that were eye-witnesses of their helish prancks, murtherous deeds, Blasphemous speeches, Treasonable attempts, unheard of cruelties, unparalleld Villanies, sacrilegious spoilings, and Antichristian undertakings, when by pretended Religion, they had obtained to play the Devils in Germany and Munster, An. 1520. at which time and in which place these severall Monsters appeared all of them in their proper colours; for you must observe they disco∣ver not themselves further then occasion and toleration wil permit them, but enough of this best. Here is a Creature that will even make you cold to behold him, though it self be very hot; he is known by the name of Quaker; he will prophesie at every turn; hearing the Word, reading the Word, and preaching of the Word, and receiving the Sacraments as seals of the Word, is but hanging upon the Tree of knowledge. So long as thou keepst him, thou needst no Chaplain; and when he goes away, believe him, and thou shalt sentence all outward worship as Antichristian. In conclusion, he will teach thy Wife to preach for nothing; and having once learned, it must be something that will make her hold her peace. Now take your choice here, is a Religion for every month in the year: and I am prone to suppose that thy Grand-father was never so well stocked. Yet to keep all fast, Accept of this Hethernigonian; he is a dapper fellow, he will
vow and maintain that the Doctrine of the Church of England is no true doctrine,The broac∣er of this dot ie was ill Hethingon by Trade a Box maker. particularly because it teacheth that all men are sin∣ners, and for keeping but one Sabbath day in the Week, or any Sab∣bath day at all, since all days are and ought to be Sabbaths. And lest thou shouldst be at any loss, he wil carve you out a dainty Wain∣scoat box to put all thy other Religions in. And indeed it is time to shut up; for these foul Vermin, are hurt∣full to my own sight; these wild beasts of prey have troubled the Church, and must, 1 Cor. 11.19. Were it not that I know the smell of these Foxes is good against the palsie, I had not given my Reader this Present as an Antidote against the unsteadinesse of this age: in which as the wild beasts in Africa, meeting at the Wa∣ters, engender with each other, by which new Monsters are constant∣ly begotten: even so in this age, by the meetings of Separatists and Hereticks, there is such a mixture of Serpentine seed cast into the Matrix of itching ears, keeped warm by the fair out-side of it's begetters, brings forth in time monstrous Opinions and shapelesse births, which after a little licking into form (as it is said of the Wolf) receives a name or mark of distinction: yet differing in na∣ture from those that were born before it, no otherwise then a young Fiend doth from an old Devill. My soul, come not thou into their secrets, and to their Assemblies mine honour be not thou uni∣ted. Each of these, and all of these giving themselves out for the only true Church, where should that soul once stand that enters in a∣mong them, but as one groweth out of the sides of another, be∣comes treacherous to its own body, and calls upon all within hear∣ing to hear onely that, and each hollowing, Come to me; the poor creature must needs stand amazed, and either come back into the Catholick whence he came, which is seldom done, or be of no Church or Religion at all, which is often. The Brownist, he is of the spawn of the Anabaptist on one side, and the Quaker comes from him upon another; from the Quaker grows the Ranter, who absolutely affirms, that there is neither God nor Devil, Hell nor Heaven; and this is to go below a Heathen, and deny the Faith held of Infidels. It is said, that Mercury could not shape a suit of clothes for the
Moon, in regard she was never of one bigness: so neither can we (so variable are they in Doctrine) name them Churches, each of them holding private points contradicted by another, onely agree∣ing against the Catholick Doctrine of the Church of England; like the three Brethren at the Siege of Ierusalem by Titus, who agreed all against him, yet had divers Battels fought in the Town between themselves. It is no safe ground to bottom a mans salvation upon; the Catholick Faith is the same in all Ages; it is for the present what from the beginning it was; and shall be at the end of the world what for the present it is; it hath stood, and will stand, though the powers of Hell rally up against her; there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and they remain ever the same; let us there∣fore ever remain where they are taught, not once turning aside to the ocks of the companions, Cant. 1.7. 5. Should we Church this rabble-rout as they have formed them∣selves, at the same instant we must have strange and blasphemous thoughts both of Christ and his Apostles. Did not Christ promise hat he would send his Spirit, and that he should guide his Church into all truth? Iohn 16.13. for if these be true Churches, then Gods Church, even the whole body of the faithfull hath for sixteen hundred years been lead into dangerous and fundamental Errors: Then the Apostles have given wrong judgement in necessary points of Faith, and contrary to the will of God have made Laws in his Church. Unfaithfull have they been in several deep points to the Church, that would no once inform her, that no member of her body but might at his or her pleasure, openly expound and preach the Gospel; that it was no lawfull for a Minister to have humane learning: or that it was unlwfll to hear such that it was and would be unlawful for Ministers to prepare themselves to preach by study: that it was unlawful for a Gospel-Minister not to have some handy Trade, and work in a Mechanick way for his living. Ought they not since it was known to have been long used by Gods people before the Law, and by his people after the Law, to have told, that to re∣ceive Tythes now, was to deny that Christ was come in the flesh: why was it not told us that the whole sterity of man, whether of Heathens or Christians, during their Infancy, are pure and holy, there being no Originall sin? why did not that wise Master builder,
lay his foundation aright, and show us that to enter any into th Church by Baptism without declaration of Faith and Repentance, though born of holy parents, was a sin? and also if any such thing were done in the name of the holy Trinity (wherein consists the essence of Baptisme with the application of the spirit, which is not hindred by Infancy) yet that they ought to be baptized again? Why did they not inform the Church, that though God was pleased to receive the Children of the Jews so far into his favour, as to give them the outward sign of his Covenant with the Fathers, viz. by circumcision, yet would not have the Children of Christians to receive the outward sign of his Covenant with their Fathers, viz. by Baptism? Why did they not inform us that there were none baptized, nor none should account themselves baptized, except they were plunged or dipped in a River? And that any member of the Church might do that: why did he not tell us that it was and would be a sin for one to teach his child to say the Lords Prayer or call God father, since they had no faith in Christ? Why do they not shew us that to be in a place hearing his word, with those that were not all holy, was a great sin before God and that there should be a parity in the Church of God; That no civill Magistrate hath any power at all, to be command a∣ny thing to be done in the Church of God; and that no Christian ought to pray in a set form; and therefore that the Lords prayer was not to be used, yea was as abominable unto God as Swines flesh unto a Jew (as I have read, some of them do) however we know it is dis∣used by them all. Why was it not told us that to receive the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper was either a vain thing or an indifferent thing, or to eat it with unholy persons, a sinful thing? and also that any one that had gifts might administer the same, or that the profit of the Sacraments depended upon the goodness or holynesse of him that gave it, or did administer them. These with a thousand more are the Principles that our Hereticks walke and teach by, and if they be true doctrine, how long hath the Church been without truth, and in matters of greatest con∣cernment, as Preaching the word, and Sacraments? Why did not the Apostles once at least encourage Christians to persevere in Holiness, upon the account of Christs comming personally to Reign upon Earth? and why would they not tell that it was a de∣cent
holy seemly thing to hear a woman Preach? It seems strange that neither by word nor by Epistle, this was made known, that any man might assume the office of the Ministry unto himself, though he were not outwardly called as was Aaron? why would they not tell us that Ordination was but a toy, and was not to continue longer then themselves? But what am I doing? If these be true Churches, and this Doctrine true Gospel, the Apostles have been faithlesse and unjust, (I speak it trembling) for no such thing did they ever teach, but the contrary; we finde them often times in the Scripture, handling those very points and laies down contrary conclusions; particularly Heb. 5.4. speaking of Priest-hood in generall, and of Christs in particular (who is the high Priest of the Gospel,) saies, no man taketh this honour to himself but he that is called, as was Aaron. And that Aaron had an outward call for that Office, and was deputed, and set apart for that function in a publick way, is clear from Ex. 29. and Levit. 9. Rom. 5.12. where the Apostle handling the infectious na∣ture of sin maintains, That by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all had sinned, viz. by the sin of that one man; I can find here no exception of Infants; which, if true doctrine, the wisedome of God would have discovered in such an apt and proper place. And truly, that In∣fants should dye, having no sin, since death is the wages of sin. Rom. 6 23. is a Doctrine that either charges God with unjustice, or St. Paul with a falshood, or at least a grosse mistake. Of Baptizing of Infants we shall speak in it's own place, and touching receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with a mix∣ed Congregation, in its propper season, and of Dipping when we come to the Font. Touching the peoples Ordination, let the Scripture be produced that gives the people power for to set apart a Lay or Mechanick, or any person, and to constitute him a Church-Officer in the least. Let the Scripture be produced that gives a power to a multitude so to do, or that approves of a mans assuming to himself the power mini∣sterially to teach, Baptize, give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: show or produce me that Scripture, that gives authority to a Lay∣man (such a one we count him that is not Ordained by an Ecclesi∣astick
person, according to Apostolicall Tradition) to bind or lose, to cast out of the Church by judicial Excommunication, or o re∣ceive in by authoritative absolution. I say again, let any of our e∣reticks produce me that Scripture, show that text, and I here pro∣mise them to renounce my Ordination, forsake my calling, and de∣ny my Baptisme. For I am not ignorant that the whole stream of the Scripture goes smoothly in another Channel. If these or any of these be Churches, then the candle hath never been upon a candlestick; the City hath never been upon a hil; Kings have never been her Nursing Fathers, nor Queens her nur∣sing Mothers, except Iohn Buckhold, alias Iohn of Layden, with his fifteen Wives; which Iohn being a Botcherly Taylour, was by a mad crew of Anabaptists, (despisers and otherwise opposers of all government) appointed King at Munster in Germany, An, 1534. where wearing Royall Robes of Embroidered work, Spurs of gold, Scabbards of gold, and two Crowns of gold, he had his Chancel∣lours, Cup-beares, Carvers, & one holding up the holy Bible, and ano∣ther a naked Sword (the handle whereof glistered with gold and pre∣tious stones) went before his Botcherly Majesty: whose riches were from pillging of the goods, burning the houses, and murthering the persons of those that were not of an Anabaptistical spirit. This Kings Title was, The King of Iustice, the King of the new Ierusalem; he erected a Throne of great cost, and coyned Money with this Motto, Verbum car factum, quod habitat in nobis. By this Kings Regall Authority, Divorces were frequently made, as men grew weary of their Wives; all books burned but the Bible: all Chur∣ches rifled, demolished, and as from God performed; blood, sighs, tears was only to be seen and heard in this Kings Reign At a feast he gave the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to the Number of 4000. but accusing one of Treason (you must note he was a King) between them cut off his head himself, and with bloody hands consecrated the Elements, administring the bread, one of his Queens following him delivered the cup. I long to make an end of this Monarch; he came in a few days to be tyed to a stake, & by two Executioners, with two hot pincers, was his flesh torn from his bones in Munster, where his most Sacrilegious Majesty had acted and enacted unherd of Villany.
This Sacrilegious King was not without Rebellious Subjects, which the German Princes, by burning, drowning, killing (not for their consciences, but for their reaso tte and hellsh acts) put an end to them. At which time  of them into England for shelter, A. 1535.  were burned, and ohers made to recant; yet some  slily carrying them∣themselves, did live and became the  Father of the Brow∣nist. Mr. Robert Brown of Northamptonshire, venting their Do∣ctrine in a Saw-pit first, near Islington, obtained Proselytes: three years afterward he Recanted his errour, and took Orders, becom∣ing a faithfull Teacher of the Doctrine of the Church of England: though his Disciples remained as thorns in her sides: they did som∣what refine the Doctrine of the German Anabaptists, and continu∣ing a separation, did bring forth that Creature whom we call an A∣nabapist, who must own the Quaker for his first born; and all those by-opinions and fancies, taught by the whole Rabble of Phanaticks, must be acknowledge to grow out of his Roots, and are sprigs of the Tame branch: all of them being quickned with the same Sap or Spirit of their German Father, who by a pretended humility, and sow of Godlinesse, got into the affections of the Vulgar, which cea∣sed not untill they had put them in the throne, which deservedly brought them to the stake. I have heard of a Welch-man, that being condemned to be han∣ged by the neck, called aloud, O good my Lord, hang her not by the neck; her Father was hanged by the neck and her dyed. Let our English Anabaptist remember that Her Father was burned at a stake, and hanged by the neck for Treason, Her Prince, Prophet, Her King and all. Except I say this King, they had never a Nursing Father. So far hath it been from all Nations coming in unto it, that if these be true Churches, they have never had a village to boast of. If these be true Churches, there are more Churches then one, and so the unity of the Church must be denied, and consequently there must be more Christs then one. Christ is the head of the Church, Ep. 1.22. and the Church is his body: Why? because all the members move according to that life that is communicated unto them from the head. Now this rabble hath not one Spirit, nor one life, neither do they preach all
one kind of faith; therefore there must be diversity of heads to give life to these several bodies & consequently, if they be Churches, there must be divers Christs to quicken those severall Churches: which destroy the unity of the Godhead in Trinity, the consent Harmo∣ny and agreement of Prophets and Apostles, and the unity of the Catholick Church on earth; and before that be done, let us condemn those segregated meetings for those that separate themselves, sensu∣al, having not the spirit. Iud. 19. Whence the Catholick faith came, we know; how old it is, we know; it hath Seniority over and above all other Doctrine, as truth hath o∣ver error: i is of the same standing with the Creation. And though heresie hath and must closely follow it, yet it was before them; the Wheat is first sowed, and then the Tares. Such is Sathans hast, that he begun to lye at the beginning; yet from the beginning lyes were not, but truth. Not to speak of those Heresies that were in the Church before the Time of our Saviour: in his time there were those that denied the Resurrection, and the being of Angels and Spirits, Matth. 22.23. Acts 23.8. Most of those grand Heresies that troubled the Church, by false Doctrine, the time they came in, the Authors that broached them, are known by name, and the occasion of their so doing is also known, not so the Catholick faith. We must know that all new lights that now shine, are but the stinking snuffs of those old Heresies that were extinguished by the powerful breath of the Catholick Doctrine, blown in again by the en∣vious breath of him that fights against the Church and her seed, and may be reduced to the same causes, that before they of old were kin∣dled by, and may be reduced to these heads. 1 Envy and discontentednesse: when men could not get into those places that either their merit did not deserve, or their ambiti∣on thought they were worthy of, then to revenge themselves, like Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16.1. they rose up against the Governours of the Church, and rebelled against Catholick truth. It was this that made Arius rise and swel like a great Sea to overthrow the faith of Christ. An. 310. for not being chosen Bishop of A∣lexandria, of which he was a Deacon, when Achillas the Bishop thereof dyed, and Alexander, a man he thought not so deserving as himself, chosen in the place: presently he set himself to oppose Epi∣scopal
dignity, and such Doctrine as plagued the Church for almost three hundred years together, purely because he could not be a Bi∣shop; whose Doctrine though condemned by 318 Bishops, A. 325. gathered together at Nice, at the command of the good Emperour Constantin the great, is revived again in our Socinians, Anabaptists, &c. for want of discipline in our Church. And truly that hideous damp that came upon the Church of Eng∣land in these last years, had it's rise from the same ground, viz. from the mouths of those men that were extended in a large measure for the receiving of a Mitre, which not coming, they vented their ill-fa∣voured breath in the very faces of them that through desert wore it, envying the glory that others had, because they themselves had but Ordinary respect. This made M. M. a principall Pres. break out into extravagan∣cy; he Petitioning the King for a Deanry, and afterward for a Bi∣shoprick, getting neither, strove as the King told, to undo and over∣throw all. So D. T. an earnest Suitor for the Deanry of Salisbury or a Prebendry at Windsor, getting neither, grew very discon∣tent. So D.B. (I have read these in, and have them from an Author that I am perswaded is able to defend his Print) A man of the same Principles, having gotten to be the Kings Chaplain & shortly after be∣ing put out of it again by the Arch-Bishop (for what cause my Author shews not) to revenge himself, became the chief leader of that Ras∣call rabble out of London, crying for I against E. of S. Invaded af∣terward the Deanry of Paul's, and the house of the Bishop of B. & W. But says my Author, had he been made Dean of Pauls, or B. of B. and W. by King Charles, he had never opposed the Bishops. The like is known concerning M. H. B. the Original of his dis∣content against the Bishops was the losse of his place at Court, which he enjoyed under Prince Charles: and for that he was so enraged against the Government of the Church that what by speaking, and
what by writing, he brought to himself deserved punishment, not to call it suffering. I Copy not this out of any distaste that I bear to the mens judge∣ments or persons, whose faces I never saw knowingly. Yea, the right hand was scarce known from the left, when B. was putting on Armour to oppose the Hirearchy, but that it may be known upon what ground some spirit opposed settled Government, not so much out of zeal, Religion or conscience, as out of spite, passion, malice, or discontentednesse, which broached Arrius his Heresie, and was the first moving cause of Corah his Rebellion, Numb. 16. and blew up some fiery spirits here in England, to call out for a Reformation, which was the mask they used to hide their ugly faces, and the Cloak they wore to cover the wicked and malicious purposes of their re∣vengeful hearts, which at length (though something late) was dis∣covered to the World, by which they are now really as odious to the present age for their Villany, as ever they were famous through Hypocrysie. 2. Heresie springs from pride and ambition; this is in some kind the Cause of the other before mentioned. For if their pride meet with a fal, they are discontented: if it go smoothly on, they are sattisfi∣ed. To become a Teacher, a head of a faction, to have Disciples, is to some in our days a gay businesse; when Pride reigns in the bo∣somes of men, it is Tyrannicall, and must outlarge its Territories by bringing into subjection those Neighboring Countries and Cities that are about; they are so full that they must empty their Hereticall Notions into shallow and ignorant brains, and are not satisfied with being Masters of their own, except they have Proseylites to their Doctrine. Is it any other but this that makes our illiterate Mechanicks preach, or Lay-men administer the Sacraments, or our women to forget both their Sex, weaknesse, and the Word of God, to expound the Scriptures? What made the Vagabond Jews to presume to cast out Devills, but this? Acts 19. and how much this induceth the Church of Rome to stand and to defend strange points, I leave for my Elders to consider.
3. Heresie springs from lust or covetousnesse: the Church lands (since it's establishment) was usually a greater eye-sore to Here∣ticks then her doctrine. the Egyptians that fold both their Cat∣tle and their Land for bread, when their mony was gone, Gen. 47.18. never grumbled that the Priests Lands were preserved: but these men having both Cattle, Land and Bread, grudge to see the Church enjoy her portion; and if they want, rather then they will dig, will reach down all propriety, and that the wicked should not enjoy the fruits of the ground; The meek only should enjoy the Earth; which Doctrine supposing it to passe in the affirmative, not a foot of the Earth would fall to them: Yet this set the Crown upon Iohn of Leydens head in Germany, and hath been a fundamentall truth in England, yea the corner-stone of strange divinity in our high places. The silver Pillars, the golden bottome, the purple cove∣ring of the Church. Ca. 3.10. hath been n alluring bait, even to those who ought to have been her guard. 4. It comes from the womb of ignorance, a misapprehension; many erre, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Many things depending upon the knowledge of the diversities and seasons of times, receiveth strange and strained interpretations from the un∣learned. This is one strong hinge that our Secretaries for the present move upon; As that the Apostles being immediately called from fishing to preaching, they shall be all taught of God: And of Gods pouring out his spirit upon all flesh in the latter days, and their daughters shall prophesie; these with a many other are foundations upon which many build their Babel; from the first they conclude, that any man may preach; from the second, Isa. 54.13. they con∣clude that preaching is needlesse: from the third, Acts 2.17. they infer that women may preach, as if that prophesie of Ioel, Ioel 2.28. were not already fulfilled in the Apostles. I must conclude this Question, being quiet tyred with fighting with these beasts of Ephesus; and beasts indeed they may be called, not onely from their barking against the light of the Gospel, but also from their surlinesse and crossenesse each to another, or fawning up∣on any other; for do but crosse or not humour them, they will turn Ranter, Quaker, Adamite or Anabaptist, and about from one to another, (if not locally in body, yet professedly in judgement)
for never did you know any of them to be purely what he is called;Thee might have been ano¦ther argu∣ment given for since the wring of al is, they appear no Churches but nsts of wasps & Traytors all our He∣reticks be∣ing of one stamp, and carrying Treason in their bosoms' as appears by their seditious and murtherous and Treasonable attempts in London, jan. 6. 1660. They being now un. Churched by Law. I wish it may be my happinesse to be the last in this Kingdome, that shal have ever occasion to handle this Question more. I know so much of all or most of them this I desire it heartily. the Anabaptist is a Millenary, the Millenary is a Quaker, the Qua∣ker is a Ranter, and vice versa, turn them again, the Ranter is a Quaker, the Quaker is a Millenary & the Millenary is an Anabaptist, and so round; as one lye, so one false opinion must have another to maintain it. This makes such a monstrous & unlovely hodge-podge among them, that had these beasts been to have entered the Ark, it would have perplexed Noah to have put them into pairs. These Babel-builders are confounded in their Opinions as well as in their Language, properly their own, having that only in common that de∣stroys the unity of the Church, and never speaks with one tongue, but when they rail against the Church of England. Quest. 6. What may justifie a mans separation from a Church? Saint Paul giving us some directions for walking after the spirit. Gal. 5 in the 19. ver. makes an enumeration of the works and fruits of either, beginning with those of the flesh, as Adultery, Forni∣cation, Vncleannesse, Lasciviousnesse, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies. These two last in the Original might be Translated divisions, Sects; for there it is  where according to this, Sects or Divisions, or cause lesse separation, as well as Murther or Adul∣tery, are the works of the flesh; the two last are Twins in one and the same womb: for the Heretick will breed division or sedition, and sedition or division to requit it will foster Heresie. Hereticks
do corrumpere sidem, and Schismacks or Separatists do disrumpere charitatem: the one corrupts the Doctrine of the Church; the other falls from her Communion; both are fruits of the flesh: and they that do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Verse ult. The sin of Separation is so infectious, that in Scripture we are to separate from them that so do. Rom. 16.17. There is a Rule in Divinity, that wil make the sin of separation to be great; it is this; Those sins are the greatest, which are most contrary to, and do most oppose the greatest of Christian vertues or graces. Now they are recorded, 1 Cor. 13.13. Now abideth Faith, Hope and Charity, but the greatest of these three is Charity: Now by the Rule, distrust in Gods promises, or in his power, is a great sin, it being a sin a∣gainst hope. Heresie or a stout persisting in an errour, is a far greater sin; for it is a sin against faith, and seeks to cover, conceal, if not to destroy the truth. Now Charity is greater then either of these; that follows therefore that that sin that destroys the peace of the Church, & untyes the Ligatures by which the whole body is compact together is the greatest: but this doth the sin of Separation, a thing by this age of no account; yet they wil find it of great moment in the day of their Account. It is a sin generally accompanied with the other lusts of the flesh, viz. Hatred, Varience, Emulations, Strife, Wrath, which seldome lurks long in a Corner, but in time appears in the field, in the ha∣bit and acts of Murtherers, Ravishers, Traytors, and all with the voyce of Iacob, pretending Godlinesse and conscience, as Histo∣ries do abundantly show. But to answer the Questi∣on; So long as a Church makes no separation from Christ, no separa∣tion is to be made from it, but to keep in it is the duty and safety, ho∣nour and happinesse of him that would enjoy the Communion of Saints, the forgivenesse of sins, the Resurrection of the body unto life Everlasting. A Church separates from Christ two ways. 1. When she overthrows the foundation of that Doctrine that
is laid by Christ: the foundation of all truth is already laid; and he that goes to overthrow that, may be said to turn from it. Do we see a society of men, whether Nationally or Domestically, whether openly or secretly, going in that road that thwarteth the foundation or fundamental points of Religion? there must be a separation, Rev. 18.4. whether it be in the adding to these fun∣damentals, as if they were not sufficient; or taking from them, as if they were redundant, or superfluous: This made the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, and the Church of England to separate from the Church of Rome, which hath both taken from, and added to those fundamental Truths, whereupon the Church was by the Lord and his Apostles erected and builded. Having to the Scri∣ptures added some Books, as the Apocrypha, makes the Scri∣ptures to be an imperfect Rule, and must have Traditions to com∣pleat it: That the sense and meaning of the Scripture depends up∣on the Churches authority; That in all matters of Controversie, not the Scriptures, but the Church must be the Judge. They have made five Sacraments more then Christ made. They have clearly blot∣ted out the whole body of the second Commandment out of the first Table of the Law in several Books. That Infants that die without Baptism, are eternally separate from God, except they be as it were martyred; by which martyrdom they are baptized Baptismo sanguinis, with their own blood. They teach that men are not justified by Faith alone before God. They make Saints and holy men departed, assistant in the work of reconciling us to God, and therefore maintain they must be prayed unto. That the Do∣ctrine of Purgatory must be believed, if we would be saved. That the efficacy of the Sacraments, depends upon the worthiness or in∣tention of the giver. That Baptism totally abolisheth Original sin. That the real fleshly body of Christ is in the Bread at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as soon as the Priest pronounceth the words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body; if he should say, Corpus mea, it were no Sacrament: They take the Wine, or keep the Cup from the Laity in that Sacrament. That the wine in that Or∣dinance must be mingled with water; that that Sacrament is pro∣fitable not only for the living, but for the dead. The Priest is not to bless a second marriage. They baptize Bells with the very words
of Baptism, and by that they teach Devils are drove from the Church (O Romanists, great is your Faith!) and give them pro∣per names. That God-Fathers and God-mothers at the Font, by reason of the nearness of their Spiritual Kindred, are not to, nor must no marry, for the seventh generation. That the Pope or Bishop of Rome, is the universal Head of the Church, and Christs Vicar. All which enets, as they were utterly unknown to the former Bishops of Rome, nor heard of in the Church of Christ for many Ages, so they are for the present opposed by all the Reformed Churches abroad, who have upon that account forsaken her, and England hath thrown her off, and separated from her; and by the Champions of the several Churches hath their separation been defended. By vertue of that Catholick truth, 1 Tim. 6.3. If any man teach otherwise (that is, then the Scriptures do) and consent not to whol∣som words of our Lord Iesus, and to the Doctrine which is ac∣cordng to godliness, &c. from such separate, turn away, or withdraw thy self: their separation is justifiable. What Paul would have Timothy in this place to do, he practiseth himself in another, Acts 19.9. yet probably in one and the same City, was it both done by Paul, and to be done by Timothy: Saint Paul being in Ephesus, some there were that believed his word, o∣thers not, but hardened their heart, speaking evil of him, and of the Gospel. After he had preached three moneths, and perswa∣ding to the things concerning the Kingdom of God, he separa∣ted the Disciples; he would not have those Believers that had re∣ceived the Truth, to be in any Church-fellowship with those that spoke against it. Luther who began to rise up, and take his farewell of the Church of Rome, Anno 1517. being an Augustian Frier, was called an A∣postate, answered, Consitetur se esse Apostatam, sed beatum & Sanctum, qui sidem Diabolo datam non servavit, that he had only fallen back from that Covenant and Engagement he had made with Satan. Not that there is a separation to be made from all the Doctrine of Rome; for she holds many great mysteries of Divinity purely and soundly, wherein we must, and do all agree with her as Christians; but he that is a true member of the Church of Rome, as it now
stands, he must believe that the least coal in Purgatory is very near as hot as hell; he must believe the least point of Reliques with as strong a faith as the greatest mysteries of the God-head; and if he de∣ny any of the former, he is no lesse an Heretick then if he had denied the latter; and he that believes not the Churches tradition to be as necessary to be believed as the Epistles of Paul, he cannot be saved. Indeed there is not an Article of the Church of Rome, that is Catholick, wherein reformed Churches differ from her: but in those Articles that are but of Yesterday, such as those above mentioned, they stand at a distance praying for her, but loth to touch her, she being not sick of a small Ague, but hath running sores, Ulcers, In∣fections, Pestilential humours within her; which makes them write over her, as if she were visited, Lord have mercy upon her, but dare not make themselves one body with her. H. The Apologist of the Church of England declares, That we have Renounced that Church wherein we could not have the Word of God sincerely taught (being mixed with tradition) nor the Sacra∣ments rightly administred (the one half of the Lords Supper, being but given to the people, and Baptisme being given to Bells &c.) Nor the Name of God duly called upon, praying to the Saints and Angels, and in a Latin tongue which the people understand not. To conclude, we have forsaken the Church, viz. of Rome as it is now, not as it was in old time past, &c. and come to that Church, (viz. of England) wherein all things be governed purely and Reverend∣ly. This overthrowing of the foundation thou maist call Heresie in dctrine. Yet by caution, take not the manners of the people for doctrine; let the people be what they will, the man what he pleaseth, it is neither the good lives of men, nor the bad lives of men that makes or unmakes Churches, but false and corrupted doctrine. Much loose∣nesse was in the Church of Corinth, and Prophanenesse particlar∣ly about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: yet the Apostle gives no ground at all for separation, only exhorts to a more orderly, peace∣able walking, and a more holy and prepared celebration.
Neither must we take things indifferent for doctrine, nor every blemish for fundamentall Heresie. It is an errour in our age to take Circumstances and outward Ceremonies for essentiall parts of worship. There was much corruption in the Church of the Jews in our Saviours time: and much false glosses put upon the Law: yet in regard the fundamentals were not razed, he commanded his disciples to hear even the Pharisees, (who yet were thieves and rob∣bers, being none of those appointed to expound the Law, which justified not their manner of teaching, but the truth of the doctrine taught) who sate in Moses chair. Matth. 23.1, 2, 3. but gives them a Caveat to beware of the practices, and leven of the Phari∣sees, that is hearken and obey to those truths and fundamental pre∣cepts, that they give out & teach to be in my Fathers Law, first taught by Moses, as cirumcision, the way and manner of the Sacrifices, which in the Jewish Church were necessary points; but refuse those things they lay down as from tradition, as Corban, washing of cups; for not these but the other are commanded you to do. Moreover you must be sure not to separate your selves from those who possibly are ignorant of the depths of Sathan in that particular doctrine delivered: for Christ pities such, and speaks comfortably to them. Revel. 2.4. nor from others whom you can perceive in the least to disown that corrupted doctrine though privately, being troubled at the razeing out of necessary principles. How many poor souls are led away from the truth, by those that creep into houses in our days, that are ignorant possibly of the designes of their prime Teachers, following them as much as the people followed Abso∣lon, (viz.) in the simplicity of their heart! these giving great en∣couragement to those that so teach, makes them bolder to go on a∣gainst the unity of the faith: showing the Number of their Disci∣ples, loving to hear those Doctrines that either add to or take from the infallible and unalterable rule of the Word, in both which the Church of Rome is erroneous, and therefore the separation from her justifiable, 2. We may lawfully separate our selves from a Church when she enjoyns those acts of worship as necessary, not enjoyned by Christ; when a Church preacheth corrupted doctrine as from God, we may separate from her: so may we, nay so ought we to do, when she in∣joyns
false worship to be performed to God; whether it be in wor∣shipping him after a false manner, or giving another besides him true worship. Deut. 10.20. This is another cause of the reformed Churches separation from Rome; their Beads, their Ave Maries, their Fastings, (a great part of worship with them) their praying to Saints; as those that have the plague must pray to St. Rochus, those that have the tooth∣ache to Apollonia, those that are poysoned to Saint Iohn, those that are in Captivity to Saint Leonard, those that have the Fistul to Saint Quintin, Women that are in labour must pray to Saint Mar∣garet, but especially to the Virgin Mary, besides those common prayers that you must make in common to all the Saints and to the Angels also must prayer be made.Gffi. Beat. Ma. ad Mat. pag. 18. There is a little Book published by the Authority of Pope Pius the V. in which almost at the begin∣ning that all might prosper the better, you have this Prayer, Precibus & meriti beatae Mariae semper Virginis, & omnium san∣ctorum, perducat nos Dominus ad Regna Coelorum. The Summe of which Prayer, is this, that God would be pleased to lead & bring the Petitioner unto Heaven, by the intercession, pra∣ers and merits of the blessed Virgin and of all the Saints. I do won∣der that Christ should be left out▪ by whose merits and intercession alone we are saved▪ but I marvail most whether all these shall be a distinct Company by themselves; for of the whole company of the Virgins they cannot be:meaning Tho Bec. a fancy & impudent Rebel: yet made a S. by the Pope. the foolish Virgins had no Oyle, the wise had but enough to save themselves; where is there any of their merits then left for me, yet this is better then Tu per Thomae sangui∣nom, &c. These with many more of the like nature, as praying for the Dead, offering or burning up of incense, praying in an unknown Tongue, that common people know not what they pray, their Or∣dination of the Hoast, their holy water, their penance, their Pil∣grimages their oyl or Chrisme, sal and spittle used in Baptism, was the cause of that separation made from her by the reformed Churches; these points and this kind of worship being not Catho∣lick; for as before; they separate not from Rome in any point of worship that she holds in Common with the Chrch of Christ, but these being brats of her own begetting, they deny them entertain∣ment
or Countenance, and separate themselves from her: and their separation is justifiable. This Errour in point of worship, you may call Idola∣try. But beware that you take not decent or comely Ceremonies for essentiall parts of worship. The Apostle urging women in the Church of Corinth to be covered. 1 Cor. 11.6. that which they might think was too much precisenesse in him (for we may be apt to suppose he discontented them that did otherwise) was decent in his eyes, and commanded to be done; but not making it a point of worship, nor pressing it upon them as part of Gods service, declares that ceremonies may be used in, but ought ever to be differenced from the worship performed. In brief, whatever Ceremony of what nature or kind soever that is enjoined, that is not contrary to the Word of God, and by the Officers of the Church thought comely to be used, as tending to make that worship then used to be the more Reverenced and estee∣med by the performers, is not to be opposed. This age discovers, what a dis-respect, contempt, undervaluinig thoughts most men have▪ even good men in a great measure) of the house of God, ta∣ble of God, service of God and Servants of God, since decent and comely ceremonies were banished from the Church of God: and where such ceremonies are injoyned, and thou separatest, thou art guilty of renting the seamlesse coat, there being no cause for making that separation justifiable. For Heree then and Idolatry only then is there a cause of sepa∣ration; and what ever is more then these cometh of Satan.Apolog. par. 5.c. 13 D. 1. & 2. Apolog. c. 1. Where∣fore though our departure were a trouble to them (sayth Reverend Bishop Iewel speaking of Rome) yet they ought to consider how just cause we had of our departure. And in another place he saith, It is true, we have departed from them, and for so doing we give thanks to Almighty God; but yet from Christ, from the Apostles, and from the Primitive Church we have not departed. Romes Heresie and Idolatry gave a just ground for the Reformed Churches separation. But
In our days there is made such a separation as by no Scripture can be justified, there being nothing in matter of doctrine taught, nor in point of worship performed, that in the least contradicts the Word written, or the worship injoyned: and therefore their sin is the greater, tending to the destroying of that love, charity, con∣cord, union that ought to be in and amongst the members of the Church; we must not cut off the arm for every scratch or smal hurt, much lesse cut off our nose because it seems to stand awry through a false glasse: neither ought we to separate from the body of the Church for every small errour in it, as for every Ceremony that in our judgment is amisse; and indeed those that are most sepa∣rate from the Church now in the highest points of doctrine, and fight against her, did but at first dislike her Ceremonies: so dange∣rous it is to yield in the least to the sin of Schisme; for the hurt in that quickly turns to the Gangreen of Heresie. Those that disliked her Suplice now scorn her preaching; those that disliked her prayers will not now pray at all; those that disliked standing at the Creed, now will fall down to no God; those that disliked her Crosse in Baptism, now scorn the Spiritual washing; those that looked sowr upon my Lord the Bishop, now casts stones at the Preacher, Master G— Those that dug down her Altars, now would pull down her Churches; they that saw her kneel at the Lords Supper and grumbled because she sate not, are now so holy that they scorn it. Which thing duly and seriously weighed, might make men afraid to play about the hole of the asp, or to put their hand in the Co∣katrice den, nay to touch it, were it but with a stick, least as it be∣fals him that toucheth the Torpedo, a spiritual numbnesse or Judici∣all stupefaction befall them, that they shall no move one foot for∣ward in a right way more. Seldome can we see them returning to their mother Church, and to that doctrine wherein they were bap∣tized, but like sheep out of the Fold (as soon as out of the Church porch) they wander further and further; and so far they are gone, that for the present I am not disposed to go after them: but to such as are within hearing, I give this short direction, viz. to behold such as have gone before them, that at first did but stmble at straws, were troubled at trifles, & thought to have gone no further, yet whither are
they now hurried: look back to the Church you have left? view her orders, her Sacraments, her points of worship; study them, try them by the Sciptures; if you can find them contrary or repugnant to the written Word of God, stand stil, and save thy own soul, but follow not them: for they went in the way of Cain, and run greedi∣ly after the errour of Balaam, & perished in the Gainsaying of Coe: Clouds without Water, carried about of Winds, raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandring stars. Jude. 11.12, 13. By good Words and fair Speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, not for our Lord Iesus Christ, but for their own belly. Romans 16.18. Quest. 7. Whether more Religions then one may be Tollerated, where the true Church is Established? In the opening of this Question, knowing the times wherein I live, and the fewnesse of my years, I will not shew you my opinion, but you shall hear the Judgement of a Master in our Israel, that was ga∣thered with gray hairs to his Fathers, and lately fell asleep. One Religion is to be Tolerated, and no more to be publickly taught then one. 1. Because there is but one God, who is the object of Religion; his Essenc being simple and indivisible, his worship is also to be: diversitie of Religion breeds and produceth only diversity of O∣pinion touching God, which in time may in the conceits of men dstroy his unity and Onenesse. 2. As there is but one truth, so there ought to be but one Reli∣gion; for false Religions either teach to worship false Gods, or else in a false way and manner to worship the true God; which made God himself in constituting the Church of the Jews, in a strict manner to give charge touching that: and in his constituting the Church of the Christians to do the same, by commanding them
to stone that Prophet that taught otherwise, and us to curse that Angel that should teach other Doctrine then he did then by Moses, and now to us by his Son, give, teach, command and appoint, Deut. 13.1. Gal. 1.8. 3. There is but one Church, which is the ground and pillar of truth, 1 Tim. 3.15. and one Spirit to lead that Church in the way of truth; and therefore there ought to be but one Religion, which is the Doctrine of that one Truth. 4. There is but one way to heaven, and eternal Life, in which way few, through ignorance and errour, walk or find; and ways to Hell and destruction, which many, through corrupted nature, fall in and run in: It is dangerous to have, or to suffer any to stand. at the head of that way to call in Passengers from that road which leadeth unto life, since men of themselves are apt and prone enough to turn from it, and go in the contrary path. 5. Religion is the foundation of States and Kingdoms; and diversity of foundations will never keep up long a building; herein we find those States in Scripture to stand surest, whose Kings feared God; and they that feared, put down all false worship. 6. Religion is the band and cord by which the unity of the State is preserved: if there be heard diversities of Doctrine, and the unity of Faith broken, either the people are divided in their affections, or among themselves, and against their Princes or their Governours. Hence proceed burnings, emulations, strifes, en∣vy, malice, sedition, faction, Rebellion, Innovation, treachery and disobedience, and infinite more mischiefs. Let me add two more. 7. Let all diligence be used to keep out, or subdue false Religi∣ons; Satan will keep them in we know by the Proverb, Where God hath his Church, the Devil will (whatever man do to the contrary) have his Chappel: A toleration seems to bring stones and timber for the enlarging of it, and making it a Synagogue. 8. The Angels of the Churches of Pergamos, and Thyatira, Rev. 2. are blamed for tolerating false Religions (taking it for granted that there is but one true, ziz. the Catholick) one of them had them tolerated, possibly not by Law, but by connivance and indulgence, who taught the Doctrine of Balaam, to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, whether natural or spiritual; and the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which God did hate then, and yet in this Age it passes for true Divinity with many. The other suffered Iezbel, who called her self a Prophe∣tess, first to teach, and then (as a proper consequence) to seduce: our Praedicantiffs do the same, and yet plead for a toleration; since Paul gave out a Law concerning womens teaching, I Tim. 2.12. we finde none but this Iezabel undertaking such an Office. It is observable, that the Angels of the Church are reproved for bearing with, or suffering them so to do; and they were the Church Officers, Ministers, or Bishops; by which it seems they had power and authority to restrain and controul them, to pull them out of their pulpits, and to stop their mouths. Whether they were Lords or no, let their power and authority speak; to do this was Lord-like in my apprehension; and not to do it was a ground of Gods accusation, Rev. 2.19, 20. This Authority, was it from heaven, or of men? If from Hea∣ven, then Church Officers have power to controul, and put down both Balaam and Iezabel, and to stop their mouths, and yet not to be accused for Factious. If of men, then Church-Officers ought to put their power in execution, and resist and stop the proceedings of lawless persons, command that none hear Iezabel, and stop the mouths of all irregular and presumptuous Teachers, and not to be accused as busie-bodies; and though they be, yet let rather men accuse them for performing, then God should accuse them for not doing their duty. Yet if the Religions be such as do not overthrow the funda∣mentals of Truth, or such as disturb not the Government establi∣shed in that State, Church, or Kingdom, wherein they be; and that the Professor of those Religions be not factious, ambitious, or pertinarious; having no other end in holding their opinions, but Gods glory, and the satisfaction of their own consciences, and willing to be taught and be convinced of their errors: diversities of Religions may be tolerated, but in private only; time may pro∣duce a renoncing of them, when violence might harden them. God hath his own times of Calling men; and let the humble, good
honest Christian have his time. Wise States, Kings and Princes for this cause have granted a private toleration. The very Turk, who is zealous in his Religion, grants this; it is especially to be granted in times of great infection; then indeed a total suppressi∣on in private of different opinions might prove, and end in a great disturbance both to Church and State: but Philosophandum est, sed paucis. Quest. 8. Wherein consists the Individua∣lity, or singleness, the Vnity or Oneness of the true Church? That the Catholick Church is but one, is both asserted in Scri∣pture, and believed in our Creed; and though it be scattered up and down through the world in every Kingdom, Nation, People, Province, Common-wealth, Countreys and Dominions that are known in the earth, from La Mairs Straits to Greenland, from Sancta Creek to S. Ians; yet differs no more then one member of the body differs from another; the question then is this, what is it that like Arteries and Ligatures, Sinews and Nerves, holds such a vast body together, that the Church of God in this place is not a distinct Church of it self, from that that is in another, but only a part of it, differing as a bone in the neck from that in the foot of the self same body? one may be preaching or hearing the word in the Country of the Great Mogul, another in Iapan, and another in Pauls at London, and yet he in one and the self same body. And as the Sea receives divers names according to the Countreys she runs through, though all but one Sea; so the members of the Church Triumphant above in heaven, and those of the Church Militant be∣neath, make but one body, differing only as a mans upper from his lower parts: this Unity consists 1. In a consenting of all of them to the truth and doctrine of the Gospel, (for we know no Church but the Christian) what ever is written by the holy Ghost, through the Ministery of the Apostles,
and Disciples, the best expositors of the prophets, Psalms, and Moses, whether made in it, and to be done, or said to be fulfilled in it and done, the whole society of the Church whereever they be scattered, believes it; and readily consents to it as a Canon of faith, and manners. 2. It consists in the consenting and unity in reference to the Sacraments of the Gospel; the same Sacraments for number, for nature, that one part holds to be profitable for the Souls of men, the same doth the other; it is true there are many Churches that differ from another in more externall and Ceremoniall points; it is the current doctrine of all reformed Churches, and of England, Art. 34. that it is not necessary that ceremonies be alike in all places, but may be altered as the People or Officers may teach and think meet, but as touching the essentiall and necessary truths, as the ends, the uses▪ the Author, the profit of them; all Christians of the Catholick Church hold one and the same thing. 3. I consists in the consenting to, and unity in holding the uti∣ly and necessity of hearing and obeying a Gospell ministery, where it is to be had; it is a Catholick truth to hear the word of God preached; and to obey those that have the rule over them; is a Catholicks practice even in their reproofs, Suspentious, Ex∣communications &c. they know their preaching is the power of God unto Salvation. I Rom, 16. and the other is necessary for the saving of the Spirit in the day of the Lord Jesus. I Co∣rinthians 5.5. There are some among us, that imagine themselves distinct Chrches from us, in this particular (viz) for the separating themselves from the ministery as now constituted, upbraiding their Minister, perhaps his receiving his dues, which he is no more to lose upon that account, then a man is to lose the milk or the wooll of his beast at night, upon the account that it wandered at Noon. Untill they be cast out of the Church, by Church censures, and by those to whom that power is design'd, their separation hider no more their union with us in the body of the Church, then a Boyl, scab or a sore hinders the continuity of the parts of a man, or no more then a Malignant Fever takes away the being of a person; so that in some sence we look upon them as Members of our Church, but itchy
ones, scabby ones, as members in our Israel, but as troublesome ones, untill they be cast out, and then for me they shll be looked upon as Publicans and Heathens, and so by all the members of the Catholick Church; for being cast out of her who is the only Church, they must so be, and so long as they are in her, they are of her; their own separation availing us no more then a mans willing confinement of himselfe to his house, makes him a Prisoner in Law, when he is commanded forth to action. 4. It consists in that Communion that they have each member and each part with another, they have the benefit of each others prayers; they are all walking in one way, by one Rule, working all one work, expecting all one reward, acted by the same spirit, carried forth upon the same Motive, and armed with the same weapons, fighting against the same Enemies, building each other in their most holy Faith, Iude 20. 5. It consists in that union and communion that they have with Christ; he is their head, and whereever they are as members of him, they have life, sence and strength from him: in him they all live, move and have their being. The Church hath also communion with Christ; and that both in his Person, and in his Offices and Sufferings. 1. In his person; every part of her is a Member of his body; they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ep. 5.30. and he that is joyned to the Lord is but one. As the Holy Ghost did unite in the Blessed Virgins Womb the Divine and humane nature of Christ, and made them one person, by reason of his formation of the body; whereby Cist is of our flesh and of our bones: so the spirit unites us to the person of Christ by the gift of faith, that we are of his flesh and of his bones, and members of his body. For suppose a man to be so many Cubits high, that his head should reach the stars, and his hands stretch to either side of heaven, and one foot stood upon the Sea, and another upon the Land, yet these members being knit toge∣ther by natural Arteries, & informed by the same specifick soul, they might truly be said to have comunion each with other; even so, though Christ be in Heaven, and part of the Church with him, and we on earth, and so should seem to be a great distance from each other: yet the distance is not so great as to make a distinction of the parts,
or separation of the head from the body; by that fore-mentioned sup∣position we may be said to be united to him, and therefore are hereby to have union each with another. 2. In his Offices: What Offices Christ executes as Redeemer of the World, in order to the great end of bringing his Church to∣gether, the same Offices doth he make his people to receive through the unction of his spirit, untill, and at their coming home he hath made them Kings. Revel. 1.6. makes them reign over all lusts, and have dominion over all the powers of Hell and Earth, and hath both Thrones and Crowns for them in Heaven; and he hath made them Priests, Rev. 1.6. in as much as they are dayly offering up the Sacrifice of burnt Offerings, & whole burnt Offerings of Praise, prayer and thanksgiving; he hath made them Prophets. Io. 15.15. in as much as they know the Will of God: and the mind of God is made known to them; for what ever he had received of the Father he made known unto her. 3. In his sufferings. She must drink of that Cup that he drunk of, and the Church must be baptized with the Baptism he was bap∣tized withall. Matth. 20.23. He drank of the Brook by the way, and they must taste after him: it's their priviledge that are his Members, to suffer for him. Phil. 1.29. He drank of the Cup of affliction in the Garden, and all his followers must pledge him. Christ ought to suffer, Luke 24.26. nay, did it not become him to suffer Heb. 2.10. And it is decreed that all must suffer, before they enter into glory: for this suffering with Christ is a dying with him; which must precede rising with him, which must go before being glorified with him; in all these do the Members of Christ (which is the Church) hold Communion and have Union with him. Quest. 9. Why is the true Church called ho∣ly? We believe the Catholick Church to be holy, yet not that we hold all to be holy that are in it. In a great mans House there be Vessels of honour and of disho∣nour;
some in the Church have a form of holinesse, but denie the power of it: there are Tares in the field as wel as Wheat, there are bad as well as good fishes took with the Net of the Gospel. Mat. 13.28. Would all the people were holy: yet we believe that the Church is holy. 1. For holinesse she aims at; for this she prays, fasts, reads, re∣ceives the Sacraments: all the acts that she and her children do, is upon the accont of holinesse: the Scripture cals upon her to be ho∣ly as God is holy: and she calls upon God to sanctifie her thorowly by the washing of water, and the Word, to be presented as holy be∣fore him. Eph. 5.26. 2. It's a holy Rule she walks by: It is a holy, pure and undefiled Law; as silver purified seven times, it hath no Impurity in it. Psal. 19.8. 3. It is a holy profession she maintains: she hath places to wor∣ship in, she hath holy Ordinances to live by, she hath a holy calling, for she is called to be holy; all other Congregations live by sence, but she by faith. 4. It is a holy Lord whom she serves: she serves the Lord Christ; she worships through him, that God that is so holy, that he beholds no iniquity with approbation: that holy thing that is called and known to be the son of God, she only owns and worships. Luk. 1.35 5. In regard of her promise and engagement to be holy: though the whole World lye in wickednesse, yet she promises to be holy and unblameable before him in love. 6. God and Christ account her: holy though there be failings and Hypocrits in the Church, yet God is pleased to give the deno∣mination from the more worthy part. 2. Pet. 2.5, 9. and all the members of the invisible Church are relly holy, and because we can∣not know them, the Church is accounted holy wherein they are, so that even the wicked have this benefit of the godly. Quest. 10. Why is the true and holy Church called Catholick? The Catholick Church in plainer English, is no other then the U∣niversall Church, and rightly so called, being universal
1. In regard of place; she is not tyed to a corner, nor limited within certain bounds: Earth it self a is not sufficient for her; she is both in Heaven and earth. 2. In Regard of persons; for no age, no condition is exempted from her jurisdiction; high and low, rich ond poor, great and small, from him that sits in the Throne, to her that grindeth at the Mill, is the doctrine of the Catholick Church open. 3. In Regard of time: there was no time since the Creation that wanted this Church; that Doctrine of it begun at the Creation and fall of man, and hath not failed, hath not been altered since, but ex∣plained and confirmed: since the Creation of all things this Church was, and untill the restitution of all things this Church shall be: and Eternity it self shal never impair nor diminish this Churches digni∣ty. 4. In Regard of parts: all the particular Churches or Congre∣gations in the World, that ever were, and all that for the present are & all that for the future shal be, are parts of her, & by unity of Doctrine & consent in Sacraments, through faith are compacted together, for the compleating of that Catholick body, named the Catholick Church. Let me dye if I would not be ashamed to be but supposed to be a Member of any Church on Earth but this; or to own that Religion that is not at least sixteen hundred year standing. The Church of Rome, as she is now constituted, is not Catholick: wee know when the fire of Purgatory was first kindled▪ it was but yester∣day, i'ts not Catholick: the Rise and Originall of many of their do∣ctrinal points, known: and those upstart Opinions now in England, those Phanatick Principles and Heretical Tenets, taught by Ioan the Spinster, Dick the Weaver, and Robin the Taylour, are not Ca∣tholick. The Well of Knowledge is deep, and they have nothing to draw, how can they get living waters? they are ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. But let them a∣lone; they be blind, leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. Matth. 15.14.
Quest. 11. Whether the Elect only be the true Members of the Church? Before this question be directly answered, it is expedient to pre∣mise these three distinctions: 1. of the Church, 2. of the persons, 3. of judgement. 1. Of the Church; here we must call to mind that division a∣bove made, of the Church visible and invisible: That wicked men, Hypocrites, &c. are members of the visible Church in common with the Elect, is not to be denied. The invisible Church is here meant (a distinction the Church of Rome cannot well digest) cal∣led the Church of the first born, Heb, 12.23. 2. Of Persons, there are some that are in the Church by out∣ward Profession, and because they hear the word, own Christ, re∣ceive the Sacraments, may and must pass for Members: Others are in it by inward resignation, in giving up their hearts to God, called a reasonable service, Rom. 12.1. 3. Of Judgement; there is a judgement of Gods decree, by which he knows who are his; and there is a judgement of humane charity: By the former, we know none so as to point him out; and he that holds one or more of fundamental truths, untill he be cast out, must be judged a Member of the Church: Yet those only that are by the decree elected and called, are only members of the Church. For, 1. The Elect draw only life and nourishment from Christ, they commonly act faith; the other are barren branches, and though up∣on, yet not properly of his body. It is the heart alone of the E∣lected and Called that will open and entertain Christ, Ioh. 15. 2. It is they alone that are established and builded upon him; he is the Rock they stand by, while the other chooseth a sandy foun∣dation (sticks possibly at his profession, imagining that will save him) their house shall stand when the others are falling, and they under them; Christ shall laugh at the one, and mock when their fear cometh; but rejoyce over the other with singing, to behold them cloathed upon.
3. The Elect only are to their power obedient to him, they are his sheep only that hear his voice; and by this it appears that they follow him; they will go with him from a feast to the garden, from that to the Crosse, from that to the Grave: They will contend ear∣nestly for the Faith once given them, were it unto blood; the o∣ther will forsake him, and love their lives better then to die. 4. They only truly and cordially honour him. O how pretious is Christ to such as believe! they that name his name in this socie∣ty, depart from all iniquity: others draw but nigh him with their lips, they draw out their souls to him for his goodness sake, & their sheaves to the hungry for his mercies sake; they bow the knee, and their tongues confess him: the other bows, and with their lips mocks him; the oe puts his soul in his hand to rule it, the other puts a reed in his hand to bear it; he says, Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and the other covers him with a vail, strikes him, saying, Prophesie who smites thee. 5. They are the only persons that are called, justified, and glo∣rified by him; one that is truly a Member of Christs body, must not be supposed to be eternally separated from his glory; its the dead branches only that are cut down and burned; such as draw sap, and bring forth fruit, these shall not be fuel for that everlasting fire; the Hypocrites may Prophesie in his name, and cast out de∣vils, and the devils know them, yet Christ shall acknowledge he nere knew them: the devils may come out of the possessed, and depart at their call, and they shall go with the devils and depart at his command. I would not have it here thought that the perfection of the Saints is intended, or that before the Elect are effectually called, this is de∣monstrated, or that it is sufficient for a Christian to say he is of this invisible Church; for though every one that are members of the vi∣sible, are not of the body of the invisible Church, yet he is not of the invisible, that acknowledgeth not himself a member of the vi∣sible: he that hath God for his Father, hath the visible Catholick Church for his only mother, and must have her if he would be sa∣ved. She is like the Ark of Noah; as all without that, was drown∣ed; so all without this, is damned. In the judgement of Charity we must indeed suppose, that God
hath his own among the heathen; and by working upon them by his Spirit, in an extraordinary secret and hidden way, brings them unto the knowledge of his Son, by which they are ingrafted into his body, and so made members of the Catholick Church; for as before, out of it there is no salvation; the reason is, out of it, is to be out of Christ; for that is his body; and to be out of Christ, is to be without God; and to be without him, is to be without eternal life. For this is eternal life, to know thee to be the only true God, and Ie∣sus Christ whom thou hast sent. Quest. 12. What are the marks of a true Church? General notes and marks are set down by the Church of Rome, whereby it is pretended, that the true Catholick and Holy Church may be distinctly and perfectly known from all false Congregations or Churches: as 1. Visibility. 2. Antiquity. 3. Durability. 4. Prosperity. 5. The name of a Catholick Church. 6. Agreement with the ancient Church. 7. Its union with the head, viz. the Pope. 8. Holiness of Doctrine. 9. Efficacy of Doctrine. 10. Holiness of life. 11. The glory and power of miracles. 12. The gift of Prophesie. 13. The acknowledgement or confession of her enemies. 14. The unhappy and unfortunate success of her enemies: 15. A succession of Bishops. With several others, which in their own nature are either sepa∣rable from the true Church, or may agree to a false, and may con∣stitute a Synagogue of Satan, as well as a Church of Christ; for which with many other reasons they are rejected of the Reformed
Churches, as proper Characters of that body whereof Christ is the head: that being able to consist pure, holy and visible without some of them, (though in some points they agree to her also in that, but not as essential or Characteristical) and knowing also that many of them are forged by and in Rome, that she may appear the better, and stand the firmer in her Pontificalibus. The proper and essential Chara∣cters of a true Church whereby she is differenced from all false, & also from the Church of Rome, and which gives her her esse, vivere & sentire, are these, viz. 1. The pure dispensation of the Word, Act. 2.4. Where the Word is taught in a pure manner, according to the institution of it, without detraction from, or addition to it; wherever that is taught what Christ commanded, and the Gospel holds out, so farre there is a pure Church; and where that is mixed and mingled with mens Inventions (as points of doctrine) so far the Church is im∣pure. 2. The pure Administration of the Sacraments. Matth. 28.19, 30.1 Cor. 11.23. That Church that keeps to the institution of those Ordinances appointed as Seals of the Covenant by Christ, putting nothing to them, nor taking nothing from them (as necessa∣ry for the making of them Seals) so far that is a pure Church: and where that is not done, it is so far impure. Some adde Church discipline, but that holds out rather her well being, then her being; in times of persecution she hath wanted that, and may want it, and yet a true Church, by the keeping pure of the Word and Sacraments, which a visible Church cannot consist with∣out: hence we behold and look upon Ierusalem, Galatia, Thessalo∣nica, Corinth, Colos. and once those famous Churchs of Asia, though the gospel was taught in them, in a glorious and a pure dispensatory way, yet for the present wanting those two, we eye them not, nor number them among the Churches of Christ. The same teacheth the Reformed Churches of Helv. Art. 14. Behem. Art. 8. France, Art. 27. Belg. 29. Ausp. Art. 7. Sax. Art. 11. Wirtem. Art 32. Swed. or the 4. Cities. Art. 15. Sot. Art. 15. and of England Art 19. That Article it self is this,
Art. 19. of the Church of England. The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithfull men, in which the pure word is preached, and the Sacraments be du∣ly administred, according to Christs Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite for the same, &c. All which considered, it follows 1. That the Church of Rome is no true Church, or pure Church, making the Scriptures to be imperfect for salvation, without their own Tradition. They will not suffer the Church to be clean through the word that Christ hath spoken. The Church is only tyed to the Gospel; For if an Angel from heaven teach any other Do∣ctrine, he is to be accursed by her, 1 Gal. 9. With her Baptismal water she adds oyl, salt and spittle, as es∣sential parts of Baptism, and useth this holy Ordinance upon Bells, Stocks, and wood. With the Sacramental wine she must mingle water, of which the Lairy must not taste. With her Sacramental bread she visits the sick, salutes Empe∣rors, makes Procession; it must be also a wafer Cke, and it must not be broken; with both these Elements she maketh a Sacrifice for the dead, and she teacheth that a Priest may give it to himself a∣lone; that the vertue or efficacy, both of that and Baptism, de∣pends upon the intention of him that doth administer; and yet the efficacy must not be questioned, but believed; and forasmuch as they are administered in Latine (which the common sort may not understand) they must act implicite faith. 2. That those segregated Congregations in England, are not true Churches. The word preached by many that are not men in Sex, nor Ministers in Office; prayer being preached down, and preaching only to be heard from men of their own principles; teaching for Doctrine, not Traditions, but fancies, blasphemies; affirming the nullity of Apostolical Ordination, &c. The Sacra∣ments are either abused, as re-baptizing those that were baptized before; making dipping necessary to that Ordinance, and the Sa∣crament performed by a Laick person. The Sacrament of the
Lords Supper being either preached down altogether, or grosly abused in nature. Its vertue depends upon his goodness that gives it; a sin to receive it with any that we conceit not to be holy, or know him to be prophane, though he be never admonished by them; and if he were, yet he is not to be eaten withal, least I eat and drink damnation to my self, through his sin; the Elements not consecrated, through which that only is an Ordinance; and the body or blood of the Lord, they are not consecrated; for he that often attempts to do it, hath no power so to do, wanting Aposto∣lical Authority, viz. Ordination. 3. That the Church of England is a true Church, as it is now constituted; her Doctrine being pure, she holds nothing, nor in∣joyns nothing upon her members in matters of salvation, by way of precept, neither doth she add to, nor take any thing from the nature of the Sacraments, that the Lord Christ hath left behinde him in the Church; by way of practice she doth, and may injoyn; and she hath power to ordain several Ceremonies, to be performed in the receiving of them, which in themselves being not contrary to the Scriptures, nor taught by her as necessary for salvation, ur∣ged only as edifying for their meaning, and decent for the service performing, her Members may, and they do give her all due obe∣dience, and their obedience is justifiable. You need not here be put in minde of that caution formerly gi∣ven, viz. not to take manners for doctrine: it is a high errour to conceit the vertue, power, efficacy of an Ordinance, to consist in, or depend upon the goodness of him that doth administer the same. A prophane person, a known Swearer, may purely dispense the Sacraments; for that lies not (as God forbid it did) in the pu∣rity of any mans conversation, but in the pure adhering to our Lords Institution. The pure preaching of the word hangeth not upon the purity of him that speaketh, but in the purity of the word spoken of. The purity of Doctrine lies in the agreement of it unto Scripture, and not in the agreement of a mans life unto the word; if so, how many had Christ converted? what multi∣tudes of people had Paul brought to the knowledge of the truth, more then he did?
The same Doctrine teacheth the Reformed Churches, and the Church of England, Art. 26. To conclude this Chapter, in all Instituted Ordinances, it is neither Pauls goodness, nor Apollo's graces, nor Iudas's wicked∣nesse, that is the cause of the plants fruitfulness or barrenness (from the grace of God must we look to receive the promised reward, 1 Cor. 3.7.) In natural, as in prayer, sometimes it may be other∣wise, Iames 5.16. CHAP. II. Of the Scriptures. COL. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teach∣ing and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiri∣tual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. HAving viewed this beautifull, heavenly, and holy building (for it is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.9.) which is as Ierusalem a City compact together, we shall now behold the foundation upon which it stands. The Builder of it was skilfull in all kind of cunning Work; and a Fabrick of this height or altitude, required a foundation suitable, deep, strong and sure; he therefore founded it upon a Rock, Matth. 16.18. by which the several parts of it stand firm; the carved and polished work thereof knows no shaking; the least vessell therein, though earthen, yet being chosen for the Masters honour, knoweth no falling down by tottering.
The foundation of this glorious Metropolis, Royal Edifice, or House of God, is in truth and nature but one; yet since Scripture speaks of it as two, we shall speak in that Language, and shew you that the Church hath 1. An increated essential foundation, which is that holy thing whose name is Jesus Christ the Lord, Matth. 16.18. begotten be∣fore the beginning of the world; it is the Lamb of God, the Rock of Ages; it is he that is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners: the only begotten Son of the Father, who taking upon himself to deliver man, did not abhor the Virgins womb: it is he whose name is wonderfull, Counsellor, the mighty God, the Prince of Peace, the everlasting Son of the Father, the Man who is Gods Fellow, Zach. 13.17. 2. A Created Doctrinal foundation; this is the Law and the Prophets, Ephes. 2.20. It is the word written, which is profitable for Doctrine, and reproof, for correction and instruction in righ∣teousness, that the man or Church of God might be perfect through∣ly furnished unto all good works: In summ, it is that word that was spoken by the Fathers, by the Saints, by the Prophets, and A∣postles, who were the servants of God, Phil. 1.1. Of these two, we may say, as Ioseph said of Pharahs dou∣bled dream, Gen. 41.26. They are but one: yet not one so, but that the preheminence is given to the first, under the notion of a Corner stone, Isa. 28.16. that giving both strength to the build∣ing, and directions to the Builder. And indeed the Prophets and Apostles laid no new Foundation, but added to that cor∣ner stone; laid to their hands daily such firme Christians as they had fitted for this holy superstructure, taking directi∣ons in their building from its posture; for unto it all the building fuly framed together, groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephes. 2. ult. No foundation being laid there∣fore but what is united to this, strengthened by this, support∣ed by this, and directed by this, shews that properly there is none but this.
Saint Paul who was a wise and excellent Master builder himself,Not that Coloss. in the Isle of Rhodes, most Geo∣grapher is making this to be the City writ∣ten to; not that; & this Epistle speaking of Laodi∣cea, & Hierapolis, Cities of Ntolia, as bodering upon Colos. and near to each other inti∣mates the same, these 3. Cities were overthrown together by an Earthquake. A.C. 68. 1 Cor. 3.10. understanding there was a Church builded at Colos. a City of Phrygia the greater, in the continent of Asia the lesse, so called from one Phryxus a King thereof, had no desire it should stand empty, left the evill spirit which hath been cast out should take possession again (as at this time he was like to do) whether by their falling back to Paganisme and Heathnish customes again, or by being taught the necessity of imbracing the doctrine or Ceremo∣nies of Jewisme, would have the Word of Christ dwell richly in them. This Country of Phrygia had once in it a King named Gordius, who of a Plow-man being chosen King, tyed or hampered his Plow-Tacklings in such a knot that he predicted that none should untye them but he that was to be Conquerour of the World: it was called Nodus Gordianus; this Prophesie was fulfilled in Alexander, who because he could not untye it by Art, cut it asunder with his Sword; and for afterward conquering the World, was sirnamed the Great. At this time there was among these Phrygian Colossians some that hampered their understandings by a counterfeited hu∣mility, who with their dark Axiomes would have intruded upon them worshipping of Angels: which knots to untye that they might be great, the Apostle sends them or recommends unto them the Sword of the Spirit: Let the Word of Christ dwell in you rich∣ly. In this Country also was the City of Midaium, where Midas the son of this Gordius lived and dwelt: he as the Poets fain, asked of Bacchus who was his Guest, that what ever he touched might become gold (his great riches was the ground of the Fable) his ute was granted, by which he turned Mountains into gold: but finding that he could neither eat nor drink but Goblets and Vi∣ands of Gold, he recalled his wish, and by washing himselfe in the River Patlus, communicated that virtue to the River, which
afterward brought up golden sand. The River that comes from the Mount Tmolus, brings with it abundance of gold and silver, which might give the Occasion of the Fable. These Colossians, our Apo∣stle would have them turn as it were by faith, even dung into gold. Moses esteemed the reproaches of Christ great Treasure. Heb. 11.26, and would have them desire to do so, nay wishes them and com∣mands them to do so; when they have tryed all they will never have cause to repent of their choice, If the Word of Christ dwell richly in them. Psamneticus a King of Egypt, gave Verdict that the people of this Country was of greatest antiquity: for heshutting up 2▪ children, for∣bidding that any humane company should come nigh them, that he might understand what Language was most ancient and most natural to men▪ the Babes were all that time suckled by Goats: at the expirati∣on of the which two years, the Infants pronounced only the Word Bee, which in the Phrygian Language signifies Bread, which they had learned of the goats cry. Our Apostle would have the Colossians to shut up their Infants ears from the doctrine whether of Heathe∣nish Idolatry or Jewish Ceremony, and by embracing of the truth become of the oldest and truest Religion (which was unknown to the Gentile; and shadowed out to the Jew) and learn the Language of Canan, the Word that shall be as bread; that the King of Saints might give this good report, that they pleased him, which he shall do, if they let the Word of Christ dwel richly in them. This Chapter is filled with divers Christian duties, which the Colossians (during Pauls imprisonment at Rome) are exhorted to perform and walk by: and they are either such as concerned be∣lievers in general, of what sort or condition soever qua believers, or such as concerned their particular Relations to and with each other, as qua Fathers, or qua Wives, &c. His generall Instructions extend themselves to the 18. ver. and may be reduced unto these heads.
1. For the right ordering and placing of their affections; though naturally they be as Sisera, nailed to the things of this world, he would have them rinched off, and set upon things that are above. v. 1. Nempe per serium studium pretatis.Pisc. in loc. 2. For the mortifying of their Members that are on earth; Me∣tonymia subjects: understanding those Earthy, sensual, natural, bru∣tish lusts, desires, inclinations, actions that war against the soul; As Fornication, Uncleanensse, v. 5. which they must put off now to∣gether with wrath, anger, malice, v. 8. (q.d.) hoc empus alios mo∣res postulat. Now you are become Christians, you must not live as you did, you must now walk worthy of the Gospel. 3. For the exercising of holy and sacred virtues; as Mercy, kind∣nesse, humblenesse, meeknesse, as the Elect of God, v. 12. (q.d.) Deus vos dilexit & in Christo ex misericordia elegit ad vitam aeter∣nam; ergo & vos diligite alii alios, &c. God having shown all these graces eminently to be in himself for their good, he would have to be in them (for they are  Intrals or bowels of mercy) towards each other for their own good; yet more, they are to put these on, that as they would notbe seen without their cloaths, they should never come abroad without their graces: some indeed use Religion for a cloak to put off and on at their convenience: but Religion should be worn as a garment, as an inward garment (bow∣els of mercy) such garments as we cannot live without, without starving; and truly where there are not bowels of mercy to keep our affections warm, Love, wherein consists the very life of Religion, soon waxeth cold. 2. His particular directions, such as concerned their particular relations to and with each other, whose measure reacheth almost to the bowels of the 4. ch. and may be reduced to these principles. 1. Of Husbands and Wives, v. 18, 19. 2. Of Fathers and Children, v. 10, 11. 3. Of Masters and Servants, v. 22.
Vt Sol inter Planetas, medium locum occupans, &c. As the Sun among the Planets, so is my Text placed in the midst of these di∣rections, giving light to those above, and communicating splendor to those below, that these Colossians might know both the one and the other, that they might be performed with as great a zeal by them, as they were by the Apostle proposed to them; he will have the Word of Christ to dwell in them. We might be mistaken touching the nature of bowels of mercy, and teach others to neglect great points of duty, were it not for this Worship of Christ: this wil raise up their affections to the things that are eternall, and cause a holy and a decent respect to be given to each other, so long as they behold the things that are temporal. In the body of the words we may behold two general parts; one tending to the perswading of those Christians to the study and pra∣ctice of the whole word of Christ, Let the Word of Christ, &c. The other inducing to the speciall practice of a part of it, viz. Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs. In the first part you have these particulars. 1. The Author of that Word he would have so studied, that is Christ, the Word of Christ. 2. The manner, how we must study it, follow it or enjoy it; that is expressed by the Word Dwelling. 3. The persons whom he would have it so dwell withall or in, that is in you. 4. The manner how he would have it to dwell in them, that is, 1. Richly, 2. Wisely. 5. The ends why he would have it so to dwell in them. 1. That they might teach. 2. That they might Admonish one another. In the Latter take notice distinctly, 1. Of the form and manner how he would have those Psalmes, Hymns and spiritual Songs used, that is with grace. 2. with affection in their hearts. Non vox sed votum: this is the best Tune to any Psalm. 2. The Object of their singing, or the end they propose to them∣selves, that is, the Lord. Cantemus . He
that sings more for the praise of the Lord then for carnal pleasure or worldly delight, may be called the chief Musician. Dum gratiae ti aguntur pro acceptis beneficiis; In their returning thanks unto the Lord for his favours, their hearts must be lifted up through grace unto his glory: which is ars bene cantandi, the highest note of all. Before we come to any doctrinal Observation, we shall enquire after these particulars, (which may give us light more fully into the Text) in an extraordinary manner, viz. 1. What it is that here is called the Word of Christ. 2. What is the Importance of the Word Dwelling. 3. The parties he would have the World to dwel in. 4. What is held out in general by the words richly and in all wisedome. 5. The Discrepancy, or Identity (let the Phrase be pardoned) between Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs; which shall be done in these following Sections. SECTION I. LE the Word of Christ] The Word of Christ may be taken two ways, Either, 1. Strictly; for those Precepts, Sayings, Sermons, Exhortations, that he gave, made, left behind in the World, when he was visibly dwelling among men, in the shape and form of a Servant; and who∣soever lets these words dwell in them, they shall be like men dwel∣ling upon a Rock: the water may come about them, but it shal ne∣ver hurt them; they may come about their feet, but never swell up to the head; the wind may blow, but not a hair of his head fall to the Earth. Mat. 7.27. 2. Largely; for all the Words, Sayings, Prophesies, Sermons that were spoken by all whom he commissioned to preach after, for the whole Doctrine of the Old and new Testament, rejecting no∣thing
nor turning out of doors of the great and capacious building of our souls, no Word, no Scripture, since we can see the Image of Christ upon them all: we know that Orally and Vocally or Verbal∣ly Christ made no Psalm, yet here they are put down as the Words of Christ; for they were truly, Prophetically and spiritually made by him: they are a part of that holy Book, called the Word of Christ, not excluding the other persons, but including; for it hath various titles according to the purpose and pleasure of the holy Ghost. It is the VVord of God. Ephes. 6.17. It is the VVord of the Lord, 2. Thes. 2.3.1. It is the VVord of Life. Phil. 2.16. and here it is the VVord of Christ. In those other places the Son is not excluded: quod necessario subintelligitur, non deest: and here the Father with the Spirit are concluded. That the whole body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and what ever is contained therein, may be called the word of Christ, though Christ might not be yet come in the flesh, may be thus demonstra∣ted 1. They were all uttered and spoken by his spirit: or they were written by that spirit that came from him. Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy ghost. 2. Pet. 1. ult. Now the Holy ghost is sent by the Father in his Sons name. Ioh. 14.26. and the Son sends the Holy ghost again from the Father. Ioh. 15.26. It was this Spirit that put words in the mouth and mind of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, David, Solomon, Iehosophat, Iob, Daniel, Ieremiah. VVhat shall I say? the time would fail to speak of Gi∣deon, Barack, Sampson, Peter, Paul, and Iames the Lords Brother; all which were acted by one and the same spirit, which proceedeth from the Father and the Son, prompting them and dictating to them the things, Councels, prophesies that are recorded in the Oracles of God. 2. They did all of them hold him out to the VVorld, or to the Sons of men; speak of him: Abraham saw his day. Iohn 8.56. Mo∣ses wrote of him. Ioh. 5.46. Isaiah saw him born of a Virgin. Isa. 7.14. and told the VVorld of it. Isa. 9.6. Ieremiah saw the chil∣dren of Bethlem slain for him. Ier. 31.15. He was seen from the top Tower of divine speculation giving eyes to the blind, and ears to the deaf, Isa. 35.5. He was sold for thirty pieces of silver.
Zacch. 11.13. he was seen scourged, mocked and crucified. Isai. 53.4, 5. he was seen to rise from the dead the third day. Hos. 13. 14. Psal. 16.10. Ion. 1.17. he was seen to intercede at the right hand of God. Dan. 9.17. he was seen coming in the clouds to judge his people. Iude 14. his Birth, his Reign, his Nature, his Suffering, the cause of his Suffering, the profits of his sufferings, the height of his Power, the extension of his Kingdom was made known to the world, to Simeon before he embraced him; else he would not, nay could not have beheld him as the Lords Salvation. Luk. 2.30 that is he through whom God appointed salvation to come by. Christ himself commanded the Jews to search the Scriptures. Ioh. 5.39. as if he had said, If you do not find by the Scriptures the properties, acts, signs, tokens of the true Messias, spoken of by the Prophets, to agree with and in me, then believe me not. They speak so fully and so largely of him, of his Kingdome, strength and power, that almost it is nothing else but the word of Christ, as if he himself were speaking of himself the things concerning himself. E∣very Prophet in his turn prophesied and spake of him, untill Iohn, and he pointed him with his finger, saying, , behold the Lamb of God; they held him out unto the World in Prophesies and Types; the Baptist held him forth to the World in flesh and bones; yet fleshand blood revealed it not to him neither, but the spirit which he sent before to restifie of those things that should come to pass, and that they might be brought by those sayings to believe on the Son of man; he brought indeed glad tidings, vere magnum id est, & majus quom humana capit intelligentiam, that said To you is born this day a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. Gloria in excelsis: he plainer, that said, Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the World. 3. They were all of them ratified and fulfilled of him, confirmed and established by him. Not a Iota or Title that was foretold of him but was to the height accomplished of him; ut impleretur, that it might fulfilled which was spoken in the Scriptures, is a usual phrase with the Evangelists. As Ionas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so was the Son of man in the bowels of the earth. As the Serpent was lifted up, that the Israelites beholding it might be cured of those wounds the fiery Serpents had given them; so
must the Son of man be lifted up on the Cross, that whoso beholds him, might be saved from the stings of that old Serpent, called the Devill and Sathan. Revel. 12.9. He is the true Melchizedec, who meets the faithfull returning from the slaughter of their sins, and comforts them with bread and wine, and blesseth them, yea and they shal be blessed. There was one Text, and it seems but a mean one, yet he wil not dye, nay rather he cannot dye until it be fulfilled; for at the last gasp he cryes out (Ioh. 19.28) I thirst. Quodnam Genus Sermonis! he that could endure mockings, scourges, buffettings, nay nailing to the Cross, cast out of the land of the living, and near to be made free among the dead: cannot he endure a little thirst? This thirst it seems is more then naturall, that death it self cannot quench: he is a thirst, and Heaven and earth shall perish before he drink not: those hands & feet, that in this his condition we would think should rather smite him & spurn at him, must be imployed to fetch & reach him drink; Ut impleretur, all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken in that Scripture, Psal. 69.21. In my thirst they gave mee Vinegar to drink, which when he had done, then Consummatum est, all was finished: if it had not been the truth that had spoken it in the Psalm, the truth had not performed it so exactly in the Gos∣ple. 4 According to his pleasure were they spoken, and at his good wil were they uttered by them. The spirit of prophesie did not always abide upon the most holy Prophet; hence Advenit Verbum Iehova, The Word of the Lord came, is a usual phrase among the Prophets. Elisha was a man of God, and yet the Lord had hid the Shanamites grief from him. 2 Ki. 4.2. When he put it in their mouths, then they spoke, and not before: they were his words; for untill he spoke to their hearts, their mouthswere shut up, end they remained silent, till the Word of the Lord came; there was neither voice nor hearing: in truth, what he spoke they uttered, and when he was pleased to be si∣lent, they were forced to be mute. 5. The prophesies did but open a passage for him, and the whole of them had a tendency to him: the Law in all its Ceremonies, and in all its precepts doth but lead us, conduct us & point out Christ unto us: it hath no Language in it but Christ: in it's Condemning
power it is a harsh School-master to drive us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. The Gospel hath the self same end, viz. To bring us to Christ; he stands, as it were, between both Testaments; the Prophets behinde him Call but to touch the hem of his garment, and come under the skirt of his apparel: the Apostles before him, call upon men to imbrace him in their arms by faith joyfully; and he himself in their mouth utters but what he delivered in person, Come unto me all ye that labour, Mhtth. 11.28. 6. They are his words in respect of that power, and that Com∣mission he gave to holy men to write, and teach them; he gave the Apostles power to preach, and a Commission to teach all Nations, Matth. 28.19. It was he that took the Apostles from their other Callings, and gave them authority to teach what ever he had com∣manded: They did nothing untill he gave that power; and assoon as they received their authority from him, they began that heavy, though holy Imployment. 7. In regard of the publication, and promulgation of them; whatever was spoken, was spoken in the name of the Lord; all was preached in the name of Christ; they desired to know nothing more then Christ; they called upon men to believe in Christ; they baptized in the name of Christ; not by their own power or holi∣ness, but in the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, did they work their miracles, Acts 3.6. It follows then, that the whole Scriptures in what way soever delivered, whether by vision, inspiration, dreams, by signs, by voice, by writing, by Urim and Thummim, by men or by Angels, by Prophets or Apostles; for God spoke divers ways to our Fa∣thers, Heb. 1.1. All of it, and every part of that All, is the word of Christ, which we must have to dwell in us; for the words are Imperative, Imperativo praceptionis; a duty that we are to avoid then, and shun him that would seek to turn us from the Faith of that word here enjoyned. The Apostle is pleased to call the Scriptures the word of Christ, rather then the word of God, for this probable reason. At this time these Colossans were infected, and in danger to be drawn to the old Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Church, by self-seeking men, who desired them to look back to the word, wherein in∣deed
these things were written, Col. 2.16. but now since he ex∣horts them to the studie of the word of Christ, he foresees and knows that by the word of Christ, they shall learn that all those Ceremonies were but as shadows; and since Christ is come, not binding; for which cause he chooseth rather to call it the word of Christ, that those Hereticks might not take any advantage to cor∣rupt them, which they might have done, if he had said the word of God. From this we might draw many inferences; we shall at this time collect two; one concerning the Ministers of Christ; the o∣ther to all the Professors of Christ. 1. Concerning the Ministers of Christ. Let them not hereafter be afraid of man, nor of the son of man; let them be bold to say to any offender, Non licet tibi, with Iohn the Baptist, It is not lawfull for thee, Mat. 14.4. Let their faces be strong against the faces of men, their foreheads strong against their foreheads, that they be not dismayed at their looks, Ezekiel 3.8, 9. the word is not theirs, but the Lords; Let the word of God be spoken with bold∣ness, Acts 4.31. Christ speaks as one that had authority, Matth. 7.29. and he hath given authority and power to his servants, to charge men to their duty, 1 Tim. 6.17. where God threatens sin, they must not be afraid to pronounce punishment: The Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesie? Amos 2.8. As they are to preach it with Authority, so let them study it constantly; where shall the Ambassadors of the most High, know the will of their great Master, but here? Till Christ come, let them give attendance to reading: A Minister must be a man apt to teach, 2 Tim. 2.24. And its this alone, that can fit him for that function. In these lyeth the substance, and matter of their Com∣mission; therefore they must be looked into, studied upon. 2. To all the Professors of Christ, to all that name the name of Jesus, let them freely hear me touching these two particulars. 1. Let none of them trust, believe, or depend upon any new or immediate Revelation for his happiness; there are in this Age many that trust to those raptures of the Spirit, as they call them, and will have no other word dwell in them, then that word that the Spirit within suggests within, casting aside, and refusing
the Scriptures, as useless and unnecessary, because a word without: But I hope you have not so learned Christ. We shall carry a small time upon the search of that Spirit, pre∣tended to, trying it by the Scriptures, the touchstone of truth, and we shall see if those breathings of the Spirit be different from the blasts of the Prince of the power of the Ayr, that rules in the children of disobedience. 1. It doth not those things that the Spirit of God should do; not to insist upon particulars; there were three general Acts, that Christ promised his Spirit at his coming, should perform unto Be∣lievers; and this Spirit that goes abroad in this Age performs none of them, as may appear by a rehearsal of the severall acts themselves. 1. Was to bring to remembrance what ever Christ had spoken, Ioh. 14.26. This was to be his work then, and his work with all believers is the same now; what Christ hath taught, what Christ hath spoken, is the Spirit to bring to remembrance, which he will send. That Spirit therefore that teacheth, and puts that in the minds of men which Christ never spoke, cannot be that spirit sent of him; but such doth the spirit that in this Age is pretended: It calls down prayer, it will not be guided by Scripture, not live of the Gospel, nor according to Law, they will have no ordained Mi∣nisters, they will not own Magistrates, thrust Sacraments out of the Church, make Ordinances in their power depend upon the me∣rits of men, take singing out of our Christian Temples, preaching up new revelations, and that they only are the Saints that heed least the Scriptures; that it is only formal or Antichristian to crave a blessing before meat; that none are baptized, but such as are dip∣ped; to curse, revile, slander those that are set apart by Aposto∣lical Tradition, for the preaching of the Gospel, &c. This is that that Christ never taught, and therefore it is not his Spirit that brings them to our remembrance. 2. The Holy Spirit of God was to glorifie Christ, Iohn 16.14. that Christ that was then with his Discsples, that was born of the Virgin Mary, that Christ that was to suffer at Ierusalem, was he to make glorious; that Spirit now amongst us, casts contumelies, and scornfully speaks of that Christ, under the notion of a Christ
without us: Its seeks its own glory, and bears witness of it self; its whole aym is to invert the Divine dispensations, by slighting that Christ crucified, upon the account of being without. 3. He was to shed abroad the love of God in the hearts of Belie∣vers, Rom. 5.5. that is, the apprehension of the love of God, a sense of it, a feeling of it, from whence comes love, joy, and peace. Now the spirit that some pretenders have, is a contradistinct spirit from this; for by their trembling, quaking, foaming, it appears that the sense of the love of God is not shed abroad in their hearts, but of his wrath; those strange and monstrous actings, proceed rather from wrath, indignation and anguish; and indeed if gnashing of teeth be a picture, or fruit of Hell, we may know whence that spirit comes that carries men forth into those distempers. 2. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Union, and of Agreement, that ever speaks and agrees with it self. In no place doth it really oppose or contradict it self; it leads all men into one kind and way of truth, how distant soever they be from one another; but this spirit that goes abroad in our Age, never appears in one shape, it speaks this in this mans mouth, and contradicts is again next day: In this mans mouth, it threatens hell; in that mans mouth, it says there is no hell; it says that it is a decent thing for a woman to preach, the same spirit calls down all preaching in another; here it throws aside the Law, there it throws away the Gospel; there it throws away both; here it is for a Christ within, there it affirms there is no Christ at all: by its cloven foot, you may discern whence it came. 3. The Spirit of God teacheth honourable and glorious Doctrine; such Doctrine as made the highest in the earth bow their necks to receive the same; the whole Army of the Philistms, even of those Heathens that persecuted the Doctrine of the Spirit of God, was overcome by the noble Army of the Martyrs: the more it was af∣flicted. the more it grew, and went over the world like a Sea, over∣flowing the banks of all Penal Laws; Kings became its nursing Fa∣thers, and Queens its nursing mothers. The Doctrine that this Spi∣rit teacheth, is a Doctrine of Reprobation; Reprobated silver hath God called it; his providence and power hath crushed it always, suppressed it, and hath only given Satan a little power for the Try∣all
of his Church, but never gave him all his chain to destroy. Their Doctrine was never on a Candlestick, their house was never on a mountain, to bring all Nations in into it. God kept it under, that it never yet said, So would I have it. How hath the same Go∣spel we teach run over the world, and that without garments rolled in blood, and hath been beautifull and glorious! But this spirit hath attempted indeed, but stopped, tryed, condemned, cast out: Ne∣ver was there a Kingdom, Country, Parish, nay scarce a house, that this spirits Doctrine, or Doctrines rather, was ever received in. These things considered, let not the Professors of Christ depend upon those seducing revelations, but to the Scriptures, the foun∣dation of the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: But, 2. If the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, be the word of Christ, let none of the people sleight it: it is that which Christ hath spoken to be the Rule of their lives, tryers of their thoughts, and measure of their actions: if thou be of the houshold of faith, thou art upon that foundation whereof Jesus Christ is the chief Corner-stone. Eph. 2.20. All you that build must be squa∣red, fitted, and proportionated to this Corner stone, which can only be done by this Word of Christ, and therefore it is not to be slighted. Now the Scripture may be slighted divers ways. 1. When it is regardlessely heard: when Gods message is delive∣ring for the good of a mans soul by Gods servant thereunto appoin∣ted, to have an irreverend or unseemly carriage, shows they put no high valuation upon it; to be drowzy or sleepy when God is holding forth our duty, or his own greatnesse, our sins and his Justice, is a great sign of irreverence, and may provoke him to thrust us out of his presence: for it is not a slighting or contemning of man who reads it or speaks it, but of God who made it and enjoyned it. 2. When it is scoffingly used; when men make Scripture to be the bottome of Jests and Jears, the Subject of their profanenesse, or Object of their mirth. When the Prophet called the Burthen of the Lord, the people answered him in scorn, the Burthen of the Lord, the Burthen of the Lord. Ier. 23.33, 34, 35. or as Iulian that would smite a Christian on the one cheek, und then bid him turn the other, as his Lord and Master directed. The Scriptures were not
written to make men laugh but to make men wise unto salvation. 2 Tim. 3.15. they were sent into the word by God to instruct men how to demean themselvs without offence towards God & man. Act. 24.16. & it ought only to be imployed to that end. It is not safe jesting with edged Tools; so neither is it safe to sport with the two edged sword of the word of God. This is holy ground let us be afraid to sin upon it, least the owner of it Mock when eur fear cometh, and laught at our calamity, Prov. 1.26. It is in it self a high provocation of his Majesty, contempt of his honour, and a diminish∣ing of his greatnesse in the sight of men. 3. When it is heedlessely forgot; if a mans servant should not do the thing commanded, und excuse himself from his forgetfulness, it would not reprieve him from his masters anger. How shall God be patient when his precepts and word are closely suffered to go out of our minds? nay how shall they be saved if they keep not in memo∣ry which it preached unto them. I Cor. 15.2. or what is read by them not that all is read can be remembred, but to sufferit to go from our hearts for want of meditation, application communication and e∣steem it no losse to find our selves ignorant or forgetful of those grand truths upon which hangeth all the Law and Prophets (viz.) to love God and our Neighbour as our selves, Matth. 22.40. Every Chapter Men read, or Sermon men hear makes them fitter for hea∣ven or fuell for hell. Take heed to this all you that forget God, lest be tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver. How many are there that after hearing or reading, remember no more the thing read and heard no more then Nebuchadnezar did his dream. Dan. 2.3. his spirit was troubled, their perhaps are affected, yet for what neither can discover. Caduca est memoria & fragilis, Let us ask this gift of rememberance with earnestnesse, that the spi∣rit may help this infirmity, but let not carelessenesse be our bane, lest damnation be our portion. 4. When it is partially received: some there are that will part stakes with God, receive and embrace some part of his word and re∣ject another: they will fear an Oath, yet love a lye. They will seem in all their actions to intend to do nothing more, then the advance∣ment of Gods glory; yet calumniate and back-bite their Brother, and privally slander their own Mothers Son. Psal. 50.20. They will
reprove, as the Scripture exhorts, but forget to do it in meeknesse and love, as it commands. They will abhor an Idol, yet commit Sacriledge. Aut muta omen aut animum, said Alexander to a Souldier of that name and a Coward: either deny thou art a Chri∣stian, or live like one. How many in these days do cut and mince the Scripture, to make it speak what they have sophistically thought upon, though contrary to that Idiom that naturally God hath gi∣ven it, à principto. It is all the word of Christ, and therefore none of it to be re∣fused; to walk according to half the Scripture, will never altoge∣ther bring thee to heaven, dimidium in this sense, nihil est, that half which thou conceitest thou keepest, shall condemn thee at the latter day for thy injustice in robbing it of its holy companion and associate, Iam. 2.9. Truth himself hath told us, that whosoever shall break one of those least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of Heaven, Matth. 5.19. There is no minutila legie, all are magnalia; untill men find out a little God, and a little Hell, there is no little sin. Let the word of Christ, all the words of Christ, therefore be entertained in your hearts, and suffered to dwell. SECTION. II. Let the word of Christ dwell, &c.] , co∣habitare, inhabitare; let it dwell, frequenter habitare; let it con∣stantly abide in you, and have its abode with you; this word dwell Imports, 1. A willing entertainment of the word of Christ: A man will not suffer that person to dwell in his house, whom he will not en∣tertain or bid welcom: dwel supposes entertainment. Many will not bid the word of  speed; there was in our Sa∣viours time some that hated the light, Iohn 3.20. It was as unwel∣com to them as a Candle is to a Sluggard, wken he is newly awa∣ked;
nay when he is awakened, and a candle held to him, they strugle against it, would have it puffed out, and turne from it; but those Colossians must give it entertainment in their hearts and consciences, in their souls and their affections; when the light comes, they must rejoyce at it, rise and work by the light of it. Nay every Christian must be that wise woman, whose candle goeth not forth by night, Prov. 31.18. this light of the Word must always be entertained, that by it we may see the state of our soul, and how to work the work of God. Christ stands at the door of mens hearts, and knocks. Revel. 3.20. he knocks one way by his Word: if you will let him come in that way, he will sup with you, and you shall sup with him; he will give you better and choicer cares then you have to present to him; give him but hearing he wil give you good councel; give him your love you shall enter into his joy; give him your service, he will give you his Sonship; give him what you can though it be little, and you shall have of his abundance; give him your heart, he will give you of his glory; nay have you nothing to present this heavenly guest withal? then ask him for the Kingdome of Heaven, you shall have it of him. 2 Familiarity and acquaintance; dwelling in ones house, or with him, supposes acquaintance and knowledge of him. The Word of Christ ought not to be a stranger in a Christians breast: he should Commune with it, as a friend with a friend, in his own heart; what∣ever man be doing, let the Scriptures be at his right hand. Amicus est alter ego. Let the Word of Christ be ever with him as a faithfull Companion; it is the most reall friend that a Christian soul can keep company withall: it is a sound and unfeigned Councellor, an upright and impartial reprover, it wil neither flatter nor dissemble, but de∣clare it self to all persons at all times, in all companies, fairly, plain∣ly and savingly. It will approve of every thing that is just, and no more: reprove whatever is amisse, and no lesse. 3. Abiding or residence. He that comes to lodge in an Inne for a night, or that comes to a place for a Week, is not said to dwel, but where his home is. The W of Christ must not be lodged as a stranger, or entertained as a fr on the Sabbath day. How ma∣ny are affected with it, and for a time with joy receive it, but fall back to their old sins again, and remember it no more then a tale
that is told, yea possibly not so much? It is to such as a stranger with whom they make merry for a night, and rejoyce in its company, after∣wards shake hands and fall to their work again. Men must resolve never to let the Word go, if they purpose to be happy; when this departs, love, grace, strength, Counsell, joy, peace, comfort, light, food, health, happinesse, nay our God and Saviour take their leaves of us, and follow it. When some comfortable holy resolutions are wrought in the soul by the application of some precious promises or strong convictions, by the means of some ter∣rible threatning, they are not to be suffered to depart till by the one or by the other the heart be brought to a holy and through refor∣maion. 4. Consent or agreement. Dwelling supposes usually Identity of affection as wel as of place and situation: we cannot well dwell with that man with whom there is contention or disagreement; we must and ought to agree with the Word in all Circumstances: as wel when it frowns as when it smiles. It wil never chide without a cause, nor reprove but for the souls good: & reason wil have us neither rage nor murmur. Quid ergo? non altquando castigatio necessaria? Quid ni hoc sincer cum ratione? non enim nocendi, &c. piety will not suffer us to turn it out of doors When once Ierusalem began to fall out with the Word, the day of peace was hid from her eyes, and destruction comes like an Ar∣med man. If the Word cannot live in peace, it wil not live at all; it will not always strive with man. Bear with its sharpest reproofs therefore, take its most plain instructions, and contemn not it's frequent admonitions, and in the end it shall be health to thy Navel and marrow to thy bones. Prov. 3.8. Say ever with Hezekiah. 2 Kin. 20.29. Good is the Word of the Lord, and peace and truth shall be towards thee all the days of thy life. Whate contention is there is pride; where pride is, there Sathan is; and where Sathan is an Inmate, Christ nor his Word will not dwell.
SECTION III. LEt the Word of Christ dwell in you, &c.] This is the third par∣ticular above proposed, wherein we have the persons in whom our Apostle would have this Word of Christ to dwell: which be∣cause we shall have occasion to speak largely of it in another place: we shall be the briefer here. In you, that is in you Archippus. Chap. 4.17. and Evagras, Chap. 1.7. (i.e.) in you Ministers of the Gospel (they being Ministers of Colos.) that you may be faith∣full Stewards and Ministers of Christ, that you may know how to comfort the dejected and strengthen the feeble stock. In you Parents, that you may bring up your children in the nur∣ture and admonition of the Lord. In you Masters that ye may know how to command in the Lord, and that you may know how to obey as to the Lord. In you young men that you may cleanse your way. In you old men that you may be as Guides.. In you Husbands that you may love your Wives. In you Wives, that you may reverence your Husbands. In you, that is in all you that professe the truth, and have been baptized in tye Name of Christ: that you may work out your salva∣tion with fear and trembling. That you may do all things without murmurings and disputings. That ye may be blamelesse and harm∣lesse, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation. Phil. 2.14.15. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ, Tit. 2.13.
SECTION IV. LEt the Word of Christ dwell richly in you &c.] O  copiose abundanter, have good store of it: let it overflow your souls, as Iordan overflowed it's banks in time of Harvest. Ios. 3.15. This Word richly im∣ports 1. A diligent care and study after the Scriptures: men will take much pains to have their houses richly furnished.Terrent. Nunquam tam mane egredior neque tam vespers domum revertr, quin semper te in fund, conspicer, sodere aut errare aut aliquid serre. And they will labour hard to increase their substance: so men must labour for to obtain the sacred knowledge of the holy Scrip∣tures; they must dig for it as for hidden Treasures, denoting the labour about it, and love they bear unto it. Nil tamen difficile, &c. It may be hard to flesh and blood, but remember, if any of you lack Wisedome, let him ask of God that giveth to all men liberally, and it shall be given him. Jam. 1.5. and it is true wisedom to know God and him whom he hath sent, who is to be found only in in the swad∣dling cloaths of the Scripture, and unto whom we are guided by the light of those Prophesies that went before us of him and he that would take him in his Arms, but must take the pains to go into the Temple. 2. It holds out abundance of it, he is not said to be rich, that hath but smal store, nor wealthy that hath but wherewithal to supply necessity: we must have enough for our selves, and our Lanthorn full of light, that others may walk holily, uprightly and cleanly by our guidance, counsell and direction, this is not to eat our Morsell alone: this makes the mouth of a Righteous Well of Life, Prov. 10.11. Where any any that wants refreshment, shal not misse of it, and none shall go thirste away.
3. It holds out some choise portion; this is not spoken absolute∣ly, but chiefly; there is something in it that must be chiefly studied & retained; he is not said to be rich that hath store of ordinary goods, but of some choce Commodity, as Plate, Mony, Jewels; which, though he look to preserve other things, yet chiefly his care is for them: there are truths of grand concernment, there are foundation stones, necessary graces that must be wel laid in the soul, that his faith fail not. There are some things that Titus must constantly affirm. Tit. 3.8. There are weightier matters of the Law, these must cheif∣ly be done, Mat. 23.23. There are some points that all the Law and Prophets hang upon. Mat. 22.40. Temperance, Righteous∣nesse and Judgement to come, would be well studied. Act. 24.25. when we have studied the Almightinesse of the Father, we shall the sooner see how the Son was born of a Virgin; I am to study better the cause, merit, benefit of Christs death then of Stephens. The na∣ture of that Covenant that God made to save poor sinners, is of greater concernment to me, then that that David made with Iona∣than concerning his Posterity. Now to study well and ponder upon the holynesse, graciousnesse and largeness of the nature, Covenants, and of the mercy of God, the Offices, sweetnesse of the Lord Christ; to know the cause and effect of his first and second coming, is of gret concernment; and he is rich that is wel stored with those great matters, yet despiseth not the least. 4. A care to preserve and keep it. Riches that have been gotten by hard labour, are preserved with care and diligence. What made men sweat for in the getting, they usually observe the profit of it in the spending: a bloody Conquest is watchfully looked after, whilest an easie victory is secured without noise. Where this Word of Christ dwels richly, there must be a holy care t keep it: there be thieves that wil endeavour to break through and steal; Sathan hath a Picklock to enter the House of the soul of man. This made God cause his people to write his Law upon the posts of their house, and upon their gates, Deut. 6.9. that being constantly in their eye, they might not through carelessenesse be debarred the heart. The Law is a Tree of life to them that lay hold upon it: and by this Word of Christ, e∣ven with a scriptum est, we may answer all Satans temptations, and put to silence all his fleshy Emissaries.
SECTION V. LEt the Word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all wisedome. &c.] Many there be that are often upon the search of the mind of God, and studious to find out his meaning in the dark and hidden mysteries of prophesies and Revelations, and in their thoughts draw from them unlearned and foolish Questions, which do gen∣der strifes. 2 Tim. 2.3. forgetting or neglecting the words of faith or good doctrine. 1 Tim. 4.7. bu this is not  in all wisedome; then dwels it twice wisely, 1. When those truths are entertained that have a more proper tendency to the bringing of the soul to the perfect obedience of the Law of Christ: how the grand duties of mortification shall be per∣formed, and what leads unto it, how the Sabbath ought to be kept, how those talents or gifts that God hath given them are to be im∣proved, will profit a man more then the knowledge of the time or fall of Antichrist; and to know which way to appear before Christ without spot or wrinckle, will conduce more to the souls happinesse then to study the day or year of the Son of mans coming down to judgement. 2. When those truths are studied and received that are in their own nature necessary for a mans salvation. Without holynesse no man shall see the Lord, Heb 13.14. For a man therefore to discover to himself by the Scripture what holinesse is, how to procure it if he want it, preserve it if it be enjoyed, will breed more unspeakable comfort, then to know by the Scriptures What shall this man do? 3. When those truths are most known that are for the more magnifying and gloryfying of God among, and in the sight of the Sons of men, to know how to maintain good works, Tit. 3.8. and to let our light shine before others, will bring more glory to God,
then to study what work God was doing before he made the World, or if he will make another when this is finished. A clear understanding of these truths, and store of these laid up in the Garner of the soul, will make a man rich in all good works, and wise unto salvation. SECT. VI. LEt the Word of Christ dwell richly in you in all Wisedome, teach∣ing and admonishing one another, &c.] We are not born alto∣gether for our selves: when men by faith as living stones are united to the body of the Church, others are to be held, fastned and preser∣ved by them; we ought to behold and consider one another, Phil. 2.4. We ought to look on the things of others: there is a publick teaching proper to the Gospel Ministry, and there is a private Teaching common to the holy Priesthood. Come Children, heark∣en unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, is a Saints Dialect. Psal. 34.11. Teaching according to some, is instruction in matters of faith, not done because not known; and admonition hath reference to matter of fact, known but not done; of both these at large afterward we must speak; for the present we may know that these duties are mutuall, Teaching and admonishing one another; he that now teacheth, must by and by be a hearer; and he that admo∣nisheth this day, must not be offended if he be reproved by his Bro∣ther to morrow.
SECTION VII. LEt the Word of Christ dwel richly in you, in all wisedome, teach∣ing and admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns and spiritu∣all Songs, &c. There are some that will rise early to follow after Strong-drink; these wil hollow and roar over their Cups, they will make a gracelesse as well as an unseemly noise, and these by singing or rather howling, expresse their delight in the Acts of drunkenness. Our Apostle would have these believers to expresse their joy in spi∣rituall singing for their Christian Conferences. How these three differ, cannot be easily determined, since there are variety of judgements equally probable; or if they do differ at all, is by many questioned. It shall be left to the choice of the Rea∣der, by laying before him two or three of the chief Opinions. 1. Some by Psalms understand those Songs or Psalms of David that were sung in the Temple, and plaid upon by Instruments, as those Psalms that were played upon the Organs, Lute, Harps, Cym∣balls, or any other Instruments: and Hymns and Songs to be such as were only by voyce sung in the Jewish Temple, or in pri∣vate houses: an instance of the first we have, Ezra 3.10. of the o∣ther, Mat. 26.30. 2. Others by Psalms understand the whole Book of Psalmes, whereof David was the principal, if not the only Author, wherein we have an Epitome and an abridgement of the whole Word of God. By Hymns they understand those Songs that were penned by Moses, Deborah, Hezekiah, wherein properly the praises of God are contained, as of his power, mercy, greatnesse: or in a word, any song in Scripture whereof David was not the Author, but other holy men. By Songs they understand any Godly Religious Song, used or composed by good men, which though not proceeding from the in∣fallible Spirit of God, yet might advance godlinesse in the hearts of
the pious users of them; such as at this day is our Lamentation of a sinner, or the like. 3. Others there are who understand these three to signifie all one and the self-fame thing (viz.) the Psalms of David; Hymns and Spirituall songs being only a variation of the phrase and holding out those Songs that that sweet Psalmist of Israel did compose for the benefit of that Church, over which God had made him a Feeder or a Keeper; where of some are Eucharistical, spending themselves in prai∣ses, some Penitential, washing themselves in tears, and some Peti∣onary. The Hebrews give generally those names, and that promiscu∣ously to the whole book of Psalmes, as it is Composed in our Bi∣bles. But the Apostle is careful that the Psalm, Hymn or Song be wel tu∣ned; he would have them sing with grace within their hearts; he would not have them to have any inclination to pride, when they sing, Lord, I am not pusst up in mind. When Mary sung, her soul did magnifie the Lord. It is known that the Heathens in their meetings, sang and did sing Songs of praises to their Gods and Goddesses, for their supposed goodnesse and greatnesse. Here Christians are exhorted to sing, but not to such: we ought to sing, but it's with Grace in our hearts to the Lord; Sursum Corda, to the Lord let us lift them up. He gives a particular direction in this place, touching singing of Psalms in a more especiall manner then of other duties; but we are to know 1. That he restrains not all Scripture to Psalms; for there are Precepts, Histories, Prophesies, Epistles in holy Writ, which must be entertained as wel as Psalms. Nor 2. That he would have other parts of Scripture put from their true and proper inheritance which in all ages they have had, as to be looked upon and received as the word of Christ; which other Scrip∣ture is as well as the Psalms, But 3. Because of all Scripture the Psalms are of most generall use, as having in them the greatest variety of doctrine, the most fervent and working motives to godlinesse and piety; and 4. Because of all the Scripture, they were usually most (if not
only) sung; they were in a special way chanted by the Saints, and sung by the holy men under the Law, which (besides the Spirit of God who by David did compose those Psalms, suitable to be sung) was occasioned from those holy raptures that by experience believers felt in themselves in the using of them, arising upon the variety of Doctrine that was naturally perceived to be in them, and flow from them; but of these things more at large, when vve come to handle that Ordinance of singing in particular. CHAP. III. HAving opened the Text, we shall now by the assistance of him whose word is to be spoken of, come to the drawing out of such truths, as shall and may serve for firm pillars whereby the true Christian and sober Saint may stand upright against, and in despite of the storms and blasts of all contrary Doctrine. Our purpose is to speak of the nature of, and to defend the Churches practise in those effectual and grand Ordinances, viz. the Word, Sacraments and Prayer, the Conduit Pipes to convey the water of life to the languishing and thirsty soul, though some in this Age (surfeiting through plenty) account them but as puddle, and to be shunned by men. As a foundation and ground to the whole Discourse, we shall therefore handle this point of Doctrine from the words in generall: That it is a Duty incumbent upon all persons, to have know∣ledge of, and to be well acquainted with the holy Scrip∣tures. The word of Christ is the unum necessarium; that one thing need∣full for a Christian in this earth, and in his passing or travelling toward heaven indispensably necessary as a guide to direct him,
as light to comfort him, and as armour to defend him, Ephes. 6.17. Psal. 119.105. Psal. 19.7. In the opening of this doctrine we shall observe this method. 1. Show what knowledge it is that lies upon all Christians as a Duty. 2. What it is to be well acquainted with the Scriptures. 3. Give other Scriptures for the proof of the point. 4. Demonstrate the truth of it, by reasons drawn from Scrip∣ture. 5. Discover some causes that hinder the knowledge of the word in our days. 6. Draw some Corollaries. 7. Resolve some Questions. This shall be the Order that we will follow, and the God of Or∣der cause his blessing to go along with it, that it may effectually teach us how to order our Lives aright towards God and towards man, in these irregular days of ours. SECTION I. VVHen Christ had ascended up on high, and led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men, Ephes. 4.8. which gifts did vary, and were more or less, according to the good pleasure of him that ruleth all things. Every man hath not knowledge alike, and no man knoweth all things; he that knoweth most, knoweth but in part, 1 Cor, 13.12. According to the Order God puts men in, he will give five, two, or but one talent, and no more; some things lie hid from the wisest, and other things God will have the lowest of men find out; he hath given his word universally to all, that by it all may know their duty: and he is a wise man which knoweth that. There are three things that every Christian must indispensably know in Scripture. 1. All necessary truths: God will be offended, if they know not how to be good Christians; not if we be not good Disputants. We
are to know that God is a Spirit, And they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth, John 4.24. that he is a hater and punisher of sin, Rom. 1.18. that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Saviour of the world, Acts 9.20. Acts 5.31. &c. From the knowledge of these, and the like things, there are none excepted; they are indeed the ground work of all Religion, and God will be angry if men know them not. 2. All profitable truths: It is necessary for men in health, strength, and wealth, to lay up some comfortable provision against the days come wherein they shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Texts that can mitigate sickness, suppress doubts, and keep off despair, conduce much to a Christians being, and his well being also. The mysteries of Daniel will not afford so much comfort to a drooping soul, as the great mysterie of godliness. What time thou art afraid trust in God, Psal. 56.3. Remember, Happy is he (what case soever befals him) that hath the God of Iacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, Psal. 146.5. God may bring thee through the fire, and refine thee as silver is refined, and try thee as Gold is tryed, Zach. 13.9. Meditate therefore upon the Faith and patience of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. and upon the end of the Lord, Jam. 5.11. 3. All Relative truths, (i.e.) to know those things that God hath given a man in charge in reference to that particular calling or re∣lation that God hath given to him, or put him in. A Father must know his Duty; for he shall answer for his failings in that particular: the Magistrate his: the Minister his: the people theirs. God will punish Eli for his failings as a Father, 1 Sam. 3.13. Saul for his as a Magistrate, 1 Sam. 15.26. Nadab and Abihu for theirs as Priests, Lev. 10.2. The people for theirs, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. Eonus Civis, sed malus homo: it is one thing to be a good Christian, and another to be a good Father: be both; or if thou be not, thou mayst be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. that is, as a man that hath his house and his goods burned, may yet escape with his life: so thou mayst be brought to heaven, but not in that comfortable and joyfull condition which thou mightest, hadst thou filled up all thy Relations, according to the duties enjoyned thee by the word. But of these there may be, and is a twofold knowledge. 1. A speculative, or a head knowledge; a knowledge that goeth
no further then the brain; old Eli might know wt he ought to have done. The word of Christ may be in a mans brain, and there it will speed no better then the seed that was sown in stony ground, Matth. 13.5. wanting depth of earth. A head-knowledge will but encrease our guilt, and that will increase our misery: for he that knoweth his Masters will, and doth it not, shall be beaten with ma∣ny stripes. 2. An affective or heart-knowledge: Theologia est scientia af∣fectiva, directiva, which goes down to the affections, and causes a man to walk and to do according to that which he knows: Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophesie of this Book, Rev. 22.7. This is to receive the seed upon good ground: thus to know is only Life eternal: he that thus knoweth, shall no longer be called a Ser∣vant, but a Brother, a Sister, and a Mother to Christ Iesus, Matth. 12.50. SECTION. II. THe next thing to be opened, is to discover what it is to be well acquainted with the holy Scriptures: this appears by what hath been already spoken; yet for further demonstration, to be acquaint∣ed with the word of Christ; is, 1. To know it from all other sayings of the world; we are to know the very face of Scripture in the greatest croud of the wisest Sentences, and know it from all the wisdom of the gravest Fa∣thers: For, 1. We cannot otherwise reverence it as we ought: we are to tremble at the word of God, Isa. 66.2. There is such a Majesty in the word, that we are to esteem the very feet of him beautifull that brings it: when the voice of God soundeth in our ears, if we can∣not discern the Royaltie that is in it, we are not like to esteem it as we ought, or as God requires. 2. We cannot otherwise believe it as we ought; by not knowing
it we may be drawn to doubt of the truth of it: in discourses while men are dehorting from this or that vice, or exhorting to this or that duty, and intermingling either threats or promises, the truth of both may be doubted, either to the hardening of men in their sin, or to cool their affections to the duty. 2. To bear it in our mind above all other things in the world; our hearts must love it above all: see that our thoughts, affections, our desires, our meditations be busied about the nature of it, pre∣cepts of it, promises of it; and what ever we forget, let us never forget his precepts, Psal. 119 93. Let us make it our Companion, by meditating upon it all the day, ver. 97. 3. To make it the Rule of our lives, above all other things; some walk after the ways of Ierobuam, others after the counsel of the ungodly; some rns with a multitude to do evil, others walk af∣ter their own inventions: many walks after the flesh; others ac∣cording to the Prince of the power of the ayr, the Spirit that now workeh in the children of disobedience: But we have a more sure word, whereunto they do well, that take heed, as unto a light in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, Gal. 6.16, make the word therefore a Lamp un∣to thy feet, and a light unto thy paths, and then thou art acquaint∣ed with it. SECTION. III. WE are now to confirm the Doctrine by other places of Scri∣pture; in the doing we might muster up Legions of Argu∣ments, we shall content our selves with a few, such as these, viz. Among other warnings given the people of Israel, there is one, Deut. 11.18. to take heed that they served not other Gods: There∣fore ye shall lay up these words in your heart (saith the Lord) and in your soul, ind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may
be as Frontles between your eyes; and ye shall teach them your children; speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up; and thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates, &c. All which put together, as laying the word up in their heart and soul, teaching it their children, always speaking of them, it will amount to as much, and hold forth the same thing the Doctrine doth. We read again, Deut. 31.11, 12. that men, women and children, and the stranger that is in Israel, must be gathered together, That they may bear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord God, and observe to do all the words of the Law. All sorts of persons must hear the Law, learn it and observe it. Also Iosh. 8.35. There was not a word of all that Moses command∣ed, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women and the little ones, and the strangers that were conver∣sant among them. Here the above mentioned Law is put in executi∣on, and performed by Ioshua, no doubt but for the same end which the Lord commanded by Moses, which was, that they might learn to do accordingly. The same did Iosiah, 2 Kings 23.1, 2. Who sent, and they ga∣thered unto him all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem: And the King went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and all the Priests, and Prophets, and all the people both small and great; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the Covenant; so did Ezra, Nehem. 8.2, 3. It is a great charge in the Gospel to search the Scripture, Iohn 5.39. and all as new born babes are to desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Per. 2.2. We cannot be ignorant that the man that would be blessed ought to have his delight in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night, Psal. 1.2. Behold I come quickly (saith Christ) Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the Prophesse of this Book, Rev. 22.7. These Laws and Precepts were never yet revoked, and therefore they stnd in full force and vertue, signifying that it is the duty of all to have knowledge of, and to be well acquainted with the word
of God: the Text it self seems to be Imperative, Imperative prae∣ceptionis. Let nothing, that is, let neither Doctrine, nor person whatsoever, hinder the word of Christ from dwelling in you: what means then the bleating of the sheep, nay rather the lowing of the oxen in our ears, nay, rather the barking of Dogs against this Truth! Beware of Digs, Phil. 2. He that barks against the Scri∣pture, against the whole Scripture, surely denies that Christ is come in the flesh, and therefore is an Antichrist, nay denies that there is a God, and therefore is an Atheist: For, 1. It was Gods main drift, purpose and intention in sending his Prophets and Ministers, Rising up early and sitting up late, gi∣ving precept upon precept, line upon line, Isa. 28.10. to have his people know his word and learn his Law. 2. It was the end of Christs Incarnation, and of his dwelling among men, that his words might sink down into the hearts of men, and possess their souls and spirits. To this end was he born, and for this cause he came into the world, that he should bear witness to the truth, Joh. 18.37. and the word of God is truth. 3. It was the end of the Holy Ghost  Inspiration, when he inspired the Apostles in preaching and writing: was it not for this that men might be saved by believing and obeying? I write to you little children, (saith the beloved Apostle, &c.) I write to you Fa∣thers, &c. I write to you young men, because you are strong, and the Word of God abideth in you, 1 Ioh. 2, 14. 4. It was the end of the Scriptures miraculous preservation; what pains did the Heathens take to have the Bible out of the world? what wonders did God work to preserve it? it was that men might know them, and keep them, that they might live by them.
SECTION IV. THe next thing in Order before us is to demonstrate the truth of the Doctrine, by reason and strength of Argument that having both reason and Scripture for it, we may without delay addresse our selves to obedience. It is necessary for all persons to know the Scriptures. For 1. All persons are bound to know God, and worship or serve God. There is a knowledge must be had which all the Creation cannot give: the Creatures in heaven and in the Earth may show that there is a God; but how to know God, they are silent: one of them could say, Deum colit qui novit, but understood he what he said? The wisest of men did worship an unknown God. Act. 17.23. The Scriptures only teach us, and do only show us what God is; that he is a spirit, Ioh. 4.24. Infinite, Eternal, Immutable, Crea∣tor, Preserver of all things; mercifull, gracious, long-suffering, a God that heareth prayer, a hater of all sin, one in nature, three in persons. This no book in the World holds out but this; and he that knew most of the nature, and best knew in the secrets of art, had read far and much in the large volume of the Creatures, yet could not know that which is Eternal life, to know him to be the only true God, and Iesus Christ he had sent. Which the Scripture doth truly, fully and clearly. Having known God by the Scriptures, we by that know how to worship. Deum colit qui novit. God will be worshipped in spirit and in truth. Joh. 4.23. By no book can this Question be answered, Wherewith shal I come before the Lord? that is to be accepted. Mi 6.6. but by the Scriptures: The whole society of men and Angells
cannot answer this one Question, How shal I do to be saved? but by the Scriptures Act. 16.30. The effectual walking after holinesse, was never to be seen and read in the starry heaven, but in the Hea∣ven of the Scriptures. Many excellent things, and indeed holy truths may appear and do occurre in the reading of Heathens. Seol verbum caro factum est & habitavit in nobis ibi non legi, but not a syllable of the great mystery of godlynesse Christ, manifested in the flesh. 2. All persons have need of cleansing against their approaches to God. Man is naturally filthy, being wholly defiled by sin, he is cast out n his blood to the loathing of his person. Ez. 16.5. Could he apprehend his own filthiness, he would be more loathsome in his own eyes, then the most infectious Creature could possibly appear. All persons may say with the Leaper, Unclean, Unclean. Levit. 13.45. Old and and young, rich and poor, Male and Female want clean∣sing; therefore had need learn the Word of God which is clean it self. Psal. 19.9. and cleaneth others. Psal. 119.9. It is of a pu∣rifying nature, and therefore compared to rain that washeth away filth. Deut. 32.2, to Rivers of Waters, which denotes the purify∣ing nature of this Word of truth; since all persons are impure, they are to entertain this Word of Christ which will make them beauti∣full. God is said to wash the soul with water. Eze. 16.9. to heal them that are sick, Psal. 107.20. and clean them that are filthy, by his Word. Psalm. 119.9. 3. All persons may be drawn to believe some great errors against, and some to damnable opinions of God. Paul assures the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.29. that after his departure, grievous Wolves should enter among them: commends them to God and to the Word of his grace, which was able to build them up. v. 32. whereby they might stand against the blasts of contrary do∣ctrine. The worshipping of Angels was going to be intruded up∣on those Colossians. Chap. 2. v. 19. the Word of Christ is recom∣mended to them that by the force and light of that, such doctrine might be excluded from Congregations. Through ignorance of the Scripture, by mens persons, by enticing words, we may be drawn to believe the doctrine of Devils. We must therefore if we would
steer our course right for the Haven of happinesse, sail by the light given us in the body of the Scriptures. Things that have but a show of Scripture, meeing with ignorance, doth oen passe as having divine Authority; while hose that know the Scripture, know that it is Sathan transformed into an Angel of light. Not a fixed but a wandring star. Iud. 13. and therefore not to be walked after, lest (as he that follows that Meteor ignis fatuus) we fall in a ditch and perish in the mid way of our errour and back∣sliding. The ignorance of many in Scripture, and the mistakes of many touching some places in it, are apparent causes or the Apostacy of many from it in these days of liberty, &c. 4. No person can perform that duty required, commanded and enjoyned them of God. Without the knowledge of, and acquain∣tance with the Scriptures, the Magistrate will be to seek, the Mini∣ster will be at a losse, and the people like sheep without a Shepherd. The Magistrate is to punish sin, which cannot be known but by the Scriptures. Rom. 7.7. The Minister is to preach the Word, and how shall he preach it but by the spirit? and how shall he have the spirit, except he ask it? and how shall he ask except the Scripture direct him? How can the people know, to give obedience to the one, and double honour to the other, without acquaintance of this Word of Christ? It is that alone that discovers the duties of all relations and by all therefore to be consulted with; lest being found faulty in the least Commandement, we become breakers of all. Iames 2.10. and be called (for so doing) Least in the Kingdome of Heaven. Therefore all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is pro∣fitable for Doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in Righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished to all good Works, 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. 5. All Persons will be judged, acquitted or condemned by the Scriptures, at the dreadful appearance of God: we mean by this
All those to whom the Scriptures are given; according to con∣formity of mens lives with this Word, shall God passe that sen∣tence of Come ye Blessed, or, Go ye cursed. If thou cast thy bread up∣on the waters, give a portion to seven and also to eight. Eccl. 11.22. if thou hast dealt thy bread to the hungry, Isai. 58.6. or hast neglected, and saw thy Brother have need and shut up thy bowels a∣gainst him. 1 Iohn 3.17. and hast stopped thy ears at the cry of thy poor brother, Prov. ult, 13. thou shalt have thy self con∣demned and separate for ever from Gods presence for this very thing; or for it received into glory. Matth. 25. It behoves all therefore that would stand in judgement, to be acquainted with the Scriptures, that what sins their souls are inclined to may be known, and what iniquity their hands have acted may be found out, that they may be repented for, and God may cast them behind his back. And also to know what duties he laies upon them, that performing of them; at that day of tryall they may be received into his Kingdome: for this Book will be opened, this Rle pre∣sented, and our lives by it measured, and accordingly both soul and body shall eternally be sentenced. 6. All persons without this may lie under most sad and grie∣vous afflictions, without any dram of comfort from God. An ig∣norant soul whose root God hath touched as it were to pluck up, and whose heart God hath griped as it were to condemn, and whom he hath stripped of all comforts, as it were to slay, must either bee stupid under that calamity, or desperate in such a case: while he that is acquainted with the Scriptures, will find out some Reason of his trouble and ease of his distemper. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I had perished in mine afflictions, saith Da∣vid, Psal. 119.92. Every promise that is in Scripture a Saint will apply for his own particular, as if God had sent it down from Hea∣ven immediately for him, assuring him of deliverance in good time. Nubecula st, cito transibit; the Momentary afflictions of this life, work for him a more Eternal and exceeding weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. from the Wells of salvation, even from the promises of od, can they draw refreshment for themselves and their Companions: the ignorant in the mean time (being like Hagar wandring in the Wildernesse of Beersheba) dying for thirst, yet a Well of refreshing,
comforting, strengthning, nay living water near them. Gen. 21.19. 7. All the Books of the holy Scriptures were written for the very end and purpose of God. These are writen that ye may believe that Iesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you might have life through his Name. Joh. 20.31. For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our leaning, that we through pati∣ence and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. Rom. 15.4. Here is an end both of the Old and New Testament, that men might have comfort in this vale of misery and hope of future glory: and how shall either hope or comfort be drawn from the Word if we know it not? Never can men be rich in hope that have not the Scriptures dwelling richly in them. Let Gods Word have its end by us, and since it was written for our learning. Let us learn it, yeat get it by heart, nd both grace and glory shall fill our hearts. 8. The want of the onowledge of the Sacred Scriptures, is a great daing sin before God: How shall men escape f they neglect so great salvation. He. 2.3. Here is in Scripture, life and deth, hea∣ven and hell is set before men, blessednesse or misery a Crown of gold or a globe of fire; an enlarged Kingdome or a narrow pit, an Eternall Throne or everlasting burnings are proffered to men: if it be received, Heaven and Comunion with God shall be thy porion; if neglected, hell and communion with the Devill and his Angels in torment shall be thy reward, which places Moses and the Prophets would deliver thee from. Luke 16.29. SECTION V. WE are now according to our proposed Method to discover what hinders the Word of Christ from dwelling richly, yea from dwelling at all in the hearts of men, the grounds of it cannot exactly be numbered by any but him that made and knows the heart
Yet there are 6▪ things apparently hinder it in these miserable days of ours, as 1 Curiosity: We have Athenians that give their mind to hearken after some new and curious thing in Religion, that studie more the knowledge of such things as God hath locked up in the se∣cret Cabinet of his own bosome, or in the secret place of the Stairs of dark and hidden prophesies, rather then plain and revealed truth, because plain and revealed; picking out of the Scripture some dark passages, and with them storing their brain, conceit themselves to be rich by empty and vain questions, such oftentimes as bring the very entity of God in an Atheisticall way into a Question and dis∣pute, and in the mean time go empty away of those truths that con∣duce to peace and holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14. 2. Coveteousnesse. Mat. 13.22. The Word of God cannot grow nor bring forth fruit, where the thorns and cares of the World are nourished; that fils the heart of man so much, that there is no Room for the knowledge of Sacred Scripture. He that had great po∣ssessions, when he was to part with all for Eternall life, went away sorrowful. Mat. 19.22. and we never read he returned. Give him Earth enough any man shall have heaven. Let him be rich in this Worlds goods, he misses not the knowledge of the riches of Gods grace shining through, Jesus Christ in the Word. He knoweth Earth so much, and is acquainted with it so wel, and troubleth himselfe so much about it, he forgets that one thing necessary, and becomes unfruitfull in good works. 3. Sluggishnesse. Idlenesse is usually esteemed the mother of all Vice. Ignorance ows both it's birth and education to her. Know∣ledge and acquaintance of the holy Scriptures, is not obtained but by industry and pains: sluggishnesse wil have a man to loyter; there∣fore he cannot be rich in that. Were it possible to see the soul of the Sluggard, as Solomon saw his Vineyard, Prov. 24.31. we should see it without either Order or Fence, and overgrown with all kind of noysome and filthy Weeds. Ignorance like a Wolf feeds her self in the sluggards bosome, and at last will eat up his own heart. The spirituall Manna falls, but he is loth to gather: the Sun of the Gospell shines, but neither the win∣dows
nor doors of his soul are open. Christ knocks and puts in his finger at the hole of the lock. Saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undifiled. Cant. 5.2. But what says the Sluggard, I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I ave washed my feet, how shall I defile them? v. 3. All the fair Words and comforta∣ble expressions, glorious things, precious promises, holy truths, that are in the book of God, are of no account with the Sluggard: but for all the light, for all the knocking, he cals, Yet a slumber, yt a little folding of the hands. He will not take pains to be saved from hel, nor labour here a little to obtain Eternall rest above. He gives not himself to reading, nor hearing, (but at's conveniency) nor to meditating, nor to discoursing concerning the Scripture, and therefore it is not like to dwell in him. The truth is, he desires not its company, for that would set him on work, and he loves not that, though it were to work out his own salvation. 4. Infidelity. There is a Spirit of unbelief in men, and that mightily opposes and keeps out the Word; Heaven is not so beau∣tifull in the conceits of some, nor Hell o hot in the opinion of ma∣ny as men make them to be they do not believe but that it shall go well with them in the latter days, though they continue in wicked∣nesse; they conceit that they shall stand in the Congregation of the Righteous, though they here sit in the Seat of the Scornfull, like Lots sons in Law, Gen. 19.14. The Scripture they think but mocketh when it holds forth Justice against the least sin and transgression: and this makes them regardlesse of its acquaintance, and carelesse of the stu∣dying of it. They esteem it not as they should, because they believe it not as they ought, nor value it according to its worth. 5. Wilfulnesse. The Jews would not come to Christ that they might have life. There is a Genertion so pure in their own eys, that they despise pro∣phesying and speak evill of the means of salvation. They will not be gathered together, but separate themselves. The Scripture if we be∣lieve these, is unto them no use. They are so pure & perfect that its company they need not its Consels they want not, and for its threatning they care not, being thus resolved they cast it from them as an unnecessary thing and empty shaddow. They can read without
this Fescue, and write without this Copy, and come to Heaven without the Scripture, &c. 6. Haughtinesse or pride, which is either Natural or Spiritu∣all. 1. Naturall. It is below some to be holy: it stands not with their grandeure to be Religious: their honour lies at the stake, and they must revenge; flesh and blood cannot indure such affronts as he hath cast upon him. Scripture would have him be humble, meek, pa∣tient, long-suffering. Gal. 5.22. and this man hates all. 2. Spirituall. Nothing can be taught this man but what he knows already; he is as wise to salvation to every good already, as all the Preaching of the World can make him: what they know, he knows also; nay possibly the Scripture is a poor dish for him; he can live without that milk, walk without that crutch, swim without those bladders; they leave the Scriptures to bring up the feeble and the tender: they will walk before to meet the Lord by Revelation, and let them go; for I here purpose to part with them. SECT. VI. The Sixth thing we promised in the opening of the Doctrine was to draw some Corolarier which shall be of Information and of Dioection. I. Information. And that 1. Of the necessity of having the scred Scripture in a known Tongue. It cannot dwell Richly where it is not understood; a strange Language cannot edify the sol that hears not: how shall the Lord be praised, served and worshipped by him that cannot un∣derstand the Lords meaning. If the Trumpet give an ucertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to battel?  Cor. 14.8. So like∣wise you, except you utter from the Tongue things easie to be under∣stood, how shall it be known what is spoken? The Scripture ought not to be kept from the people by keeping it in an unknown Language. Sacrilegious, therefore is the Church of Rome for so doing. It ought not so to be. For 1. The Prophets and Apostles that were the writers of it, writ it in Tongues then known and common to every Nation did they Preach and write in that common vulgar tongue then in use in that Nation. 2. They are to be the Spiritual weapons for those that receive them. The Scripture is the Armour of a Christian, Ephes. 6.17. his Armour is to be by him, to secure him at all times against his Ene∣mies that are always watching an opportunity against him. 3. There is a generall precept for all Christians to search them, Iob. 5 29. Deut. 31.11. This command is not only for Scholars, but for the whole company of Believers; every one singularly, and all of them universally are to search the Scriptures; they must therefore be in a Tongue and Language that they can under∣stand. 4 It is against Common equity and justice. When Modecai wrote Letters to the hundred twenty and seven Provinces, Est. 8.9. He write unto every Province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their Language; and ought not the mind of God and the gospell of our Lord, be made known to all, according to their severall Languages? its but equity that people understand those Laws, they are governd by; especially when their lives are in hazard, as the case was then with the Jews; but most of all when mens souls are in hazard, as the case is now with the Ro∣manists. But let me not wrong Rome; she lately consented since neces∣sity drove her to it, to allow Bibles to some in their Vulgar Tongue; yet prayers to be made, Sacraments to be delivered to a people, Church or Congregation in a tongue common, that is in any, save in the Latin, is no lesse sin at Rome then blasphemy: making the poor people at those Ordinances, ptake of that that they have no knowledge of.
From their practice in this dissent the Reformed Churches; and the Church of England, Article 14. the Article it self is this. Art. 24. of the Church of England. It is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the custom of the Primitive Church, to have publick prayer in the Church, or to minister Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people. 2. This informs us with what spirit they are possessed, that con∣temn or flight the Scriptures, and tread it underfoot as unsavoury salt, counting it an unholy thing. Must the word of Christ dwell richly in all? How is it that many scorn it all? That spirit that is in them sets its face against that Spirit that the Scripture was written by: therefore we may know whence he came: but of these &c. 2. Direction. Seeing how necessary it is that the word of Christ be known and received, it is expedient to direct the Christian to walk in that Road where the word of Christ is to be found, that he may bring salvation to his house. The Direction shall be general, to follow or practise four things; which are four Ordinances of God, contemned and slighted in this Age, though they be necessary means of the words indwelling, and the power of God to salvation: the Directions are these; 1. To read the Scriptures. 2. To hear the Scriptures. 3. To confer about the Scriptures. 4. To sing some part of the Scriptures. Which being practised by the watering of his grace that work∣eth all, the good man shall bring forth of his treasure things new and old; his leaf shall never wither, nor be shaken with the blasts of persecution, nor blusterings of Hereticks or Seducers, which is the cause and ground of our undertaking this subject at this time, wherein so many are shaken to and ro by every wind of Doctrine; desiring to establish you in that Faith, once given to the Saints, and
to confirm you in the dorine of the holy Catholick Church, to which I presume you were baptized, we shall from this Text main∣tain several grand truths, in reference to the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, which may serve you as Antidotes against that poyson that hath already slain thousands at our right hand, and ten thou∣sand at our left: but we must first come to the last Section, and see some questions resolved. SECTION VII▪ Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. Whither the Scripture be the word of God. Quest. 2. Whither the Scripture ought to be mens onely rule. Quest. 3. Whither men may come to a saving knowledg of God without the Scripture. Quest. 4. Whither persestion may be attributed to the Scrip∣ture. Quest. 5. Whither Salvation may be had by the single knowledg of the Scripture. Quest. 6. What may perswade one that doubts to beleeve the truth of the Scripture. Quest. 7. How far the Saints may be our rule besides the Scrip∣ture Quest. 8. Whither the books called Apocrypha be not Scrip∣ture. Quest. 9. Why would God writ the Scripture. Quest. 10. Whether men be bound to beleeve all that is in the Scripture.
Quest. 1. Whether the Scripture be the word of God? By Scripture here is meant the whole word of God, contained wholly and onely in the Canonicall bookes of the old and new Testament; for though the word Scripture, signifies only a writ∣ting, or a book, and may be attributed to any book, scrole, or wri∣ting in the world; yet use and custome which is the rule of speak∣ing, hath wrought this word Scripture to signifie that writing of the Holy Ghost contained in the Book of God, and not any other book. 1. From the excellency that it hath above all other, it is called the Scripture, that is the Book; as if there were none deserved that name but it; hence the book of Canticles is called the Song of Songs, that is the most excellent of Songs, so this, the Book, that is, the book of books. 2. From that necessity that lies upon men to have this book, above all other. If all the learning of all the most famous Libraries could be contracted into one book; and that one book digested into one mans Head, yet he would call for thee Book, that book that his life, his comforts, his salvation stood upon; this book was made to mend all other books; and the light that all other Learning could afford, without this, would but make Hell so much the darker: when all Books are shown him, yet as David said of Goliahs sword; there is no Book like that, 1 Sam. 21.9. or as Rachel said to Ia∣cob, Give me that or else I die, Gen. 30.1. The like might be said of the word Bible, that signifying also a Book; and properly any Book of the world might be called a Bible; but customarily its given only to that Book, that contains the word, or that Book written by the Spirit of God. Now that the Scripture, or the Books of the old and new Te∣stament, are the words of God, and written by none but God; that they are from heaven, and not of men, may appear by these follow∣ing reasons. 1. None but God can be found out to make them: let heaven and earth be searched as with a Candle, and among all the Inhabi∣tans therein, the Author of this Book is not to be found: For, 1. If he was not the writer of them, either Angels, Beasts, or men must; for Plants and Trees are not to be once suspected for their original: But 1. Angels made it not; for then it was either made by them al∣together, or by some part of them: But 1. Not by them altogether; for then in some place or other this had been discovered; the Angels would have told the world be∣fore this time, that it was composed by them: They would have discovered to the sos of men by some means or other that they were beholding to them for these comfortable words. 2. Neither can the Scripture be supposed to be made by one part of them; for then either they mst be made by the fallen An∣gels or the confirmed Angels: But 1. Not by the fallen Angels; the devils are more subtle then to destroy their own Kingdom, to give weapons to overcome them∣selves: Satan hath more policy then to reveal how men shall a∣void his snares, escape his traps, overcome his temptations, pre∣vent his ambushments, frustrate his watchings, and disappoint all his purposes: every line of the Bible tends to the rine of his Kingdom; every verse in it is his neck verse: Would he have had himself known by no other name, then a lyar, a Serpent, a Dra∣gon, a roaring and devouring Lyon, a Deceiver, an Accuser, an unclean Spirit, if he had gone to set himself out into the world: it will follow therefore it was not them. 2. Neither was it made by the confirmed Angels; for they ac∣knowledge themselves our fellow Servants, Rev. 19.10. & 22.9. being therefore professedly our fellow servants, they could not make Laws to restrain us of our desires, nor enjoyn us from performing any thing that our own hearts lusted after, neither would men ac∣knowledge the Angels in this case to be their superiors. 2. Beasts did not write it. It is to be hoped, that the Reader is so much a man, as to understand Beasts or Fouls composed not that work, their irrationality shews sufficiently their impossi∣bility.
3. Men did not do it. There is but man to be thought on as the Author of this Book, since Angels are known not to do it. And yet apparent it is, that men had no hand in it; for then either it must be done by men altogether, or by some men: But, 1. Not by men altogether; where was that meeting, and in what Country is that place, that mankinde gathered themselves together, to make Lws against themselves, to bind their own hands to their own feet; nay to crush their own heart; yea which is more, to doom themselves to the everlasting flames, for doing that, that above all things is most pleasing to themselves? What time of the world was this meeting in? What Histories mentions of it? What Generation was then living, and who called this Assembly together? What makes this Age to tye themselves to those Laws made by their Fathers, since they are dead and fallen asleep? 2. Neither was it done by men apart; for then those men that composed it, must be either good or bad: But, 1. Good men would not do it; for then they ought to have been speakers of the truth; they have kept the world in falshood; for they say that the Scripture is of God made by his finger, spoken by his Spirit: if made by themselves, its nothing so: yea, the best of men find in themselves disobedience to the Laws therein contain∣ed, which costs them much sorrow, many tears, spiritual con∣flicts, which in their own nature are so unpleasing, and so bitter, that were it only their own Laws, we should see them live more merrily in the world: And what makes after. Ages imbrace those Scriptures, though good men should make them, since they are contrary to flesh and blood, and might therefore be rejected? In a word, a good man could not have said, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Jer. 22 29. if it had been his own Inven∣tion. 2. Bad men did not do it; the lyar, the drunkard, the thief, the swearer, would never have made Laws against lying, Drunken∣ness, stealing, swearing; nor have counselled men to have shun∣ned their company; nor damned themselves eternally for their so doing. Since therefore, neither in heaven, nor in earth can there be found ut a Creature to be but probably supposed the Au∣thor
of the Scriptures, it remains therefore that the Creator must, who is God blessed for ever. 2. From the testimony of the Scripture it self, it is apparent that God is the Author of it. He that gave the Law, was the same that brought Israel out of Egypt, viz. the Lord God, xod. 20.2. He that commanded Iohn to write to the Churches of Asia, was the first and the last, Rev. 17. Thus saith the Lord, Hear the word of the Lord, is a usual phrase in Scripture, which cold not have been said by Men or Angels, had it been their own. It was he that gave Moses the Law, the Statutes and the Judgements for all Israel, Mal. 4.4. It was God that spake by the mouth of his Holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke 1.70. All the words that are written in that Book are his words, Ier. 0.2. What Isaiah uttered, it was the Lord that spake it, Isa. 1.2. what Ieremiah spake, the Lord commanded, Ier. 1.7. Nay what ever the holy men of God spake, it was as they were moved by the Ho∣ly Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. 3. From the excellency of the matter contained in the Scrip∣ture, it appears to be of God; where it promiseth, it goes above the power, reason or invention of man; as Those that do well shall shine as the stars, and as the firmament, nay as the Sun for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. and Matth. 13.43. The Incarnation of God, a Virgin bearing a Son, the resurrection of the dead, all without the reach of man; making Laws for the hearts of men, of Kings and Princes, poor and rich, high and low, shews that it is not of man; threatening eternal death, and promising eternal life, both which are without the power of men, and that to soul and body; both which by man, nor the powers of man, cannot be reached unto: It perswades to nothing but what is in it self good, were it not commanded; and disswades from nothing but what is in it self hurtfull, were it not forbidden; and that oftentimes with∣out giving any reason, but the will and authority of the Law-giver; why must not men swear, steal? &c. The Lord hath forbidden it. The Proem to the Law is, I am the Lord thy God, Exod. 20.2. I am the Lord, is often given, as the only reason of the Law, Lev. 18. 4. From the effects thereby wrought; the Scripture hath wrought
that upon the hearts, souls, and consciences of men, that the wri∣tings of men and Angels could never have accomplished; it fills sometimes the very souls of men so full of terrour, and other times so full of comfort, that were not God the Author thereof, could not be effected: he that is in love with sin, and dark through sin, it makes him to hate sin, and to be in love with righteousness; it hath brought the hearts and spirits of men to so much certainty, that all the tortures, torments, and pains that men or devils could invent, was not once able to make them doubt of it. 5. From the scope and final end of the Scriptures, it declares that God is the Author of them: if any creature had been the com∣poser of them, he would in one verse or other have sought some∣thing to himself: but the scope of the Scripture is purely for the glory of God, the honour of God, the praise of God, to make men admire God, to have them praise God, to have them pray to God, and to depend upon God, and in their ways to acknowledge God. It debaseth every creature in comparison of God, and puts all things under the feet of God, by which it is demonstrable it is from God. 6. From the constant consent and declaration of the holy Ca∣tholick Church, that in all Ages under and after Moses, before and afte the Judges, before and under the Kings, before and after the Captivity, before Christ, and in his time, before the coming of the Holy Ghost, and afer the Apostles, untill this very time, hath in all Ages been consented to, and looked upon as the word of God; the very word of God, the only word of God, the holy word of God; and besides this, the Church hath owned no other. The same Teacheth the Reformed Churches of Helvetia, Ar∣ticle 1. of Bohem. Art. 1. of Frace, Art. 2. of Belg. Art. 3. of Wirt. Art. 31. of Scot. Art. 17.
Quest. 2. Whether the Scripture ought to be mens only Rule? There are many that pretend to new Revelations, & new lights, walking according to, and going a whoring after their own Inven∣tions; but that the Scriptures are to be our only rule, these fol∣lowing Arguments may declare. 1. It is the only infallible and unalterable Rule: Many Rules and Laws have there been in the world, which time hath altered, and experience hath made to appear not good; but the Scriptures of God remain the same, no addition to them, no dimunition of them: to Kings and people they are now what they ever were, and they shall be what for the present they are to all generations: For ever, O Lord, thy word is setled in heaven, Psal. 119.89. All other Rules have, and may still deceive, but this hath never deceived nor failed, and is the same for ever and ever. 2. The Churches of Christ had never any other Rule: the word of God, the Scriptures of God, was ever the Rule of their Do∣ctrine in matters of Faith: The Rule of their lives in matters of fact; Malachy that ends the Old Testament, commands them to Remember the Law of Moses; and Iohn that concludes the new, pronounceth him Blessed that keepeth the Prophesie of the sayings of this Book, Rev. 22.17. And whoever speaks not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Christ himself appeals to the Scriptures, to be the Tryers of his Doctrine, Iohn 5.39. 3. They are written that they might be our Rule: These things are written, that we might believe that Iesus is the Christ, and that believing we might have life, John 20.31. We are to take heed unto this doctrine, 1 Tim. 4.16. We have a more sure word of pro∣phesie, unto which we shall do well, if we take heed, 2 Peter 1.29. And as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Hence it is that the
Scriptures are called Canonical, because they contain and give a perfect Rule of all things conducing to salvation. 4. God hath now ceased to repeat any new matter to his Church, or for giving them any other Rule: We must know that God, who at sundry times, and in divers manners, spake in Times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1.1. We are to expect nohing now, but to walk according to what his Son hath given us; and to the word his Son hath left us: God hath revealed his mind by his Son to the world, and there stops; his Son at the time appointed will come to Judge according to this Rule that he hath left behinde Him. 5. By this Rule only can the soul be satisfied, and peace secu∣red: when this Rule is left, what Rule can man have to walk by? nay how many Rules shall he presume to settle himself by, when this is laid aside? All other are so full of uncertainties, so loaded with doubtings, so liable to exceptions, so uncomfortable in di∣stresses, so various in their natures, that like Noahs Dove, Gen. 8.9. the creature can get no rest for the feet of its soul, untill it pitch upon this again: When he that is builded (that is ruled and fitted to) upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ being the chief corner stone, groweth unto a holy Temple, &c. Ephes. 2.20. being stened, secured, and confirmed, he grows in holiness and purity, and in Christ is quieted and glorified. 6. The Spirit of God it self, when it acts within us, is to be try∣ed by this Rule: We are not to believe every Spirit, but try whe∣ther they are of God, 1 Ioh. 4.1. And this is one way to see if it speak according to the teaching of Jesus Christ, or not, Ioh. 14.26. The Doctrine that St. Paul taught, was by the infallible Spirit of God, and yet the Bereans are commended by the same Spirit for searching the Scriptures, to understand whether the things th were spoken were so or not, Acts 17.13. 7. We should open a wide door to all impieties and prophaness should we admit another. What Laws might not be baffled by pretence of the Spirit? what murders, thefts, might not be com∣mitted under the notion of a Call from God? What man could be secure of his life, or his goods, if men might walk according
to their own wills? How often is that in Scriptures, In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes! And what villany was then committed, is clear and obvious. 8. We have seen sad wanderings, and dangerous paths since this doctrine of inward Light was known or broached. The sme teacheth the Reformed Churches of France, Art. 2. Belg. Art. 7. Bohem. Art. 1. Helvet. Art. 1. of Ireland Art. 5. and Article 6. of the Church of England: The Article it self is this. Art. 6. of the Church of England. Holy Scriptures containeth all things necessary for salvation; for whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite and necessary to salvation, &c. Quest. 3. Whether men may come to a sa∣ving knowledge of GOD without the Scrip∣ture. That there is a natural knowledge of God in the hearts of men, cannot be denied by him that knows his own soul; the Nations ne∣ver so barbarous, acknowledged ever a superiour power, and su∣preme being, unto whom they called for help in their distresse; but a spirituall saving knowledge of the true God is only to be acquired from the Scriptures; but we must distinguish 1. Between Infants and the Adult: how God works upon In∣fants in a saving manner to fit them for himself, is a Theam the Scripture is dark in: that Infants may be saved and that some are, is
easie to be defended, though they are not capable of knowing God by Scripture: the Question is to be understood of the Adult, and such as are grown in years. 2. Of the Adult there are two sorts: some that never had the Scriptures, unto whom the knowledge of Christ never came: these we ought not, neither will we judge them, but leave them to rise and fall to their own master and others that have the found of the Gospell unto whom Christ hath been preached, of them only is the Question proposed. 3. Those that have the sound of the Gospell, are of two kinds. Some of them God hath bereaved of the use of sence or understan∣ding; one that is born deaf, another that hath not the ue and ex∣ercise of Reason, we must behold as perpetuall Infants, and leave them to the Judge of Israel that will do justly. And others there are unto whom God hath given the benefit of sence, use, exercise and reason; those then who having their understandings open to receive the Gospel, and opportunities of hearing, can have no knowledg that is saving without the Scriptures. For 1. There was never any other way given by God. The Scrip∣tures since their composing, have been by God given unto men that men might live by them, know him, serve him: in this only is the way to, motives for holynesse and piety; here alone can we read of Heavens glory to stir up zeal, and of eternall life to cause diligence. 2. There was never any other way known to the Church of Gods The Scriptures are written that ye might have life through his name Joh. 30.31. The Church of Ephesus is recommended to this Word by Paul, it being alone able to build them up, and give them an inheritance among them that are sanctified. Acts 20.31. Blessed is he only that keepeth the sayings of the prophesie of this Book, Rev. 22.7.
3. We are to shun him, nay cure him that wld teach us ano∣ther way. For though we or an Angell fm Heaven preach any other gspel unto you (that is, that holds ou nothr way to be saved then is in the gospel) then that which we hav  unto you, let them be accursed. As we said before, so ay  now again: If a∣ny man preach unto you any other gospell, let him be accursed. Gal. 1.8, 9. An Angel who is incompassing the Throne of God dayly, and whom od useth as his Messenger Ordinary, should he as from God reveal another way of salvation, though by his very nature and holynesse, he might allure men to this doctrine, but forewarned, forearmed, he were to be Anathema Maranath. 4. What need we any further witnesse? we our selves have heard him say To the Law, and to the Testimonies. Isai. 8.20. Thou shalt not go aside from any of the Words that I command thee this day, to the Right hand or to the left. Deut. 28.14. Quest. 4. Whether Perfection may be attri∣buted to the Scripture? This Question arises from the doctrine of the Church of Rome, who teacheth her Members, that the Scriptures are not perfect, that is, that the Word of God contained in the Scriptures, is not of it self sufficient for salvation, and therefore they help it out with their Traditions: yet the Catholick Church in all Ages reputed the word in it self absolutely perfect. For 1. The Scripture it self acknowledges perfection to be in it. 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof▪ for Correction, for instruction in Righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect throughly fur∣nished unto all good workes. Now what Spiritual occasion can there be devised, or what Act of Religion can a soul intend; but what in
one of these ways the Scripture is profitable, and able to make him perfect of it self without any addition to it. Its profitable for Do∣ctrine, that is for all truths necessary for salvation. For Reproof, that is, for confutations of all errors. For Correction, that is a repre∣hension of all Vice. For Instruction, that is for exhortation to all verues. And all this is that the Man of God may be perfect, or that he might be a perfect man of God, throughly furnished unto all good works. This discovers the Scriptures largenesse. The Scri∣pture is written that the Soul may be full of joy. The water of tra∣dition need not be mixed with the Wine of the Scripture; it can give fulnesse of joy without them. 1 Ioh. 1.4. 2. They are the Rules whereby the perfection of all other doctrine must be tryed; we must bring all other to this Touch-stone: we must weigh all weights in this ballance: all Rules must be ruled by this, and therefore it ought to be straight it self. Acts 17.11. the truth of Pauls Doctrine appears by it's conformity to this. Nay Christ himself in whom was no errour appeals to it. Iohn 5.39. 3. The whole and full will of God touching his Church to the end of the World is contained in it. Ioh. 14.26. There is no new thing to be done, nor no new truth now to be taught. The Acts of the Spirit are but remembrancers of that Doctrine formerly taught by Christ. He shall bring to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you: so that no new thing nor any other thing is to be ex∣pected, but what he did speak unto them, even all things that he had heard of his Father, John 15.15. so that the will of God being by the Scriptures fully known, they are to be acknowledged perfect. Put nothing therefore unto his Words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Lya Prov. 30.6. 4. There is no truth, doctrine or Act which is necessary for salva∣tion, but is in the Scripture, either by express Text, or may be drawn from it by good, rationall and holy consequence; yea, all necessary truths are plain, open and manifest in Scripture. 5. The Scriptures are called and owned by the Name of Gods
Testament, Heb. 9. the Old is the first Testament, and the New is the last. v. 15. &c 18. Now the last Will and Testament of a man will not admit of any Addition, nor suffer a diminution; shal Gods Will and Testament not be sufficient to bring his Sons and Chil∣dren to heaven without something put to it by man? It is not there∣fore his but their Testament, if they must perfect that: which blasphe∣my let our souls abhor. 6. The Arguments that the Church of Rome brings, are in them∣selves frivilous, and indeed prove the perfection of the Scrip∣tures. To this agree the Reformed Churches of Helv. Art. 1. Bohem. Art. 1. of Fr. Art. 5. of Belg. Art. 7. of Wirtem. Art. 31. of Sev. Art. 1. of England, Art. 6. The Article it selfe was men∣tioned before. Quest. 5. Whether Salvation may be hold by single knowledge of the Scrip∣tures. By the single knowledge of the Scriptures we understand the bare knowledge of the History, precepts, counsels and promises of the Bible, abstracted from the spirit of God, which knowledge will never bring a man to Heaven nor happinesse. For 1. Not by grace but by nature might many be saved, contrary to Ephes. 2.8. much reading and a good memory, or once a week to look upon the Bible, might be sufficient to make a man holy, and denominate one a Saint. 2. Such a knowledge might and doth consist with all wickedness and uncleannesse; there are some, Matth. 7.22. that did prophesie in the Name of Christ, which shews that they knew his Law, and yet
they knew not his glory, for he never knew them, being workers of iniquity, v. 23. 3. It is not a knowing only, but a doing also that God requires as a means to obtain Eternal life. Iames 1.22. But be ye doers of the Word and not hearers only: we are not altogether to know but likewise to walk by the same rule. Phil. 3.16. 4. A clear, full and true knowledge of the Scriptures can never be had without the spirit f God. Man is naturally blind, and cannot see spirituall things, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. the plainest thing in the Scripture is a mystery to him; he knows not wat sin is, he knows no what Christ is; he cannot see sin to be deadly poyson, the vomit of a Dog. Neither beholds he the Lord Jesus as the chiefest of ten thousand. It is the unction of the Spirit, by which the Believer knoweth all things, 1 Iohn 2.20. that is, savingly, and as he ought to know. 5. God threatens severely, suth as barely know his Law, Psalm 50.16. Hs says to the wicked, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my Covenant in my mouth? &c. God puts no regard to a sinner that only knows his will on Earth, and shall never Crown him that barely knew his Masters will in Heaven. 6. If the bare knowledge of the Scriptures were sufficient for salvation: I question whether the Devils should remain in everla∣sting chains under darknesse. This is not spoken to put away the use of the Scripture, but that abuse of trusting barely to it; we ought to call for the Spirit, and beg for the Holy ghost to open our eyes, and sanctifie our hearts, and re∣new our natures, that the Word of God might be inwardly taught us, as well as outwardly preached unto us.
Quest. 6. What may perswade one that doubts to believe the truth of the Scrip∣tures. By doubting of the Scriptures here is understood a calling in question out of pure ignorance the very truth of the History of the Bible: he doubts if David King of Israel did compose Psalms; and doubts that the Lord is not round about them that fear him, as the Mountains are about Ierusalem: He doubts that the Apostles being ignorant men and by Trade Fisher-men most, could convert Na∣tions not a few. In a word, he questions the Books of Moses, of the Psalms, Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, not all out of pre∣judice, nor malice, but by simplicity and ignorance. By beliefe is not meant a saving beliefe, or such a faith as may save him, but to cause him behold the Bible as a true History, not a fiction now this beliefe may be wrought in such a one by these and the like Argument. 1 From the Churches tradition, in all ages, and through all gene∣rations were the books of Moses received and owned to be his, Solo∣mons to be his, yea they were by the whole consent of the Church owned as the very word of God, spoken in the mouths of men. Now as he believes the books going under the name of Ovid to be his: and of Virgil, to be his, of Cicero to be his because that former generations, yea that age they lived in then gave them down to the next as theirs and they to the next, untill it comes to us; so he may be brought to a Historical beleiving of these books to be true and not Supposititious. 2 The nature of the men that made it. They were good just and upright in their generation. As Moses Samuell, David, Solomon, Esaiah, &c. who, would not have took pains to have cheated the
world, nor deceived men as to write those Histoies of Israels come∣ing out of Egypt &c. Had they not been true. 3 The miseries that the writers of the Scriptures went through is a proof of some concernment; if men would cheat, it would be for some profit; but what honour or preferment had Paul for his preaching: or for his writing? The Apostles in general might have lived at home in ease, and not go abroad to the hazzard of their lives as they did. What could their policy or reason suggest to them by being at so much trouble to themselves purely to cheat others? What needed or what could provoke Ieremy to undergo such dan∣gers as he did, purely to cheat the world? We know they were in Jeo∣pardy every hour for writting and preaching of it; Which in reas∣on shews that they had no purpose to delude. 4 The distance of the place it was written in; if it had been done all in one place, there might have been some cause of suspicion; but what consultation had Moses in Arabia, or in Egypt, with Daniel in Babylon? or what agreement had Paul in Rome with David in Ierusalem? severall ages they lived in, and no compact had the one with the other, which if they had made, yet what would have been the issue of their undertaking but stripes, death and imprisonment, enough to have diverted their thoughts from such a dangerous en∣terprize. 5 The agreement of every part of it with the whole. Nothing that David writ, contradicted Moses, nor nothing that Samuel writ was spoken against by Solomon; no prophet spok against ano∣ther, nor none of the Apostles wrot against them; yea so far were they from that, that they strengthened and confirmed each others doctrine; Had it been of men, there would have been real jangling, and apparent contests, writing so long after one another, and at such a distance from each other. 6 The submission of the gravest, soberest persons that are now in the world to the practice of it. There are men that will not easily give a credence to what they read or hear, but are carefull of their reputation that way. But yet yeildeth and gloryeth in that yeilding to the truth of what is therein writ and when their glory, wisdome, parts vertues are tryed they appear to be the most eminent per∣sons in the world.
7 From the sincere dealing of the coposers of it; men that would go about to flatter or allure, wo  by some arguments at least seemingly pleasing to th  they would delude; but now the Scriptures are contrary; they will a men to forsake houses, wives, and land for it; Call upon them o forsake that which above all things they love most, plucking out the right eye; hatred, afflicti∣on, persecution is that which the Scripture declares men must un∣dergo that come to her. Nothing that is pleasing to flesh and blood throughout the whole Scripture that is promised to, or allowed of unto men. 8 From the Silence of its greatest and most Implacable enemies. How was Christ hated in the times wherein he lived? And Iere∣miah and Paul; and yet none durst, nor none did write books, in confutation of those books written by them, nor to perswade the people that it was but a feigned story. The Scribes and Pharises that hated Christ, and did persecute him to death, yet wrot no book in confutation of Matthew or of Luke, which if in the least they could have falsifyed, the gospells should not have come to us without a Salvo. Quest. 7. How far the Saints be our Rule besides the Scripture. That the Saints lives ought to be a Rule for us, and that we are to walk according to their steps, is Catholick Doctrine. Heb. 6.12. Phil. 3.17. But how far they are to be followed, is the ground of our Question. That the Saints had failings, haltings and miscarria∣ges, is not to be denied; but in such things they are our Examples for evitation, but not for Imitation. Follow the Saints we must, But
1. So farre as they were approved of God; where we can hear God saying, whether in providence or by his presence, Well done good and faithful servant, we may be bold to tread in that step, and to keep in that Road. 2. So far as their actions tended to the glory of God. What we can see Abraham, Iacob, David doing which brings in any reve∣nue to the Exchequer of Gods praises, so far may they be our pattern copy and example. 3. So far as they gave no just cause of offence to the Church of God. Peter that seemed to be a Pillar, yet in this is not to be fol∣lowed but blamed. Gal. 2 11, 12, 13. In this we must be wary that we tread not in their steps, least we make the enemies of God to blaspheme, and slay him for whom Christ dyed. 4. So far as they had the promise of God; we may safely walk in that way wherein wee find God promise to be with them, keep them, blesse them and in his favour to protect them. 5. So far as their own hearts did excuse them before God; where we find them doing, and afterwards their hearts smite them for their so doing, let us by their fall look the better to our own way, and by by that blot seek to mend our hand. Always provided. 1. That be not done by us which was but for a time approved; and to some peculiar persons granted; as was was the Offerings, Washings, and Sacrifices under the Law, and Iebu with Elishas go∣ing into Bals Temple. 2. That for which God was silent only for a time, as concerning the Saints Polygamy or plurality of Wives he was, &c. 3. That which for a season was only granted, that the gospel might not be hindred: as Pauls care in giving of offence, which was in great measure but untill the Jews declared their perversnesse, as is evident by comparing Acts 16.3. with Gal. 5.2, 3. If there were no limitation in this case of giving offence, there would never be an Heretick; Whom we are to reject after the first and second admo∣nition. Titus 3.10.
Quest. 8. Whether the Books called Apocrypha, be not Scripture? These Books commonly called Apocrypha, are so called from abseondo, a thing hid, because the authority of them is not known to the Church: and in testimony of Faith, those Books must not at all be produced. The Church of Rome owns them as part of the Canon, but the Catholick Church did ever exclude their Authority: For, 1. They were never used by the Jews, neither in their Temples, nor in their Synagogues; the Jews were always Gods Library Keepers. To them were committed the Oracles of God, Rom. 3.2. Now these being never used nor committed to them, cannot be Gods Oracles: and by consequence, their authority is not binding. 2. They never received any countenance from the gospel, they are never mentioned as a Rule, or as Books wherein the will and minde of God was made known to men, which Christ would never have neglected to do had they been so: yea, as he chid the Pharisees for putting false glosses upon the Law; surely he would have upbraided them sharply, for taking away so great a part of the body of the Law. Our Lord Jesus mentions no other parts of the Scriptures then Moses, Psalms, and the Prophets, Luke 24 44, 4. of which the Apocrypha is no part. 3. There are many things in those Books false, both in Histo∣ry and in Doctrine; much non-sense, and against both sense, rea∣son and Canonical Scripture are there many passages. 4. The Author of the second Book of Mac. Mac. 2.2.23. In∣genuously confesses, that that Book was only an abridgment, or compend of those five Books of the Wars of the Jews, writ by one Iason a Cyrenean; and great sweat, pains, and labour it cost hi so to do. This was no fit work for the Spirit of God to abridge the long books writ by Iason, that men might have more pleasure
in the reading of them. The same Author concludes this History with a Complement, and also desires to have his errours pardoned, professing his best in composing that book, which also shews it came not professedly from the Spirit of God. The same each the Reformed Churches of France, Art. 4. of Belgiae, Art. 6. of Ireland, Art. 3. of England, Art. 6. Yet the Chrch does, and hath used these books, and reads them in their Congregations, though not to confirm doctrine, but to ex∣hort to manners: For these Reasons. 1. From that Relation and aspect that it bears toward the Scri∣pture, concerning the Jews returning from the Captivity; the Passeover kept by King Iosiah; the Wisdom (so called) of Solo∣mon, though probably made by Philo the Jew, who flourished, An. C. 90. the sentences, and sayings of the son of Sirach, are so much reflecting upon Sacred Writ, that they are not to be de∣spised. Iohn 10.22. We have some account of a Discourse that was held between Christ and the Jews in the Temple; and withall tels us what time this discourse was, viz. At the Feast of the Dedication. Now of this Feast the Scripture nowhere gives us an account; we read of no Laws of it, no Sacrifices for it; no time set apart for it, yet Iesus owns it: To know the original and cause of this Feast, we must go to Apocrypha, 1 Mac. 4. ver. 52. to the end. In which place we read that when the Iews had defeated the forces of Gor∣gias, and had regained the Temple and rebuilded the Altar, they offered Sacrifice thereon, and dedicated it for future service, and kept the days of Dedication with gladness, for joy that God had gi∣ven them again Liberty to worship in their Temple; and ver. 59. it is appointed that that feast be kept every year for eight days, which in our Saviours time is kept, and he graceth it with his pre∣sence: too blame then are they that are offended at Ministers go∣ing down to the Apocrypha, citing it for matter of fact: for in this and in some other places, no Minister under heaven can give his hearers any rational account of this Text, without making use of the Apocrypha. 2. For those excellent, plain, Moral Instructions that lie in many places of it; so full of variety, so plenteous in brevity;
particularly those books of Ecclisiasticus, and Wisdom, wherein are excellent documents suited to, nay most of them taken from the word of God. 3. For those godly and profitable uses, beleivers may make in reading and hearing those great deliverances that God was pleased to give his own people Israel in so wonderfull a manner; cloathing their enemies with shame, when they were at strongest, and crowning them with glory and honour, when they were at weak∣est. In a word, to see how God preserved them in the midst of their enemies, keeping to himself still a people; when the Heathen about them had said, Let them be no more a Nation; as is manifest in the history of the Maccabees. Yet alwayes care was taken that none of these bookes, nor no∣thing in one of those bookes was ever made use of in matters of Faith or Doctrine, but in matters of fact onely, as men will make use of Poets, Chronicles, or moral Authors. To this agree the reformed Churches, and the Church of Eng∣land. Art. 6. the Article it self is this. Art 6 of the Church of England, He flou∣rished Ann. Chr. 385.Holy Scripture containeth &c. And the other books (Hierom saith) the Church doth read for example of life, and instruction of manners, but yet doth not apply it to establish any Doctrine, &c. Quest. 9. Why would God communicate his will to his Church in writing. The meaning of this question is this; Seeing God was pleased to let his will, and his pleasure, or his word be known and com∣municated to the world from the Creation unto Moses by traditi∣on, or by speaking; why would he have it to be revealed from Moses
untill the dissolution of the world by writing? might it not have been delivered to succeeding ages by the present, through the Fa∣thers delivering it to the Children, and so forward to the end, as well as it was for two thousand years at the beginning of the world? But God would not have it so he would have it given in writing. 1 Because of the darkeness of mans nature; the candle of the Lord shined darker and darker; as man increased, sin increased; & that lamp of light, that he put in man at first, grew dimmer and dimmer. To prevent a gross darkness from falling upon the deluded sons of men, he would not trust his word alwayes to remain upon the tongues or hands of men, but would have it set in a candlestick, and writ in tables of stone, to remain a perpetual light. 2 That it might be keept thefreer from corruption, before man grew more stuborn, and as they multiplied they sinned; that word that might have been purely and unsported given to the Fa∣ther, through negligence, forgetfulness, wilfulness, might not have been delivered intirely, and perfectly to the son; but now in wri∣ting, none of these can alter the age that now is, can know if others do corrupt, and those that come after may judge of this, each ha∣ving copies by them, they are able to discover, or iudge of the in∣tegrity of another; neither can any one corrupt it in the least, but it may easily be discryed by his neighbour, through the copies or writings of it. 3 That helpe might be afforded men against those imperfections that attend the best, for through fraile nature, cares and troubles of the world, sutable comforts & confirming truths might not suddenly be thought on, now by writing this malady, hath a proper cure, the word being open and before our eyes, we may take up and read such truths as may stay the Soul in her greatest shakeings, and comfort her in her languishing distempers. 4 That mens faith might be the more confirmed in the truth of it: when men see the prophecies that were foretold in the book of Daniel, and in the Revelation, the fulfillings of the threatnings, is a∣gainst the Jews, &c. To know that these things are done, and to see them foretold so many hundred years before, induceth a man more firmely to beleeve them, then if it were told him barely from another, that his Father or Grandfather said it should be so, of which
he also might have cause to doubt, and the truth of the Speaker even in that particular suspect. Quest. 10. Whether men be bound to believe all that is in the Scripture? For the dispatching this Question, we must distinguish 1. Between the Scripture it self, and the persons who writ; it is not necessary to salvation to believe that Matthew writ that Gos∣pell that goes under his Name: nor that Peter writ his: to believe what is spoken or written, is one thing; and to believe that David writ it, is another thing. 2. Between the writing it self, and the time when, or the place whence it was written. It is one thing to believe the truth of those Epistles of Paul, and another thing to believe that they were writ∣ten from Corinthus, as that to the Romans; or that from Athens, as that to the Thessalonians; or from Rome, when Paul was brought the second time before Nero, as that last Epistle to Timothy. 3. Between the Words written, and the meaning, or sence of the thing writ. It is one thing to believe that Paul writ the words of his Epistles, in that order, method, place, as we have them in our Bibles ordered and placed; and another thing, to believe the sence and the meaning of the thing so written; we shall find the writers of the Scriptures, in citing of places deviate from the naturall order of the Words given them by the first Author: which shews that we are not bound to believe that. For instance, David declares, Psal. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved: which Text Peter having occasion to use Act. 2.25. reads it thus (viz.) I foresaw the Lord always before my face; he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved. The words being clearly varied, but the sence and meaning being the same, we are tyed to the one and not to the other
which alteration is evident in many places; particularly the very next verse both of that Psalm and this Chapter. 4. Between an Historical and a saving faith; we are to believe all that the Scripture contains and set down; that is, the sence and meaning of it to be no other then the very will, purpose, mind and Law of God, which we must believe if we would be saved. And that it was written by David, and sent to the chief Musitian: by Matthew, by Paul, and sent to them from Corinthus that the Epi∣stle to Timothy Ordained the first Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, was written from Rome, when Paul was brought the Second time before Nero (as his second Epistle at the close declares) ought to be believed by an Historical faith: that not being written by the in∣fallible spirit of God, but by the Churches Tradition, of whose au∣thority in an Historical way it is but presumption in any man to doubt. CHAP. IV. Of Reading. We are now come to the prosecuting and enforcing of those directions above named, as necessary Antecedents for the Words indwaking. The first was to read the Scriptures. In the handling of which, we shall 1. Prove it is a duty to read. 2. Direct how to read. 3. Resolve some Questions. Sect. 1. THat all are to read the Scriptures, is a truth that the Religious Christian will not doubt of, and the Hypocriticall dare not de∣ny: yet that all might be left without excuse, we shall prove that all must do it. According to the usuall division of Magistrates, Mi∣nisters
and people, or of Old and young, which comprehendeth al sorts of persons whatsoever. 1. Magistrates are to read it. God giving Laws concerning the Ruling of his People to him that should be King ver them. Commandeth Deut 17:18. that when he sitteth upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a book out of that which is before the Priests, the Levites, and it shal be with him, and he shal READ therein all the days of his life. The King therefore it not exempted from this duty, though he be Lord of all; notwith¦standing all affairs, he must READ therein all the days of his life; And the truth is, he will be the best Ruler that is best acquain∣ted with this word; he will know sin the better which he is to pu∣nish. Rom. 13.13. the better he be acquainted with the Scripture. Rom. 7.7. It is the abundance of the sincere milk of the Word that maketh Kings & Queens nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers un∣to the Church. Isai. 49.23. that all that live under them, may by their knowledge and discipline grow in all godlinesse, and wax strong to every good work, sucking from their breasts wholesome doctrine springing from good government and Laws, and enjoy∣ing the fruit of all in every Act of Justice. What God doth in this place require of a King who is Supream 1 Pet. 2.13. he requires the same of all Magistrates and Officers under him, that are as Kings in their proper places and Domini∣nions, and by the Subjects ought so to be beheld. 1. That they be not puffed up by conceit of Earthly greatness. Psal. 131:1, 2. 2. That they may be impartiall in their Sentences. Proverbs 31.5. 3. That they may uphold and defend the truth of his worship, 2 Kings 23.1, 2, 3, 4. 4. That they may know whom to encourage and whom to pu∣nish. Rom. 13.3. 5. That every thing may be done by them, as those that must give an account to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lord, for they dye like men. Psal. 82.7. and after death commeth judgement. Heb. 9.27.
2. Ministers must read the Word: St. Paul seriously & pres∣singly exhorts his Son Timothy to give attendance to Reading. 1 Tim 4.13. It is the Scriptures that he professeth he is come to open; therefore his heart and breast above all mens should not be shut a∣gainst it. He cannot execute the Office of an Ambassadour, that is ignorant of the Nature of his Commission, nor he of a Divine; that is not wel read in the Word of truth. God in some sence never gave his Ple potentiaries to a Minister, but the Scripture always is pro∣posed for this Rule: he must be therefore an Aollos, mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. His calling is to draw men from darknesse into light from the power of Sathan to the power of God. Act. 26.18 The light therefore of the Scripture ought to be in his hand con∣stantly, and the Gospell which is the power of God, ought to be in himself powerfully. 1. That he might Preach the Word boldly. 2 Tim. 4.2. Pru∣dently. Eccles. 12.10, 11. Aptly, 1 Tim. 3.2. Savingly. 1 Tim. 4.16. 2. That he may pray servently. Iames 5.14, 15, 16, 17. 3. Administer the Sacraments purely. 1 Cor. 11.23. 4. Visit the sick comfortably, Iam. 5.14. 5. Convince the gain-sayer strongly, 1 Tit. 9. 6. Reprove and admonish the Offender meekly. 2 Tim. 24, 25. 7. That he may save himself and all that hear him, Eternally. 1 Tim. 4.16. 3. All people must read the Word. No person is exempted, of what degree, quality or condition soever, high or low, rich or poor, Male and Female ought to perform this duty. Every one must let the Word of Christ dwell richly in them that would dwel with Christ, enjoying those Riches that shall never fly from them: the truth of this appears from what hath been spoken in the proof of the Doctrine; yet by way of supplement let us adde 1. The rich and high ones of this earth must read the Scriptue. 1. That they may not set their hearts on riches, Psal. 62.10. 2. That they do good to the poor, 1 Tim. 6.18. especially toward the poor Christian, Gal. 6.10. and that he might do both bountifully not grudgingly, 2 Cor. 9.6, 7. 3. That they be not high-minded, 2 Tim. 6.18.
4. That as God hath blessed them above others, they might go in holynesse and devotion before others, Matth. 5.16. 5. That their works of charity might be suitable to their plenty, 1 Pet. 4.9, 10. 6. That they might not oppresse the poor, Isaiah 1.17. 7. That they may render to all their dues, Rom. 13.7. 8. That they might be rich toward God, Luke 12.21. Laying up for themselves A good Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternall life, 1 Tim. 6.19. 2 The poor and low ones of this Earth must read, 1. that they may never distrust Gods goodnesse to themselves and their posterity; Gen. 48.15, 16.2. that in patience they may possesse their souls, nei∣ther grumbling against God, Iames 5.10, 11 nor grudging or en∣vying any man, Psal. 37.1. 3. That they might with the stronger faith pour out their desire before God for things they stand in need of. Psal. 42.8. 4 That a Momentary affliction may work for them a more Eternall weight of glory, 2 Cor, 4.17. 5 That they be not false accusers, Incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traytors, 2 Tim. 3.3, 4. Again 1 All the male-kind must read it. 1. For they were made ac∣cording to Gods image, which consisteth in knowledge, righteous∣ness, and true holinesse, which the Scripture worketh in men. Ephes. 5.26, 27. 2. That they may admire Gods wisdome, goodnesse, and greatnesse, in making all creatures for his use. Psal. 8.6. 3. That they may use all those gifts to his glory, which he gives to them. 1 Corinthians, 12.8. 4. That they might not be drawn aside by the flattering tongue of a strange woman. Prov. 6.24. 5. That they might be temperate and sober in the use of all Gods creatures. Ephe. 5.18. 6. because the Scriptures were written to them. Its written to Fathers, 1. Iohn 2.13. to young men, to little Children, v. 14. Its written to old men, and young men, therefore they must read it as an Epistle sent to them from God, for the ordering of others, and cleansing and purifying them∣selves. 2. All the Female kind must read it; the weaknesse of woman should be a spur to excite them to the knowledg of the word of truth. I have read of one Catharina Alexandria, who during the per∣secution
of Christian Religion, An. 309. did so rationally refuse the practises of Heathens and Infidels against the faith of Christ, that she caused severall of the wisest of them to subscribe to its doc∣trine, and turn Christian; their most accute reasons being blun∣ted with that divine wisdome which appeared in that virgins tongue. But to proceed, that sex is to study the Scriptures. 1 That they may continue in Faith, and Charity, and holiness, with sobri∣ety, and be saved by Child-bearing, 1 Tim. 2.15. 2. That they may so demean themselves as may give no occasion to any to be en∣ticed or drawn after them. Gen. 14.1, 2.3. That they provoke. not the Lord to anger, through pride. haughtinesse, and disdaine, Isa. 3.16. 4. That they may keep within those bounds God hath set them, and not exercise authority over the man, as to preach, &c. 1 Cor. 14.34, 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. SECT. 2. WE are now to give some directions, touching and about Rea∣ding; and they shall be 1. Before Reading. 2. In Reading. 3. After Reading. By these as by three doors the Word of Christ enters in and dwels. 1. Before Reading. 1. Pray that God would give knowledge to understand his Word. It was Davids Petition, Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, Psal. 119.18. the naturall man cannot see the things of God. 1 Cor. 2.14. The Spirit of God must make us to understand the things of God. In his Word there are many things hard to be understood; and in them we may easily mis∣carry: there are also many things plain, and they have a further
reach then man can at the first perceive. Let God be called upon therefore that he would open thine eyes, and cause thee to under∣stand the meaning of the Holy Ghost. The Saduces did read, and yet erred in that great doctrine of the Resurrection, not knowing the Scriptures. 2. Pray that thou mayst profit by the Word. Read not Scrip∣tures to put off time, but to prepare for Eternity: it is best for thee to desire this; if thou profit not by Reading, thou shalt be on the lo∣sing hand; if it do thee not a great deal of good it will do thee much hurt; if it dot subdue thy sin, it will increase thy punishment. Study not therefore the Scriptures to fetch thence curious and sin∣full questions, the forerunner of Heresie. Tit. 3.9 10. but to in∣crease thy spiritual wisdom. Even to know God and his Son Ie∣sus Christ, whom to know is life Eternall. Joh. 17.3. 3. Resolve to practise the Word: what vice thou findest the word to reprove, charge thy own heart not to act; strive not against the Spirit in the Word, but says speak Lord, for thy servant hears. What Act or duty it exhorts unto, stay not but make hast to perform all Righteous Judgements. Make haste, least hell and damnation over∣take thee, left hardness of heart and willfullesse of soul creep upon thee, and God and his grace forsake thee and thou become like those that go down into the pit. What thou ara commanded to do; do it withall thy might; resolve to confss sin, and forsake Transgression: thou shalt have mercy for sin and for iniquity. 4. Resolve to believe the Word, and that stedfastly. What God hath declared and purposed in his Word, touching Saints or sinners, in reference to a Temporll or Eternall condition, must be believed if we would be saved. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2. God says that he comes quickly and his Reward is with him, Rev. 22.12. Do not mock saying, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 2.3, 4. What hth passed from the mouth of God, is by man to be believed; if Judgement, it is to be feared: if promises, to be loved. The wicked may presume of his present security, and cry peace, peace; The Righteous may doubt of his present safety, and say One day or other I shall perish; yet say to the Righteous, it shall go well with him, and wo nto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, Isai. 3.10, 11. this if thou believe, thou shalt do wel.
5. Resolve to receive the Word and that wholly. It is not the duty, nor suits it with the profession of a Christian to pick out of Scripture, and separate one part of the Gospell from another. E∣ven in this sence these are days of separation, &c. Let not a tittle of the Law or Gospell be by thee slighted: the Word of the Lord is for ever settled in Heaven, & his faithfulnesse to all Generations Psal. 119.89, 90. though now the Spirit of this World can set the Son against the Father, and the New against the Old Testa∣ment; and the Servant against his Master, the Epistles against the Gospell, yet from the beginning it was not so. The Christian being thus prepared for reading what David said to his Son when he had instructed him cocerning his building of the Temple, shall be said for him, Now my Son, the Lord be with thee and prosper thee, 1 Chron. 22.11. 2. In Reading. 1. Read it Reverendly. It must be read as the Laws of the great mighty and Eternall God upon the performing of which de∣pends the Eternall happiness or misery of thet soul that is at this present within thee: it must not be read as a story. It remains for ever to acquit us or sentence us: this man will I look that trembles at my Word, Isaiah 66. 2. The Laws was delivered with Thunde∣rings, Lightnings and smoak, Exod. 20.18. to create a Reverential fear in the souls of men, left that fire come down and that smoak break out into a flame to consume that spirit that shall contemn the least of those Commandements. 2. Read it heedfully. What thou readest, let thy Judgement be employed about it: not a word thou readest, but there is some∣thing of an everlasting concernment to thy self. Some studie the Scripture and observe things without themselves: but these men are not wise. O thou man of God, flye these things and follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meeknesse, 2 Tim. 6.11. this will profit thee more then to enquire after the State of this or that man, or that will profit thee nothing here, and the other will both here and hereafter. 3. Read it distinctly. It must not be read as if we were in haste, or
could not tarry as Saul for answer from the mouth of the Lord, we ought to ponder every line, as did Ezraes and his ffciats when they read the Book of the law of God, they read it, saith the Holy Ghost Distinctly, Nehe. 8.8. he that huddles up this duty▪ but looses his labour, and if it be not done again his own happiness, if it be hastened by the tongue, it is to be feared it will not tarry long at the heart, we ought to say to every verse in Scripture, as Iacob to the Angel. Gen. 30.26. I wil not let thee go except thou blesse me. 4. Read it affectionately. Arr thou hungry, thou would'st eat thy meat with gladness and joy of heart. It is the word, when thou hast done all that thou must live by, be saved by; its called Bread. Ames, 8.11. And that is the staffe of mans life. Its the word of e∣ternall life. Iohn, 6.68. Its thd water of life that enlightens the Eyes, and rejoyceth the heart, Psal. 19.8. It feedeth and strength∣neth the Soul. Deut. 8.3. It maketh a man to be born again. 1 Pet. 1.23. It purifyeth and cleanseth men. Iohn, 15.3. purifies them from tueir iniquity, and cleanseth tham from sin. Psal, 51.2, 116, 9. And therefore with joy draw thou water out of that well of Sal∣vation. Isa. 12.3. 5. Read it dayly. O how some have loved the Law and made it their meditation all the day. Psal. 119.97. There ought not a day to passe without inspection into this word, the soule of man is in continual reparation, for it is subject unto loss and damages; there is no day wherein Satan assaulteth not, no day but may be our last day, no day wherein man may not see evill, or fall into evill, and therefore no day ought to passe without our guard against evill, and an antidote to cure the evill, the word hath a soveraign quality to cure all our running sores; we ought therefore to have our meditations there upon night and day, but in this two things must be avoided. 1. Wearinesse; when thou findest thy self growing weary of reading, (O how fraile is man, O bon Jesu) lye close the Book, and goe about thy lawfull and ordinary occasions. for in that thou must also serve God; as the Scripture commands the. Yet in this let me charge thee, by God not to nourish sluggishness, drousiness, or idelness.
2, Confidence, it is the blessing of God that must make thy day∣ly reading profitable unto thy soul; depend not and trust not there∣fore upon thy doing; without him thou canst do nothing. In this also, its not onely the hand of the diligent, but the blessing of the Lord maketh rich, Prov. 10.4, 22. that is in the word of Christ. 3. After reading. 1. Meditate upon the word, it is meditation that gives a soule to reading. and breaths in it the breath of life; it makes the word to be lively, and o stir in the soul. It wat Davids meditation all the day. Psal. 119.97. Nay all the night too. Psal. 16.7. So must every one th would frame his heart according to Gods heart, and have the Scripture thereupon. God would not under the Law have those beasts offered up fo him in sacrifice that did not chew the cud, they were unpured as unclean; those under the Gospel that brings not up again by meditation; what they gathered by reading, shall not be esteemed pure. Meditation puts a boult upon the door; that Sathan, that gsand picklock cannot so enter to rob their trea∣sure of knowledg. 2. Walk sutably to it, When Moses was in the mount with God, his face shined at his comming to the people; when a Christian hath been in, and seen the glory of the Lord in the holy mount of the Scriptures, his conversarion ought to shine in the eyes of the world, he ought to bring forth the fruit of the Scriptures in a holy life; Not lying but speaking the truth. Ephe. 4.25. As much as in us lies, living peaceably with all men. Rom. 12 18. Iudg∣ing no man. Matthew 7.1. Giving honour, to whom honour, tribute, to whom tribute, custome, to whom custome is due. Rom. 13.7. Speaking no evill of dignities, not reviling the Gods, nor cu sing the ruler of the people. Levit. 22.28. Judg. 8. &c. Putting away all bitternesse▪ and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evill speaking, with all malice, Ephe. 9.31. But as he who hath known the mind of the Lord. 1 Cor. 2.16. He may honour all men, love Brotherhood fear God, honour the King. 1. Pet. 2.17. Every good act is a watering of that root of grace that is planted in the soule by the word of God, that it may abide and bring forth the fruit of eternal life. 3. Call upon God again to blesse it to the] As thou hast sought
him ie his word, where his Saints alwayes found him, through his goodnesse, so do thou, raise up thy soul and beg that it might make thee perfet in every good work; that he by the abundant pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, might sanctifie thee through his word. Ephe. 5.26. But 1. In this praise him for what thou hast learned. 2. Repent for what thou hast neglected. 3. Confesseth and forsake that for which thou hast been reproved. 4. Remember those who to thee are recommended. 4 Go about the works of thine ordinary calling chearfully: it is not the end of God in publishing the Scriptures to make men idle, and loyter in the earth, to neglect their Families, and forsake their callings, as &c. Follow then thy calling; it is a part of his service: and leave him to bring to perfection that good work which he hath begun: But never forget to remember that the Scriptures are as necessary as thy dayly food. SECTION III. Question Resolvd. Quest. 1. Whether there be a God as it declared in Scripture? Quest. 2. Whether God be a Spirit? Quest. 3. Whether there be but one God? Quest. 4. Whether there be three Persons in the God-head, and how these Persons do agree? Quest. 5. Why are Kings and Magistrates called Gods, and Re∣bellion to be like witch craft, in Scripture?
Quest. 6. What was that image wherein God made man, and why was man created naked? Quest. 7. Whether the reading of the Ceremonial Law be pro∣fitable to a Believer? And whether any part of that Law be esta∣blished under the Gospel? Quest. 8. Why would God suffer his dearest Saints to lie under such sad afflictions as are mentioned in Scripture? und whether the book of Job, be a reall history? Quest. 9. Whether there be a difference between the old and new Testament? and why the Scriptures are called a Testament? Quest. 10. Why are there some things on Scripture hard to be un∣derstood? and whether the Scripture can dwell richly in those that cannot read? Quest. 1. Whether there be a God as is de∣clared in Scripture. It hath been proved that all are to read the Scripture, that being the will of God revealed and published to man, for the right order∣ing of his life: yet in reading some fool might say in his heart There is not a GOD; and throw all aside; but that there is a God appears, 1. The Creation or Fabrick of the world by such a glorious buil∣ding as this wherein we live, such a goodly frame as our eyes, be∣hold, could not but have been formed by some or other: if by a cre∣ature, why cannot a creature do the like? now why cannot they that are displeased with this, remove it, and give us another? who made the starry Heavens, and the vaulted Roof of the whole Earh to shine with such glorious light, by night and by day; what is his name, and what is his Sons name? Who hath layed the mea∣sures thereof, if thou knowest who hath streched the line upon it? whereupon are the foundations thereof fastned, or who lay the corner
Store; name another besides God, & eris mihi magnus Apollo. I shall take thee to be some great one: see Rom. 1.19, 20. 2. From the order that is in all the world; this world is of an uniform nature; this world, is not a confused, and disorderly heap, but in all things ordered and sure: were there not a God to keep all in order, the Sun might often stray, the Moon might withdraw her shining, or get above the Stars: the Stars forget their path, and shine below the Moon, the Heavens might not alwayes goe direct∣ly rond, by ehance they might slip aside, and smother men, and cover the whole Earth, or the beast might break out upon man, and the Horse not know his Rider; the Servant rebel against his Ma∣ster, and he that had a House might live in fear: by chance harvest might fall in the spring, and the spring not make haste by reason of the cold. yea the Sun by some means or other might not hasten his going down; The universal and constant order that we see in the world makes manifest, they are acted by some superior being, which is and can be onely God. 3 From the variety that is in that Order; wee see not onely a sweet and orderly Harmony in the Creatures, but a delightfull and pleasant variety: there are Stars of different magnitudes, and each Star differs from another in glory, there are greater and lesser lights, lighter and heavier, darker and brighter Clouds. It is a goodly sight to see the Sun like a Bride-groom comming out of his Chamber in the East: to see Flowers. Herbs, Grasse, Plants, stores of rare qualities, and inimitable variety to see the Earth shining with Flowers, and Heaven with Stars, with the souls of the one, and Bests of the other, sporting in the beautifull Ayr; and play∣ing in the delightfull Rivers, without the study or art of man; or any other creature doth plainly show there is a God. The wonder∣full symmetry and proportion that is in the face of man▪ the place∣ing of its parts; the hanging of his Tongue, the guard of the Teeth, how uniform are they in all! yet the variety that is in those Faces; the diversity that is in those Sounds doth evidence a Diety. 4. From the testimony of all Nations in the world: no People so Savage, no Kingdom so Atheistical, no Nation so Ignorant; no part of the Halitable world so Barbarous, but acknowledged a Diety, and ownud a od: some superior power they had to call
to in distress: something though it were but an Onyon, did they bow to the Knee to, and adore. Those barbarous inhabitants of Matta of Melita, seeing a Viper come upon Pauls hand, conclude. Acts, 28.9. that he was a murtherer, whom though he had es∣caped the Seat yet VENGEANCE suffereth him not to live. He had escaped drowning; yet he will not scape dying: some God or other, Nemesis posibily will not have him live; this was a darke ac∣knowledgment of a God. 5. From the Testimony of the consciences of men: Who is he that can put to silence that tell-tale called Conscience, which makes men affraid, and tremble, even when for all the world they might spend their dayes in mirch; what made these Barbarians to think murther a sin, a sin that deserved death? even this testimony of conscience, which (though they know not the cause) did so sharp∣ly reprove them, fright them, when evill committed, that never could they fully nor freely act according to their own desire. Sup∣pose one of those in a ▪ wilderness meets a passenger loaded with treasure that may be profitable for him, he dare not take his goods, he dare not take his life; why he is affraid of VENGANCE: where doth that dwell? when did you see it? is it not a great way of? yet for all this he is affraid; that if he do so, some time, in some place, some way, VENGEANCE will not suffer him to live; this is a dark, yet a conscionable demonstration of the being of a God. 6. From that restraint that is put upon wicked men in the world. If their were but a Bridle in the jawes of the wicked, such as they could not shake off, how long should the world endure, what face of Religion, what beauty of Holinesse, what acts of Righte∣ousnesse, what deeds of Justice, nay what naturall maintenance would be either for good or bad, if the wicked of the world could have there full swing in iniquity, their are stops put to them by conscience; they are affraid of VENGEANCE; they are held in by Providence. God beats out the Teeth of these Lyons, and the cheeh Teeth of those young Lyons, and oft times brings their wickednesse and their wicked lives to an end together. They roare sometimes; but as to the Sea, he hath made them Bancks; and though they lift up themselves, yet can they not passe over. 7. From the Testimony of the Scriptures; in this the being,
natures, properties, works of God are so fully held out, and in all points necessary; so clearly. that h that runs may read it; of whose authority if any doubt, see Quest. 1. and 6. of the third Chapter. Quest. 2. Whether God be a Spirit? In reading of the Scripturee we read of the hands of God, the Eares, the Eyes, the Nose, the Back, the Face, the Mouth, the Feet of God; his Heart, his Breath, his Throne, his Age; which gave formerly, and at this day doth give occasion to some to conceit God a corporall and bodily substance. A Spirit therefore we defend him to be (excepting the body of Christ, which in fulness of time he took upon him. 1. From the Scripture, Ioh. 4.24. God is a Spirit; saith he who was well acquainted with his nature, and Paul who was wrapped up into the third Heavens, charges the Heathen, for changeing the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image like unto corruptible man, Rom. 1.23. If God had a bodily shape, there was no ground for this reproof. 2. From his nature: as 1. From his Infinity, were he in the shape of man, that is of a bodily substance, he could not be infinite; every body is confined to its own proper place, but God is in all places at once, filleth all, yet confined to none, of old did he declare of himself that he filled both Heaven and Earth. Ier. 23, 24. It was long before that, that it was the ground of Solomns admiration, that God would dwell on Earth, when behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens could not contain him. 1. Kings, 8.2. And before that it was the subject of Davids praise; that he could not flee upon Earth from his presence and if he went up to Heaven he was there, and if he went to Hell he was there; Psal. 139.7 All which could not have been true, had he been circumscribed with a body. Christ himself; as
man is not infinite but sits at the right hand of God according to the 6. Art of our Creed. 2. From his invisibility. Were the Son of God again upon the Earth he would be seen because of his body: now whoever saw him? he is an invisible King, 1 Cor. 1.17. A Spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me have, says Christ to his timerous Apostles. Luke 24.39. Now God is a spirit, Ioh. 4, 24. 3. From his Eternity. He was for ever, and to everlasting shall remain with him is no variablenesse, no shadow of changing. Now all flesh is grasse, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the field, that is naturall of itself: which shews if God were a fleshly substance, he must in a great measure have a shadow of imperfecti∣on. 3. Another Argument against that grosse conceit, may be drawn from those prohibitions, so often urged by Moses against the Isra∣elites, making any Image of God. Deut. 1.12. Ye heard the voyce of the Words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voyce. And again, v. 15. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spake to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) lest you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image: the liknesse of Male or Female. If our Au∣thropomorphites had heard this Law, the Argument had not been strong enough to keep away Images: they themselves being made after Gods Image, and by their Logick the Picture of a man might have been a sufficient representation of God. Since in outward appearance he is all one with them and they with him. We must note that those Scriptures that hold out God to have a heart or hand, &c. are but spoken to our capacity, that knowing the use of those parts, we may be broght to know the better what he is The Holy Ghost speaking to us as Nurses to their Children in that childish Language best understood by them. By the eyes of God therefore we must understand his watchfull care and providence over men. By his ears his infi∣nite knowledg; by his mouth the Word he hath revealed; by his Nose his fury kindled: by his heart his Eternall decree, or his his good liking: by his arm the greatnesse of his Power: by his hand his effectuall purpose to bring all things
to passe: by his right hand his honour, glory and Majesty: by his fin∣ger the holy Spirit: by his love the content he takes in men: by his hatred a detestaon of things done; by his feet is signified the pow∣er, strength, speed or presence of God: by his back parts an im∣perfect Image of his glory, &c. these things being in Scripture in a Metaphorical way to help our infirmities. Quest. 3. Whether there be but one God? 1. That there is but one God; the Scripture in no point is more clear. For instance, Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts; I am the first and I am the last, and besides me there is no God, Isai. 44.6. And I am the Lord, and oheré is none else, there is no God besides me, Isai. 45.5. so Deut. 32.39. 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. Deut. 6.4. 2. There can be but one Omnipotent. Omnipotency is to have all power, might and strength: there is power, and there is Omnipotency. Power may do much, but Omnipotency can do all: power may be suppressed by a greater power, but Omnipotency knows no opposition. It hath no difficulties nor Lets: it works free∣ly and perfectly without co-workers or Materialls: if at any time it uses any, it at no time needs either, Gen. 17.1. I am God Al∣mighty, therefore there can be no other God but he. For suppose another, there must follow a Contest who should be most worship∣ped, most feared, most magnified; one must yield to the other, which denotes impotency, which is a denying of a deity. 3. There can be but one Infinite. To be Infinite, is to be fully, constantly in all places. It is to be without bounds to be unmea∣surable, to exceed reason or capacity: it hath respect to time, place, power, wisdome, Justice, mercy. God is infinite in time, being Eternall, Infinite in place, filling Heaven and Earth in power: he
do all things in wisdome: he knows all things past, present and to come. In Justice: who can dwell with everlasting burnings? in mercy, for the Righteous go into life Eternal. Do not I fill Hea∣ven and Earth, saith the Lord. Jer. 23.24. There is therefore no place, no time left for another God. Suppose one & you must at the same instant give him a Vacuum to Reign in, which to affirm would but argue emptinesse of Wisdome, and shallowness of under∣standing. 4. There can be but one recipient. We are commanded to love God with all our strength, soul and mind. Deut. 6.4, 5. there is no part of our love, service, fear, worship to be given to any o∣ther then one: therefore there is but one. 5. Therre can be but one Efficient. There are many things in the World depending upon each other, as the lincks of a chains: which if we measure and count, we shal come to the first, which is the pre∣server of all: the greatest number hath it's Original from a Unite. Trace every Creature in it's steps upward, and we shall fall upon one that is the Original of all. He is before all things and by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. To suppose another God, were to sup∣pose a being without acting, which is an irratinall conceit. Yet thre are in Scripture that are called Gods besides the Lord: of which afterwards. Quest. 4. Whether there be three Persons in the God▪head: and how these persons do agree. These things are by many of this age denyed, and therefore must be proved, and though they may be thought to be needlesse in regard that by many they are believed, yet this may give to many
an enlightning into the truths that possibly upon trust only are recei∣ved. Before we come to prove the question, its proper to premise; 1. We must know that this mystery is a great mystery, and is in∣deed above Reason. It is to be rather the subject of our admirati∣on then inquisition: it's to be feared that many reason themselves out of Heaven, by endeavouring to apprehend the depth and ratio∣nality of this. 2. That though it be above reason, yet it's necessary for salvation i. e. to such as are of years of discretion: Upon this Principle stands the Fabrick of all Religion, to quit this is to quit with Christi∣anity. 3. That though the word Trinity be not found to be in Scrip∣ture, yet the thing that we would expresse by that word is in it. 1 Iohn 5.7. which holds out that one is three, and that three is one, which is expressed significantly enough by the Church under the word Trinity. 4. That the three Persons in the God-head are distinguished by these Names. The first person is called the Father; the second is called the Son, or the Word; the third is called the Holy ghost or the Spirit: yet they make not three but one God. There are three that hear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy ghost, and these three are one▪ the other three that follow, viz. the Spirit, Water and blood are said to agree in one: but these three are said to be one, 1 John 5.7. that is essentially and naturally. These three differs three ways, 1. The Father begets, Psal. 2.7. Thou art my Son this day have I be∣gotten thee. He begets Christ by Eternal generation, and be∣lievers by spiritual adoption; in reference to both thes is he called Father. Ioh. 20.17. 2. The Son is begotten, he is called a Son, Prov. 30.4. Iesus is the Christ, and is born of God. 1 John 5.1. 3. The Holy ghost proceedeth from these two, Ioh. 15.26. As a man when he looks in a glasse, if he smile, his image smileth also: and if he take delight in it, it taketh delight in him: the face
is one being: suppose that the Father: the Image of the face in the glasse is another being: suppose this the Son begotten of the Father, and the smiling of them both is a third thing proceeding from the two former: suppose this, that the spirit that procoeds from the Fa∣ther and the Son. All these a man knowing to be but one face, and of one face may know that these three are but of one od. That they are personally distinct from each other appears by ma∣ny Texts, chiefly these, Prov. 8.25. The Son speaking of himself, shews us, that when there was no depths I were brought forth, when there were no Fountaine abounding with water, before the Mountains were setled, before the Hils was I brought forth, &c. When he pre∣pared the Heavens, I was there; when he established the clouds a∣bove, when he gave to the Sea his decree, then was I by him, as one brought up with him, &c. In which speech it appears, that he that was begotten by the Father was a distinct person from him that esta¦blished the clouds, which was the Lord Gen. 1. Again, Psal. 33.6. we read, that by the word of the Lord, were the Heavens made, and all the Hoasts of them by the breath of his Mouth. Here are the three persons differenced, Christ the word, the Lord God, the Breath of his mouth, the Spirit, which appears by comparing this Text with. Iohn 1.1. and Gen. 1.2. Also, Gen. 1.26. One says Let us make Man in our image, af∣ter our likeness, he that sayes these words, must be one that can create and make Man; to whom are these words spoken, not to a Creature, not to an Angel, for man was not made after the image of an Angel, (as some that denies this truth, makes Christ to be) it must be God. Why is it said let us? note that there are more Gods, as hath been before proved; but the word Us, denotes the plu∣rality of Persons, for the next words show God created man in his own Image. It must be therefore God the Father, that sayes to the other persons the same God with him, let us make man in our own image, that is in the image of God. not of any created, being moreover. Matth. 3.16, We finde Iesus the second Person in the water, the Spirit of God descending like a Dove upon him, and the Father calling down from Heaven, this is my well beloved Son, &c. where we clearly see the three Persons, in different places, do∣ing different acts, which proves that they are different persons,
which place being clear for the distinguishing of three, we may say to our new Atrians, or Antiteinitarians, what I read Athamasius said to the old ones, who denyed the three Persons, Abi ad Iordanem & vibebis, go to the River of Jordan, and thou should see the truth of it. Though they be different in persons, as is so clear in Scripture, that it is to be wondred what impudent devil possesseth so many in our dayes to deny it; yet it is not to be concluded there; there are three Gods, for these three personally make but one God essentially, 1 Iohn 5.7 which brings us to the second part of the question; how these three persons do agree, This being such a mystery, if any be too curious about this point, let them shew me how they are framed, figured in the wombe, how they grow upon Earth, how their own Soul animates their Body; and by that time something more may be thought on for the further clearing of these insearchble mysteries, (viz.) the begetting of the Son, and proceeding of the Spirit; yet that the one is begot∣ten, and the other doth proceed, from Scripture is apparent, but the manner of his begetting, and of the other is proceeding, God hath clouded. And it is not good to be wise above what is written but to the point. The three persons, agree and ate one in Eternity, in Dignity, in Diety, in Operating, and in Willing. 1. In Eternity, there was none of them before another; each of them have had, and shall have as long continuance as another; all of them hath been from everlasting, and all of them shall be to everlsting. Iesus Christ is the same Yesterday, to Day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13.8, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning or ever the Earth was. Prov. 8.23. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God. Iohn 1.1. and Gen. 1.26. To suppose now the Father, and the Son to be one from Eter∣nity, and not also the Spirit; is to suppose that God was without his Spirit; which were Blasphemy in Divinity, since he was alwayes a living God; and absurd in reason, yea equally ridiculous, as to imagine a man to live, move, and have a beeing without a Soul.
The Father, the Son, and the Spirit, are therefore coeternal, that is, one in eternity. 2. In Dignity, that is, one hath as great excellency, & majesty, as the other; they are in one and the same state, Honour, and Glory  none of them is greater then another, none of them to be wor∣shipped, called upon more then another, nor to be worshiped less then another, the same glory that we give to the Father, we are to give the Son, and the same to the Holy Ghost; and what we give to the Son, the same we are to give to the Father, and the Spirit; Holy Holy Holy is the Lord of Hoasts; cryed the Angels Isa. 6.3. a darke representation of the Trinity in Unity, so Iohn 5.18. Gen. 1.26. Iohn 5.23. All men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father, and Revela. 5.12, 13: Blessing, Honour, Glory, and Power be to him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the lamb for ever. We cannot give nor ascribe these to him that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb, but we must give them also to the Spi∣rit of him that sitteth on the Throne, and of the Lamb. The Fa∣ther, the Son, and the Spirit, are therefore coequall, that is one in Dignity. 3. In Diety; that is, one is equal, and as much God as the o∣ther, the Father is very God, the Son is very God, and the Holy Spirit is very God; and yet there are not three but one God, the self same God that the Father is, the self same is God the Son, and that very God that the Father and the Son is, the self same God is the Holy Ghost, (Trinitatem omnipotentem quis intelli∣git, & quis non loquitur eam, si tamen eam? Rara anima quae dum de illa loquitur scit, quid loquitur. Lord I believe, help my unbeliefe.] I believe that the Father is not the Son, nor the son the Spirit, and also that the Son is not the Father, nor the Spirit; and also that the Spirit is neither Father nor Son: yet I believe that the Father, the Son and the Spirit is ONE.
A TABLE Demonstrating this. In his igitur tribus quam sit inseparabilis vita & Unae essentia, quam inseparabilis distinctio, & tamen distinctio, videat qui potest:certe coram se est, Aug. lib. Con. 13. c. 11. The weak Christian may read often the Creed of Athanasius immediately prece∣ding the Letany in the book of Common Prayer, whereby these things shall be made familiar. Haec est enim sides vera, veniens de sa∣na doctrina: haec cer∣te est Fides Catholi∣ca, & Orthodoxa quam me docuit De∣us in sinu matris Ec∣clesia gratiâ suâ, Aug. 1. med. 30. This shall appear by a distinct proving each person to be God. And 1. That the Father is God, appears by the Scriptures, and rea∣son. 1. By the Scriptures. Thes. 3.11. Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Iesus Christ, direct our way unto you: here God Almighty is called upon distinctly with the Son, under the notion of our Father: for so he is by adopting us his children as be∣fore was spoken: and so v. 13. Before God even our Father, so 2 Thes. 1.1, 2. Paul, &c. Unto the Church of the Thessalonians, in God our Father, and Chap. 2.16. Now our Lord Iesus Christ him∣self, and God even our Father: & so Ephes. 1.3. Blessed be the God, &
Father of our Lord Iesus Christ; He that is his Father, is our Father, is God blessed for ever. Heb. 1.1, 8. God who at sundry times, and in divers manners, spake in time past, unto the Fathers by the Pro∣phets, hath in these last day, spoken to us by his Son: The same God that spoke to the Prophets hath a Son; therfore he is his Father, whose Son now is Christ: His, who spake in divers manners to the Prophets, and he is God. And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son, v. 5. Who says these words? he that begot him; Who begot him? He, whose Son he is? Who is that Son? Christ that purged our sins, and sate down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, v. 3. Whose Son is he? He that spoke un∣to our Fathers by the Prophets: and he was God, v. 1. Moreo∣ver, Prov. 8.22. The Son himself says, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, &c. when there was no depths, I was brought forth, before the Hills was I brought forth. Who brought him forth? he that made the Earth: and who made the Earth? God. Geu. 1.9, 10. Many other places might be brought for this truth, as Ioh. 17.3. Ioh. 20.17. Rom. 1.7. but we forbear in regard that those against whom the question is raised, denye not the divinity of the Father, but of the other person, 2. By reason drawn from Scripture or scripture rea∣son, it appears that the Father is God. for 1. Prayer must be made to him: Pray to the Father which is in secret, Matth. 6.6. Pray. Our Father which art in Heaven; now we are to pray to none but to God. Isa. 42.. 2. It is he that revealeth hidden mysteries Luke 10.8. This none can do but God. Isa. 41.8.22, 23. 3. It is he that maketh the Sun to shine, and the Stars to give light to the Earth. Matth. 5.15. The Sun is his, for he made it: he made the Stars also. Gen- 1.16. This showes that he is God. Isa. 40.26. 4. It is he that maketh the Raine to fall. Matth. 5.45. This none can do that but God. Jerei 14.22.
2. That the Son is God, appears by Scripture, and Scripture reason: 1. By scripture, John 5.20, And we know that the son of God is come, &c. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Iesus Christ; this is the true God and Eter∣nal life. Heb. 1.. But to the Son he sayeth, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever. Rom. 9.5. whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ, came, who is over all God blessed for ever. Isa. 9.6. Vnto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, &c. his name shall be called wonder∣full, Counsellour, the mighty God; so John, 1.1. The word was God. John, 20.28. Psal. 68.18, with Ephe. 8.8. Psal. 95.6. compared with 1 Cor. 10.9. Isa. 41.4. with Re∣vela. 8 6. Isa. 25.9. Zacha. 2 9. Isa. 7.14. Phil. 16. Phil 2.6 Acts 7.59. Tit. 2.13. 1 Tim. 3.16. What ed we oppose those blasphemous Arians any longer? hve we not heard himself say, I and the Father are one? John 10.0. Reader, these things are written that thou mightest believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing thou mightest have life through his Name. Ioh. 20.31. And this is eternal life to know him to be the only true God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent, (viz) to be the true God also, Iohn 17.3. 2. By Scripture reason, or reason drawn from Scrip∣ture; tis clear that the Son is God. 1. He made and created the world. Iohn 13 this none did but God. Gen. 1.1. or could do. Isa. 44.24. 2. He can and doth forgive sins. Luke 7.48. this none can do but God. Luke 5.8. 3. He gives the holy Ghost. Ioh. 20.22. this none can do but God Isai. 44.3.
4. He preserveth his Church. Matth. 16.18. this none can do but God. 5. His Name is preached up, Phil. 1.18, this ought not to be done, were he not God. 6. He is Omnipresent, he is in Heaven and Earth at once. Iohn, 3.13. this could not be, were he not God. 7. He knows the thoughts of man. Matt. 9.4. this he could not do, where he not God. 8. He is Eternall. Revel. 1.8. this he could not be, were he not God. 9. He is Almighty. Revel. 1.8. this he could not be, were he not God. 10. Men are baptzed in his Name. Mat. 28 19. this ought not to be done were he not God. 3. That the holy Spirit is God, appears by Scripture, and Scripture Reason. 1. From Scripture. Act. 5.3. Why hath Satan filled thy heart to lye against the Holy ghost, &c. Thou hast not lyed unto man, but unto God. Isaiah 6.9. The Prophet heard the Lord say, Go and tell this people, hear ye indeed but un∣derstand not, &c. The Holy ghost is said to speak the Words, Acts 28.25, 26. By which two places, it appears, the Holy ghost is God. And so, 1 Cor. 12.6. there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same God, which
worketh all in all, &c. To one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdome; to another the gift of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another the gift of Faith by the same Spirit. Quest. What Spirit is it that giveth these diversities of gilts? Answ. It is the same God that worketh all in all, and the same Lord, v. 5, 6. Also we read, Deut. 12.6, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known in a vision, unto him, and will speak to him in a dream: now Prophets spake as they were moved by the Holy ghost. 1 Pet. 1 21. 2. By Scripture Reason, or Reason from Scripture, It appears that the Holy ghost is God. 1. He is Eternall, Heb 9.14. this he could not be were he not God. 2. He is Omnipresent. Rom. 8.9, He is in all the faith∣full whereever they be; therefore he must be God, Psal. 139.7 3. He is Omniscient. 1 Cor 2 10. therefore he must be God. 4. He created the World, Psal 23.6. this he could not do, were he not God, Gen. 1.2. Job. 26.13. 5. He gives the gifts of miracles. &c. 1 Cor. 12.10 there∣fore he must be God. 6. He calls men to be Apostles: Acts 13.2. therefore he must be God. 7. Because the sin against him is unpardonable, Matth. 12 31, therefore he must be God. 8. He knows the souls and consciences of men, Rom. 9.1. therefore he must be God
9. He hath a Temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. therefore he is the living God. 2 Cor 6.16. 10. Men are baptized in his Name, Matth 28.19. therefore he must be God. Thus it appears, that the Father, the Son and the Spi∣rit are one essentially, that is one in Deity. The other two parts in which they are one a (viz.) in Operating and in willing, may be dispatched in Word. 1. For Operation, they work all one and the self same thing together, Joh. 5.17. Gen. 1 26 And 2. For willing, they will all one and the self thing, without opposing, crossing, or contradicting each other. Joh. 8.29. I do always those things that please him (viz. the Father) saith the Son: by consequence the Spirit of the Son must please him, which is the holy Ghost, Rom. 8.9. and the spirit of the Father must please the Son, which sthe Holy Ghost Isaiah 48.16. The Church of Christ hath in all ages held this truth, giving the same glory, honour, worship to all the three persons, which they gave to each of them singly. How often the Church of England sings, glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c. is known. It is the Catholick Doctrine taught by all Reformed Churches; both of the late and the former Councell of Helv. Art. 6. Art. 3 of Bas. Art. 1. of Bohem. Art, 3 of Fr. Art. 1 of Belg. Art. 2 of Ausp. Art. 1 of Wirt. Art. 1, 2, 3 of Scot. Art. 1. of England Art. 1. The Article it self is this; There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body parts or passions, of infinite power, wis∣dome
and goodness; the maker and preserver of all things, both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this Godhead there be three Persons of one substance power and eternity. The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Quest. 5. Why are Kings and Magistrates cal∣led Gods, and rebellion said to be like witch∣craft in Scripture? 1.This Question ariseth from what hath been before spoken: for if there be but one God, how come the rulers of the Earth to be called Gods? Ex. 7.1. Ex. 22.28. Psal. 82.1. Iohn 10.34, 35. 1. Gods they are called to teach that such ought to excel others in Godliness, and such only are to be chosen, that for religion are like Gods among men. 2. To encourage them, that they ought no more to fear the faces, or regard the person of men, or to punish the wicked among men, then God doth. 3. To draw them to his honour, he hath given them his own name: they are Gods, and therefore they ought not to serve the Devil or the world, but execute true judegement as God doth. 4. To teach their Subjects Obedience: there ought to be no grumbling nor murmuring nor rising up against God. In distress one may petition to him, but further we ought not to go: he hath in the hearing of their Subjects given them his own name, and thefore they are to honour them: accordingly beg, petition of him, but no further. 5. Let us of these nation add one comparison not known to the ancients: our British god, (whom the Heavenly God make in peace glorious and in warre victorious) hath only as God, one unpardo∣nable sin, but one sin which he will never forgive, one sin which is unto death; he doth not say that we shall pray for it.
There are some that are thought to sin against the holy Ghost, yet possibly do not. I am prone to think that Spira sinned not that sin, though he charged it upon himself; some poor souls through Sauls persecution did blaspheme Christ, for whom God might have a pardon. Saul might not be guilty of that sin of Regicide so high as to make it a sin unto death; for them our King hath mercy. Fear might make them to blaspheme majesty, repentance may procure them a pardon; the others like Witches, though repent, must die, whence flowes the second part of the question. Rebellon is either against God, Num. 14.9, or his Word, Psal. 108.28. of against a King, 1 Kings 12.19. Yet when ever it is, in nature it is as witchcraft, 1 Sam. 15.3. We shall consider it in that part, that is against Lawfull Kings and Governours; the Simili∣tude may stand thus, (viz.) 1 Witchcraft is a direct opposing of the order, laws and Sta∣tutes that have been enacted by him who is the God of Hea∣ven. Rebellion is of his who is a God on earth. Witchraft throws off God, and is not afraid of his Majesty; Rebellion throws off a lawfull Prince, and is not carefull of his honour. 2 Wichcraft is usually entered upon by a League, Compact, or Covenant, which according to Authors is sometimes private∣ly and sometime visible made with the Devil. So Rebellion seldome or never goes without one or both these. 3 Witchcraft (as we read) draws the party to deny that oath that he made with God in Baptisme. Rebels, if not formally, yet virtually renounce those obligations which they made to their King and Soveraign. 4 Witchcraft arises often from Malice; Envie, Discon∣tentedness; if God anser nor their mindes, or revenge their quarrell, they will endevour to do it by Satans assistance; if Roy∣al bounty flow not upon the Subject, as he would have it, he growes angry and will take by Rebellion. 5 Witchcraft sometime is followed by pride or curiosi∣ty to do some secret and hidden work, and to receive some kind of reputation among men. Some will turn Conjurers, Negro∣mancers, and Witches; by the same, subjects will turn Rebels, and Traitors.
6 Witchcraft is followed by some through poverty, or cove∣tousness; to get a poor living, and to help their necessity they will bargain with Sathan; Subjects to better their estates, & purchase wealth, will often break out into Rebellion. 7 Witches, what through Justice, guilt, fear, as we read, sel∣dome or never repent; some sorrow they may have when they are in the hand of Justice; for the same reason, Rebels seldom or ne∣ver repent, except, or untill they fall in the hands of the Officer; and as Witches, seldom then. 8 Witches first or last, meet with judgement; much trouble and evil may be made and done by them, but at length, here or hereaf∣ter they are brought to triall; they that rebell, first or last receive to themselves damnation, Rom. 13.2. I will not judge of their eternall estate, but fire on earth is usually prepared for them both. In Scripture Satan is called a god, 2 Cor. 4.4. because of that power given him over the wicked, whom God hath not called out of the World. The Belly is called a god, Phil. 3.9. men spending their time, strength, parts, for its service. Idols are called gods, not that they are so at all, but because Jdolaters have such an opinion of them. Quest. 6 What was that Image wherein God made man, and why was man created naked? God having made man according to his own Image, and yet God not being a corporall substance as man; how is man made in his Image? The likeness of God wherein man was made, is In∣ternall, or externall. 1 Internall, that is in his soul, where he was like God 1 In knowledge; he knew God, himself, the Creatures, his own
happiness, distinctly, clearly, fully, that is, as a creature was capable of, Gen. 2.20, 23. 1 Rom. 19.20. 2 In holiness. In him was no sin, as in God is no darkness. In him there was an ability to have cleaved only to good, and exactly to perform what by God was commanded; his affections were holy and pure without disorder, and without stain, and subject perfectly to the rule of right reason. 3 In righteousness. God could behold nothing in him but what was very good, Gen. 1.31. no crookedness, but a totall and univer∣sall conformity to his own nature, purpose, and desire, law and precept; there needed no Mediator between God and man, he being upright before him. All these three to be inwardly the Image of God appears, Ephes. 4.23, 24. Col. 3.10. 2 External, that is in body, where he was like God. 1 In Immortality. Death was to have no dominion over him; dissolution he was not to know; God is Immortall, and man in Immortality was like him. 2 In Dominion over the creatures, God gave man half his Em∣pire to rule over, Gen. 1.28. The furious Lyon, the Kingly Ea∣gle, and the great Leviathan, man stood in no awe of, they all submitted to his Scepter: The whole Creation of Beasts and Fowl was, brought before him, and though he was naked, he feared them not, and they disobeyed not him, Gen. 2.20. This ushers in the second part of the question, why man was created Naked? For answer to which we make this brief reply. 1 That but for sin, this would be no more a question, then it is now why men cover not their faces; that was a piece or part of that perfection wherein God created him; cloathing is but a cum∣ber, a toyl, a labour, a trouble; and God made him perfectly happy. 2 To admonish him of his sociable and peaceable life with his kinde. God created other creatures with weapons, strength to defend themselues against each other, to some he gives swiftness, to others craftiness, to others strong and hard hides, to others hard hoofes, to some prickels, to some sharp claws to others stings and poyson; but only man is naked, exposed, open and free: so that we see when men go to make war one upon another, they
deform themselves, and look liker monsters then men. God therefore would teach him, by his being naked, to live peaceably and sociably in the world. 3 To Admonish him of his diligence and industry. He hath given man little without him besides his skin: yet Inriched the World for his use, and that he might Imploy himself in some refreshing labour, without trouble, and do those things in the World, most pleasing to himself, what ever they were, with the greater facility. God created him naked. 4 To discover the excellency of Adams perfection. God did not make so beautifull a Creature, to hide it in the cloud of a Woolen, Silken, or Linen garment; he was the most beautifull of all creatures, and God would have his beauty discovered. As Eva was the Mother of all living, I am prone to suppose she was the fairest of all her Daughters that lived, and God would have her favour seen. What needed cloathes to either, since both were perfectly holy? It was their holiness that made them not ashamod of their being naked, Gen. 2.25. Quest. 7. Whether the reading of the Ceremo∣nial Law be profitable to a Beleever? Or whether any part of that Law be established under the Gospel? The Law Ceremonial, which consists of Types and Sha∣dowes, as Washings, Shavings, and Offerings, of Sacrifices, Shedding of blood, Sprinkling, &c. some may think to be need∣lesse under the Gospel; but they erre, a Beleever may reap much profit by them.
1 They may serve to confirm his faith in the truth of the Word, by his seeing the Types fulfilled by Christ, he is the Lamb of the Male kinde, that must be Offered for the sins of the World. He is the scape-goat that taketh the sins of men into the Wildernesse of Oblivion. 2. By them we may take notice of Gods offence at sin he wil have the blood of man or of beasts, to satisfie his Justice in respect of sin, willing to spare men, untill the Son of man come, the blood of Buls and goats shall serve to the purifying of the flesh. 3. By them believers may be excited to love Christ the more for freeing them from the burthen of that Law. It was a yoke that the Jews were not able to bear. Acts 15.10. By Christ, the Believer is freed from it: he is not now tyed to Ierusalem, he needs not go there to worship: neither need he kill his beast for Sacrifice: but offe∣ring pure hands without wrath and doubring makes him accepted in the beloved. 4. By that Law we see that there is but one Saviour for Jew and Gentile which may be the ground of many a fervent pray∣er for the Jews Conversion, that they might effectually have the blood upon their hearts for the pardon of their sins, whose blood typically they shed for the remmitting of their offences. Poor souls whose Fathers saw his blood in the killing of their beasts, & yet their seed to be killed through their not believing in his blood now that it is poured forth. Return O Lord to thee many thousands of Israel. 5. Believers by that may see how carefull God is of his Worship: in his making such strict Laws, Statues and Judgements, and the least of them to be fulfilled under the pain of being cut off. 6. They may fear to sin the more against the gospel, if it was dangerous under so dark a Ministration, what now? if it was death to break the Law delivered by Moses, what then to sin against the Law given by Christ? if these escaped not that broke the Law, because they were delivered from Egypts thraldome. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation. Heb. 10.2, 3. Let
us not sin the more because the yoak is took from us, but rejoyce al∣ways in God that made us free in Christ: which calls upon us to see if by Christ we are free'd from any part of that Law or from all of it, which is the second part of the Question. The ground of it, is the determination of that first and famous Counsell of the Church. Acts 15. In which it was appointed. v. 29: that the converted Gentiles should abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, &c. By reason of which precept some conclude this part of the Law to be confirmed under the gospell, and by Christians to be observed. But these men erre, not know∣ing the Scriptures. An upstart Preacher in the audi∣ence of some of the Authors Parish de∣fnding the Contray Dctrine, did occasion the stating of this Question next Sabbath, and shewing it to be the Doctrine of Devils one gave the Author freely hish and never to hear such Teachers more. It is wished the Reader reap the like profit. For the detecting of which errour, we shall promise a few things, touching the institution of the Law, and the reason of the Law. 1. Of the Institution. When God had preserved himself a ve∣ry small remnant in the Earth by Noahs Ark, he gave to Noah and to his Sons, every moving thing that liveth for meat, Gen. 9.3. But flesh with the blood thereof; which is the life thereof, these they must not eat, that is flesh with the blood in it, or raw, or not tho∣rowly boyld, or not throughly blooded, or not throughly dressed, as for haste the Israelites did, 1 Sam. 14.32, 33. Afterwards in the time of Moses this Law was enlarged. Levit. 17.1. Prohibiting not only the eating of flesh with the blood, but the blood of any manner of flesh, v. 10. v. 14. so that untill Moses, the not eating of blood divided from the flesh is not expressly forbidden; though it might not by holy men be eaten, for a reason hereafter to be shown. 2. Of the reason of this Law, and that is three fold, Either
1. Physicall. 2. Morall. Or, 3. Mystical. 1. Physical. The blood of beasts divided from the flesh, eaten alone; or the blood of beasts eaten with the flesh might and doth breed bad and unwholesome humours in the body, of which Noah might have been ignorant: or at least would caution him against it: and the Israelites we know are most of all forbidden those beasts and fouls and fishes that in their own natures do breed no good nor wholesome nourishment to the body: whatever the matter was, a∣bove other Countries, Israel had most Lepers. God suited their fare according to the nature possibly of their foyl; forbidding in it selfe what might harm their healthy constitution, and among other things forbid them blood, or to eat flesh with the blood, or flesh not well blooded, as being grosse food and tending to the hurt or detri∣ment of man. 2. Morall, blood might be forbidden to the Jews, 1. To separate them and keep them from the practice of the Gen∣tiles, who eat and drank the blood of those: Creatures they offered in Sacrifice to their false gods. That Israel was a people prone to Idolatry, it is known no Nation was more; they might quickly learn this piece of Gentilisme: which to prevent, this Law might be enjoyned them. 2. To dehort or keep them from cruelty, to teach them by pro∣hibiting the eating of the blood of any not greedily to thirst after the life of any Creature, or of their own kind: that the Jews naturally are a cruell, mercilesse and hard hearted people, is known by a pro∣verb: to teach them therefore to be tender of the blood (wherein is the life) of all Creatures, how strictly doth God give a Law, concerning little Birds. Deut. 2.26. that they shall not take the young ones with the Dam, but to let her go. So they are not to seeth a Kid in his Mothers milk, Deut. 23.19. (which literally to under∣stand
is not absurd (which shows how farre God would have his people from the very appearance of cruelty. 3. Mysticall: and to the Author this is Instar omnium,: God would have the blood not to be eaten, because he would have it sprinckled and poured out upon his Altar, signifying that man for his Rebeliion, had forfeited his lifeto the hands of Justice, for it is said Levit. 17.11. And I have given it to you an Attonement for your souls; For it is the blood that maketh an Atonemen for the soul. This is the mystery that is included in the prohibiting of blood, it it makes attonemet, and God would have it not put to any use, for food of the o'y, for he intended to be for the use, even the Atone∣ment of the soul, which might by inspiration be known even to Noah and to the Fathers before Moses, since the eating purely, was not exprssely forbidden till now Since Christ by his blood hath made an Attonement for the souls of men, there is no use to be made of blood now in Sacrifice: nei∣ther is it a Creature can be used any other way then for food: it must therefore be eaten or thrown away, that is upon the account o con∣science: to throw it away hah an appearance of sin, nay is a sin, since there is a Rule in the gospell to make all things edible good for man: to be eaten some say is a sin, since it is forbidden in the gos∣spell at a Council of the Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. In that E∣pistle written to the Churches of Antioch: but this Scripture is also wrested; which to demonstrate, we shall briefly view the occasion of that Epistles writing. The parties written & the thing written of. 1. The occasion of that Epistles writing. A Church being plan∣ted in Antioch, by the conversion of many Gentiles to the Christi∣an faith, some Jewish Preachers, yet believers, taught unto them the necessity of keeping the Law of Moses, Act. 15.1. if they would be saved▪ and v. 5. this discouraged the Gentiles much, from, or in believing in Christ: the Law being to the Iews themselves an un∣supportable burhen as is implyed v. 31. Paul and Barnabas dis∣sented from such teaching, maintaining that Believers were not at all tyed to Moses Law. Now the Houses, Churches and Pulpits of Antioch were full of disputings and arguings: the Iewish Doctors teaching one thing, and Paul another. No small dissention was a∣mong them v. 2. At length they think of an agreement: Paul and
Barnabas and others; some of both opinions are sent to the Church of Ierusalem, to know their minds, vers. 2. At their arrival there is a Councel called: great controversy and much disputing there was the law of Moses must be kept, if they would be saved, ver. 5.6.7. Peter rises, (so great is the difference) Appeals to the Councel if among them whom God appointed to Preach, he had not made choice of him, to Preach to the Gentiles, the gospel of Christ that they might be saved, from whom as if he had said I re∣ceived no such commission; as to preach the Law of Moses, as circum∣cision or the like: Takes God to witness that all times, God had testified of his content sufficiently; and was satisfyed in the Gentiles beleiving, without their keeping of the Law of Moses, by giving them faith and the holy Ghost, vers. 7.8.9. Maintains further that they tempt God that reach the contrary doctrine, and hinder or may hinder the progress of the Gospell, by putting on that yoake (viz of the Ceremonial Law of Moses) on the necks of the Disci∣ples, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear by which he holds forth that the law of Moses obligeth not the Church under the Gospel, And therefore is to be taught by none and is any do, they tempt God. At this Argument the mouths of all opponents are stopped. Peter had been an eye witness of our Lords death and resurrection. He got a special tripled comission to feed the sheep of Christ; And at Gods Appointment did preach to the Gentiles the gospel, and not the Law; that God had blessed his preaching by giving the Gentiles Faith and the holy Ghost. Though the Law was never taught nor ob∣served, their conscience now tells them this their doctrine is not of God: they remained silent, no disputing, no arguing more, vers. 10, 11.12. Paul and Barnabas, takeing occasion by this argument of Peters, declares unto the Councel, what works God had done by their prea∣ching among the Gentiles, without the observance of the Law, make∣ing the same conclusion Implicitely, that Peter made from the same Premisses. (viz) God owning their Preaching by faith and miracles, and therefore as they taught at Antioch, so they teach now (being both here and there guided by the infalliable Spirit of God) that the Law of Moses was not to be Preached; was not to be kept: in the
mouth of these three Witnesses guided by the Holy ghost: let this truth be justified, that no part of the Ceremonial Law is to be taught, obliging now, and by consequence, eating of blood is no gos∣pell precept, v. 12. Again, there is silence, the whole Councel being convinced of the truth of the Arguments urged by Peter, confirmed by Paul and Barnabas. However being met, something must and ought to be done for the peace of the Church, yet nothing contrary to the meaning of the Holy ghost. It is a sin and a high one, to think that either Peter or Paul or Barnabas in this taught false Doctrine, which must be gran∣ted if any part of the ceremonial Law be obliging. Iames there∣fore (who was Bishop of Ierusalem) demands attention: main∣tains that to be true which Peter, Paul and Barnabas had said: con∣firms it from the Words of the Prophet Amos, Am. 9.11, 12. So that by Iames also, (This is a fourth witnesse) guided by the Spirit of God, the Ceremonial Law it not now obliging. Iames by Pe∣ters Argument seems to apply, that the teaching of it might hinder the gospell, v. 19. and gives it as his sentence; so that still even by these eating of blood is not forbidden under the gospel, being a part of that Law which they all consent not to be binding.Iames also declares that the Church ought to be satisfied in mat∣ters of salvation, when God is satisfied; and since he requires not that Law, none is to introduce it: However▪ Authoritatively ap∣points, that the Gentiles be written to, that they may abstain from pollutions of Idols, from Fornication, from things strangled, and from Blood, his reason is (and let his reason be noted; for the not observing of that is the ground of the errour) for Moses of old time hath in every City them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. vers. 19.20, 21. Which deter∣mination pleased all parties; the controversie ceaseth; the coun∣cell writes these Letters to the Churches of Syria, Cilicia, and of Antioch. Before Discessuri ab invicem Apostoli normam praedicatio∣nis in com∣mune consti∣tu unt Cyp. ex Alst. Chi Symo. &c. the breaking up of this councell, that Creed called the Apostles Creed, is supposed to be made as a Standart of Doctrine now we come to
2. The parties written to; the direction of the Decrees or Can∣nons of this Councell runs thus, The Apostles Elders and Brethren send greeting unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles, in An∣tioch, Syria, and Cilicia, &c. Now we must note that in all these Countries, the Jews were mingled among the Gentiles, and had their Synagogues (in many places at this day,) and the Law read therein: and in them such as preached Moses; God yet permitting in some sort the Jewish ceremonies to live in the World; the Temple, of Ierusalem yet standing; this gave great occasion of quarrelling; and caused con∣te: the Jews were angry that the Gentiles were not circumcised; that they eat blood, that they eat in Idol▪ Temples; or any part of that that had been sacrificed to Idols; a thing in it self indifferent 1 Cor. 8. they wonder that the Gentils wil not abstain from fornica∣tion, an act much practised among the Gentils & held by many in∣different and consistent with Religion, 1 Cor. 5.8. and Chap. 9. The Gentiles again wonder, and proved that they were not obliged to circumcision, nor tyed to worship at Jeruslem: nor to observe the distinction of clean and uncle in Beasts, Foul or fish; wondred they would abstain from blood since Christs was shed, and proves and disputes, that it is no sin to abstain from things strangled. There is no discourse in Antioch, but his every Meeting, every Sabbath, may every House is divided in the truth of these Doctrines: some for one, some for another; Paul and Barnabas are for the Gentiles; some of the Sects of the Pharises are for the Iews; there is meet∣ing after meeting bout it, no smal division Moses; being read and taught in the Synagogue every Sabboth day, confirms the Jews in his opinions; Paul and Barnabas's teaching confirms the Gentile in his judgement. Paul indeed brings good arguments from Christs death; but the other brings stronger from Moses writings: shall Moses that was but a servant in the house have his Laws kept, now the Son is come? cals one; and shall the Laws and customes that God himself commanded be sghd? says another. In th is garhoil the Gospel is hindered; the new plants of the Christian Religion are discouraged. Paul thereto  akes great care for them; Barna∣bas and he maintain that the Law is not to be urged; so sayes Peter, so says Iames in the Counsel, yet that this rock of offence
might be removed, the Holy Ghost puts it in the minde of Iames to decree that the Gentiles should abstain from Fornication, and from Blood, at which the Iews were offended. And that the Iews should not teach circumcision, washings, &c. at which the Gen∣tiles were offended and discouraged; the reason of both is, Moses is read every Sabbath day, and by this decree some part of the Law is kept, by which the Jews might be pleased; and yet not all the Law; by which the Gentiles might be encouraged, and that which is commanded, is one of the easiest parts of the Law; that the Jews might not boast; and yet what is commanded is in the Law, that the Gentiles might not brag: for Moses is read &c. and happily this determination did agree them. Yet still remember, that Paul, Peter and Iames, maintained that the Ceremonial Law was not to be taught as obliging; and that yoake ought not to be put upon the disciples: for the peace of the Church therefore rather then for any necessity of Salvation, is that part of the Law Ceremoniall here enjoyned. But this leads us to the 3. Thing written of, or determination of the Councel it self with the grounds of it; the Canon or decree, it self is this with its preface. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater burthen then these necessary things, that ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication. It is observable that in this Epistle the Council gives the Gentiles information, that they had heard that some preached to them Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law, unto whom (says the Councel) we gave no such Commandement v. 24 Where know, if it had been sin for the Gentiles to have eaten blood, then without question they had been commanded to have preacht it down. This decree of the Councill hath 3 parts: 1. Something Ceremoniall, as to abstain from things strangled, and from blood. Here call to mind the Reasons given above for the prohibiting of blood; things strangled may have some relation to them, the blood not being out of them, and therefore that sort of meat might be unhealthy: and if this were a sin (viz.) to eat blood it behoved every man to assure himself of a good Cook: Nay we
question whether ever he would eat meat. We are sure the Mysticall use of blood is gone viz. to make an Atonement for the soul: what vse it is prohibited now for hath not yet been discovered. 2. Something there is indifferent (viz.) to abstain from meats sacrificed to Idolls, now we know that is not in it self unlawful, for an Idol is nothing. 1 Cor. 8. The Apostle there speaking of it, con∣demns it not as a sin, but only if weak Brothers be offended at it, it is forborn, for the peace of the Church; if it were absolutely neces∣sary here: it would never be indifferent there. 3. Something is morall, necessary and binding (viz.) to abstain from Fornication, looked upon among the Gentiles as a thing of no great concernment: the Corinthians though called, were very guil∣ty of it, and one in a high measure. 1 Cor. 5. & 6. Now says the Canon. It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us. The Holy ghost of old and new, commands to abstain from fornica∣tion, and it seems good to us gathered together by the Holy ghost filled and guided by the Holy ghost (viz.) Us Apostles, Elders &c. that you should abstain from meats sacrificed to Idols, and from blood, &c. for no otherwise are we to read the words, when we con∣sider that Peter, Paul & Barnabas did oppose every part of the Ce∣nial Law, yet in regard that Moses is read, &c. it seems good to us that these things be done. They are called necessary things. For 1. Fornication is necessary to be abstained. 1 Cor. 6.9. And 2. That of Idols, if it be taken for pollution with Idols, as Iames sentence is. Act. 15.20. then it is absolutely necessary, if it be taken for eating meats offered to Idols, as the Canon of the Councill is, then it is necessary secundum quid only, as abstaining from blood and strangled, that is, they are necessary now in respect of procuring peace to the Church, for the taking away of the cause of offence; for again remember that three Apostles opposed every part of that Law that was given by Moses. Iames found out the Medium, and abstaining from things stran∣gled and from blood, is no more necessary by this Canon, then not eating of meat sacrificed to Idols, & that that is not necessary, but may
be lawfully done, where no offence is taken  as if it were written with a Sun-beam, from 1 Cor. 8.  any of these three last been necessary for salvation,  been much dis∣putings against them by Paul, would  been against it? would Iames have confirmed  nay would not Paul here have opposed him to his  Paul ever have made it a thing indifferent, if the Holy Ghost had made it absolutely necessary? for the prese  it was judged by the Apo∣stles so to be in regard of Moses being  no further obliging. There is a remarkable instance for this, after the breaking up of the Council Paul; preaching the gospel, found and took one Timo∣theus, Acts 16.1, 2, 3. and circumcised him, which act he strongly opposed at Antioch, yet did it in , not that Paul changed his judgmen; e circumcised him, says the , because of the Jews which were in those quarters, verse 4. that all occasion of offence might be taken from them; when, had that determination of the Coun∣cil been literally looked after, Paul sinned grosly in laying a greater burthen upon the believers then any was mentioned in the Apo∣stles cannons; this declares that in regard of the Iews at that time there was a necessity in some things to eye the Law, but never holding nor teaching it as necessary, yet holding it in some places, and at some times convenient, in some part necessary for the peace of the Church, particularly that no of∣fence might be given to the Iews; so desirous were they of their salvation; but when the Iews remained constantly in their keep∣ing the Law, and out of stubernness still would have it observed, the Apostles then, and Christians at this day, stood and do stand to their Christian liberty; Paul will circumcise no man, be offend∣ed who will, Gal. 5.1, 2. and Gal. 3.1. the whole body of the Ce∣remonial Law is preached down, written down, which shews that those Ceremonial decrees▪ in the Canon of the Apostolick Coun∣cil, was never ordained for a standing or an eternal rule in the Church; the Temple is now gone, Christianity is established. Pe∣ter, Paul, Barnabas and Iames know that God is satisfied with our believing; and though for a time it seemed good to them, ga∣thered together by the Holy Ghost, to keep a few of those Laws for the peace of the Church and for the ingathering of the Iews; yet
since they still remain offended, let them so remain, and for all their offence taking, let us now stand fast in the liberty where with Christ hath made us free. The Law is not now read; the Apostles lived to see the Jews once a glorious people, a royal priesthood, and a holy nation, re∣jected of God, unchurched of him, and they see her ceremonies all buried; hear what is written by the Holy Ghost, since the Iews weakness is turned to stubbernness, if Peter now take part with the Iews for offending, he must and is reproved before the whole As∣sembly, and that in Antioch too Gal. 2.12 See Gal. 5.2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Now he speaks out, seeing the Iews are not the better for that indulgence given. For I testifie again to every man that is circumcised that he is debtor to do the whole Law; by Christ we are debtors to no part of the Law, nay not to abstain from eating of blood. Was it not Pauls Caution to the Collossians, Col. 2.16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat and in drink, or in respect of an holy day or of the new Moon; what ever you eat, or what ever you drink, let no man judge you, that is, condemn you, though it it be not according to the Law; for they were a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ; blood was to be poured on the altar to make an attonement for sin; but the blood of Christ is now pour∣ed forth, and there ought to be no other offering for sin; to be brief, that blood may be eaten now under the gospel, or that that decree of the Council is not binding to us in these dayes, appears, 1 From the rule of proportion between it and things sacrificed to idols according to the Canons of the Council, they are alike unlawfull they are alike necessary, they alike binding, they were enjoyned by one and the self same authority; but now S. Paul 1 Cor. 8. speaking of things sacrificed of idols, which was one of the questions the Corinthians desired to be satisfied in from that Apostle, in regard that some did eat of that meat, upon their know∣ledge that an idol was nothing in the the world, and some did not eat, fearing it might be something, the Apostle yeilds, that though an idol be nothing in regard there is but one God; and though men might eat of that meat, sacrificed to them, for anything was in it;
for neither if we eat, are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse; a plain demonstration that that Law is not obliging; yet he would have them to abstain, not as from the Law, but for the conscience of him that was offended; so that onely in respect of giving cause of offence to others, is things sacrificed to idols not to be eaten; and by consequence eating of blood is no more ne∣cessary, the cause therefore of that forbearance being removed (viz.) the reading of Moses Law; and the tenderness or ignorance of new converted Iews, through the establishment of the gospel being also taken away, that the consciences of few or none that are Christians are wounded for useing our liberty in that particu∣lar, we may without sinning against our own souls, eat blood, as safely as ever the Corinthians might eat things sacrificed to idols, or in an idols Temple; since both these by the Canon of the Coun∣cil were esteemed necessary, not in themselves, but in respect of weak consciences & peace of the Church, which now in these two particulars, is in no danger for had things sacrificed to idols been in it self necessary to prevent sinning against a mans own soul, then meat had commended us unto God, which it doth not, 1 Cor. 8.8. Nay our Apostle would have urged it, and pressed the not doing of it, upon that account; but contrary he yields, and would have them to abstain for the consciences of their weak brethren onely, withot once mentioning any other cause. 2. From the holy Apostles attestation, speaking of things indif∣ferent, and of meats. Rom. 14.2, 3. Commands that be that ea∣teth meats (forbidden in the Law) despise not him that eateth not. (viz., for conscience of the Law.) Every man living not to him∣self only, ought to have a care of his Brother, or not judge him, Or put no stumbling block in his Brothers way, v. 13. But why must not one judge another, in eating or not eating meats forbidden in the Law? the Reason he gives, v. 14. I know and am perswaded by the Lord Iesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that estesmeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean; the Apostle is speaking of meats, of which not by Moses, but by the Lord Ie∣sus, he knows none unclean in it self, therefore not blood; but if a man be conceited through ignorance, or conscience, to that man any thing, were it bread, it is unclean: He perswades therefore that though
men by Christ may eat any thing yet if any Brother be grieved, for his eating any meat forbidden by the Law, he would not have him cause his Brother to sin. For the kingdom of God is not in meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these things serveth Christ, is acceptable to God and ap∣proved by him. Now if it were so that that Law touching eating of blood were necessary, then a part of the kingdom of God should consist in meat; and though we followed after peace & righteous∣ness, yet could we not, neither should we be acceptable to God without abstaining from meats, or something that were in it self edible: for what is such, is meat. What ever therefore is forbidden as eating of blood is not to be forborn upon any account, but onely upon the weak consciences of our brethren, and in eating or forbearing none ought to judge the other, for God hath received both him that eats: and him that eateth not, vers. 3. Which God would not do, if abstaining from, or eating things edible, had in it self been either a grace or duty. 3 From the Apostles unlimited proposition, 1 Tim. 4. where warning Timothy of some that in the latter days should fall from the faith and teach the doctrine of Devils, Forbidding to mary, and commanding to abstain from meats which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving, of them which beleeve and know th truth, v. 3. Blood is a creature that God hath created for the use and service of man, is in it self edible, and therefore meat. God was pleased for a time, to forbid the eating of blood, having appointed it for his own Altar, to make an atonement for the sin of the soul; but now Christ being come, and his blood shed, which was Typified by that, No man is now to judge us in respect of meat, Col. 2.16. The time is expired: and he that under the Gospel preacheth up the use of forbearing meat, as a point of Doctrine, binding the con∣sciences of men, under what seeming purity soever, is but a mes∣senger of Sathan, and his doctrine the doctrine of Devils, &c. To prevent an Objection which might have been raisd against that which the Apostle is asserting, suppose blood eating, he affirmes that eve∣ry creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be recei∣ved with thanksgiving, v. 14. But are there not some creatures that
are in themselves good, yet for us to eat them, it is a sin, and a part of unholiness? No says the Apostle, Every creaturo is good, & none is to be refused, for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, v. 5. Suppose S. Paul to have blood before him, he is not afraid to eat: he hath cra∣ved a blessing, by which it is Sanctified, and he wil eat: for no creature is to be refused: and these things if Timothy teach, he shall be a good Minister of Iesus Christ, v. 6. He is not a Minister of the Law, and therefore he is not to look to that, but of Christ, and what the Word of God and Prayer hath sanctified, (and they sanctifie every creature,) let no man call it impure unlawfull, and if they do (as what will not some men do) we are to avoid them, they are sedu∣cing Spirits, and teachers of lyes: not apprehending the Law of the Counsel, and the reason of that Law, nor comparing it also with other Scriptures, makes the ignorant and unlearned wrest this, as wel as other Scriptures to their own hurt and the Churches distur∣bance, making this not eating blood to be a standing law in the Gospel, upon the account of sin, when by the Apostles themselves, it is made no more necessary, then that of not eating what was Sacrificed to Idols, a thing by that faithfull Labourer in the Gospel, Saint Paul, in it self lawful enough to be done, but to be forhorn, for the sake of the consciences of others; and yet that very forbearance but for a time, till ignorance did turn to perverseness, and the Iiws weak∣ness became stubornness, then other doctrine was taught. but still having a regard to the peace of the Church, the ground of Iames his determination, which otherwise in point of Doctrine, did agree to Paul and Peter, in opposing every part of the Ceremonial Law, yet it seemed good in regard the Iewes, in a great measure were not yet unchurched, nor wholy cast off, for their sakes to forbear meats in themselves lawful enough, as blood was since Christs was shed. But to teach now as a matter of faith, the forbearance of any thing edible▪ particularly blood, the Iews being wholly unchurch∣ed, and the Gospel confirmed, is not of God but of Satan. For every creature, and therefore this is Sanctified, by the Word of God and Prayer, and by the Lord Jesus, we know now that no∣thing is nclean of it self. And that the Kingdome of God consists in no part of it in meat, & that God hath accepted us whether we eat or not. And he that teacheth so is a Minister of Christ, and he
that teacheth otherwise, a messenger of the Devil, 1 Tim. 4.1. and 6. Quest. 8 Why would God suffer his dearest Saints, to lie under such sad afflictions as are mentioned in Scripture, and whether the book of Job be a real History. That Gods people groaned under National grievances and under personal troubles, is known to all that can but read; the causes possibly are not so well known; we shall for their information discover some. 1 To punish them for their sin. Thus were the Israelites pressed under the Heathen Princes so often in the Book of Iudges. This made Absalom rebel against David, and brought Ierusalem it self to ruine. 2 To prevent their sin. Gods afflictions and his scourges kept them from setling on the lees; it kept the rust from them; he would teach them experience by suffering, he would frame them according to his own heart. Davids afflictions before he came to the Throne, made him the holier in it. 3 That the wicked might fill up the measure of their sin; the godly may be crushed, that the wicked may triumph, that he may sport and take delight in mischief, when he brings his wicked devices to pass, Psal. 73.18. 4 That the graces of God might be exercised in them; None but hath a talent, and all that have, must improve it. Grace if not scoured by affliction, will rust in the most heavenly heart. Where God hath given beauty, he will have it seen; and where he
hath given gifts, he will have them used. Abrahams Faith, Noahs Obedience, Iosephs Fear, Pauls Sincerity, Iobs Patience, Nao∣mies Constancy, Ruths Affection, and Davids Trust, God will put to the touchstone. 5 That the Name of God might be glorified by them. God hath brought in a great revenew of praise, to the Exchequr of his own glory, by casting his people into many difficulties, and when they have called upon his Name, by delivering them out of them all. David had not sung possibly so sweetly in the Palace of Ierusalem, had he not mourned in the Wilderness of Iudah; God loves to hear his children pray, and also to praise his Name, and to attain both, he uses the rod of affliction. 9 To make them examples to the Saints that shall follow after them. Davids afflictions, doth the present age good: for by them, they learn to keep the law of God. Iacobs hard lodging, shews us, that God will be with them that wait upon him in the poorest condition. The troubles of Iob, the patience of Iob, and the issue of Iob, is a soveraign remedy and antidote aginst despair, in any or the greatest calamity; but this brings us to a second part of the question, Whether Iob be a real History? There are that would have that book only what Iob says himself is, (viz.) A shadow, Job. 17.7. They would have it to be no more real, then the Parable of the Rich man and Lzarus. They sup∣pose that such troubles could not really fall upon a man, but they must sinke him, such crosses would have broke a mans heart, much more his patience. It is true indeed, that Iobs History is ushered in by a Parable drawn from Kings and Princes courts, where in mat∣ters of concernments, all parties, as well accusers as defendents, meet together, in those words; Now there was a day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them, denoting the readiness of Angels, either to give an acount of what they had done, or to receive a Commission for something to be done; and to discover the malice or envie of Satan, watching all opportunies for the destruction of man; But of the History, that is, the man Iob; of the Countrey he lived in, of the Children, and riches that he had, of the troubles that be∣fell him, and of the glory that he afterward received, we have no
more reason to doubt of, then of the history of Noah, of Abraham, of Moses, of David, or of any other of the Patriarchs. For, 1 Here are real names, real countreys, and kindreds described; no such thing is ever done in Parables. we have no account of the Prodigals name nor of his Fathers, nor what Countrey he dwelled in, as here. In that Parable, Luk. 16. We have the Beggar named Lazarus, which might be a common name as well as a proper, sig∣nifying the help of God, or one helped of God; but now in this History we have proper: The land of Vz, or Edom, Lam. 4.21. Iob was a man of that Land, probably the same that is called Iobab the son of Zerah, that was King of Edom, Gen. 36.33. differing only as Iacob and Israel, or as Saul and Paul. Here is Eliphaz the Temanite, a son of Esaus, the Fathes of the Edomites, Gen. 36. 10, 11. Bildad the Shuhite, Abrahams son by Keturah, Gen. 25.2. Zophar the Naamathite, not improbably of the City of Naamab, a City in Iudah, towards the Coast of Edom, Iosh. 15.21, 41. Though in other Authors then the Scripture we read that Ninensis was the rich mans name at whose door Lazarus begged; yet there is in that parable, that which will not permit it to be any other then a parable; and to say it was Herod and Iohn the Baptist, as some do, is but a declaration that they have neither studied the Parable well, nor the history of the Baptist exactly; but now in Iob, there is no more reason to suspect the name then to suspect Davids, or his friend Husha the Archites: neither is there any thing in the story that may not stand with truth; they are living rational learned men; and for them to speak together is no wonder. There are such time∣ly descriptions of persons, of cattle, of countries, of kindred, of places, as cencurs in no parable whatsoever, but in all circum∣stances holds out a true history. 2 The Holy Ghost numbers the man Iob among such as were really and in nature existent, speaking of Israel, Eze. 14.14. Though these three men, Noah Daniel and Iob were in it, they should deliuer but their own souls. Let no man say that Ib is but a shadow, since God said he was a man, had a soul and a righteous soul; and seeing we doubt not but there were such men as Noah, and Daniel, why should we doubt of Iob? Iob indeed wished that his birth day
might not be inserted in the Kalender: but these men would blot him out of the book of the Nativities, to give him no Mother but a mans brain: yet since God hath numbered him among reall Saints, he shall pass for a man, a righteous man with the Author, until such time at he sees him a man, as Iob knew he should see his Re∣deemer. 3 The Holy Ghost holds forth both sides of Iob as a double motive unto perseverance, a circumstance no Parable is at tended with so long after the Parable made: how often do we hear repeated the story of the rich glutton? where or in what place do we hear the story of the prodigal urged in the Epistles? Now Iob being alive, and his Tragicomedy upon the stage,Iob is said to have flourished Anno 2330. Moses brought the people  of Aegypt, An. 2453. before or in the time of Moses, which must be the time of Iobs living, in regard Iob sacrificed in his own land, which he ought not to have done: neither would God either before, or at that time, have accepted any sacrifice but in Ierulalem, neither ought Iob to have sacrificed at all, whe∣ther there or in Ierusalem: since he was no priest: besides in those pssages of Gods dispensations towards men, used much in this book, something would have been spoken of those wonders of those Laws that God shewed and gave his people Israel, of which there is not one syllable: for Iames then to bring Iob as a pattern of patience, o long after the troubles of Iob, is a clear demonstra∣tion of its verity. The words of the Apostle, are these Iames 5▪ 10.11. Take my Brethren, the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of pati∣ence; behold we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pittiful, and of tender mercy: shall we imagine that the Apostle would be so far forgetful of the evil consequences of this arument, as to urge it if it had not been without exception? For perswading them to give heed to the Prophets who suffered, and make them our example, and in naming of them who had suffer∣ed really, to hold up one who was a meer shadow, a seigned history, a Iob, and tell the world how he suffered, and how he endured, because might the people say, he never felt, do we think that he would have let pss all those that truly were afflicted, and hold up one that never was? But why would he say that they had seen the
end of the Lord, as concerning Iob, when they might answer, Iob had never a beginning? Nay he concludes that they by Iob might see that the Lord was very pittiful and of tender mercy, which had been a very mocking of God, had not that history been real. For what object could that Chimera be of pitty, what provocation for the Almighty to be tender of that man who was never born, never breathed? 4 It hath been looked upon as real history and no Parallel, in all the Churches of God: the Iews in their generations, looked upon it as a true history and not a fiction:He came out of his afflictions, An. 2332. the Church of Christ in the times of the Apostles eyed it never as a Parable: and therefore in this age we should reverence it as a truth, and esteem Iob for a Holy Saint and patient sufferer. Quest. 9. Whether there be any difference between the old and new Testament, and why the Scriptures are called a Testa∣ment? In Scripture the Old and the New Testament are often opposed the one to the other, the Old sometimes signifying that covenant of works, or that of the Law, as Ier. 31.31. and sometimes again that covenant of grace made with Abraham, and in him to all his seed. In this sence doth the Question take the Old Testament; and by the New that covenant of grace which God in Christ made with believers, is signified: now these two insubstance are one and the same: agreeing. 1 In their Author, they were both made by one and the self same God: he that was the Lord God of the Hebrews, is Lord God of the Christians. 2. In their Mediator, the same Christ that we believe in, they believed in; the same Lord Jesus by whose blood men are re∣conciled to God, was spoken of by the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.10. 3. In the parties; the Old Testament was made with Gods own
people, his chosen ones, this New is made with his people now. 4. In the issue or end: Eternall life was the Reward then, so it is now: glory and the enjoyment of God, peace and safety in Abra∣hams bosome then was the reward of a Righteous life: the same now: the same Heaven for duration, for happinesse, was proposed to be∣lievers, which is now. In these substantiall things no difference be∣tween the Old and the New Testament, but they are one and the same to all intends and purposes, and are not divided in the sub∣stance, but in the manner of the Administration of the same they are different. As, 1. In their extension: the old Covenant or Testament was made with one single man, family or Nation. At most it was confined in the borders of Israel. They only were the people of God: but now the New is enlarged over all. It is taught to all-Nations. Act. 13.47. 2. In the clearnesse: the Old Testament held out a Mediatour and eternal life, under typs, as offerings and washings, and divers sorts of cleansings; now the New Testament holds out Christ the sanctifier and puriier of the soul clearly and fully, and eternall life most evident and plain. 3. In their Seals; the seals of the Old was circumcision▪ and the Paschal Lamb: he that would have eat of the Passeover, must first be circumcised. The Seals of the new are baptisme and the Lords Supper: and he that would eat of our bread, and drink of our cup, must first be washed with our water. 4. In their easinesse: the Law was full of Cermonies; yea so full that it is called a yoak which was not able to be born. Act. 15.10. they were to do so much duty, put to so many journies, three times every year to Ierusalem from all parts of Iudea: they were at so great charges, that the Church might very well be said to be in bondage. Gal. 4.25. Now the yoak of the Gospell is light and easie. Matth, 11.30. 5. In their duration. Many of those Laws that God gave his people, were to passe away, being only for a time, but the Laws of the New are all binding, and can admit of no alteration, untill all things shall be dissolved.
But let us come to the second Part of the Question, Why the Scri∣ptures are called a Testament? That the Scripture is called a Testament, is clear, Heb. 9.15. with this difference, that the Law is called the first Testament, and the Gospell the New; not that it is of a distinct natre from the Old or the first; it is called only new in regard of the pblication of it to believers, being delivered and taught in another way, and by other means then the first, as without shadows and dark types, by Christ a Son, not by Moses a servant. It was writ upon tables of Stone, this upon the tables of the heart, which makes it look as it were a new thing, when for substance it is the same with the other: It's called a Testament 1. In respect that it is the last will of God, touching those bles∣sings that he will give his children, and a full of Will God, wherein are all the duties he requires of his people, recorded and inserted. 2. In respect it was confirmed by the death and sufferings of Christ: he was the Lamb slain before the beginning of the World. Revel. 8.31. Matth. 26.28. For this is my blood of the new Testa∣ment, &c. For where a Testament is, there must also be a Testa∣tor. Heb. 9.17. Having therefore the blood of Christ sealing this his last will, it is called a Testament. 3. In respect there is no addition to, nor no diminution oght to be made of it. When the Testator is dead there is nothing oght to be took from his Will, nor nothing put to his Will. Now Christ having fulfilled both Law and Prophets with his blood, hth sealed them by his death, and hath threatned them that adde to or take from it, Rev. 22.18.19. it is called, and that fitly, a Testa∣ment.
Quest. 10. Why are there some things in Scripture hard o be understood and whe∣ther the Scripture can dwell richly in those that cannot read? That there are in Scripture some things hard to be understood, is both arrested by S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.3.16 and known by the expe∣rience of the Saints, who dayly pray that their eyes may be opened, to behold the wonderous things therein written, Psal. 119.18. which yet sufficeth not to maintain as the Church of Rome, the imperfe∣ction of the Scripturs. For 1. It is but some things; it is not all hard to be understood: we easily understand the whole meaning of the Law and Prophets. In loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and our neighbour as our selves, Matth. 22.37. 2. Every thing that is necessary for salvtion, is most easie, it is plain before us. This commandement which I command thee this day, it is not to hide from thee, says God, Deut. 30.11. And who dare say it is otherwise? but observe, when any thing is said to be hard in Scripture, or obscure, as the doctrine of the Trinity, of the incarnation, or the resurrection, it is to be understood either in the mstry it self, or in the manner of its delivery; now the my∣stery is in it self inscrutable, cannot be understood nor fathomed by the wit of man; we are not able throughly to apprehend the grat mystery of the three persons, the glory of heaven, the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, the nature of Angel, the eternal decrees; but the manner of their handling, that is, that these things are so, is clear and manifest, and held out to us for to believe; which last is necessary to salvation not, the other; we may be happy though we cannot comprehend the nature of the Trinity, yet we must belive it. The resurrection is an Article of our Creed, that is, we believe
it, and the ground of our belief is clear in Scripture, though the thing it self be above our prehension. 3. We ought to expect some hard things in Scripture; it is no wonder to hear God speaking like himself, he is delivering his own mind; and sometimes he will speak according to his own con∣ception; yet that makes the Scripture no more imperfect then a man who knows not how the souls acts, his bones grow, nor how the watery humour of his eyes keeps a fixed place, moves, and how his soul by that humour discerns colours, how the soul by the self same ea jdges of diversity of sounds, is to be judged not a perfect man. There are in nature many hidden mysteries: and shall men won∣der to find some in the book of God? to come to the Question, he purposely in his Scriptures conceals something from us, and speaks soe thing therein which is hard to be understood, 1. To keep us humble; knowledge is often times a cause of puffing up. God foresees that men would be apt to be conceited and raised up, should they comprehend his meaning: therefore in divine things he wisely orders, that all shall not be understood, to keep down pride, and bridle arrogance. 2. To stir us up to diligence: by this doing God intends to set us a working, that by searching and praying for the spirit, we might the better be brought to know what God would have us to do. 3. To hold up the dignity of his word: were it plain, men would quickly contemn it: Ministers would be slighted whose office is to open it: to save his word therfore from being vilified, he is pleased to wrap, up some of it in the clouds of prophesies, dark sentences, visions, that we may set the greater value upon it, and men in their reading may have the more reverend thoughts of it, which brings us to the second part of the Question, whether it may dwell richly, &c. Which we shall answer briefly. There are four wayes by which Christians may come to the knowledge of Scripture: that is, by reading, by hearing, by remem∣bring, by discourseing; he that cannot read, may have the Scri∣ptures dwelling richly in him to salvation, by the oher three means. Yet 1 Whose fault is it thou canst not read? thy unwillingness, or crosseness, or thy parents neglect or carelesseness? if thy self be in the
fault, the greater is thy sin; be the more earnest unto God in acts of contrition and repentance. 2. Hast thou not spent as much time in toys, and in sin, as thou mightest have learned to read in, supposing thou wert brought up in ignorance? if so, redeem the time by a double diligence. 3. Be more humble before God: the less help thou hast of thy self, call to God for more; those that read, must have Gods bles∣sing before they profit, and grace before they be righteous. Thou shalt have grace if thou beest humble, Iames 4.6. 4 Be more diligent in other Ordinances; if thou hast not skill to read, yet hast thou ears to hear? Faith comes by hearing Rom. 10, 17. and by hearing of the word, it may dwell richly in the salva∣tion; 1 Cor. 15.2. But this brings us to the second direction above proposed for the Words in dwelling, viz. Of hearing the Scriptures, that is, to suffer our selves to receive the knowledge of the Scripture, by its being opened, taught or expounded; this is done two wayes. 1. Authoritatively and pb∣lickly, proper to the Gospel Ministry, which is commonly called preaching. 2. Charitably and privately, common to all belie∣vers, called in the Text teaching; we shall first speak of the pub∣lick, proper to the ordained Ministers of the Gospel, and in Or∣der to it, handle three Ordinances contemned in this age, which are as adjuncts or circumstances to this Authoritative way of teach∣ing: these are 1. The time of preaching. 2. The place of preaching. 3. The party that preacheth. The party that doth or should teach, is the Minister of the Go∣spel, appointed and separated thereunto, by Apostolical Ordi∣nation: the place of teaching is that which commonly and autho∣ritatively is called the Church; we shall speak of these in Order, be∣ginning with the time of teaching, which is either Ordinary, as the sabbath, or extraordinary as the times of fasting and feasting ap∣pointed by the Church, of all which we shall discourse somewhat,
and something briefly, beginning with the ordinary time of teach∣ing, (viz.) the sabbath. CHAP. V. Of the sabbath. TO every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven, saith the kingly preacher, Eccl. 3.1. At all times God is to be worshipped and served by the sons of men; but the sabbath is the special time wherein those that fear him, singularly serve him. When that beginneth, then begin they, as men in the dayes of Enoch, Gen. 4.26. to call upon the name of the Lord, more solemnly, fervently, orderly and publickly, in obedience to his Law. In prosecution of this Ordinance we shall let pass many distinctions made of sabbaths; and particularly handle these points. 1. What a sabbath is. 2. How the sabbath is to be kept. 3. Why God would have it kept. 4. What sabbath it is, that men now under the Gospel are bound to keep. 5. Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. 1. A sabbath may be thus described; It is one whole day in seven. 2. Separated from other dayes. 3. Wherein a man resteth. 4. From all other works. 5. And recreations. 6. In a holy and spiritual manner. 7. To serve and worship the living God, in a publick so∣lemn way.
1. It is one whole day in seven] a full day consisting of 24 hours; beginning at the midnight before, and continuing until the mid∣night after; other dayes are of that length, and the sabbath ought not to be shorte, Acts 20.17. Paul continued preaching on the first day of the week until midnight. The Iews had a time of prepara∣tion for the sabbath, Luke 23.54. which begun about three of the clock the day before the sabbath, wherein all work was laid aside, and all Artificers prohibited work saving Shomakers, and Tay∣lors; and they had onely but half the time of preparation allowed them▪in this it were to be wished that Christians were Iews, &c. 2. Separated from other dayes] the sabbath is distinguished from other dayes; it is holy, it is set a part by God for his own use and service; she is Queen of all other dayes, and Lady of the week: the rest are attending her but as concubines and handmaids. 3. Wherein a man resteth] by this particle man is included all tht is his he is head of his Wife, Father of his Children, Lord of his servants, and Master of his beasts: when he rests, he is to see tht all about him rest also: from this day, the day is named. Sabbath signifieth rest, and judgement shall rest on him that will not rest with all that belongs unto him. 4. Fom all other works] what ever trade or occupation he be of; and what ever work he follow at other times, must be laid a∣side at this time: no servile work is to be done now, without sin∣ning against God: and he that doth so, sinneth against his own soul: no buing nor selling of Merchant ware, no dealing in husbandry, N b. 13.15. no carrying of burthens, Ier. 17.22. no outward ser∣vile bdily labour mst be performed: it would distract the soul and keep it from doing that for which this day was consecrated. 5. And recreations] This is a time wherein there is no time for sports and recreations; that God that would not have us work, never made the sabbath for us to play: these distract the soul much therefore we are not to touch them; it may be lawful with Samson to propose ridles at another time, but not now: for it is the sabbath of the Lord thy God, Isa. 58.13. 6. In a holy and spiritual manner] The Law is spiritual, and therefore birds the souls of men: an outward resting from work, is but Sabbatum Asinorum; there ought to be a difference between
the resting of a man and the resting of his Ox: we must therefore rest from our works of sin; but of this hereafter. 7. To serve and worship the living God in a publick solemn way] when God had made man, he rested from all his works, to shew that man was to be eternal, and he instituted the sabbath, as a type of that eternal test wherein man was to worship him for ever. God ought to be, must be served every day, but in the sabbath more publickly if it can be; or more solemnly, if otherwise, Acts 13 14, 15, 16.44. Acts 16.23. and Iohn 20.19. SECT. II. The sabbath being known, we are to inquire how this holy day is to be kept. God will not have his sabbath polluted, Is. 56.6. Other days, by the Hebrews were called prophane, this being by God made holy, holding it unlawful to rost an apple, to pluck an herbe, nay to defend themselves when they were assaulted by their enemies, by which a thousand of them were slain, 1 Macch 2.38. The sabbath must be kept; and our rest is onely sanctified and approved of God, when we use the means, and do the works of sanctification; our resting must not be an idleness▪ but in doing the work of God which is our sanctification, Ex. 20.20. 1. By using the means, as hearing the word 4 Luke 20. praying to God, Acts 16.3. receiving the Sacraments of Christ, Acts 20.7. and all Acts that may conduce to the strengthening of grace, con∣firming in faith. 2. By doing good works, as relieving the poor, 1 Cor. 16.2. teach∣ing the ignorant, Acts 18.26. reclaiming the erroneous, Acts 17.1, 2 3 and all other Acts that have an immediate tendency to the e∣difying of the Church; and these things must be done both pri∣vaely and publickly. 1. Privately, as Meditation upon the Word, and inward appli∣cation of it to a mans soul.
2. Publickly; conferring with others, ing the sick, praying for them, or if it may be, singing some comfortable Psalm with them; and that all these may be the better done, we must prepare our selves 1. By removing all hinderances the night before; overmuch bu∣sinesse may and will distract the soul, and keep a man, either from all or from part of Gods worship: the first burning of our Christian incense may be sweetest: the first prayer may do us most good, &c. 2. By putting our souls in a holy frame some time before. Me∣ditate upon. Eccles. 5.1.28. Gen. 17.10. Numb. 3.1. Mar. 35. Isa. 2.56. Which may compose and put the spirit of man in a san∣ctified frame of heart, to join in affection to the prayers of the Church, and cause him to heed with affection the Word of Christ, and that both Forenoon and Afternoon, Eccles. 11.6. or then so far as in thee lies, thou robbest God of half his due, the whole day being his: that this may be done. 1 Prevent or quash all domestical or house-troubles. Levit. 19. 3. Discords, contentions and heart-burnings are but as water to quench the re of holynesse: and may extend to the prophaning of Gods Sabbaths: beware of coming before God with this strange fire, least he consume thee. 2. By meditating of our wants: bethinking while thou art fit∣ting thy self, to go to Gods house, what mercies thou wantest, what grace thou lackest; if patience, trust, hope, faith, knowledge, ask accordingly &c. 3. By calling to mind thy particular sins, and sacrifice them in thy Closet, or at least bind them hand and foot, and let them be slain in publick: never spare for their crying. 4. Know that thou art to do nothing else; lose not thy labour, by a carelesse performing of duty, seeing God hath called thee from thy ordinary employment; and to be outwardly in his work only, may make thee lose the reward of all. Follow therefore that, since thou art allowed no work besides these following. 1. What is for comelinesse, decency, and honesty, as putting on of neat and cleanly apparel.
2 What is for necessity, as milking of beasts, dressing of meat, foddering of Cattle, Matth. 12.1.5. 11. 3. What is for charity: so Physicians and Mid-Wives may work. In those cases man is not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath was made for man. People may walk a journey to Gods service, and Ring Bells for Gods people. Numb. 10.2, 3. Nay watch and Ward, nay be set to secure Gods people. Neh. 13.19. All these rending to the great end of keeping the Law, and sanctifying Gods name. SECT. III. God is pleased though he be a Lord of all, to give his people a reason why he would have them keep this day holy to himself; let us see why it was instituted, and why it is continued. 1. It is Gods own property from the beginning. It was his own from the first and it shall and must be his untill the last. Untill the time come that the whole Church celebrates an Eternal Sabbath with himself, this Sabbath shall be kept for himself. 2. It is a Type of mans happinesse to everlasting. Six days God gives man to work in, but in the Seventh he must not work; he must not think his own thoughts: he must rest from sin, and labour for his God; shadowing out that rest that man shall enjoy from all his labour and from all sin, in the new Ierusalem. 3. It is beneficial to the creatures: while they have a being, the beasts of the earth are preserved in it; and by reason of sin, servants are continued to till the ground: by this precept God provides well for beasts, and servants, that they should not be op∣pressed by harsh, cruel, or covetous msters. 4. It is coninued that men might keep the doctrine of the Creation more firm in their memory; God having created the world and the creatures therein, men might contemplate and
behold the wonderful works of God, and read therin Lectures of his power; he beheld all his works and he saw them good when he had been six dayes in making of them, he will therefore have men to see the same, when they have been six dayes making use of them. 5. Because of that blessing which he gave the sabbath at its first instituting: he blessed the Earth, and by vertue of that blessing at this day it brings forth herbs yielding seed, by which man is preserved; he blessed the sabbath, yea and it shall be blessed: that is, be a means whereby man may receive by Holy Duties, saving graces, that he may be happy: he ordained it for no good it could do himself; neither is it Holy, through any holiness in it, but it is a time designed for the service of a Holy God, in whose service onely men are blessed; and by sanctifying his name this day, by setting themselves apart from the world, for the duties of it, God sanctifies their hearts by setting them apart from the wicked by his word, for the glorifying of them. SECT. IV. We have them amongst us that are for no sabbath at all: we have those that are onely for the Jewish: let us therefore see what sabbath that is, which day of the seven, we are under the Gospel bound to keep, and sanctifie by a Holy resting from our or∣dinary imployment. That a sabbath or one day in seven is to be kept, the Scripture is clear: that that sabbath kept by the Iews was the sixth day from the Creation, is more then probable: that the sab∣bath of the Christian Church, is the first day of the week, is easie to be defended, the Jewish sabbath being changed. In which defence we shall distinctly speak to these three things. And 1. See that there is such a change. 2. The Authors of that change. 3. The reason of that change.
We read in several places of the Apostles going into the Iew∣ish Synagogues on the sabbath day, to preach the word of God unto the people; they bearing for a time with the infirmity of the Iews, kept in a publick manner both their sabbaths and their feasts, Acts 13.15. Acts 20.16. yet so that they alwayes Implied some freedom gotten by Christ, and therefore daily met. But when as the Iews grew perverse, and urged a necessity of those things, then the Apostles stood to their liberty, and changed the day quite and clean, and wrot to the Churches not to heed the sabbath, that is, the seventh day from the creation; for instance, Col. 2.16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New-Mooner of the sabbath dayes? every thing here is Jewish, which the Colossians being pressed by some to observe, the Apostle would not have them be startled for meat or drink, or New-Moons or sabbath days; for since Christ is come, these are not to be observed. At the difference of meats is taken away by Christ, so is the sabbaths; for you must note in all the Gospel the Christains day of rest is never called the sabbath, and therefore not now to be observed by them, or taught unto them. It is to be observed that in the body of the fourth Commande∣ment, which is onely binding in respect of its being moral (for all those after Laws, as not kindling fires, were not written upon the mount with the finger of God on tables of stone) God commands simply the seventh day to be observed, speaks not of the seventhday from the creation, but gives and allows men six, and the seventh to be his; which is done even in the Gospel, by setting apart for his service one day in seven, the moral Law requiring no more, which seventh day the Iews in their worship make the last day of the week and by it keep the Law: the Christians in their worship make it the first day of the week not contradicted by the Law, God leaving himself a power to alter or not alter the day as he saw good, without infringing any of those Laws which he appoint∣ed should be binding: the same God therefore that spoke to the Iews on Mount Sinai, for keeping of the seventh or sabbath day, indifferently forbids the Colossians to observe the sabbath the se∣venh day from the creation stricty. But shall the Colossians keep no day for the service of God?
shall they rest from their labours no time? withot question our A∣postle had taught that Church to keep one day in seven; he was a wise master-builder, and could not  in so necessary a point to give them his judgement; we conclude therefore that that day that was kept by the Apostles and the Churches where they were, was taught also to the Churches where they were not; which caused the Collossians to be judged in not keeping the Jewish b∣bath: and that made the Apostle write to them so punctually against sabbaths. Now the day that the Apostles kept, and the Church with them, is generally called the first day of the week (never the sabbath) of which we have these remarkable passag, holding forth a change. 1. Our Saviours resurrection, Mat. 28. he sleeped in the grave the Jewish sabbath, & left it behind him wrapped in the grave clothes; as he had by his death & burial put an end to all Ceremonial Laws, so to the Ceremony of the sabbaths being precisely the seventh day from the Creation. 2 Col. 16. on only day in seven being moral, we have this shadowed out untosis more clearly then that idle Ro∣manist Paleatus, who took great pains to write about the shape or shadow of our Saviours body in the linnen cloth wherein he was buried; we are sure that the Jewish sabbath was but a type or sha∣dow of that day of rest, that even on earth was to be kept. 2. Our Saviours apparition, Iohn 20.19 the same day at even∣ing being the first day of the week, he appeared to all his Disci∣ples vers. 19. And after eight dayes; he appeared again: which must be the same day of the week. On the Jewish sabbath, if the Disci∣ples should be gathered together to worship God, yet they behold not Christ, but being gathered together on the first day of the week, Christ comes and preaches to them, & confirms their faith in that he is the Son of God, and so declared by his rising from the dead. 3. The Spirits descension, Acts 2.1. the Holy Ghost did chuse this day to baptize the Apostles: And when the day of Pente∣cost was fully come, ther were al wi one accord in one place, &c. And there appeared  even  as of Fire, &c. That this was no other then the frst day of the week, may easily be proved: for that our Saviour was crucified at the feast of the Passe∣over, is clear in Scripture; and that the day after our Saviours
death, was the Paschal sabbath feast, on which the Iews rested, Luke 23.5.6. Now from the keeping of the passeover, or from the Paschal sabbath feast, (for at our Saviours death that feast happened on the sabbath & the preparation was not so much in re∣gard of it, as in regard of the sabbath, as, Ioh. 19.14. compared with Luke 23.5, 6. and Mark 15.42.) is just fifty days, the fiftieth day from the passeover must be the feast of Pentecost, Levit. 23.15, 16. which feast shall fall on the sabbath. Now the day of Pentecost was fully come before the Spirit discended, that is, the day or first day of that feast, he came not down in the beginning of it, not in the middle, but when it was fully come, that is the day fully fi∣nished, at its compleating the Apostles were gathered together with one accord, that is, in the beginning of the day after, be∣times they were met according to agreement without doubt to worship God; for the spirit came, and the multitude was gathered, and all before the third hour of the day, which is our nine of the clock. An argument made use of by Peter to prove that neither he nor his fellow Apostles were drunk as was supposed; many such circumstances fully shew that the sabbath was passed, and the day of the feast fully come, that is, compleated and ended. God therefore chusing this day to inspire his servants with his own spirit, to imbolden them in the preaching of his word; and they preaching upon that day, baptizing upon that day, taking no notice of the Jewish sabbath, is an argument of its change God giving them the spirit of doctrine, not on the Jewish resting day, but on the first day of the week: in regard that not that but this was the day wherein God appointed men should be taught in a more solemn way the wonderful works of God, of Christs resur∣rection from the dead, and of salvation to all those that believe in his name. 4. The Sacraments Administration, Acts 20.7. it is thus writ∣ten, And upon the first day of the week when the Disciples ea  to∣gether to break bread, Paul preached; the Jewish sabbath was kept by the Iews immediately before; at the close of it, and beginning of the next day the Disciples came together; that is, believers or Christians, as if it had been customary, and they came to hear the word and receive the Sacraments, to break bread, &c. And Paul
preached until midnight, which is the close of the sabbath. Now why should the Christians design and appoint meetings, forbear working, spend the day in Ordinances, continue at that so long, ex∣cept the time of rest had been changed? they would rather have done it on the sabbath day that was immediately gone before, then on this, if there had not been a change made. 5. The poors collection: The Apostles 1 Cor. 16.1, orders the Members of that Church, that upon the first day of the week every one lay by him in store as God hath prospered him, concerning col∣lections for the Saints. Now why should this office of Charity of setting apart some small piece of money for the use of the poor be done upon the first day of the week, but because of this that that day being the day set apart for the serving and worshipping of God, they should set apart some of their goods for the poor Saints of God; charity being alwayes a work accompanying the sabbath? and he informs them also, that he had given the same Or∣der to the Churches of Galatia, vers. 1. The first day of the week they must also Remember the poor, and not on the seventh. 6. The Divine Revelation; what time was it that God was pleased to make known to his servant Iohn the things that were to be hereafter? it was on the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. as we call it the Lords Supper, because of his institution; and his Church, because of his presence there in an especial way; so there can no oher reason be given, why any day should be called the Lords day more then another, (for it is manifest that Iohn is speaking of some particular time) but in respect either of his institution, or some special Act that was done, or day that was dedicated for the Lords service in a particular manner above or more then other days: And without doubt this day at or before that time was com∣monly called the Lords day, for we read it was a common question among Christians, Servasti Dominicum, keepst or hast thou kept the Lords day? the answer was, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum. I am a Christian, I must keep it: and that day being commonly so called, Saint John calls it so likewise, as either set apart for him or instituted of him; which brings us to the next thing to be considered (vi)
2. The Authors of that change. The keeping of the Christian sabbath, or the observing of the first day of the week for the day of rest in the Church of Christ, whence was it? from heaven or of men? it is answered, from heaven; by Heavens great Trumpeter we are freed from any duty to the Jew∣ish feasts or sabbaths: from Heaven therefore doth our liberty come: but whether first appointed by Gods Son, or by Christs Apostles, the Scripture is silent: but that it was done by the spirit of God in one of them, is certain. We read that Christ carried forty dayes with his Disciples after his resurrection, speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. What things conduced to the honour and glory of God; how the Church should be ruled, ordered and guided, did our Sa∣viour without question speak of: there is written enough for us to believe: but all that he spoke, is not written, Iohn 20.30. Now a∣mong those things this circumstance of time for publick worship might be treated on and spoken off. Christ is Lord of the sabbath, and he might remove it from the last unto the first day of the week. If not changed by him, then without doubt by his Apostles who were in points of such high concernment guided by the in∣fallible spirit of God: they durst not of their own accord teach any thing to any nation, but what he gave them a commandement for, Math. 28.18. And in this case, what he spoke to them in the closet, they might reveale on the house top: and by their preach∣ing, administring the sacraments, Laws touching gathering of col∣lections upon the first day, we are to conclude; that that spirit that led them into all truth, led them also to this practice: and ac∣cording to them in this hath the Church of Christ directly, con∣stantly, holily set apart the first day of the week for the worship, not by its own authority, it being not in the power of the Church, Men or Angels to alter the day, but in him only who is Lord of it, or them who are immediately and infallibly guided by the spirit sent from him; but by example & from the practise of the Holy Apostles this day (viz.) the first of the week is kept for the Lords service, and because of that not unfitly called now, as it was of old, the Lords
day, as instituted by him, or by his Disciples. It is time to see the third thing (viz.) 3. The reason of the change. Go nver changes his will, but he ofen wills a change; darkly it seems to be his will that a change be made in some time of the world; of the circumstance of time required for his own worship. in giving the Law; but to come to the reason of that change from the last to the first day of the week, it might be made 1. From the indifferency of the Law; at the Creation God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it: now while the people were in bondage, it may be questioned, whether the Aegyptians would suffer them to rest, since they were denied three days to sacrifice. God at the establishing of his Law upon the Mount, Exo. 20.2453. years after the Creation, before which time the doctrine of the sabbath was never written. God in the Law makes it moral that men shall for ever work six dayes, and the seventh day they shall rest; says not precisely the seventh from the Creation, but in ge∣neral one day in seventh: now by this the time might be changed, and the Law not at all altered, since mn even under the Gospel gives God one in seven, which is that onely the Law requires. 2. From the proportion of the Law: the Law of the sabbath is because God rested from his work of Creation; the change might be because God the Son rested from his work of redem∣ption, God the Father sanctified the beginning of the seventh day because he then ceased working: God the Son might have the dwning of the first day sanctified, because he then ceased suf∣fering. This is by some thoght to be darkly mean by that Text, Hb. 47.8.9. The work of redemption was greater then that of Creation, being done by the blood of God: and the sabbath day being not precisely commanded on the seventh from the Crea∣ation, he that is Lord of the sabbath, might command it to be kept in memorial of his resurrection (which is  new Creation unto Holiness and good works) whence it might be called the Lords day. 3. From the power that the Lord hath over the . This might
be done that we might know the Son of Man is Lord also of the sab∣sath, Mark 2.28. He hath power over, and he can say to the seventh day from the Creation, Go and it goes: and he can say to the first day of the week Come, and it comes; if the sabbath hasten to come abroad the seventh day, shewing it self to be a day to be rested in, he hath power to forbid its out going until to morrow: he spake to his Disciples of things pertaining to the kingdom of God, which are not written: and the change of this might be one: how∣ever the Spirit that guided the Church by the Apostles, did not erre: Christ having all power given unto him, he gave them a power, to change the day: none durst presume to have altered a sab∣bath that had been instituted of God. Laws made by him, can one∣ly be altered by him: a change there was we know. It must be by some that had power given them, and that was the Apostles who had not the power of themselves, but it was given them by one that had all power, and was Lord particularly of the sabbath, who bound it up in the Napkin that was about his head, with the sacrifices that did attend it, and left them both in a place by them∣selves in his sepulchre, Col. 2.16, 17. 4. From the change of that outward worship enjoyned by the Law: the old sabbath had oblations, circumcisions, sacrifices, wash∣ings, &c. All which were now to be abolished as to their out∣ward act: no circumcision now but that of the heart: no sacrifice but that of prayer and praise: these things being these things being removed, God would also have the day removed; they might dote upon those things still, and to wean them from it, another day is appointed and a new time set for that worship now to be per formed for though some of those parts of worship were continued after Christs death; yet they were languishing, dying and giving up the Ghost, and in a few dayes were quite buried: which though, some amongst us would breath life into again, and make them rise and appear in the Holy City) shall never be seen to live more, since the Church is founded on a rock, and neither Iew nor Greek, Tik, nor Infidel, shall be able to prevaile against her, &c. 5. For the greater honour fo the Lord Iesus Christ: the Iews kept the Law that was given by Moses but behold one greater then Moses is here, who hath altered the day, by which there is more
inquiry made of him, his power, his person, who thus alters the Law, who thus changeth the sabbath: had the Gentiles come in to the Iewis sabbath, Christ had not been so much magnified by it, as he is when both Iew and Gentile come into a sabbath ne∣ver known before, and that upon the authority of Christ: it tends to his honour much, and respect among the people of both sorts. It follows therefore that we in this age are to keep that sabbath kept by the Apostles inspired thereunto by the Spirit of God, and approved of by the Prophets and people of GOd that then were, and blessed by God in all ages of the Church, that hath been since, what ever ignornant, factious Spirits say to the contrary, &c. SECT. V. Questions resolved. Quest. 1. Whether the keeping of a sabbath be a Ceremo∣ny, and so abolished by Christ? Quest. 2. Whether it be lawful to make feasts on the sabbath? Quest. 3. Whether sporting or gaming are to be done upon the sabbath? Quest. 4. Why did God give charge concerning the resting of beasts upon the sabbath? Quest. 5. Why did not God give charge concerning a wifes resting upon the sabbath? Quest. 6. Why is not the change of the sabbath mentioned in Scripture? Quest. 7. Whether the Church may command any other day to be rested on beside the sabbath? Quest. 8. Why doth God put a Remember before the com∣mandement of the sabbath? Quest. 9. Whether the first day of the week may be termed bath or sunday?
Quest. 10. Why is the sabbath called Holy? Quest. 1. Whether the keeping of a Sabbath be a Ceremony and so abolished by Christ. This age fruitful in nothing more then in false doctrine, hath brought forth them that affirm it is purely Iewish to keep a sabbath at all, it being a pure Ceremony abolished by Christ; since whose death every day is Holy and to be kept alike; but we have no such custome, neither the Churches of God, the keeping of a sabbath being moral, and for ever binding, and therefore not ceremonial. For 1. It was instituted and appointed before sinit came not upon, neither was it imposed to man by reason of transgression; therefore was no bondage that he should be freed from it by Christ: fin never brought, it on, for which he wanted no Redeemer to take it off. 2. It is one of the ten Commandements, written in Tables of stone, it is equally moral with the Law against Idolatry, with the Law against Adultery; they were equally pronounced from the mouth of God, Deut. 4.13, 14. Now Ceremonies were all of them instituted by Moses as sent of God. 3. It is not a Ceremony; for it was established or ratified by Christ, which no Ceremony was: for Matth. 24.20. speaking of Ie∣rusalems visitation, he bids them Pray that their flight be not on the sabbath day, so that there must needs be a sabbath that is a day of rest after Christs death. 4. Ceremonies were as a partition wall between Iews and Gen∣tile, to difference the one from the other: but now in this there is no difference, but equally binding all, as is manifest in the Particle Thou, in all the Commandements. 5. Ceremonies were abrogated not changed: but now this Law of the sabbath is changed only, nor abrogated: for what we finde the people of God under the Law doing, or what they ought to have done by vertue of that Law given upon the Mount upon the seventh day, we finde the people of God doing under the Go∣spel,
by vertue of that Law given either by Christ, or by his Apo∣stles through the Spirit upon the first day of the week; so there is no abrogation but a change, which is to be seen in no pure Cere∣mony. Quest. 2. Whether it be Lawful to make feasts on the sabbath. The Disciples going through corn fields upon the sabbath day, being hungry, rubbed some of the corn and did eat, Matth. 12.2. if they could have dined better they would, and it is hard to say that a man is onely to supply the necessities of nature: since the day is Holy to the Lord, he may eat of the fat and drink of the sweet: he may refresh himself. 1. With the society of good and godly people: he may be in that multitude at the Table, as well as go with that multitude that keeps Holy day, Psal. 42.4. 2. With a more enlarged receiving of the creature comforts, God gave man wine which makes glad his heart, oyl to make his face shine, and bread to strengthen his heart, Psal. 104.15. He may therefore dayly drink that wine, eat that bread: that new kinde of religion that holds the necessity fasting upon the sabbath in our days; hath no ground in Scripture: in spite yea rather in sight of these may the Christian spread his Table: he is this day to me∣ditate upon the works of God, chearfully to praise him: the com∣forts of the choicest food may be therefore used of him; if he see his cup run over, let him abound in thankfulness, the 92 Psalm is a Psalm or song for the sabbath, and in a natural way it is no here∣sie to say Thou Lord hast made me glad through thy work, I will triumph in the work of thy hands, vers. 4. yet never use the crea∣ture so. As 1. To be hindered from any part of worship; set not the length of thy feast, keep thy seat empty in the house of God. 2. To be indisposed in any act of devotion; wine was made to make the heart of man'glad, but not to make him lumpish; be∣ware
then of drouziness through immoderate feasting, Remember that of Solomon, hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient. 3. To forget any act of charity: when thou ar fareing well, re∣member poor Lazarus at thy door when he calls: know thou hast good things which he wants: eat not therefore thy morsel alone. It is a day wherein God hath blessed thee by thy charity: bless thou him; it is good husbandry and not impiety this day to cast thy seed upon the furrows of the faces of the poor, that with the fields of the earth, they may clap their hands, shout, yea also sing. Quest. 3. Whether sporting or gameing is to be followed upon the sabbath? The sabbath is appointed for the service of God, and not for the pleasuring of men: by denying sports is not here meant, that men should be sour, sullen or peevish; but whether or no plays, wrestling bowling, fouling, or fishing and the like be to be used this day, or any thing in the like nature it is, denyed it is unlawfull so to do. For. 1. The Scripture forbids, all manner of works, in regard that working distracts the soul, and will not suffer the heart of man to close in a spiritual way to bless and praise the Lord; now who knows not carding, diceing, bowling, cocking, stage-playes, may∣games, wakes do wholly pull back the soul? and indeed who fol∣lows those things, cannot be said to rest so much as his horse. 2. The very end of instituting the sabbath is against these things: that men might in a publick solemn way entertain Com∣munion with God, that they might meditate in his word, read on his Scriptures, that they might be Holy is the sabbath designed: now these sports and their attendants, are so far from conducing to this end, that many of them that so do appear: rather to have Commu∣nion and fellowship with Sathan, then with the Father & the Son
lying swearing, coveting, quarrelling and often times murdering, is the issue of some of them, and snares, traps and temptations to sins are in the bowels of them all. 3. Some of these sports in their own nature seem to many knowing men, to be unlawful at any time; particularly that bru∣ish, and undelightful spectacle of Cock-fighting; for man who is a rational creature to sit and behold, (more usually for covetousness then for delight) these poor creatures destroy one another, through that enmity which he put in them, is unworthy; but possibly the young Gentleman is of another judgement: his conscience as∣sures him it is no sin to behold that spectale. I will not question his judgement, but doing it that day, makes it clear he hath no con∣science. For 4. It lays a platform and foundation for future prophaness: the young usually are the persons subject to those extravagant va∣nities: and he that follows them in this tender years may rather surfeit of them, then willingly lay them down in age; these plea∣sures may leave him, not he them: for pleasure is alwaies upon its young legs, and desires to be sporting. It loves not the company of old men, so well as of their Sons. Now by this there is a root of prophaneness planted, and it may go from generation to ge∣neration; he that is allowed or can allow himself any part of the sabbath to sport in, may in time take half the day, and afterward the whole Day, he may not value the fourth Commandement, and that may make him break the third, which may provoke him to break the sixth, and by a strange progression, doibling his sins, he may grow a Devil incarnate. It is easie to be observed that the Apostacy of this age usually begins at the sabbath: they often quarrel with this first, doubting of its Authority; they are in time resolved: then they doubt of the Assembly, then of the place of worship, then of the parts of wor∣ship; then of the God who is worshipped, &c. Let us therefore of our spending the sabbath have care, and serious thoughts, that sin and iniquity grow not upon us, and the root of prophaneness over∣spread not our families. 5. It put  a reproach upon Christ and casts a scandal upon that Religion we profess. There are but two Religions that keep a sab∣bath
beside the Christian; that is, the Turk and Iew; the former keeping Fryday, the other keeping. Saturnday for set times of worship, who are most precise and strict in their service; refusing to do many things wherein even necessity might excuse them: Shall the Christian therefore that would be thought to serve God after a more true manner, and pretends his sabbath is more Holy then theirs (as it is) give himself to those pleasures and vanities upon his time of worship? this must needs make those Infidels to deride Christ, and by such practises to abhor our profession, and mock at all the other parts of our religion. Quest. 4. Why did God give charge concerning the resting of beasts upon the sabbath? God takes care for Oxen, we may in some sense affirm, since in his own Law out of his mouth he gives charge concerning them: the reasons may be such as these. 1. From that tender care that he bears to all his creatures: the Ox and the Ass, creatures that man useth, are in some sort looked after by God for that life that they lead they have it from him; and he would have their lifes as comfortable to them, as their nature and being is capable of: he hears the young, ravens that cry, Psal. 147.9. and therefore the Ox when he lows for need, or the Asse when he groans underneath his burthen. 2. From that tender care that God would have us bear towards the creatures. He would have us to regard the life of our beast, Prov. 12.10. God provides food for the beasts, and gives them life. and gives them to us as our servants, and we are not cruelly to use them to teach us to pitey that poor Creature that onely in groans calls to its maker God put the  the number of his Comman∣dements whereby we ought to let them rest, for their refreshment and comfort. 3. From that power and authority that God had given man over the creatures: he hath dominion over them, and by vertue of
that, might in violating the Law it self, Command his beast to do so to, which this precept prevents, and will not have his beast to work; he therefore that labours commits a double sin in forcing the beast and working himself, yet the poor creature being forced against its will, and against the Law, man must at the bar of Justice Answer for the offence; yea he may fear that his beast, though no body should know it, should rise up in judgement against him and condemn him, for violating the Law himself, and compelling it to do so likewise: to send therefore Horse and Cart to and fro upon the Lords Day, is a most wicked custome, and will have a smarting recompence in the end. 4. From that type the sabbath bears of that eternal rest wherein bondage shall be taken from every creature. The whole Creation groaneth under that bondage of corruption which lies upon it, Rm. 8.20, 21, 22. and it longs to be delivered, that it may be at liberty; now as a type of that rest which it shall injoy after the re∣surrection, God will have the creatures rest on the weekly sabbath, as well as man. Quest. 5. Why did not God give charge con∣cerning a wifes resting upon the Sabbath. The Person that is spoken to in the fourth Commandement especially, is spoken unto in a triple capacity, first, as a Father, and so there is mention made of his Son and or his Daughter: secondly, as a Master, and so there is mention of his man servant and maid∣servant, and his Cattle, thirdly, as a Magistrate, and so there is men∣tion made of the stranger within his gates; no mention made at all of his relation as a husband, or of any care that he hath to see his wife if he have one, keep the sabbath, the reasons may be such as these. 1. The party spoken to may be a wife, and she is to take care of her Sons and Daughters, her man-servant, her maid-servant, and the stranger within her gates, or within her roof. 2. To shew the mutual love and care that ought to be in all
governours of families, the precept of keeping this Law is not given to one single, but to every one alike; the wife is charged as much as the husband, and the husband no less then the wife, with looking well to their families touching the worship and Law of God. 3. The parties here to be cared for, are the parties usually most apt to break our; the Son, the Daughter, &c. Marriage is honou∣rable, and that in all, and God in this precept so far honours the married woman, that he will not suppose her to transgress; he takes it as it were for granted that she needs not be looked after in that particular. She hath been brought up and looked after by her Fa∣ther and her Mother, when she was a Daughter, and now she be∣ing a wife, she will walk according to her education, and the heart of her husband trusts safely in her. 4. From that oneness that is between a man and his wife: God after he had made two, made these two one again; and whom he had joyned together in marriage, he will not disoyn in a pre∣cept: the husband is the head, the wife therefore must be the body. What is spoken to the head as a duty, nature teacheth the Mem∣bers are to be imployed to perfom. Let thou be said to a husband, yet the man and his wife being but one flesh, the same is spoken to her. Quest. 6. Why is not the change of the Sab∣bath in Scripture mentioned? That the Sabbath is changed, is apparent; why it is changed, and that change not recorded or spoken of, is not made manifest; it might not be mentioned; 1. Because not publickly taught by Christ; he spoke many things in private to his Apostles, Paul intreats the Elders of Ephe∣sus, Acts 20.35. to remember the words of the Lord Iesus how he said, it is more blessed to give then to receive; which words we find not in the history of our Saviours life. The doctrine of the change
might be taught among those that pertained to the kingdom of God, of which the Scripture gives us no account Acts 1.3. If it had been publickly delivered before his death, it had been recorded in the Evangelists. 2. Because the publication of it might have been a great stum∣bling block to the Iews; God is pleased to bring his people on by degrees. After our Savirour came to preach, and after he was a∣scended, the sacrifices of the Law were not forbidden: he never opposed circumcision, the Temple standing, things in some sort went on as before; to have dashed the sabbath in pieces by a publick Law, might have made the people to scruple at Christi∣anity: the Apostles wisely take their liberty to keep the first day of the week, according to the private precept, or in word, instinct of Christ and the Spirit; prohibite not the Iews their meeting, that the Gospel of Christ might not be hindered, knowing that time and knowledge might make them leave those things, and of their own accord comform to their practice. 3. Because it was not publickly opposed: things that were much struck at, as the necessity of circumcision, justification not to be by the works of the Law: that Jesus was the Christ, the Saviour of the world: these were the grand controversies in the Apostles dayes, and these we have fully maintained; now this of the Chri∣stians first day little or nothing medled withal, since by the de∣crees of the Councel the Christians were freed from circumcision, sacrifices; and the converted Iews might be indifferent also, as touching the Sabbath; they see the first day kept Holy unto the Lord God of the Hebrews, and the converted Gentiles see one day in seven kept to the honour of Christ, one party no oppo∣sing the other; the Question is not much, disputed, and the  therefore not recorded: that caution given to the Col. . 2.16. doth exhort the Christians to their liberty, in regard Chr is dead, says nothing to the Iews by way of reproof, still hoping  time they might be brought to the observing of the Lords  Being therefore not publickly opposed, at least in those places  which the Apostles writ, it is passed over in silence, their dispu being ge∣nerally about things then and in that age called in quion.
Quest. 7. Whether the Church may Command any other day to be rested on besides the Sab∣bath? God Commanding the seventh day to be kept Holy, and gi∣ving six dayes for man to work, some conclude it unlawful to set apart one day or more for Gods publick worship then he did; but it is otherwise; the Church may set apart one day, or two or more, for the publick worship. For 1. Because the Commandement is not preceptive, but per∣missive; when we are allowed six days to work the meaning is not that we shall fill up all those dayes by working, as if it were unlaw∣ful for men to do any thing but work; shall God never be served in those six dayes? must we do nothing but work? the meaning there∣fore is, that when we have six dayes before us, we shall do all our work (not spend them all in working) but upon the seventh day we shall do no work at all: nothing hinders but that the Church may set apart a day for Gods service, there being nothing in this Law that contradict it. 2. Because the Church of the Iews unto whom this Law was given, did use such a liberty. God gave the children of Isal three feasts in the year: each of them seven dayes long, and commanded them to be strictly observed, Levit. 23. Good Merdecai added a fourth in the Canon of the Scripture, Est. 9.26, 27. to be kept every year two dayes for the mercies shewn the Iews in their delive∣rance from Haman. Holy Hezekiah added seven dayes more to the feast of Passeover then God did; 2 Chro. 30 23. Valiant Iu∣das added a fifth feast in the book of the Apocrypha, 1 Macha. 4.59. to be kept seven dayes also, at which feast our Saviour him∣self was present, and never reproved it. Iohn 10.22. Sure if this was done under the Pedagogy of the Law, it may be done under the liberty of the Gospel. 3. Because the frailties and imperfections of men require it; it is often urged against the set times of the Church, that if the Sabbath, the day set apart by the Lord be kept, it is no matter
whether other dayes be kept or no; but it would be asked if ever they kept a Sabbath; mens frailties, failings, nay crosses may be much helped, sanctified, pardoned by their diligent worship in other dayes besides the Sabbath. It is strange to hear, to read how men will preach that ordinary Lectures ought to be kept and ob∣served by people, and yet at another time tell them it is suffici∣ent to keep the Sabbath, (Ridiculum apus) purely to oppose the Law of the Church. April 6. Anno 1654 There was a solemn fast kept at Oxon, for rain, there being none for a long time together, whereby the corn was much in danger; before the Churches broke up, there was a great and a plentiful shour and moderate rain a great while af∣ter, whereby the fields did laugh and sing. 4. Because God hath been pleased to bless his people, for ser∣ving him in other dayes; to let pass his approbation of that day set apart by the King of Nineveh for fasting; Iona 2.10, the Israelites in captivity, Zach. 8.19. set apart a fast on the fourth moneth, another on the fifth, another on the seventh, another on the tenth: All which God would turn to oy and gladness and chearful feasts; it is known that it hath pleased God to refresh his servants with his comfortable presence in these dayes: from such accidents as these did the Church of old institute those dayes that are called Rogation, An. Ch. 450, wherein by prayers and tears, and fasting and sup∣plication, the Church obtained great mercies, &c. And most of those dayes that are kept by the Church of England are owned by Reformed Churches, and have been established for above a thou∣sand years; but of these afterward. 5. Because of that encoragement and freedom that the use of those dayes gives to servants, Prentices and others, whereby the religious may have occasion to pour out their soul before God, to read and study his word; prepare themselves for his Holy Sacra∣ments: if any do abuse the use of these dayes, it were a pitty that those that serve God the more chearfully of them, should be sup∣pressed for the others prophaness. 6. Because we see none speak against them, but those that in other points are against all order, and could willingly see that all Discipline were laid asleep: we may behold them to be factious,
turbulent, hypocrites, stumbling at straws, Apostates, what not? Quest. 8. Why doth God put a Remember be∣fore the Commandement of the Sabbath onely? This word Remember is put in Scripture usually before nothing but what is matter of Moment, as thy Creator, Eccles. 12.1. From whence thou art fallen, Revel. 2.5. Lots wife, Luke 17.32. that ye being in time passed Gentiles, Ephes. 2.11. &c. And the Sabbath day to keep it Holy, Exod. 20.8. The reasons may be; 1. Upon the Holy keeping of that depends in a great mea∣sure the observing of all the other nine Commandements; how to cleave to God onely, to worship him truly, to use his name reverendly, depends much upon this dayes observation, and Holy keeping. 2. There is less in nature to teach us the keeping of this precept, then in any other of the Commandements: nature teacheth us that there is a God, to worship this God, to honour the name of that God whom we worship, to honour parents; and though the Barbarian know no body seeth him, none can accuse him, none can judge him, though he escape dangers by sea, and perils by land, yet he dare not murder for fear of VENGEANCE, &c. But to set aside one whole day in seven, precisely one in seven, and that not a part, but the whole of a day, and this not for, thy self alone, but thy cattle and thy ser∣vants must rest as much as thy selfe, as long as thy self, and that not at thy conveniency or times of leasure, but in the thickest of thy imployments, and not at thy pleasure, but still one day in seven; of this we say nature teacheth nothing, and therefore there is a special memento put upon it.
3. There is more in nature that may allure us to the breach of this precept, then there is to the breaking of any other of the Commandements. It is onely the Fool that will say there is no God: and if he do, it is but in his heart; every man hath something of that natural principle to do as he would be done by: but the Sabbaths being Gods property, we are apt to catch hold of some part of it through the ignorance of God that is in us: the day is clear, and the streets are clean, and such a thing is doing, or may be done, and profit will follow, we shall gain by it, &c. All this might tend to the prophanation of the Sabbath, and therefore God gives a strict charge particularly for that. 4. They might in Aegypt have small or no regard unto the Sabbath if they had opportunity. The people had been long in bondage, and might forget at least in their observance, that God had hallowed the seventh day, or through bondage not have time to keep it, which in time might blot or score the fourth Commandement out of their hearts, forget to teach it to their Children, which God by this remembrance brings back to their minds again: and though they forgot to keep it Holy in Aegypt, yet they must Remember it in Canaan. It is by some probably conceived that in the latter captivity of the Iews in Babylon, Akasuerus making a feast, Est. 1.5. for the inhabitants of Shushan, which continued seven dayes, one of which must necessarily be on a Sabbath day, which by reason of that feast that had been held a hundred and four∣score dayes to the Princes of Persia, in which several Sab∣baths had fallen, and that one feast, the Sabbath if not for many dayes, yet for one was by the Iews neglected; to punish which forget fulness, God stirred up Haman to root them out, and for that one dayes feast, they keep a three dayes fast, with their nights, Est. 4.16. and by that got mercy, yet by that might receive instruction, the next feast that came, and Re∣member to keep Holy the Sabboth day.
Quest. 9. Whether the first day of the week, may be termed Sabbath or Sunday? This is a Question in it self scarce deserving an Answer, but by a Pharisaical generation of the sect of the Libertines, being counted a piece of prophaness so to call it, and a part of Religion to call it otherwise, we shall spend a few drops of Ink to Answer it: in brief it may be called Sabbath; 1. From the sence and signification of the word, it is their foolish mistake, that because it was on Saturday, therefore it was so called: whereas if it had been upon a Wednesday, so long as men rested upon it, it might have been called Sab∣bath, that being the Hebrew word for rest. A Sabbath day is no more then a day of rest. Christians therefore resting from all their imployments, and doing no manner of work, they nor their Sons, nor their Daughters, nor their man-servants nor their maid-servants, &c. upon this day, may lawfully call it a Sabbath day. 2. From the equality of the Christian Churches practice with the Church of the Iews. That day that was held Holy by the people of God, under the Law, wherein they ceased from working, and therein did read upon the word of God, repaired to the Temple or Synagogues, and heard it taught, was called the Sabbath: the day therefore that is held Holy by the people of God under the Gospel, and wherein they cease from working, and therein read upon the word of God, &c. may receive the same denomination. 3. From the morality of the Law: the Law is moral, re∣quiring one day in seven to be kept Holy to the Lord, which day God himself calls a Sabbath; wherever therefore one day
in seven is kept Holy, it may from the morality of the Law be named a Sabbath, providing it to be the Sabbath of the Lord God, that is, a day set apar by him for his own service, by which we conclude that the seventh day kept by the Iew, or the seventh day kept by the Turk, though they work not, are not morally Sabbaths, the Lord never chusing the one, and rejecting the other, constituting the first day of the week to be since Christs Resurrection a perpetual Sabbath to him∣self. Bt what is all this to Sunday, this being a prophane name drawn from the Heathens? It is to be wondred at to see what canting language is in the mouthes of men, and how mystical∣ly they will speak to avoid ordinary expressions; in time our dip pers may new dip doublets, gloves, and give them new names, and by consequence set us all to schoole again, that we may learn to forget our selves to be men, and with authority pro∣nounce all our Ancestors fools, being they could not tell how to speak. The Heathens, it is true, named the days of the week according to some feigned Gods & real planets: one among the rest was called Dies Solis, the day of the Sun, the self same day that is our Christian Sabbath, naming or dedicating that day to that planet; if the day had been dipped in the fountain of the Sun, all had been well enough; tamen non bstante, we may call the first day of the week Sunday, any thing in this argument to the contrary notwithstanding. 1. From the practice of an Holy Evangelist; he that was in labours more abundantly for the Gospel, then any now can pretend to be, that is not past shame, was not so scrupulous as these men would seem to be (for it is but a seeming) be in his History of the Acts, Acts 28. giving us an account of Pauls dangerous voyage to Rome, shews us vers. 11. That they (viz. Paul and his company, whereof Luke who wrot this History was one) after three moneths departed in a Ship of Alexan∣dria, which had wintered in the Isle, whose sign was CA∣STOR and POLLUX; the Spirit of God made no scruple at these heathenish names, but writ them, and they
stand in the Scripture, and no reproof is given to the users of them, and yet in their own natures they are to be more stum∣bled at, then Ds Solis or Sunday either. We shall interpret and open this story that these mens folly may appear: you must know that the great Heathen God who ruled all was called Iupiter: he was born at Crete, and when he came to be of age, he threw his Father Saturn out of his kingdom: having three Brothers, he gave the govern∣ment of Hell to Pluto, the government of the Sea to Ne∣ptune, and kept the government of Heaven and Earth to himself.Charity here begun at home. This Iupiter according to Heathen Poets and Fa∣bles, would come oftentimes out of Heaven and play pretty pranks upon Earth, one of which was this. One Tyn∣darus had a handsome wife called Lda; she being with childe to her own husband, Iupiter in a merry pin turned her into a milk white Swan, and in that shape he being a God (a pretty one) got her with childe likewise; she grew mighty big, her hour of travel comes, she is delivered of two Sons, well shaped boyes they were. One of them is named CA∣STOR, the other POLLVX; the lads grew, and when they came to be of age, their coasts being pestred with Pirats, they got Ships, and destroyed the Pirats, in a short time they rid the Sea of them: for this they are worshipped as Gods of the Sea, and where they are together, it is a sign of a fortunate voyage: this is the reason that that Ship wherein Luke and Paul was, had the sign of Castor and Pollux upon Their stern; as some English Ships have Saint George: this Ship therefore being at her outrigging named by Castor and Pollux, foolish and heathenish Gods which had such a filthyoriginals this name being used by the Spirit of God, and that without a check, we may use the name Sunday though used by the Heathens (by a more raional cause then the other) and not to be reproved, by any whimsical, sawcy, or Hypocritical rebel whatsoever, whose conscences in matter of sin we have no cause to suppose tender.
Witness their rebellion and murdeder at Lon∣don, for though they have different faces, yet they are all one blood.2. From the innocency and harmlesness that is in the using of it; there are some customes original∣ly heathenish, used too often, that are attended with sin; and whose being ought to be removed because of transgression, as may∣games particularly, which always is accompanied with sinful, and by relation shameful Acts, and once in seven year, a great occasion of the polluting of that day of which we are now speaking. But this word Sunday hath nothing in it that savours of evil, or that can be said to border upon that which is not right. 3. From the happy event, that God hath been pleased to give this name The Heathens gave one day to Mercury, ano∣ther to Venus, one thought a thief, and the other a whore; the first day of the week to Apollo or the Sun; Apollo they thought a God well skilled in Physick, Excellent in Musick, good to open Prophesies, always young; to such a one was this day dedicated, and after him named, he carrying about the Sun it was called Sunday; now this hath fallen out so well, as it deserves to be remembred. Christ is Sol Iustisiae, the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. this day did the Sun of our souls break through the clouds of his winding sheet, and tri∣umphed over darkness, this day did he come out of the Cham∣ber of his sepulchre, and rejoyced as a bridegroom to run his race, he came with healing under his wings to cure our souls, he brought the sweet Musick of the Gospel of reconciliation: I ascend (said he, Iohn 20.27.) Vnto my Father and your Fa∣ther, to my God and your God; he is the true explainer of the Prophets: by this Sun rising we see what was meant by Ie∣nas lying in the Whales belly: he comes out of his grave, like a Re or a young heart, Cant. 8.14. In a word he is the light that inlightens every one that comes into the world: our Sun the Son of God is risen, by him we see Heaven, by him we receive the fruits of the Earth; this is his day dedicated to him by the Spirit, set apart by himself; never be bafled therefore, but if thou
so please, call it Sunday it hath fallen out well that this day; was by them that knew not God dedicated to the Sun and not to any other, since in many points, it can quadrate with our Sun of righteousness, which with others it could not so well have done. Quest. 10. Why is the Sabbath called Holy? We shall have occasion to speak to this more at large here∣after: for the present the Sabbath may be called Holy: 1. In regard of the author of it: it was instituted by him who is altogether Holy: it is not of an Earthly extraction: neither was its original from the Creatures breast, but the Creators will. 2. In regard of the end of it; it was set apart for Holy uses and purposes. It was designed for the time of Holy worship, and to be a day for Holy Assemblies and congregations. 3. In regard of the Holy observers of it: Holy men obser∣ved it: nothing was done by them but was Holy; they prayed, they read, they sacrificed, they heard, they received the Holy Sacraments, they meditated, they did Holy things in private, Holy things in publick, whence deservedly it is called the Holy Sabbath-day, and is the ordinary time of hearing the word taught. The extraordinary now follows.
CHAP. VI. Of a Fast. WHen Iesurun waxed fat, then she rebelled, Deut. 32.15. that the Church might keep her Children from sinful wantonness, she appoints dayes of fasting which are as dayes of Physick, wherein she her self as cloathed with sackcloth, sacrifices with Iob for her self and her Children, least in their feasting they should sin against God. To let pass many distinctions, a fast is either private or pub∣lick. 1. Private, Matth. 6.16. Then the Church goes into her closet; if you mark her narrowly, you may with Eli see her lips to move. To this private fa is joyned reading of the word. 2. Publick, Ioel 2.15. then the Church blows her trumpet, and invites her people to beare her company; every preacher ought to be a Mordicas to give intimation to all Gods people: to this is joyned Preaching of the word: we shall speak of this kind of fa; yet so as not excluding the other. This Publick fa is either Occasional, or Annual.
1. Occasion, Ester 4.16. when some imminent judgment is to be removed, or some great suit to be made, then the Church sends up strong crys and suplications for deliverance and accep∣tance. 2. Annual; Lev. 23.29. she hath dayes which at the return of the year she usually observes in mourning habit, having for that purpose fervent and sutable prayers lying by her. The Principal whereof is that solemn Fast of Lent, in which by a moderate abstinence, joyned with prayer, she obtains a victo∣ry over corruption: This large fast hath an Ash-wednesday for dawning, and a Good-friday for its twilight; which two, like a goodly porch and a pleasant garden, cast a glory upon the whole building of her Lent devotions. If the Church be overseen in these, or any of her family fa in point of duty, she hath her Ember weeks, sanctifying every quarter of her year by a holy mortification, craving a blessing upon that part which is to come, and begging a par∣don for her offences in that portion which is past: yet know∣ing that she dayly offends, and therefore fearing the worst, she casts in Wednesday and Friday to help her drooping spi∣rits to enbosome her self before the Lord for her weekly offences; not omitting her morning and evening sacrifice-duty performed, for the sins of the night and of the day, in which inwardly she is cloathed with Sackcloath by repentance, and outwardly she is abstemious, craving only for her dayly bread. Before the fall, the Churches garments were purely white, and her service was only gratulatory; but since she is pos∣sessed with an evil spirit, which goeth not out but with prayer and fasting, unto which sackcloath with ashes is proper cloath∣ing. In Paradice by eating she caught a surfeit, through which for above five thousand years she hath been in a feaverish distemper; and to prevent it from being deadly, she is often in this duty of fasting: touching which we shall run over these particulars and see,
1 The nature of it. 2 The Ends of it. 3 The time of it. 4 The manner of it. 5 Resolve some questions concerning it. SECT. I. 1 The nature of it. 1 It is an holy and religious abstinence. 2 From the exercises and comforts of this ontward life. 3 To witness the humiliation of the body. And, 4. Fitting of the soul for more fervency in prayer. It is an holy and religious abstinence; there is a natural ab∣stinence or fast for the health of the body prescribed often by Physicians; there is a civil abstinence or fast for the good of the Common-wealth prescribed sometime by the civil Magistrate: but the fast that we are to behold is holy and re∣ligious, prescribed by the Church for the good of the soul. Not that fasting in it self considered, or abstinence abstract∣edly taken, is holy, or any essential part of religion, but as a means or way to make the soul holy or religious, that con∣ducing to the ends hereafter to be mentioned. It hath holi∣ness in its eye, and holiness in its desire, and therefore may be called a holy abstinence. 2. From the exercises and comforts of this outward life; these are the things we must abstain from in the time of our fast: (alwayes having a respect to decency and frailty.) as 1. From bodily labor, Levit. 23. 30. this is properly for that fast that is appointed for a certain day, Ioel 1. 14. 2. From food, Ionah 3.7. this is sometimes total, as ab∣staining
from God altogether, 2 Sam. 3.35. and sometimes partial, abstaining from pleasant or delightfull feeding, ac∣cording to the length of the fast, Dan. 10.2, 3. David there will eat nothing till the Sun go down, and Daniel here will eat no pleasant bread for three weeks. From sleep, 2 Sam. 12.16. The body even in this may be afflicted, for it's frequent sinning in that passion. 4. From attire, Exod. 33. this came into the world by sin, and therefore ought to be laid aside, yet herein all apparell is not to be put aside, nor in the other is all sleep to be forborn, we must in these have respect to frailty, and necessity: David in the one place, Will lye all night upon the earth and the Is∣raelites for that day, (in the other place) will not put on their ornaments, so the King of Nineveh put off his robe, Jonah 3.6. 5. From the marriage-bed, Ioel 2.16. 1 Cor. 7. 8. 6. From sports and recreations, Levit. 23. 39. A fast is a Sabbath, a day of rest, and therefore what is required for the one, is to be performed on the other▪ Isa. 38.13, 19. 3. To witness the humiliation of the body: here is one end of fasting. But what shall we appear unto men to fast? this rather hath an eye to publick then to private abstinence, and deserves rather to have God for a witness then man; he knows the body sinned; the heart hath been lifted up, and the eyes lofty; the tongue hath spoken proud things in its heaing, and the hands of man are not clean in his sight. Man is de∣filed by that which befals him in the night, and his ears are made impure by what he hears in the day; Let God therefore that knows thou hast sinned by eating, and by strange ap∣parrel, see that thou art humble for it, either by thy fasting or more sober diet, spare not thy stomack for its crying, and let thy pride know that this day is not for ornaments, but for courser or plainer apparel, Ionah 3. 6. Pity not thy back, if it have to supply necessity. 4. For the fitting of the soul for more fervency in prayer, this is the special end we are to have in this day of fasting, unto which all the other doth but conduce, the rest are but servants waiting upon this:
Fasting hath in all ages of the Church been used to, or for three great duties, as 1. For Repentance, and so it looks backwards; and this in reason calls for an abstinence from all carnal delights▪ being a part of that holy revenge the soul taketh upon it self, for sinning against the Almighty in the using of those sports whe∣ther in measure or in nature unlawfull, 2 Cor. 7.11. Quem poenitet peccasse, poene est innocens. 2. For mortification, and so it looks forward; to this we must come only by degrees. He that would subdue lusts, must not fast long nor much; a long fast will but make him eat the more the next meal, and those vessels of sin will be filled as so on as any other parts of the body: this devil of conscience will not be cast out by an act, but by a state of abstinence, a dye  of fasting, a dayly lessening our portion and of meat and drink, but this alone will not cast out those legions of lusts, and therefore fasting is used 3. For prayer, and so it hath reference to the present time, this may be short and true, as the misseing of a meal or two, when men are not overcharged with surfeiting and drunken∣ness, they are then in fit case and condition to watch and pray. The Jews are said to eat nothing upon the Sabbath day untill they had performed their devotion, which was about the sixth hour, which began at nine of the clock. We find also and know that many godly people will neither eat nor drink upon the Sabbath day morning, finding meat an hindrance to that in∣ten siveness of devotion, that they desire to be acted by, and also many will take the holy communion fasting. At which ordinance, as God requires pure hearts and hands, they endea∣vour to come with clear heads and empty stomacks, that they may so much the more be like the Angels of God, quitted from the loads and burdens; I had almost said bonds of the flesh. But this intrencheth upon the ends of fasting, which accord∣ing to our method we come now in some sort to discover.
SECT. II. 2 The ends of it. Every act of nature hath an end to which it tends, and every act of Religion hath an object which it eyes: Fasting hath these 1 The subduing of wanton lusts, no sooner have we got our dayly bread, but we had need pray, forgive us our sins, our food even through corruption, becoming instruments of death to subdue those extravagant motions that rise in the soul; fasting is known a proper remedy: the tears of contri∣tion poured out by fasting, are most effectual to quench the fire of lust, lest the flame burn up the ungodly. 2 That we may more devoutly contemplate the nature of God, he is in heaven, when we come before him we ought to be lifted up from earth: Now the Christian in meditation can go many cubits higher towards heaven in the time of ho∣ly abstinence then otherwise. Peter about the sixth hour grew hungry, and saw heaven opened, Acts 10.9, 10. Cornelius was fasting, and at prayer an Angel of God stood before him in bright cloathing, Acts 10. v. 31. & 30. And upon this ground it is that most Christians and devour people receive the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper fasting. 3 That we may the more readily obtain some eminent fa∣vour from God, this occasioned the great fast of Queen Ester, Ester 4.16. and of the King of Nineveh. We shall see the Saints when standing in need of some special mercy, take themselves in all ages unto this duty; and as God suffers no man to kindle a fire upon his Altar for nothing; we shall sel∣dome see the Church fasting; but He satisfies her desires, and fills her with his mercy, in reference to things especially then required.
SECT. III. 3 The time of it. This hath chiefly reference to the occasional fast, whose time can∣not punctually be determined, yet if the practise of the Saints may be allowed of this age for a rule, a Fast is to be proclaim∣ed. 1 When sin and iniquity abounds, Deut. 9. 18. When transgression reigns, and iniquity is not ashamed, then every true Christian with Lot afflicts his soul, that at least he may save himself, and upon the waters of his broken heart, pre∣servs the ark of his soul wherein his graces are, untill that sin, that aboundeth be abated. 2 When judgement is threatned or feared, Ionah 3.4, 5. Iosh. 7.6. When heaven begins to look black, then every good Christian with Iosiah hath paleness on his face, and all loyns begin to shake, but when it thunders in the clouds, then a trumpet is blown in Zion, and the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, call, Spare thy people, O Lord. 3 When judgement is entered or set, 2 Sam. 12. 16. When the Lord sayes, smite then the Church as David in Sackcloth falls down at the sight of the Angel before the Lord upon her face, and weeps sore, , let this cup pass from me, with great earnestness she desires: she then cryes with Hezekiah, Undertake for me, O Lord, for I am oppressed, Isa. 38.15. 4 When the Church is in danger or persecuted, Ester 4.16. When Gebal, and Edom, and Ameleck, the Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tyre, conspire together against Ie∣rusalem, to destroy her, then prayer is made without ceasing, then the Lord gets no rest, (for his Church will take none) untill he make Ierusalem a praise in the whole earth. 5 When a reformation is sought after and designed, 1 Sam. 7.6. Every thing is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer, and to have God at the beginning of a reformation, is every Iosiahs and Hezekiahs desire; if men go to build, and con∣sult not with God, God will come down and destroy the building. 6 When an enemy is in arms, and coming to invade, 2 Chro. 20.1, 2, 3. When the enemies of the Church, whether general or national, covers the mountains like Grashoppers, then that little flock puts forth strong cryes, saying, Rebuke the company of spear men, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people; scatter thou the people that delight in war. 7 When an Army is routed, and their Captain killed or foiled, 1 Sam. 31.13. When the mighty are fallen in the high places, and when great men fall in Israel, then there is a proper season for prayer and fasting, when the Church turns her back before her enemies; what can her people say, but lye untill Even in sackcloth; this teacheth them the use of the bow, and gives their bleeding hearts fresh courage to fight against their sins; like men ready to drown or desperate; they are strong to wrestle even with God himself. 8 When there is any great undertaking that it may prosper, Ezra 3.10, 11. It is a good thing to ask direction of God in the way wherein we purpose to walk. All things are in his hand, and according to his power and will so cometh things to pass, to fast therefore that God would bless us, and pros∣per the work of our hands, is acceptable sacrifice. SECT. IV. 4 The manner of it. This Fast as a Sabbath is two wayes to be performed; outwardly and inwardly. 1 Outwardly, as hath been before declared, in abstaining from bodily labor, (for a fast day is a Sabbath day, Lev. 23.
33.) food, &c. and that the whole day for it must be no shorte then other dayes, alwayes provided that nothing be done to the prejudice of health. In that case, as in the Sab∣bath God will have mercy, and not sacrifice; yet as bodily la∣bor profiteth but little, 1 Tim. 4.8. so outward resting in it self is not of great value, except unto it there be joyned, fasting or resting. 2 Inwardly, he that worketh, and he whose soul is not af∣flicted upon a fast are both in danger, Levit. 23.29, 30. This inward fast consists, 1 In a diligent examination of the soul to find out sin: this is a day wherein the soul is specially invited to be reconciled to God, the heart must now be searched, and the beloved sins must be found, that as Samuel slew Agag, we may hw them in pieces before the Lord, 1 Sam. 15.33. 2 In an unfeigned humiliation before the Lord for sin: it is not sufficient to acknowledge that we have offended; if we would be accepted, we must be penitent, Zac. 12.10. 3 In an undoubted faith in Christ for a pardon of sin: this is a time of prayer and repentance that our sins might be blot∣ted, whether private to our selves, or common to the king∣dome wherein we live. Now he that prays, Let him ask in faith, Iames 1.6. 4. In a stedfast resolution through the spirit to oppose sin: In this repentance must we continue, it must appear in the fruit of practise, to be real in the root. Dayes of fasting are dayes of attonement, therefore sin must be parted withall, they are days of Physick, therefore we are to abstain from delighting in that which would offend us. 5 In a serious meditation of the good word of God if the Fast be private: and a diligent attention to it, if the Fast be publick. It is the word that discovers Gods judgement of this or that kind (as famine, pestilence, sickness, unseasonable weather) to this or that sin, (as perjury, Sabbath-breaking, prophane or common swearing, stealing, &c. which enlightens the soul much in the holy and orderly performance of this duty.
SECT. 5. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. Whether the Fasts of the Church of Rome differ from those of the Church Catholick. Quest. 2. Whether Fasting be not a Iewish Ceremoniall or Jewish rite. Quest. 3. Why is the Fast of Lent observed by the Christi∣an Church. Quest. 4. Why are the Fasts of the Weeks of Ember obser∣ved by the Church. Quest. 5. Whether it would bring advantage to the Church, now to have those dayes again observed. Quest. 6. Whether it might not be an acceptable service to have an annuall Fast, for the crimes lately acted in Eng∣land. Quest. 1. Whether the Fasts of the Church of Rome differ from those of the Church Ca∣tholick? The Church Catholick differs not from that of Rome either in the act or ends of Fasting, yet toto coelo differ in these follow∣ing respects. 1 The Church of Rome makes fasting to be meritorious: they suppose they merit something at the hand of God for their ab∣stinence, that is deserve somthing at his hands, not so the Ca∣tholick Church, she teacheth that when we have done all, we are to acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants.
2 They prescribe certain times as necessary to be keept upon the account of salvation, what ever dayes the Church appoints for annuall Fasts it is necessary if they would be save to ob∣serve them accordingly, hence it is that the neglectd of it as a breach of the third (though according to God of the fourth,) commandement must of necessity be confessed, to the priest, that such penance may be injoyned as is sutable to that high offence for the expiation of its guilt. Now the Church Catho∣lick, appoints, neither knows she any time to be obser∣ved as necessary but what God and his Son appointed in his word. 3. They abstain from meals of this or that fort, as being for the time (prescribed for the fast) altogether uncleane, their consciences will be defiled if they should eat them, that is with∣out authority. Now the Catholick Church though she injoyne a fast, yet by the Lord Jesus she knows no meat unclean of it self, and he that teacheth otherwise is not of God but of Sathan, 1 Tim. 43. 4 The Church of Rome looks upon her fasting as a part of Gods worship, her very abstaining from meat or from this or that meat, is taught to be points of worship, the Church Catholick teacheth that Fasting in it self is of no use, nor no part of worship, But as a fit meanes and as it serves to the uses aforesaid, so she requires it, not otherwise. 5. That some fast, particularly lent, is of Apostlical insti∣tution, and out of religion and conscience to be observed, the Catholick Church knowes no such law, and therefore she keeps not lent, upon that account, but for other ends and o∣ther causes, as shall by and by be shown. 6. That outward Fasting is of it selfe sufficient without the inward, and indeed if fasting that is abstaining from meats or meals be of it selfe a point or part of worship it may be so: but the Catholick Church pleads for an Inward fasting or abstaining from sin, and for a soul to afflict it selfe for trans∣gression, without which the outward fasting is not regar∣ded.
7. They are foully belyed by many Authors if good Christi∣ans would not take the Fasts of the Church of Rome to be great feasts, through the variety of dainties, and plenty of wines therein fed upon, by which it is not to be called a fast, which makes us that for the present we need not show the difference between this and the Fast of the Church Catholick. Quest. 2. Whether Fasting be not a Ceremoniall or Iewish rite. Who are those among us and about us, who teach that fasting in its own nature is not a Gospel but a legal exercise, and not to be observed in the Church of Christ but fasely, for, 1 The ground or end, or cause of our religious fasting is moral, for the subduing of corruption, and exercising our selves in the dutyes of repentance, and mortification, unto which by experience fasting is known to be an apt meanes, and suta∣ble help. 2 Christ prophesied, or rather commanded Fasting after his own death, Luke 5.53. But the dayes will come when the briegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. this is a duty not for every novice in religion, there is great strength required to bear this exercise of fasting, and therefore during the Apostles ignorance, or weaknes our Saviour would not impose it upon them least it should prove like a new piece of cloth upon an old garment: but when he the bridgroom was taken then they should fast, for by that spirit, he was then to give, they were made as new bottles, able to hold and stand under the practise of abstinence, which before they were not able to do. By severell circumstances in this text it might be shown Fasting was to be performed by the Apostles, and if
necessary for them, how much more profitable is it for us now. 3 The Church in the time of the Apostles was frequent in this exercise, Acts. 10.30. Act. 13.1, 2. Though the king∣dome of heaven consisteth not in meat and drinke whether used or forborne, Rom. 14.17. Yet fasting as an extraordinary help unto the chief exercises of piety, hath the warrant and weight of a duty both in the old and new testament, when either God in his providence, or our own necessities call us thereunto; alwayes remembring that when we fast out of religion; we forget not them whose bowels are empty through poverty and want, 58 Isa. 5 6.7. It is true that to fast upon the tenth day of the seventh moneth. Lev. 23, 27. was a Ceremony, yet a fast or a yearly fast upon that account is no more a ceremony then to rest once in seven dayes, &c. Quest. 3. Why is the Fast of Lent observed by the Christian Church. This most solemne fast is of very great antiquity, and of old it was a time of renoune; Lent is the Saxon word for the Spring, but when it begun to spring is not certainly known, but yet the fruit of it hath been sweet to the Christian pallat, for many generations.It was first appointed in England by ercom∣bart a kent∣ish King (who de∣stroyed the of the hea∣then gods Ac. 641. It hath overflowed the whole Christian world like Nilus once a year, and made it fruitfull, yet like the same river is the head of it unknown, howbeit Telspho∣rus the eight Bishop of Rome from Peter is supposed to have instituted this Fast, An. Ch. 142. and his next successor save one (viz. Pius) to have instituted Easter and since they have both been observed with great devotion, In all the Churches of the Saints though this blocked age of ours, will have nothing passe for religion, but what is framed upon addle heads, order∣ed by sacrilegious persons, and loved by notorious sinners.
Some make a threefold distinction of it, the first is a fast of expectation, and such were those fasts of the Iewes before the coming of the bridegroom; or in remembrance that Moses fasted forty dayes at the receiving of the Law, all which time the Israelites were in expectation of him. The second was a fast of contemplation, such was the fast of E∣lias, when he fasted forty dayes as it were for the breaking of the Law; The third of refrenation to bridle our affection that we might not sin against the Gospell, and this last use only is in the eye of the Church in her Quadragesimall, ob∣servations, to let passe many things that might have here aptly been spoken to, lent is observed 1 In a pious memoriall of our Saviours fourty dayes fasting in the wildernesse. Moses fasted fourty dayes at the making of the first Covenant, and our Saviour fourty dayes, at the making of the new; In memory whereof the Church voluntarily gives of her time this fourty dayes of Lent for Christian ab∣stinence, looking only at the moal not at all upon the miracle of that long fast, she not abstaining from all manner of food (her weaknesse gives her a licence or dispensation from that) but from some; as the Jewes eats not nor did not eat of old, of the sinew which is upon the hollow of the thigh, in remem∣brance of the Angels touching the hollow of Iacobs thigh in the sinew that shranke. Gen. 32.32. In which doing I dare not charge them of superstition, seeing God himself was e∣ven pleased to let them so do, No more ought we to be ac∣counted will worshipers in abstaining from some kind of food, as from the flesh of beasts in memoriall of our Lords fasting in the wildernesse. 2 For the better subsistance of those whose trade and occu∣cupation is about the Sea and rivers s fishers and drud∣gers, are to be looked after by the civill magistrate as well as Butchers and Drovers. If he would have the Child divided, or not looked after (pardon me) he might be suspected not to be the true and lawfull Father.
3 For the preservation, and upholding a good stock of cattel in the Common wealth. It is known that little is kil∣led, but what is young in the Spring time, which this time of lent keps alive, and that makes plenty and that a∣gaine causes cheapnesse, so that the poor are much the bet∣ter all the year of that abstinence for the rich. It is observed that the Price of Cattle is now almost double what it was in the times when Lent was observed. 4 To prevent that evill even morally which by high feed∣ing might arise from the nature of man. It is the spring time when the blood rises and waxeth hot, now a moderate absti∣nence, checks those proud humors which might arise to the hurting of a mans soul and offending against God.A Feast so cled from the Saxon word E∣ser a gd∣nesse of the old Saxns whose feast thy keept in April, or as others because Ch. the light of the world then arose, or so that word signi. in the Saxo∣ash vedens day was of old called Cut lu. nu. 5 for the more worthy preparing of our selves for the holy communion celebrated at Easter, abistence as hath been shown, is a fit meanes to subdue sinfull lusts, and a sutable help for meditation and pouring forth of the soul, God was never more familiar then he was with great fasters, witnesse, Moses, Elias, Daniel, and Christ the three great fasters, Moses (for the Law) Elias (for the prophets) and Christ for the gospel meet together in the holy mount, 17 Mat 3. now since Ea∣ster is a time appointed by the Church fo the receiving of that blessed ordinance of the Lords supper, this lent may serve as a bidle to inordinate affections, and may be a time of attonement for the soul. It is a time of solemne re∣pentance, and as a sign of it, hath ashes upon its head. By an even thread it leads you to our Saviours passion, and will shew you the place where the Lord lay, and if you be not wanting to your selves, It will show you the Lord him∣selfe in breaking of bread. Be thou but a Simon, and hear and do what the Church sayes unto thee, thou shalt know∣that the Lord is risen indeed.
Quest. 4. Why are the fasts of the weekes of Em∣ber observed by the Church. THe time of Lent may be compared to the head of all the fasts of the Christian Church, and the four Ember weeks may be termed, the four quarters of their body, the other fass being but as arteries, ligatures and sinnews proceeding from or leading to those more principall parts. They were of old called Qatuor anni tmpora, and were thus quarterly observed. The Wednesday Friday and Satur∣day after Witsunday is the first Ember week; the sae days after exaltari, crucis, or the 14. of September is the second, the same days after Iodocus Lucius, or the 13 of December is the third the same dayes aftr the first Sunday in Lent, is the fourth According to that old verse. Post Cineres, pnter, post crucem, po{que} luriam Mercurii, Veneris, Sabbatho, je unia fient. The whole week is called Ember, though the fore mentioned days were not only observed by the Church for the ends here∣after to be mentioned. Why they were called Ember weeks or days is doubted, some say from the Greek word, . i.e. Dies aday as if those days were singularly to be observed, others from two Saxon words, viz. Em. a Brother, and Bertnable, this may signify something. Others say they were so called from that ancient and no lesse religious custome in using haircloath and ashes in time of publick pennance, which was in these times performed, by the Church, (for which cause also, the first day after Lent was called (Ash wedensday, and there∣fore called Dis cinerum,) or then from the Old custome of eating nothing on those dayes untill night, and then only a cake baked under the Embers or Ashes, which was called panis subcineritius, Ember or Ashy bread. They were kept by solemne prayer and fasting for these reasons.
1 That the Church of God under the gospel might not be behind the Church of God under the law, in point of devotion and piety, the church of the Jews had their Iejunia quatuor temporum, four solemn fasting times in the year, instituted by themselves, all of them mentioned with a special promise Zacha. 8. to respect the order of the thing done, rather then the order of the text. The first was the fast on the 10 day of the tenth moneth. (viz.) Tebeth answering to our December, upon which day Nebucadne∣zer first layd siedge to the city of Ierusalem; the second is, the Fast of the 17 day of the fourth moneth. Thamaz answering to our Iune, on which day the city of Ierusalem was taken, the walls of it broken, and Idolatry set up in the temple, the third is the 9 day of the fifth month Ab answering to our Iuly, for on this day was the temple burned, first by Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, A. M. 3360. And afterward by Titus the Roman General, A.C. 69. the fourth is the third day of the seventh month Tisri, answering to our Sptember for the murthering of Gedalia, see Ier. 41.1, 2, 3, 4. Now that the Christian might not be behind the Jew in the service of God, those four Ember weeks (almost at the same time of the year) are set apart for solemn prayer and fasting in the Churches of Christ. 2 That there might be a blessing given to the fruits of the earth, then either sown, growing or gathered. For now in those seasons the corn and fruits of the earth are in most danger and these days were appointed for solemn days of prayer for their preservation. 3 That they might in some sort chastise their bodys for the sins of the last quarter, and prevent exorbitancies, for the quarter to come, prayer and fasting will cast out the worst Devil, to beg earnestly that God would pardon the sins of the last quarter, quarterly, can favour no more of superstition, then to crave mercy upon the sabbath for the sins of the last week, or in the morneing for the sins of the night, begging withall to have grace assisting them in the dutys of the aproach∣ing quarter, weeke or day. 4 That every Christian might assist the Church in her sacred
ordinations the sabbath following. In the next Immediate Sab∣bath following each of those days were men separate and set a∣part by ordination for preaching the word, and administring the Sacraments. This being known, for Christians to meet in publike to call earnestly upon God for him to blesse those souls that were then going into his vine-yard, that he would sanctify their gifts, and give them courage, zele, knowledge and holynesse, and make them Instrumentall of bringing in many sons and daughters into glory, was a most laudable custom and pious practise.It was to be admir∣ed that our late gover∣nours or changlings would not appoint the mock fasts upon the sbbath or some o∣ther day; and ot on these ap∣poned and used by the Church. It is to be thouht God would  suffer them, that the faith∣full might . deliverance of the Church on those days apponted by her self. For which end these days were in apeculiar manner set apart. Besides those four solemn fasts observed by the Jwes they had other fasts though of lesse concernment, as the 10. of Nisan Abib or March because Miriam dyed that day. Some the 8 day of Tebeth or Dcember a day of great heavi∣nesse for the translation of the Hebrew bible into Greek by the seventy Interpreters, A. M. 3699. Some precise ones fast every Munday and Thursday, and their fast endures untill the evening that the starrs appear. The Christian also hath other Fasts besids those grand ones above mentioned. Some abstaining from meat for one cause, and some for another, besids the vigils of every feast. Wedens∣dey and Friday have been days of abstinence of old in the Church, and publick fasts are generaly upon them days. Wedens∣Day is fasted in memorial of our Saviours being sold by Iudas, and Friday in regard of our Lords crucifying. Some also abstain on Saturday in memorial of that sorrow that was upon believers, while our Saviour lay in the grave, praying for a remission of those sins, which were the cause of the death of the son of God. Quest. 5. Whether it would bring Advantage to the Church now, to have those days again observed. There is a distinction passes mens mouths often without con∣sideration,
that such days as these might be profitably kept, dureing as it were the Churches nonage, but not now, when truly were the most sort of Christians looked after and tryed, this time would appear to be their doteage; these days therefore be∣ing observed, would advantage the Church much every way, par∣ticularly in these respects. 1 To prevent schisme, saction sedition or heresy for young Christians to see their parents, and their teachers walking in the steps of the Ancient Churches, and seing an holy and orderly conformity between them, would much strengthen them a∣gainst the pernitious doctrine of hereticks or discontented persons. 2 They in a great measure satisfie the desires of the most de∣vout, there are really religious souls, who exercise themselves continualy in prayer; There are many that use the world as though they used it not. Now such times as these fulfill the expectations of their hearts, helping them to poure out their souls before the Lord in publick, which otherwise through want of those opportunities, might either not be done, or with lesse profit. For their fakes therefore we may say to the Governours of the Church. Restore unto us the ancient paths. 3 They will confirme us, in the truth of the 9 Article of our Creed (viz.) the Communion of Saints, not to speak of that Communion the Saints have with the head but with each other, they are of one nature, and heart alike disposed, they have no externall fellowship in the flesh, yet they have an interest in each other, as in their teachers, as in their hapinesse, in their victories, in their warrs, in their fruits of the Earth which sted∣fastly to believe, the observeing of these days, were of great concernment. 4 It might put a dayly check to growing sin, when men otherwise cold in their acts of repentance, and dutys of mor∣tification, should observe a solemn quarterly appearance before God, for the ends above mentioned. It might stirre them up to pray for a blessing on the fruits of the Earth, and crave a pardon of their sins formerly committed; which by degrees might make them perfect holinesse in the fear of God.
Quest. 6. Whether it might not be an acceptable service to have anannuall fast for the crimes lately acted in England. This Question took its rise, from the Authors occasionall reading of a motion made to the late long Parliament,Trap in Mat. c, 22, v. 6. by one preaching before them, for the keeping of a Fast in regard of that blood that was shed in the dayes of Queen Ma∣ry, during her five years raign. If that was supposed ne∣cessary, sure this supposition is not to be thought vain. It is not to be reflected on particulars, either touching crimes or persons, that being forgiven by an act of Oblivion here on Earth: but since it is not for ought we know ratified in heaven it may not be in vain to sound a trumpet in this our Sion and proclaim a day of humiliation: for, 1 Flagitious and unheard of crimes have been acted and that that not in a corner, but before the Sun: such as were it possible should not be told in Gath. 2 God, for a time may only keep away wrath: some acts were of that nature that the world never knew that sin to com∣pare with them, and therefore there may be expected strange judgements, God hath them written down, and will without question without much entreaty visit for them, therefore prayers and tears are to be offered to expiate the guilt. 3 The Actors for a great measure seem not yet penitent, we might charge many but it were to be desired that such as blew up division for their own ends, (whom God hath al∣wayes crossed) would not keep up division to the Churches disturbance and their own ruin. 4 To remove the scandall that may be in all ages, and is in those times cast upon our profession, King killing was once a doctrin charged upon the Jesuits who ever denyed it, but now, our religion bleeds, by Turkes, Jewes and Papists, to
let the world see that we are better catechised, it is expedient that the Ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and the altar, that it may be known those practises are both detested and abhorred by true Christians. 5 That future ages might beware of the like crimes to o∣pen a story in the eares of the young might have the some influ∣ence upon tender yeares, as the beholding of old Dunkards had upon the children of the Lacedemonians, which was to make them shun the like actions. A fast in Walingford Chapple by the army officers at the turning out of D.C. there was such spee∣ches & such faces as would have made a tender Christian to have fa∣sted a whole week through sicknesse 6 The hypocriticall fasts that have been so many, deserve to have one week in the yeare; that God may not remember them: never greater sinners then those that presumed most to performe this duty of fasting, and usually before they under∣took notorious actions like Machiavil, who sometimes, ap∣peares like a Devill, and another time like a Saint, God hath not forgotten these things, and therefore they are to be regarded. They were in their own nature sufficient, to have made even God himselfe loath the very place they were made in, and he often bringing the sins of the Father upon the Children, if not upon themselves, calls upon this generation to cry aloud. CHAP. 7. Of a Feast. FRom a fast we come to a feast, both are Christian and therefore not an unlawfull transition, he is a stranger to the Calender, that is ignorant of the vigills ushering in the Saint. We have seen two dayes wherein Christians may hear the word taught, this is a third wherein possibly there may be a mariage in Cana of Galilee, and though the Church Catholick, invite neither the mother of Jesus nor his disci∣ples (as that of Rome doth) it is not out of disrespect to ei∣ther, but out of their incapacity to be present, yet Jesus is alwayes called.
Now every pious soul with David goeth to the house of God with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that keep ho∣lyday Psal. 42.4. Fast or day of uhmiltion is appointed for mercyes to be ask∣ed, a Feast or day of thanksgiving is designed, for returning of praises for favours already received, and is Either private or publick. 1 Private which is a sweet and holy rejoycing in the Lord for some speciall mercy shown to a mans own soul or fa∣milie in particular to this is joyned reading of the word. 2 Or publick enjoyned by authority for the returning thanks unto the Father of all good gifts for some peculiar blessing shown that Common-wealth in generall, unto this is joy∣ned preaching of the word, for the stirring up of affe∣ction, and of this we are now to speak, and shall see as in the Fast. 1. The Nature of it. 2. The Ends of it. 3. The time of it. 4. The manner of it. 5. Resolve some questions concerning it. SECT. I. The nature of it. 1. It is an extraordinary solemn and joyful appearance, 2. of a Christian people or congregation, 3. for th performance of holy duties, 4. Especially of praise and thanksgiving, 5. for benefits or mercy received. It an extraordinary solemn and joyfull appearance; is this to distinguish it from the Sabbath or Sunday, wherein there is
a solemn appearance, but that is ordinary, this is extraor∣dinary. Neh. 8.1. 2. Of Christian people or Congregation, this is to distin∣guish it from the Feasts of Turks, Jews or Pagans; who have days set apart to worship for some special favour shown, sometimes privately, and sometimes publickly: but the feast we are upon, is a Congregation of Christians. 3. For the performance of holy duties: When there is a so∣lemn appearance of a Christian Congregation, it ought to be supposed that something sutable to their profession will be done before they part, and the duties must be afterwards spoken of. 4. Especially of praise and thanksgiving, this is the chief end of this extraordinary appearance to return praises for mercies received, and to adore the Majesty on high for his peculiar favour, Nehem. 8.17, 18. From this it is called a day of thanksgiving, though prayers and supplications be made for all Saints on it, yet thanks and gratulations is especially intended by it. 5. For benefits and mercies received: It is thankfulness that keeps Gods hand open; he that would come to God suing for new favours, must come with Iosephs brethren, with double money in his hands; thanks for the former, and faith to procure future favours. The Church possibly sees her enemy, that wicked Haman fall before her; blame her not, if there be joy in all her Cities, Ester 9.18. She fasts to procure them, and gives thanks at the receiving of them, hence it is called a Feast-day; It is a time wherein the Church invites her Nobles to a Banquet of Wine, puts on her royal apparrel, and shows what God hath done for her and her people.
SECT. II. 2. The ends of it. This solemn Assembly being gathered and met, is not to be thought like that, Acts 19.30. for which there could be no cause given; it is for these ends instituted and appointed, viz. 1. To praise the Lord, to give unto the Lord that glory due unto his name, are all these his people flocking to the tem∣ple. Now he is worshipped in the beauty of holiness, Hark; 1. In his Temple doth every one speak of his glory, Psalm 29.9. Now Miriam the Prophetesse takes a Timbrel in her hand, and charges the daughters of Israel to sing, for he hath tri∣umphed gloriously, Exod. 15.21. Barake the son of Abi∣noam awakes, and speaks to all true Israelites, Praise ye the Lord, Iudges 5.2. Res. The Lords name be praised. 2. To shew that the Churches dependance is upon the Lord; should she not have such times as these to celebrate praises to the God of Armies, she might be thought to pur∣chase renown, as Iacob did that portion which he gave to Ioseph by her sword and with her bow, by this therefore she declares her subsistance to be of him, and by ascribing the kingdom, power and glory to him, she demonstrates her up∣holding to be by him. 3. For the keeping in remembrance the favour of the Lord; The Church declares her deliverances to the present generati∣on, that they may tell their children, and their children ano∣ther generation; they will shew them the praises of the Lord, and his strength, that they may set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, Psalm 78.6, 7. which to do, she ap∣points these solemn meetings.
SECT. III. 3. The time of it. Though religion be not tyed to time, yet it is not prophane to al∣lot some time for it, and we in this age may learn to see that when the usual time of devotion is spoken against, it is but to take away the vey being of that service, in that time per∣formed. Thanksgiving hath been made of Gods people of old. 1. When they have received victory over their foes, Ester 9.15. Wherein they joy not so much for the destruction of their enemies, as for that peace which God by that victory is pleased to give them. 2. At the inauguration of good Kings, 1 Kings 1.40. when God is pleased to give the Church one that is faithfull to be her Ruler and her Keeper, to go in and out before her, and to fight her battles, then the people is glad, and shouts, and says, God save the King. There is mention made in the Chronicles of A May day, which is called Ill May day, there being upon that day A. C. 1517. in the City of London, a great insurrection of Prentices and young persons against strangers, for which several of them were put to death, the residue came to Westminster to King Hen. 8. and there received their pardon. Let May day be hereafter accounted A good May day, for on that day, 1660. King Charles the second (whom God Almighty bless) inti∣mated to his Parliament his resolution touching the publishing an Act of Oblivion, &c. and let the 29. of May of the same year be never forgotten, as is appointed by Law, where∣in his Majesty rod through his City of London, triumphing in his peoples affections: and slaying without blood shed his ene∣mies in the gates. At which time, as after Salomon, All the people rejoyced with joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them, 1 Kings 1.40. One there was with him, of whom we might more truly have said this day, then Adoniah unto Iona∣than that day, Come in, for thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings, ver. 42.
3. When some gracious suit or favour is obtained, 1 Kings 3.15. The Church is not unmindfull of that love that God hath shewn her in the day of her distress, in hearing her prayer, and granting the request of her lips, but will withall offer up the calves of her lips, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which is her peace-offering. 4. When the true worship of God is established and con∣firmed, 2 Sam. 6.13, 14. When the glory is departed from Israel, then her children are called Ichabods, but when its returned again, and God owned in the land, then by Isaack are her sons called, because God causeth her then to laugh, which she is not afraid to confess, Psalm 126.2. SECT. IV. 4. The manner of it. This duty of thanksgiving is two wayes performed, either in∣wardly or outwardly. 1. Inwardly, and that consists, 1. In a cheerfull mentioning of the mercy, 1 Chron. 29. It is a good thing to make mention of the name of the Lord, that men may know the Lord to be near by the declaration of his wonderfull works. 2. In a hearty thanksgiving for the mercy, 1 Chron. 16.17. he that hath received much ought to love much, and it is not love but flattery if it be not cordial. In the heart chiefly God delights, he that giveth thanks with a closed heart, doth pro∣voke God to hear him with a bended fist; yea his soul ab∣hors such heartless performances. Offer unto God in the peace-offering, the fat of the inwards, or offer nothing, Levit. 9.19. 3. In renewing thy Covenant upon the account of that mer∣cy, 2 Chron. 15.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. to lay some engagmtent up∣on the soul of walking sutable to the deliverance given, is a high degree of thankfulness, to take such notice of this pre∣sent favour, as to assure the soul that God will give more, and
to observe this special act of providence, as to oppose all future acts of sin, is acceptable sacrifice. 4. In a studying of the word how to improve that mercy, Neh. 8.3. It is the Law of God, that sanctifies and cleanseth the soul by working out those corruptions that defile it, and soft∣ning the heart to receive the will and law of God, which is that time given or spoken to it, which alone makes a mercy to be a mercy, that is, frames the soul to a right using of it, without which it may prove a heavy judgement. 5. In receiving the blessed Sacraments, the visible tokens of all mercy; they are the Christian solemnities fitted for days of thanksgiving, one of them is milk for Babes, and the other meat for strong men: this fast upon a day of returning praise is most proper, it makes the Christian go away rejoycing, yea shouting by reason of wine; Whatever mercy God pro∣mised, Christ procured, is instantly held forth in them, and Christ the Author of all mercy is by them put on, and received. 2. Outwardly, and that consists, 1. In a resting from our ordinary imployment, Neh. 8.10. It is a day set apart unto the Lord, and therefore unto him is to be given, to call upon God for mercy a whole day, spending it in his service only, and not to praise him with the same time-favours of spiritual nigardliness when the mer∣cy is obtain'd. Two or three of such days in a year is rare, which might stop the mouth of Covetousness, if it should plead fear of want. 2. In relieving of the poor and indigent, Ester 9.22. Io∣sephs afflictions must not be forgotten, and the hungry soul must not go empty all that day; he must be filled with thy goodness, yea if thou pleasest, thou mayst send portions to thy friends, that they also may rejoyce with thee, and for thee, Revel. 11.10. 3. In more liberal receiving of the Creatures, both in food, Neh, 8.10. and in apparrel, Ester 5.1. The Jews in Chushan, when the Council of Haman was turned to foolishness might have said with the Psalmist, A Table hast thou prepared for us in sight; yea in spight of our enemies: and in a day of praise no∣thing is more sutable then a garment of praise.
From this it is that the Scripture calls them feasts; of which the Church of the Jewes had these most remarkable com∣manded them of the Lord, viz. 1. The seventh day or Sabbath. 2 The feast of the Passover, Exod. 12. In remembrance of the peoples delivery out of Aegypt, and the Angels passing over the houses of the Israelites, and smiting the houses of the Aegyptians. It was celebrated the fourteenth day of the moneth Nisan or Abib, and continued till the one and twen∣tith of the same moneth, answering to our March; It is called also the Feast of unleavened bread, Mat. 26.17. 3. The feast of Pentecost, Levit. 23.11. so called from , which signifieth fiftieth, being celebrated the fifti∣eth day after the feast of the Passover; the harvest of the Jews falling between these two feasts; this is called also the feast of the first fruits, Levit. 23.17. that their grain and corn might be sanctified for their use, which was begun with one feast, and ended with another. 4. The feast of Tabernacles, Levit. 23.40. It was cele∣brated the fiftieth day of the moneth Tisri, (answering to our September) and continued full seaven days, in memory of their Fathers dwelling in Tents, Booths and Tabernacles the space of fourty years in the Wilderness. 5. The feast of Trumpets, Levit. 23.24. this was according to their political or civil account, celebrated every new years day, which was the first day of the first moneth Tisri, which moneth was the seventh, according to their Ecclesiastical or Spiritual account. It was so called, because on that day there was more sounding of Trumpets, then at other times, even all the day. In memory, say some, of Isaacks delive∣rance from sacrifice, a ram being offered up for him; the horn of which beast was used as Trumpets are now. In memory, says others, of the Law which they were to keep all the year, which was delivered with the sound of many Trum∣pets. Some say it was to put them in mind of the resurrecti∣on to a new life, which shall be done with the sound of a Trum∣pet. Others think it was to make their new years day the more remarkable, because from it all their deeds and con∣tracts bore date.
6 The feast of the new moone, Numb. 28.11. Every new moon was a festivall among the Jews, and the first day of the moon was the first day of their moneth. In it it was unlawfull to buy or sell, Amos 8.5. they repaired to the Prophets of God, 2 King. 4.23. 7 The feast of Expiation, Levit. 16.40. this feast was observ∣ed the tenth day of the moneth Tisri, the priest at this time went into the Holy of Holys and made an attonment for the sins of the people. For all their sins once a year. Yet the Jews say it was in memory, of Gods forgiveing them their sin of Idola∣try in worshiping the golden calfe. It is reckoned among their feasts (though in it self a fast) for that the Lord and they by performeing certain rites were agreed, a true cause of joy, and on that day the year of Jubile was proclaimed, a time of great mirth. 8 The feast of the Septennial Sabbath, Levit. 25.4. as every seventh day was a sabbath of rest, so every seventh year was a year of rest, to show that man his lands, his grounds, were all the Lords. 9 The Feast of Jubile Levit. 25.8. this was celebrated every fif∣tieth year, proclaimed on the day of expiation. It is called Jubile as some supposes from Jabal a Ram because it was proclaimed with sounding of trumpets or Rams horns. All servants were this year set free, and all lands that had been sold or morgaged returned to the true or first owner who had sold or morgaged them. It mysticaly shadowed that Spiritual Jubile, which Christians enjoy under Christ, by whose blood we are not on∣ly made free, but also the sound of the gospell, (which was typically showed by the sounding of the trumpets) is gone throughout the world, to those the Jwes themselves. added, 10 The Feast of Purim or of Lots, Esther 9.20. this feast was celebrated the 14 and 15. days of the moneth Adar, an∣swering to our February. In memorial of their deliverance from Haman. 11 The feast of comportion of wood, Nehe. 10.39. celebrat∣ed in the moneth of Ab, or Iuly, in memory of the
wood comported or brought for the perpetual nourishing of the fire under the altar of Ierusalem, accord∣ing to the law of God, to burn the sacrifices thereon made. 12 The feast of Dedication, 1 Maca. 4.59. of which we have spoken before. Now notwithstanding we find not in the new testament, any man bound to the observation of those days appointed by God to the Church of the Jwes, or of any other, yet because the exercise of Godlinesse may be interrupted through the fleshes frailty and the worlds emergency. In a holy Imitation of the Jewes piety and Mordechais zeale, and Iudas Maccabeus his devotion (whose feast though Apocryphal was observed by our Saviour) the Church of Christ here on Earth hath pointed out some days in the Calendar, to be kept holy to the Lord, for the honour of his name and credit of the gospel, as the feast of the Nativity, Circumcision, Epiphany, Purifica∣tion, &c, SECT. 5. Questions resolved. Quest. 1. Whether the feasts of the Church Catholick iffr from those of the Church of Rome. Quest. 2. Whether the Festivals of the Church of England may lawfully be observed. Quest. 3. Why are Bone-fiers made in England upon the feast of the fifth of November. Quest. 4. Whether the time of a Martyrs death be a proper time for feasting. Quest. 5. Whether the feast of Philip and Jacob be not pro∣phaned?
Quest. 1. Whether the Feasts of the Church Catholick differ from those of the Church of Rome. That the Saints are to be honoured, is by no true Christian denyed, and that days may be set apart, upon their account, to worship God in, is justifiable, and in this both the Catholick Church, and that of Rome agree, but vastly differ in the man∣ner of keeping these days, as also in other points touching those days. For 1 The Catholick Church, performes worship or makes pray∣er even in those days to God alone, whereas that of Rome offers supplications, petitions, intercessions to those Saints in whose days they are performeing that or any other holy service. 2 The Catholick Church keeps feasts, for no Saint, but what she is sure had a being, and once were, and keeps no day but upon good and real grounds, now that of Rome hath days ob∣served, and prayers made to those whose very being not with∣out just cause are called in question. It is very much to be doubt∣ed if ever there were such a man as Saint Christopher, or Saint George, or such a lady as Saint Ktherin, or how can they know that Iosph, the supposed Father of our Lord, was a pious con∣fessour, or that Lady Anne was mother of the virgin Mary. Who was he that told them that the virgin Mary never dyed, but was taken up to heaven alive, Aug. 15. and therefore that day must be in red letters in the Roman Almanack, and on that day prayers must be made to her. This is not to serve the Lord Christ, the days that the Catholick Church keep, are such as have in them a real truth, and not legendary vanities. 3 The Catholick Church keeps no days in memorial of Saints but those whom she knows to be good, they were not only men, but good men whom she honours with a day, now in this the Church of Rome also fails, she hath not only days in remem∣brance
of them that never were, but dayes in memoriall of them that never were good. Thomas Becket must be Sainted and given to the Christmas holy days by way of augmentation, and yet his religion purely consisted in rebellion, and being an arch traytor, deserved to be preferred in another sort, and as we pray to Saint Feriol for geese, to Saint Agatha for sore breasts, to Saint Giles for Children, to Saint Hubert for dogs, to Saint Iab for them that have the pox, to Saint Kathern for know∣ledge, to Saint Orilia for the head arch, to Saint Russin for madnesse, to Valentine for the falling sicknese, so we must pray to Bcket for sinners, when if stubornesse be as iniquity: were he in a capacity to be bettered by prayers, supplications ought to be made for him, yet poor souls are taught to pray. Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te Impendit, ac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. The like might be sayd of many others 4 The Catholick Church, she loves, useth, and enjoyn∣eth those days to be observed, as meanes conduceing to the good of men, and no further, no, what ever day be enjoyned by Rome, were it Beckets or Leola's they must be observed as part of divine worship, binding the consciences of men to the observation of them, though but of humane con∣stitution, in themselves, and often times fictitious in their nature. Quest 2. Whether the Festivalls appointed by the Church of England may lawfully be ob∣served? Those solemnities established by law in the Church of England ought not by any that is compos mentis, well in his wits, to be spo∣ken
against for they appear in many respects to be lawfull and usefull. 1 From that countenance God gave to those feasts Instituted by the Church of the Jewes under the Law: the the days of Pu∣rim, was never spoken against, and that seven days feast of Iudas Maccabeus his institution, was graced by our Sa∣viours observance, shall they and may they appoint days to worship God in for temporall mercy and not be bla∣med? what hinders then but that the Church of England may appoint days to return thanks for spiritual mercy shown to her in common with the whole Church of Christ on Earth? 2. From the nature of that worship she in those days per∣formes, though the day may be denominated from a Saint, or kept in remembrance of one, yet the prayers she offers up are purely to Christ, the Gospel she reads is the Gospel of Christ, the bead she breaks is the communion of the body of Christ, and nothing is done in way of worship but what is agreeable to the rule of Christ and will of Christ. 3. From that opportunity that they put into the hands of such as hunger after spirituall food, they may by these of∣ten hear the word of the Lord, receive the Sacrament instituted by the Lord as a memoriall of his death, untill his second coming, and what ever ordinance they take most delight in, or receive most refreshment by of that they have abundance in the using of those dayes instituted by the Church. 4. From that profit that would accrew to the poorer and weaker sort of people to them those days would be a Cate∣chisme, upon the feasts of the nativity to hear of the birth of Christ, and afterward of his circumsion, and then of his passion, and then at Easter of his resurrection, and then of his ascension, and then of the spirits descension, and so for∣ward this might, being taught upon those dayes, be of very great consequence to all Christians, especially to those whose understandings are not ripe enough for high contem∣plations in subjects of this nature.
5 From that power that the Church hath to ordain fasts, and dayes of humiliation, which is granted, we may draw her power to ordain feasts and dayes of thanksgiving which is the thing doubted, but of the power of the Church in such cases we have spoken in another place. 6. From the doctrine of reformed Churches, Confess. of Helva. Art. 24. of Bohem. Art. 17. which Churches deliver their minds thus: that of Helvatia says. Every Church doth choose unto it self a certain time for publick prayers, &c. & it is not lawful for every one to overthrow this appointment of the Church at his own pleasure, and if the Churches do reli∣giously celebrate the memory of the Lords Nativity, Circum∣cision, Passion, &c. according to Christian liberty we do very well allow of it. The Church of Bohemia says thus; Many of the ancient Ceremonies are retained among us at this day: of this sort be many appointed for feasts and holy days, &c. such as Christs nativity, such as be dedicated to the Apostles, &c. chiefely of those Saints of whom there is mention made in holy Scripture; all these things are done of us that the word of God may be taught and that he may be glorified among us, &c. the same teacheth, the Church of Ans. Art. 4. The ignorant must or may learn that the observation of those dayes is no superstitious observation of days condemned in Gal. 4.10. for with the Atheist there is neither good luck, nor bad luck, supposed to be in them, neither with the Papists are the consciences of men tyed to them: It is no more a sin to observe such times as the Church teacheth, then it is will-worship to observe noon for dinner time, or to open a shop upon a market day.
Quest. 3. Why are bonefires made in England upon the feast of the fith of November. It is not only the Practise of England to make bonefires upon dayes of thanksgiving or great deliverance, but almost every where: yet we shall chiefly consider it upon that account. 1 That the fire might be a memoriall of our deliverance from the Popish fire, there was a secret pile, to devour the blood of nobles, and burn to ashes the bones of Princes, and powder to blow up the Majesty of Kings, to remember which to all posterity, fire and powder is then in an harmless way used by us, and layd before us. 2 To show what death traitors ought to dye, a rebel is as a witch, and therefore ought not to have the Eearth which is Gods to be buried in, but to be dissolved to ashes, and blown to and fro in the ayr, the region or principality of him with whom they covenant, against them that are called Gods on earth. 3 To prevent darknesse least it should hinder men in ma∣nifesting their joy, they will have light to rejoyce in, though the Sun go down:Satan is prince of the power of the ayr: and there∣fore the fit. est place for such witches to have heads and limbs abid in. the longest day may be too short for a loy∣all subject to make known the Love he beares to his Prince in his rejoycing through that deliverance which God is plea∣sed to give unto him, this makes him, that in spight of might he will have day, and for all that others eyes are closed up in darknesse, he will have light roud about him. 4 To expresse that heat and fire of affection that is in the bosomes of all true subjects, the fire of wood burns in the streets, and the flame goeth toward heaven, this is a visible sign of that fire of zeale and holy affection which goeth up in praise and thanksgiving for that deliverance. 5 That the memoriall of it might be kept up to all ge∣nerations, we know that Children delight to look in the fire; let them this day play about the fire: It is such circumstances
as those, that will make the deliverance even be observed of Children, that as soon as they learn to speak, they can prat∣tle of the powder treason, which but for this would be scarce known of them. 6. That it might mind traytors of the fire of hell: fire is dreadfull, but who can dwell with everlasting burnings, and though this fire burn them not through the Kings mercy; yet fear that everlasting fire through Gods justice. Quest. 4. Whether the time of Martyrs death be a proper time for feasting? It is certain, that the days in which the Saints were crowned with Martyrdome, or baptized with their own blood, is not feasted in, purely for their dying: shall the Church of God make great mirth An. c. 37. for the death of Stephen, when the Church of Christ, made great lamentation, over him, A. c. 36. The Church keeps feasts not purely for that: but 1 For the preservation of the Gospell notwithstanding their death, Stephen was stoned to death that the light of the Gopell might be extinguished, Herod Ascalonite sur∣named the great slew the infants or innocents of Bethlelm, that Christ might have been killed: for his preservation, more then for the poor childrens deaths doth the Church rejoyce. When Andrew the Apostle was crucified, when Iames had his braines dashed out, when Thaddeus was slain, when Matthias was stoned, when Philip and Peter was cru∣cified, when Matthias, Iames, Paul, and Matthew were be∣headed, Bartho slayed alive, &c. It was done for to hinder the Gospell, which not doing the Church makes great mirth. 2 For that confirmation the Gospel received by their deaths: those men put to their hand, and by their blood gave testi∣mony touching the truth as it was in Jesus. In this they set to their seales that God was true; for by their blood, and their constancy in death did religion it self receive a rigorous life.
The Churches foundation was with blood, so was its propa∣gation, this makes the Christian to rejoyce: 3 For that glory that was given to the Saints at that time, the day of the Saints Martyrdome, was the day of their coro∣nation, they were crowned with glory and immortality, hence it is said that devout men made great lamentation over Stephen, Act. 8.2. not for him, it was a losse to the Church not to Stephen to be stoned from life, especially in that time of her none-age, when she was but weak and feeble to re∣sist that power wherewith she was dayly assaulted. The Church being now established devout men rejoyce for that consolation that God that day gave Stephen in reference to him selfe, and also for stirring up such a man to evince the truth of that doctrin, which they professe that all its enemyes were not able to resist. 4 That it might be as motives to perswade others to constancy, if God should call them forth to suffer: were it not for the celebration of those days, the storys might pa∣sse without much observance, but in the return of the year people hearing the nature of the Apostles deaths, their pa∣tience in them, the advantage that it gave to the grow∣ing of Christianity, they might receive profit and advantage even in point of suffering. Quest. 5. Whether the Feasts of Phillip and Jacob be not profaned. That the Church might not be overflowed with publick solem∣nities and being willing to commemorate Gospel Saints bring sometimes two Apostles in together, perswading her members by their examples to sutable holinesse, as upon the first of May, Philip and Iacob. Unto which the Satanicall and Hethenish practise of erecting May-poles, is an unsutable pro∣phane preface as may appear. 1 From the lawlesse practise of them, neither Church nor State
as now constituted gives strength to such customes. The Church setting apart this day for holy uses, and the state owns it by obedience, but of this custome taking no notice, some other originall would then be inquired after for this annuall custome then law, for no statute was ever made in the least to countenance that irregularity. 2 From the sinfull originall of them, Let this practise be traced up to the times wherein these May-games were first instituted,Cod. Rom Aut. lib. 1.7.87. Ovid lib. 5. fast. As a day or place may have relative holinesse though not absolute, so a thing or act may be relatively prophane absolutely no hurt be in it.  tubae so∣nitu vocata nudato co∣pore in flora lib. discurat Farn. in Iu∣ven. Sat. 6. Cato severe venistii A ideo tantum vnras ut exires Mat. epig. lib. 1. Ep. 1. half the mirth is in the poles stealing. and a nationall Christian will grant the question without much dispute. They sprung out of this ground (viz.) There was one Flora or Maia, who being a notorious strumpet of the City of Rome when heathen, gathered great riches; leaving the common-wealth her heir, upon con∣dition they should yearly celebrate her birth-day. The Senate being ashamed to own such open prophannesse, coloured the businesse by giving out that she was a goddesse of the fields, meadows, flowres, &c. and except she were pleased and appea∣sed nothing that year would prosper. Upon this her feast is instituted (the Devil being alwayes Gods ape) and observ∣ed the four last days of Aprill and the first of May, at which times all sorts of wickednesse was acted, and women ap∣peared upon the streets of Rome in those dayes naked: the young sort with flowres, garlands, &c. and dancing of Elephants and other exercises spent their time. The very mentioning of this should make these things not so much as to be named among Saints, &c. yea what height of impiety was coneived, as when a Mayd out of most parishes was culled out personally to represent this Flora, under the notion of a May-Lady: who oftentimes by relation proved a May-where, &c. 3. From the circumstances that do accompany them, appear they to be sinfull and the day of those glorious Saints prophan∣ed, as 1 Stealing, this is so frequent, and so known a custome, that it needs no proof, and so odious that it needs no con∣futation. 2 Prophanation of the Lords day, Once in seven years,
the day set apart for the Lords resurrection,More peo∣ple appear at those games, then at the Churches devotion. Ths suits with the o∣riginal of those game not with the church∣es Institu∣tion of this day. Except it be the sel∣ling of the pole by the Erectors, though this also eventualy is not good. must be abused by those May-games, and the day of the Lords Apostles is  prophaned by these sports, it is held unlawfull to prophane the places set apart for the Lords worship by any thing that is not comly, sure this therefore upon this day ought not to be esteem∣ed decent. 3 Great loosenesse, as quarrels, fightings, drunkenesse, which so certainly are known to attend it, that good, honest, moral men have no hand in them, but the loose wicked and de∣boyst. If it were good holy men would own it, if not bad wick∣ed men would not incourage it. 4. Eventualy there is no good in them. What Christians do ought to be for the glory of God, either originaly or eventualy, now these sports originaly tend to his dishonour, casualy pro∣phanes his day, really and sensibly breaks his laws, abuseth his creaturs, and in the close brings no honour to Christ, and therefore are not to be suffered where God or Christ is owned. If this day be set apart in pious memoriall of Christs disciples, for the doctrine of the Gospel to be publickly taught, Flora (who in these May-games is remembred) ought not to be commemorated which so suits to the doctrine of Devils, left prophannesse in the streets hinder our prayers from heaven. I would have insisted on this longer, but since the de∣livery of this there came forth a tract in particular against May-games called Funebria Flora, to which I referre the Reader.
CHAP. 8. Of a Church or Temple. WE are now to speak of the place of publike teaching cryed down in these days of Schisme, there being some that speak of them as the Edomites in the day of Ierusalem, Psal. 137.7. Rase them Rase them even to the foundation. Not that teaching is confined to a place, for with our Saviour men may preach upon a mountaine, Mat. 5.2. or in a ship, Mat. 13.2. but that a place gives a lustre to teaching, and a place be∣ing an ordinance of God comes within the compasse of our in∣tentions, and those places that are set apart for Gods worship in a publick and orderly manner being in our days slighted, it is not unprofitable to speake something of them. In the handle∣ing of which we shall see. 1 That there were such places. 2 The names of those places. 3 The necessity of such places. 4 Resolve some questions. SECT. 1. That there were some cert places wherein men did worship the Lord in times of peace and settlement, is clear in Scripture both before and after the law. 1 Before the law, Gen. 4.3, 4. Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, and Abel brought, of the Firstlings of his flock, and of∣fering unto  Lord. Now bringing suppo a place which they both brought their offerings unto, even that place which by their Father, Adam, who shall be the priest that offered his sons
sacrifice, had been as it were consecrated for Gods house, where∣in he and his family might publickly worship, for Cain when he had slain his Brother is said, to flee from the presence of the Lord, which must in this sence be only understood. This is the first congregation we read of, and represents all other to the end of the world. It is a mixed one, consist∣ing of good and bad members, sincere and Hypocritical of∣ferers. As bringing supposes a place, so a sacrifice supposes an altar, in which or at which the Lord is said to dwell, and an altar, and a sacrifice suppose a priest which in regard of dignity must be Adam. Who as a priest unto his family as Iob for his, offers up sacrifices for their sins and offences. Lo here at the very beginning of the world do we implicitly see a place set apart for publick worship. For God to dwell in, for God to be praised in; for God to be consulted withall, and for God to be offered to; which not only used for that time of Cains offering; but constantly dureing Adams aboad in that place, Gen. 4.16. In this sence generaly Divines take that place, Gen. 4.26. Then (viz. In the days of Seth) began men to call upn the name of the Lord. Not that he was forgot before, but in more pub∣lick places or Churches, for men at that time building citys and houses for their own security and ease, it is not to be sup∣posed that places for Gods worship to be celebrated in, with safety and honour, was forgotten, since nature taught the very heathen to set apart places for the worshiping of their false Gods. Especialy since the distinction of clean and unclean beasts which was chiefly in respect of Sacrifice, was known be∣fore the flood, Gen. 7.2. That God that taught them to offer sacrifice, taught them also which to offer, and how to offer; without doubt taught them also where to offer, for the more honouring of his name in the eyes of the sonnes of Cain. To let passe that place, of Mount Ararat, where Noa, (that preacher of righteousnesse) builded an altar, and sacrifi∣ced. Gen. 9.20 and come to Abraham, for by him God intends,
and from among his sons, purposes to get himself a name, and establish to him self a Church; he near Bethel, builds an altar and there he worshipped God, not for a day only but as long as he and his family lived there, Gen. 12.8. by reason of a famine Abraham is forced to dwell in Egypt, who comeing thence when God had visited Canaan with bread, came to the place of the altar which he had made there at the first, and called upon the name of the Lord; Gen. 13.3, 4. that is at Bethel, whose name of old was Beersheba, Gen. 20.10, 19. At this selfe same place did Isacck build an altar and worship God, Gen. 26.23, 24. In the same place did God appear to Iacob, Gen. 28.10. Surely (saith he) the Lord is in this place, the house of God, vowes that it shall be Gods house and that he will give his tithe thereto, or of∣fer them thereon, ver. 17. And when after twenty years he re∣turned he is called upon to go to Bethel, and offer sacrifice which he did, Gen. 35 1. At the same place he offered when he went down into Egypt. Gen. 46.1. For to sojourn, with his son Ioseph. Thus we see Bethel was as it were the Mother Church to these three glorious patriarcks, their other altars o places of sacrifice being but chappels of ease unto it, nay it is not improbable, that it is the very place where Noa sacrificed at first, however we are sure, it was a place of worship, a place where God dwelt, in the days of Samuel. 1 Samuel 10.3. Further, Gen. 22.2. Abraham is commanded to go to mount Moria, and offer up his son Isaack, the very same place where David is directed by God to build a altar for restraining the plage among his people, the place where Abrahams altar stood, A. M. 2062. was the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. A. M. 2922. and the place which was his threshing floor, was the place where Solomon laid the foundation of his temple, A.M. 2933. and then and there God established himself a Church; and appointed that to be the place of worship, unto the Church of the Iwes, but this leades us to the next point (viz.) 2. After the law, and that before the Captivity and after.
1. Before the Captivity, when Israel had been in the house of bondage, and from it delivered, and when God had given them rest, he appointed a place of worship, Deut. 12.5, 11. to bring burnt offerings, sacrifices & tithes, which is called his habita∣tion; this was in Shiloc, Ios. 18.1. and there was the place of Israels service all the days of the days of the Judges, even untill the days of David, 1 Sam. 1.3. who removed it into his own city, 2 Sam. 6.12. Where it abode in tents untill Salomon builded a Temple, 1 Kings 6.1. where it remained all the days of the Kings of Iudah, untill the days of Zedekiah, 2 Chron. 36.11. at which time the Temple or house of the Lord was burned with fire, A. M. 3360. 2 King. 25.9. and the Lords people carried away to a strange land even unto Babylon, where the harps of the sons of Iacob were hung upon the trees by the rivers of Babylon, as being of no use, since the glory was de∣parted from Israel, Psal. 137.2. 2. After the Captivity, and that before Christ and after. 1. Before Christ. When the seventy years of Iacobs trouble was accomplished, according to the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah; Cirus King of Persia, who had conquer∣ed in battel Asyages King or Emperour of Bbylon, and uni∣ted the Monarchy, A. 3403. he appointed that the house of the Lord should be rebuilded at Ierusalem, 2 Chro. 36.22. the foundation of it is laid by Zerubbabel, A. M. 3422. Ezek. 10. and finished, A. 3528. and dedicated for a place of pub∣lick worship, Ezra. 6.15, 16. this continued the place of wor∣ship for 350. years, and and then was polluted by Antiochus Epiphanes, by reason of Idols, but being cleansed by Iudas Maccabeus it was restored unto its first use, 1 Mac. 4.59. and repaired afterwards by Herod the Ascalonit, King of the Jews, who also beautified it with sumptuous buildings and curious stones, to obtaine favour of that people, not for love of the place, which continued the days of our Saviour. 2. After Christ, and that before and after his ascension. 1. Before his ascension, In our Saviours time we read free∣quently of Synagogues, so called from the word  to ga∣ther
together, and may be applied to any thing whereof there is a collection, yet they are vulgarly taken for those houses de∣dicated to the service of God, wherein it was lawfull to per∣form any kind of holy service, except sacrifycing. The Temple at Ierusalem was as the Cathedral Church for the whole Dio∣cess of Israel; and these Synagogues, as Parish-Churches to the people. When they began, the Scripture gives no particular account, however in regard that the Temple was a great distance from most of the people, and the Sabbaths were to be observed: Its probable they were erected in the days of Iosuah after the Lord had given the people rest: That they were in Davids time is clear, Psalm 74.8. And Moses of old time was preached therein every Sabbath, Acts 15.21. In the City of Ierusalem there were 480. of them; there were of them in Ga∣lilee, Mat. 4.23. In Damascus, Acts 9.2. At Antioch, and at Salamis, Acts 13. In all which places Christ and his Apostles did preach and teach the people. The Synagogues had written over the gates, that of Psalm 118.20. This is the Gate, the Righteous shall enter into it. and upon the walls within for the people to meditate upon such sentences as these, Remember thy Creator; Silence is com∣mendable in time of Prayer. In them the Scribes ordinarily taught the people; And as in the Temple there was a high Priest, in these there was a chief Ruler: they had in them al∣so an Ark, wherein they keeped the book of God, and the peoples faces were towards it; both these and the Temple were places of publick worship in the time before Christ his ascention. 2. After his ascension, Peter and Iohn taught in the Temple, Acts 3. & 5.42. so also in the Synagogues, as those of the Li∣bertines, Cyrenians, Alexandria, of Asia, Acts 6.9. and several other all which were places set apart for divine service, and frequented by the Apostles, Acts 14.1. during their life, yea, since Ierusalems destruction, the Jews had Synagogues in Rome, Venice, Mentz, Frankford, Fridburg, Amsterdam, in Polonia, and in Hungaria, where they meet together to pray, and to
hear the Law, and great preparation is made before their en∣trance; using these words when the bok of the Law is brought out of the Ark, into the pulpit, Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, Psalm 68.1. SECT. II. There being in all ages such places as were set apart for divine service in solemn publick manner, by the Saints and people of God, we may conjecture what they are that would have none; but to leave them, and come to the Names that unto those places were given; in doing which we shall instance only in the more usual remarkable and principal, as these, viz. I. The house of God, Gen. 28.22. Or the house of the Lord, 1 Kings 6.1. with many other places; and that, 1. Because designed for his peculiar service. 2. Because here in a special manner he is said to dwell, 1 King. 8.10, 11, 12, 13. II. The house of prayer, Mat. 21.13. That being a prin∣cipal part of worship: not that prayer was confined unto it, But, 1. Because prayer was there made, Acts 3.1. 2. Because God in a special manner promised to hear the prayers that were made, not only in it, but towards it, 1 King. 8.30, 48. & 9.3. Dan. 6.10. III. The Temple, Mat. 24.1. Take Templum for Tectum amplum: a large covered place to hide God in; and so the Ta∣bernacle was a Temple, the place for publick worship from Moses unto Samuel, 1 Sam. 1.9. that being set apart for the same use that the Temple afterward was, which was also a ve∣ry large place: 1. Take Templum for Templando, or Contemplan∣do; for the place where Gods nature, word and works were contemplated, heard and admired; and so all the places of publick worship from the dayes of Adam, might be called Temples, however it is generally used for that glorious stru∣cture of the house of the Lord in Ierusalem.
IV. The Church, 1 Cor. 11.22. of which there are two sorts: 1. The material Church, which is builded with the same matter that other houses are; yet distinct from them in regard of the use they are designed for, they being made to eat and drink in, and what if I said, to sleep in, these for to worship God: Of them the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11.18, 22. 2. There is a spiritual Church, which is the whole num∣ber of the faithfull souls in general, or any holy soul in par∣ticular, which is a personal Church; Of them the Apostle speaks, Rom. 16.5. The same distinction is made of Tem∣ples, 1 Cor. 6.19. Hence it is that those places of publick worship, of which we are now speaking, may be called a Church or Temple, that is, material Churches, being as the Temple set apart for Gods worship, and as it were abiding in them, Rev. 1.20. SECT. III. We come now to be informed touching the necessiy of those publick places for Christian worship, by which we hold not the incon∣sistency of a Church without these, but the dignity only; they are necessary for its honourable being, and for decency and or∣der, for these reasons. 1. From the nature of the precepts: there are commands in Scripture for the keeping of a Sabbath; for the peoples hearing of the Law, for the Prophets teaching, and for the peoples gathering together; all which in their own nature im∣plie the necessity of having a proper and publick place to do these things in. 2. From the practise of all Nations; we see no Nation al∣most throughout the habitable world, but hath places set apart for the worship of their false Idol gods, and it hath been dis∣covered that the Saints of old had places, (not to say build∣ings, for they were not from the beginning) where they erect∣ed Altars, and worshipped the Lord, and inquired of him, touching doubtfull cases, Gen. 25.22. shall Christians then be
backward, and want places of worship for to serve their Lord and Master. 3. From the confusion that would upon the want of them, ensue: if every one might worship God in what place he pleased, or every family in what place they pleased: We may without the Spirit of Prophecy, foresee as by a vision that thereupon would follow nothing but disorder, confusion, devi∣sion, sedition, destruction, and it were to be feared damnation. 4. From that ease it gives to Ministers. In those places one Sermon may feed five, yea ten thousand, which could not be done were he to go to every particular company in what place they thought best, so he should no where be sure of a Congregation, and while he were teaching one, the other might be without instruction, and he not able through weari∣ness to preach any more, some must want, which in time would make the people heap to themselves Teachers contrary to the practise of good people and sober Christians, 2 Tim. 4.3. 5. From that care that it puts upon Ministers: These publick places and solemn meetings puts a certain awe up∣on the Preacher, that he dare not utter that but what he is able to defend, and what he knows to be truth, in regard it cannot be recalled without some stain, nor denyed without abundance of sin, in regard of the multitude that hears, which private meetings and corner-assemblies, and brew-house or kitchin Sermons clearly takes away, it being pos∣sible to preach to recal, and deny that to one of them which he uttered in another: and to speak truly, the Kitchin or Barn is a good shelter both against Ignorance, Heresie and Falshood. 6. From that honour they bring to religion: Is it not more honourable for Christ to be worshipped by his Disciples in large, decent, comely structures, the very walls of which hath a certain holiness in them, to put an awful respect into the soul of him that enters, & to see a number of Christians praising the Lord with one breath in this house, then to see the same num∣ber meeting in a Washouse, Warehouse, Backhouse, or any other outhouse, worshipping God. When the Turk hath starely Temples, the Jews clean Synagouges to perform that service their ignorance and infidelity leads them to.
SECT. IV. Questions resolved. Quest. 1. Whether those places may be consecrated. Quest. 2. Whether those places may be termed holy. Quest. 3. Whether such places that have been builded by Roma∣nists may be lawfully used by Catholicks. Quest. 4. Whether at a Christians Entry into those places, he may perform his devotion. Quest. 5. Whether it be lawfull to have Musick in Churches now. Quest 1. Whether those places may be consce∣crated? When it is affirmed that Christian Churches may be consecrated or dedicated, it is not granted that the Walls of it are to be sprinkled with holy water, or that crosses are to be mae on the pavement with Salt, Ashes, Water and Wine mingled together, with many other Fopperies used in the Church of Rome; But a solemn publick setting apart, that building for holy uses, and no other by preaching and praying; which practise is lawfull. 1. From the practice of Salomon, and other pious Princes, 1 King. 8.63. having builded the Temple of the Lord at Ie∣rusalem, he and his people did consecrate or dedicate the same, that is, separated it from all secular or civil uses, and ap∣propriated the same unto God, by prayer and sacrifice, de∣siring that God would own it for his house, and hear the prayers that should be made in it, or towards it, ver. 9. which service was accepted, and God promised so to do, 1 Kings 9.3. the
like did Zerubbabel at the building of the second Temple, Ezra 6.16. The like did Iudas when he had raised a new Altar in the Temple of Ierusalem, the heathens having pol∣luted the other for three years, 1 Mac. 4.59. which dedicati∣on was owned, countenanced, and graced by our Saviour him∣self, Iohn 10.22. He was not it seems so scrupulous in his judgement, as some in our generation are: but that they value not, Christ and they differing often in point of practise, well may they differ in point of judgement: The like we read, 2 Kings 12.18. 1 Kings 15.15. 2. From the Law or rule of proportion, if all along we find in the Scripture things that were appointed for the service of God consecrated, and that service approved of, counte∣nanced and owned by him, whether done to persons, things, or places; what should hinder but that things and places set apart now for his worship and service might be also so de∣icated: were it a pulpit that God would bless the doctrine taught in it: a Church that he would bless, and cause to pros∣per the souls of such as delight in it, and so of any other thing. 3. From the practise of people in their several dwellings; they will when they have finished a house, set one room apart for a Parlour, another for a Bed-chamber, which is a civil de∣dication, setting them apart for their use, and the very al∣tering of those uses, hath a piece of unseemliness attending it: a sink in a Parlour, and a jack in a Dineing-room, were not comely, and therefore not used, because of the civil de∣dication. Now is it not therefore as proper, that that house in a parish builded for the Lord, have its sacred dedication, and separated by some holy service for that end and purpose; which may put a kind of sham upon any that would out of cros∣ness or wickedness alienate it from its proper use: but this bra∣zen sacred age hath quitted shame, and our upstart noble men and Gentlemen, would be loath to have their grooms litter, or curry their horses in their Halls, yet these sacrilegious and prophane Saints, could approve, ye command them to do it in Churches.
Hear this, ye old men, and give care all ye inhabitants of the Land; hath this been in your days or even in the dayes of our Fathers, 1 Joel 1. O Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Aske∣lon, Kings 1.20. 4. From that holy and generall rule of the Apostle avouch∣ing, All things to be sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Tim. 4.5. It is these two by which our meat, our drink, our beds be sanctified, that is that these things are fitted for their use for which they were appointed designed and created: the like may be said of Churches, that may serve for the use and purpose for which they were designed, framed and ere∣cted. 5 For the greater terrour to the enemies of Christianity, or indeed of regularity, when they shall know that this place, this table, hath been set apart for Gods worship for, prayer, Preaching and the Sacraments, and seeing from Scripture that both God and Christ allowed of the like practises in for∣mer ages, they may be affraid of alienating or thwarting the first institution of the same. Quest. 2 Whether those places, or Churches may be termed holy? It was to be admired that some pretending to be so familiar with Scripture that it was their ordinary language, yea the main ingredients of their orders and warrants would be text: yet be highly offended with others, for speaking the language of the holy Ghost, in calling a man devout, or a Church holy, which are Scripture expressions, to passe over the former, and that we may not be mistaken in the latter, we must di∣stinguish of Holinesse, for there is an absolute or relative holinesse. 1. Absolute; that is where holynesse is really inherent, and actuall in the nature of the thing, and so no created being
can be holy but Angels and men. It were high blasphemy to affirm a stone or a beam holy in this sense, for they that are so sanctified are glorified. 2 Relative, that is where holynesse is only adherent, and in respect of the presence, or interest that it hath unto ano∣ther that is holy, in this sence the person of the Levite, is in a peculiar way holy, Levit 21.6. as being separated from others for the service of the most holy God, so the Nazarite, Num. 6.8. so the sabbath is holy, so are the garments of the Priest, Exod. 28 2. In this the flesh of Beeves, of Calfes of Sheep, is holy, Numb. 18.9, 10. and the firstling of a Cow, or of a Shep, or of a Goat, are holy, v. 17. the Spoons, snuffers and vssels used in the temple or about the worship of God are holy, 1 Kings 8 4. And the garments in which Aaraon performed divine service are holy, Exod. 3.5. Ios. 5.15. the structure of the temple is holy, Psal. 79. 1. the ground upon which it stands is holy, Psal. 48.1. Zeph. 3.11. In which sense our Churches in the birth may be termed holy, the vestry holy, Ezek. 42.19. there was never a spoon in all Solomons Temple holyer then our pulpit cushions are, nor an altar in his Temple holyer then our tables, nor a basin holyer then our souls, nor a culhen our chalices, nor any of his hangings holyer then our communion cloaths: to speak then according to the language of the Spirit what ever it be that is set apart for the service of God to be used in his worship may without Idolatry or superstition be called holy, that is, in this relative sence in which only God speaks it; for absolute holinesse God knew they wanted. Quest. 3. Whether such Churches as have been Erected by Romanists may be used by Catholicks? It is an argument, brought by some who are wise in their own conceits, that the Churches or Temples no in England, being builded by Papists and defiled through Idola∣try
are rather to be levelled then supported, but nothing lesse. 1 From the end and purpose of their being builded. They were made by the Papists, to worship God in, and him in the Lord Jesus, for the honour of Christ and him crucified were they erected, if there were Idolatry mixed with this general end we may remove that and let the place stand, and it is done. 2 From the practice of godly Princes, Holy Hezekiah did not destroy the temple, though it was defiled, by Ido∣latry in the days of King Ahaz, but cleansed it, neither did Iosiah overthrow the house of the Lord because it had been polluted by Mannasseth, but repaired the breaches and ruines of it. 1 King. 22.5. It is true they both broke down the groves and the high places, the Lord abhorring them, and command∣ing at the first Israel to bring them down. Indeed Iudas Maca∣bans pulls down the altar that had been poluted through Ido∣latry, and builds a new one, 1 Mac. 4.46. which it is ho∣ped will not be objected against us being Apocrypha, and if it should, when they can show us, that it shall be as easy and as cheap for as to build other Churches, as it was for him to build another altar, then something may be done, and yet at second thoughts it is easie to be supposed that there is scarce a communion table, (which the Altar typified) now in England that was originally used by any of the See of Rome. 3 From the scope & design of hem that would have those pla∣ces abolished, they foresee that such places could not be buil∣ded againe, and they know that such great lights, keps their glow-worm conventicles from appearing, these places being aloft, do condemn their meetings in corners: Christ preached on mont, was transfigured, crucified, ascended on a mount, all publick places, now this they have and there∣fore to keep their error from derection, they would have those places raized from the foundation.
Quest. 4. Whether at a Christians entry in∣to those places, he may perform his devo∣tion. Some have been thought superstitiously affected (by many that knew not what superstition was) for offering up upon their knees or otherwise prayer to the almighty at their first entry into the Church, but wrongfully; for, 1 To performe some part of worship, in a place set apart for worship is most sutable: it is an house of prayer, and therefore prayer is a proper act for the place, and no time more sitting then at the first entry. 2 Prayer obtains a blessing in other dutyes, he is possibly to hear the word read, preached or sung to crave a blessing that all these may do the soul good cannot be a branch of su∣perstition 3. It gives a good example unto others, when thou seest one performing any act of worship in that sort, whether out of formality or otherwise; yet by that thou mayst learn that in the Church thou oughtest to worship God, heed him not therefore so much as thy self, if he give hypocritical service the judge shall judge him, fear thou God. 4. It is but spoken to draw a contempt upon the house of the Lord, those actions with many others are inveighed at, that the house of the living God may be had in no more reve∣rence then Barnes, Stables, not to say Halls or Parlours, every thing is Popery in this age, wich either tends to decency or comeliness in outwards worship, as if we must be papists except we be slovens, 5. The reasons brought against this justifiable practise, are poor and weak, they are these chiefly. That they by this would hold forth the Church to be more holy then other pla∣ces. It may be answered it is, that they will perhaps not pray at other times, It may be aniwered, Blame them, and reprove them for that by themselves, blame them not at all for this to any other.
Quest. 5. Whether is it lawfull to have Musick in our Churches. This is of it self nothing, yet since the rulers of the Church are pleased to introduce such a ceremony, and others take occasion to barke against them for it, it may be seasonable to speake a few things as to the lawfullnesse of its use, it appears therefore to be lawfull and that in our days, for 1 From the practise of the Saints in the Iewish Church, what variety of musicall instruments were introduced by David and Solomon is clear in sacred writ. When the ends that these holy Saints proposed to themselves are found out, they shall make it appear that it is as Lawfull to have musick now as it was then. 2 From the helps men may naturally receive from musick in the time of worship, God loves a chearful giver, and this may make a drooping soule to give him acceptable ser∣vice. 3 It was never a part of the Ceremoniall law, and there∣fore not abolished by Christ, that Law that Christ put an end to, was that that belonged to the tabernacle, musick being no part of that is no more abolished by Christ then standing Churches or Temples. 4 From that vision that was seen in heaven, Rev. 5.8. Four beasts and four and twenty Elders worshipped the Lord with harps: these are generally taken for Ministers and the congregation, and again, Rev. 14.2. there is heard the voice of harpers, harping and singing from heaven, though in the mystery that signifies there joy, yet in the Church, it is not absurdity to expresse or help their Spiritual joy by the naturall use of musick. 5 They who are against this are generally against matters of greater concernment, and their opposing of this is the lesse to be admired or noted.
CHAP. IX. Of Ministeriall ordination. THe party or person that teacheth which is the priest or Minister comes now to be considered, unto whom in the title we have given ordination, both are ordinances appoint-by God to go together, and both of them for that very thing cryed down in this generation for this time we shall put them together and distinctly handle 1 The nature of ordination. 2 The person to be ordained. 3 The parties who are to ordaine. 4 The duty of them that are ordained. 5 Resolve some questions? SECT. I. The nature of ordination may be expressed in these words. (viz.) It is a solemn setting of one apart, and ordaining of a person. 2. By Fasting and prayer. 3. For the preaching of the Word. 4. Dispencing of the Sacraments. And, 5. Exer∣cising the power of the Keyes. 6. With laying on of hands. 1. It is a solemn setting of one apart, and ordaining of a person] It is not to be rashly or inconsiderably done, 1 Tim. 5.22. but in most solemn decent manner ought to be perfor∣med, Acts 5.6. 2. It must be done by prayer and fasting: these two at this ordinance go usually together, Acts 13.3. For by prayer much may be obtained, and by fasting a strong Devil may be cast out.
3. For the preaching of the word, Acts 13.5. for the opening of the word by way of Doctrine, Reason and Use is the proper work for which one is separate to the work of the Ministry. 4. Dispencing of the Sacraments,] 1 Cor. 4.1. as that of Baptism, Mat. 28.19. and of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23. these are the seals and evidencies of our reconciliation with God. 5. Exercising the power of the keyes;] whom they bind on earth, they are bound in heaven, Mat. 18.18. Now they bind by excommunication, which is a delivery over unto Sa∣than, a casting them out of the Church, making them to have no interest in the ordinances of the Church, more then heathens or Publicans, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. Whom they loose on earth, shall be loosed in heavn, Mat. 18.18. Now they loose by Absolution, opening as it were the gate of the Church, to him that for his offences was thrust out, and re∣ceiveing him again upon his repentance to the communion and fellowship of the faithfull, 2 Cor. 6.10. 6. With laying on of hands] this is a grave and ancient ceremony in the Church of God. Iacob used it in blessing his grand children, Gen. 48.14. By it the Levites were given by the Isaelites 'o the Lord instead of their first-born, Numb. 8.10. By it the beasts under the Law were to be set apart by sacrifice, Num. 8 12. By it Ioshua was set apart to be Go∣vernour of Israel ter Moses, Numb. 27.23. By it did our Saviour bless those children that were brought unto him, Mark 10.16. By it was Stphen and his brethren made Dea∣cons, Act  6. By it Paul and Barnabas Apostles, Acts 13.3. And Timot made a Priest, Minister or Elder, 1 Tim. 4.14. for which cause in holy imitation of so ancient and divine a practise, the Bishop and his Presbyters lay their hands upon the head of them hom they separate for the work of the Mi∣nistry, 2 Tim. 1.6. being asign of celestial grace, which God with an open hand will give to all those who conscionably serve him in that holy imployment.
SECT. II. Let us now see unto whom this ordination is to be given, and who it is that ought to be thus separated in a solemn way for the service of God, what persons they be that Timothy and Titus the Bishops of Ephesus and Creet must ordain, is told us in their Epistles: some notes of them are essential, and some of them are accidental; some are for their being, some for their well-being; some shew their carriage without, and some their deportment within the Pulpit; we shall see only the chief of them. In a Minister there is required, 1. Courage, Tit. 2.15. 2. Sobriety, 1 Tim. 3.2. 3. Liberality. 4. Docibility, or aptness to teach. 5. Temperance. 6. Patience, 1 Tim. 3.2. 7. A Lover of good things, and of good men. 8. Holiness. 9. Justice, 1 Tit. 7.8. We must note, that some of these cannot be known by the quickest eye. No Bishop is omniscient to know the heart, and therefore may ordain a man that wants many of these; and al∣so we must observe, that a person may come for ordination, with many, or all of these and yet may backslide, which takes not away the force of ordination. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus fell from his first purity and love, yet was an An∣gel still, Rev. 2.4, 5. he may loose his patience, his tempe∣rance, his holiness, yet a Minister still, and the power of preaching and administring the Sacraments, and exercising the keys, abide with him, these ordinances not depending up∣on the quality of him that doth administer them, more then the force of the Broad Seal of England, depends upon the merits of my Lord Chancellour, as shall God willing be proved in its own place. To all these qualifications above named must be joyned competency of knowledge. It is not every man that is just, holy or patient must be ordained, he must be of understanding competent for the work, which competency appears in these particulars from Tit. 1.9 (viz.)
1. His adhering to the truth known, not opinionated. 2. In his ability to teach, and that soundly for the edification of the Church, according to that truth. 3. In his dexterity in maintaining of that truth, stopping the mouth of Gainsayers; he that is so qualified cannot be refused ordination. We say competently qualified', For who is sufficient for these things. SECT III. Let us see who they are that must thus ordain, whose hands they be, that by their laying on the person is qualified in an external way for the publick preaching of the word. 1. Not their own, Heb. 5.4. It is against the practise of the whole Church of God in all ages, for any man, though never so well gifted, to separate himself, or ordain himself, as is clear in the examples of Stephen, Nicanor, &c. Nay if it were in a mans own power to separate himself for the work of the Gos∣pel, Paul needed not to have left Titus in Creet, to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. It is a practice beyond a president in the Church of Christ, for one to ordain himself. We read indeed how Frederick the second upon Easter day (through necessity) crowned himself with his own hands King of Ieru∣salem in Ierusalem; but that ever man made himself a Priest in Ierusalem, save Saul, Ieroboam, and such prophane Wretches whom God did curse even for so doing we read not. Neither in old or new Testament, is there any instance of one who set himself apart for holy functions, or that thought himself qualified in an authoritative way to reach the Gospel upon the sufficiency of gifts, as Courage, Holiness, Knowledge, and the like; if so, Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, &c. needed never have been ordained Deacons, Acts 6.3, 4, 5. Nor Paul, nor Bar∣nabas, Apostle or Evangelist, Acts 13.2. nor Timothy a Bi∣shop or E'der, 1 Tim. 4.14. 2. Not the multitude: Never did God give the power of
ordination to the people in general, before, nor after Christ: if so, where two or three would please to meet, they might or∣dain, which in few dayes would make the Church of Christ conist of Shepherds, rather then of sheep; yea would make all Apostles, all Teachers, &c. We find the contrary practised. For when the multitude had chosen and nominated persons of ho∣nest report, full of the holy Ghost and Wisdom, thy set them be∣fore the Apostles who prayed and lid their hands on them, Acts 6.3, 6. yea, as was said before, the inhabitants of the Cities of Creet, might have ordained Elders; Titus might have gone forward with Paul. In summe God never giving the people the power of ordination since the creation: they can never deliver that power to any untill the dissolution of the world. Presumptuous are they therefore that will take ordination from them, impudent before the Lord, there∣fore, they that will presume to give that authority in matters of so great concernment (as the word and Sacraments) to any of their own body. 3. Only Church officers, or the Apostles successors; they are only to teach and to baptize unto the end of the world: Paul and the Presbytery ordains Timothy: he ordains others, and they others: and so by a moral succession from the Apo∣stles, is the Ministerial office upheld; but of this we have spoken. It were too great a task for me to offer to wade into that troublesome discourse touching Episcopal or Presbyterial or∣dination, least I should drown my self, being but of small standing in the Church of Christ: yet by vertue of that Proverb, It is good to be sure. Episcopacy is much to be preferred, that being the most ancient way since, if not before the Apostles departure from the world; and albeit it hath some ruptures or breaches in some of the reformed Churches, yet the Acts and Lawes of England make no ordination valid, but what origi∣nally is Episcopal.
SECT. IV. We are to behold the man thus separated for the Lords use, For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephes. 4.12. We say we are to see what his duty is, and what he is to perform amongst men. The very naming of his ordination shewes you what he is to do, and the distinction above named discovers his duty: but to be more particular, yet not large. 1. He is to take all advantages and opportunities of preach∣ing that word, the preaching of which he is separted for, 2 Tim. 4.1. 2. The more wicked the times be he lives in, the more bold and confident he ought to be, 2 Tim. 4.3. yet this excludes not, but that he may flee persecution, Acts 9.25. 3. In preaching of the Word he is to observe the proporti∣on of faith, Rom. 12.6. 4. He is to teach the word according to the capacity of his people, 1 Cor. 14.9. the other parts of his duty are clear and obvious. SECT. V. Questions resolved Quest. 1. Whether ordination may better a Ministers gifts. Quest. 2. Whether a Minister may renounce his ordination. Quest. 3. Whether the Ministerial office be to continue alway in the world. Quest. 4. Whether it be lawfull to hear an unordained man preach. Quest. 5. Whether an ordained person may bear an office in the Common-wealth.
Quest 1. Whether Ordination may better a Mi∣nisters gifts? Though this sacred ordinance be of no account with some, yet to the conscionable Receiver it may be very advantageous; For, 1. It is an odinance of God alwayes practised in his Church, it may appear at the first sight to the carnal Christian, but a low and poor device to gather some men together, and pray, and lay their hands upon anothers head, to make a man an Ambassador of Jesus Christ, to make him a steward of the Mysteries of God, a Planter, a Waterer, a Builder, and a Watchman to the Church: by the same kind of Logick the other ordinances of God might be abused: What force (may the same Creature say) hath a Morsel of bread, and draught of wine, in the Sacramnnt of the Lords Supper to assure men of heaven, to foagive their sins, to confirm faith, to qucken hope, to preserve love, and so contemn that. We ought in those cases to look to the institution and approbation of God, and practise of the Apostles; and to keep and hold up Gods ordinances in purity, is a means of being ever happy. This therefore of ordination being one, to receive it, to come to it, may procure much profit to the party that hath it, and to the Church for whom it is given him. 2. It imboldens him in that imployment, by this he may shew both his gifts and commission, which two may make his face as brass against the Irony faces of perverse & wicked men; There may be some whose imprudence may carry them out, to preach without this commission, yet when they read the Scripture, and see this ordinance practised, so constantly both in Law and Gospel, their conscience, (if they have one) must needs accuse of that of which the Pharisees were by ou Saviour, even for Thieves and Robbers, Iohn 10. by entring th Church, not by the door of ordination: for of the Pharisee preaching God gave no commission.
3. The solemn prayers of the Church with which that ex∣ercise is attended, may bring the holy spirit to him that is or∣dained, The gift of utterance, Gal. 4.3. The gift of Wisdom, 2 Tim. 1.7. being asked, God may send them down: Prayes. availeth much, and in an act of so high concernment, both to Christ and to his Church, it is not Christian like to suppose those prayers to be barred from the ears of God; he that is ordained may be a prophane sinner; yet as men will give the Nurse good things for love of the Children, God may give him gits for the good of his Church. Iudas bore the Bag by which Christ relieved the poor. 4. It binds him to that function; he that is once brought to the plow of the Scriptures, and hath put his hand to it, to till the ground of the hearts of men, is not through the uneven∣ness of the path, or hardness of the soil to forsake that im∣ployment; knowing that what ever happen, however the world go, this must be his work, it may, and without questi∣on doth make him set himself to his work, and study how to go through bad report and good report, &c. but this leads us to the Quest. 2. Whether a Minister may renounce his Ordination. It hath been the practise of some persons for the pleasing of a facti∣ons generation of late years, to contemn, quit, deny or renounce their ordination, but it savoured not of godliness. 1. The nature of Ordination is against it. That is a setting a man apart by the Church for that peculiar exercise and office, he is separate from othe imployments to follow this, and therefore it is not in his own power, to renounce it at his pleasure, or for any cause whatsoever. 2. That Assertion of our Saviour,  Luke 9.62. condemns it, He is not fit for the kingdome of God that puts his hand to the plough, and looketh back; he that makes an entry either
upon the preaching of Christ, or professing of him, must ne∣ver come back to the world for the renouncing of either. 3. The Ministerial office should fail, if this were granted. It is unknow what the thoughts of a Minister are, in his troublesome going through the parts of his office, and allow him power to forsake his calling, in a few years we might see Pulpits empty, the least cross, affront, persecution, might be arguments strong enough to induce him for the forsaking of his people, study, calling, and betake himself to some, other ho∣nourable profession, or whatever seemed good in their own eyes 4. The Laws of the Church will not suffer it to go unpunish∣ed if it be done. Those that are Church-officers themselves know what strong reasons may induce men to forsake and quit their callings, to put a chain to them that are otherwise with∣out conscience, the Church of England orders, No man being admitted a Deacon or Minister, shall from henceforth voluntarily relinquish the same,Canon 76. Church of England. nor afterward use him∣self in the course of his life, as a Lay-man, upon pain of excom∣munication, &c. Quest. 3. Whether the Ministerial Office be to continue alwayes in the World. There are spirits gone out amongst us, crying down the Ministry as Antichristian, affirming th; light within, or the witness within is only now to be heard: but these spirits when tryed, are not of God; for that office must and shall continue. 1. For Christ hath promised to be with it unto the end of the world. Mat. 28.20. Unto that time therefore it must endure. It is spoken to the Apostles the first Teachers who are dead, it must therefore be understood with them that are their successors in that office, which are now in being, and those that shall come after us who are not yet born.
2 From the imperfection of the Church, Eph. 4 11 12. Untill all the members of the Church come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a prfect man, unto the measure of the sature of the fulnesse of Christ, God will give Pastours and Teachers, admit that many were now perfect that were of age, yet for them that are young the ministry is necessary, there is dayly a young generation coming up, belonging to the Election of grace, and therefore the Church is not pefect, and therefore the Ministery must abide, that this Scripture might be fulfill∣ed. 3 God hath appointed this office to be the ordinary meanes of salvation: so long as their soules on Earth, this office must remain, there being no way shown by God since the fall but this, that can bring a man to glory; repentance, faith and good workes, must be tauht by them: and while he world stands this dctrine will be necessary. 4 The Sacraments must be received by the members of the Church untill Christs second coming, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.26. It is these men that have this power derived from the Apostles to administer the seales of the word, which seales untill the end of all things, and unill the coming of the Lord by the whole body of the Church must be received: by con∣sequence therefore there must be Church-officers to deliver the same untill the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. 5 From the practise of the holy Apostles and disciples of the Lord, They constantly ordained Elders and left them in Churches, which they had planted. And sure to the end there shall be as much need of odained Priests or Elders (for they are one) as then: men will be perverse, wicked, sinfull, Impenitent, unruly, ignorant, despisers of dignityes, un∣unregenerate, unholy, and still there will be some ignorant of the Misteries of God, & therefore care must be taken to plant and leave Elders in every City and in every country for the cure of those evills.
It is easie to behold how soon a parish or a village will grow loose, disorderly, and indeed loose, the very face of religion, if they want a setled Minister but a few moneths: the like we may judge what would befall the world should it want Church officers, Though people were wicked, yet an orderly keeping of the Sabbath, &c. conscience in some sort will bring them to it, but in unsetle∣ment they have arguments to stop consciences mouth, which by degrees brings them quickly to be Heathens, the Princi∣ples of religion, not taught them that are young, makes them regardlesse of God or his word either, when they come to years of maturity, and so their profession comes to be prophane and their conversation to be Ungodly, which in a great measure is prevented by a setled Minister though but of weak parts or abilities. Quest. 4. Whether it be lawfull to hear an un∣ordained man Preach? We must stand at the doore of this question avoid errour and distinguish of Unordained Preachers before we go for∣ward. 1. There is a preaching by way of tryall to ordination, their gifts, their knowledge, their uprightnesse, their utterance cannot be known but by preaching, the Church gene∣rally, will have a tryall of their parts before she separate any for that worke, thus Paul preached before his ordina∣tion. 2 There is a preaching by way of opposition to ordinati∣on, so there are some that will presumptuously execute all the offices of a minister, and slight ordination, desiring possi∣bly not to be bound nor tyed to that calling, that though their errours might be detected, yet their irregulari∣ty might passe unpunished, of these latter sort, the
Question is to be understood, and that it is unlawful appeares 1 Because to hear such is to goe out of Gods way, and practise: the Pharises that taught sound doctrin in some points, yet were but theeves and robbers, coming not in at the door but climbing up some other way, these the sheep hear not. Never did God give a power to any to ordain themselves Ste∣wards in his house, and therefore we are not to go to them for bread, left we be thought strivers against him, he ne∣ver intrusted them with his broad seale, and therefore we are not to receive the seales from them. Christs knows Paul, and Stephen, and Timothy; but these he knows not, there∣fore his people are bound to esteem them not as Ministers of God. 2 It encourages them in their irregular proceedings, when they behold, giddy heads, ignorant persons, curious spirits flocking after them, imboldens them and hardens them in their er∣rour, whereas to withdraw from them might in time make them ashamed of their doings. 3 It gives an evill example, when the weake Christian seeth one that is strong going to those upstart teachers, the weak may follow him; he may go out of wantonnesse or cu∣riosity, and the other may go out of conscience and frailty. 4 Errour is ever sooner believed, then truth. It is expe∣rimentally known, that an Heretick may broach that do∣ctrine in a day; which truth cannot overcome in a year: there is a certain connaturality between the nature of man and falsehood. It is best therefore to withdraw from them, the very foundation of whose teaching is erroneous, in as a much as the authority they pretend to have, goes contrary to that autho∣rity that ever God invested his Church withall. 5 Experience shews that God is offended with mans hearing or following of them, for we shall seldome see men giving eares to their doctrines; but what through ignorance of justice they are brought to believe a lye, which mkes them hop from one opinion to another; untill faith and religion be lost, and conscience it self be baffled or stifled; that they sit down in the seat of the scornful, and mock at laws established by either God or man.
Quest. 5. Whether an ordained person may have an office in the Common wealth. There are that maintaine this Popish tenet, and yet would be thought no Papists; that the Church hath nothing to do with the state, or that the government of the Church is a distinct thing from that of the state, a distinction framed upon his ho∣linesse anvil at Rome, and received here by them that are no good willers to the Catholick clergy, to be short an ordained per∣son, that is a man separate for spirituall offices may exercise ju∣diciall offices in the Common-wealth and state. 1 From the practises of those that were of old separate for the Lord, Melchizedek was both a Priest and a King, Gen. 14.18. a great part of the government of Israel was in the hands of the Levits, we find them judges. In all the businesse of the Lord, and in the service of the King, 1 Chron. 26.29. and ver. 19. Zecharia is a wise counsellour, They are also ap∣pointed together with the Princes, For judgement of the Lord, and for controversies in Jerusalem, between blood and blood, &c. 2 Chron. 18.8, 9. so also Samuel a Levit, was both judge and priest in Israel 1 Sam 7.15. and if ignorance make any boast of Samuels being a prophet, It may be answered that his sonnes were Levits, set a part by God for the service of the Tabernacle, Yet their Father made them judges in Israel, 1 Sam 8.1. his own circuit was yearly while he had strength and failing, he allotted circuits to his three sonnes throughout Israel. Who by reason of perverting judgement, through bribes are complained of by the people ver. 5. by the same rule it will follow that those that are separate now for the work of the gospel, may be in businesse of the Lord and also of the King. 2 From the abilityes of some persons that are ordained It may be known that in all matters of controvesie, in both
kindes of the Law, the Clergy may have more understan∣ding then many Gentlemen that are justices in the Country, and the presence of the Clergy may be helpful in that respect to the most judicious judge. 3 From that apparent necessity that there seems to be of it, the ordained person is not free from trouble, from Law∣suits, from warrants, taxations in which he may receive much wrong, if there be none but Lay-persons there, who usually may look over the inferiour sort of the Clergy with an unregardfull aspect, nay possibly the gentle∣man may be both judge and harry of himselfe. A minister may have stronger presumptions to be redressed of his wrongs which are seldome of the smallest magnitude, when he hath some of his own function upon the bench. 4. Officers of state may have much matters concerning God,That Parli. which sat Sept. 17. 1659 was long plea∣sed about the nature of blasphmy when J. N. was accused of it before a very wor∣thy society. his worship, his honour touching religion, now who more competent and fit to reason and debate withall then those spirituall persons I leave the reader to consider, in such cases without question they are chiefly to be imployed. It is not safe to interpret Scriptures without the ayd, help and assistance of them, who are more conversant in such writings as we have had sad experience of late dayes among our Gran∣dees. 5 From the benefit that would thereby accrue to the peo∣ple and honour of the Clergy, we see that every factious spirits boasts of his contending, and will not much value his falling out with the minister; this will put a bridle in the mouths of horses and mules, and for quiet spirits, if occa∣sion of Law suits be given, a minister through his learning, calling, gravity may bind his Parishioners to the peace with∣out troubling his Clerk, or taking any suretyes save God and their own consciences. 6 It is consistent with their ministeriall calling, it serves to the end of keeping up the Love of God and the Love of man, to the cherishing of godlinesse, and suppessing of wick∣ednesse.
7 From that inseparable interest, that the Church and state hath to each other, there are scarce any causes so purely civill, but have something of spirituality in it, nor scarce any so wholly spirituall but something in order to tem∣porals is in it. It is fitting therefore in such cases in court, of judgement, to have such persons as can determine touch∣ing the nature of the thing then in controversie. 8. Those persons that are against it, are such as fear, that should some civill power be put in the ministers hand, it might not only be a meanes to have him respected by o∣thers, but they durst not crush him, trouble him, contem nor indeed outwardly despise him as they do. This makes them (being taught by the Jesuits) to affirm that ordained Ministers are not to bear offices in the Common-wealth both against Scripture and reason. If it be said that the Apostles had no such power; answer may be returned as before, the Laws of the world ran against them, & the judges of the earth made them their prisoners, ra∣ther then their assisters: but after persecution ceased, and Chri∣stianity established, then what Christian comon-wealth almost throughout the whole world, but made use of them in tempo∣rall affairs, and particularly England, untill this late unhappy reformation, and what profit she received by their abolishing may be quickly and easily summed up—she hath drank of the new kind of government, and if she be not drunk with astonish∣ment; she will say as men of the new wine, that the old is better. Thus have we considered the three circumstances touch∣ing publick teaching proposed above, our Meathod now leads us to the thing it self. It is twofold, 1. A laying down the principles and founda∣tion of Christian religion, and this is called catechising▪ 2 A building upon those foundations by way of doctrine & use, and this is called Preaching: two ordinances set at naught by many that wish not well to our Ierusalem, we shall speak of them in their order.
CHAP. 10. Of Catechising. THis word Catechise comes from the Greek word , and is translated in our Bibles to instruct, Luke 1.4. To inform, Acts 21.24. And to teach, 1 Cor. 14.19. , that I might catechize, teach or instruct others. In this ordinance we shall discover, 1 What it is, 2 How it is to be performed. 3 To whom it must be performed. 4 Who are principally to perform it. 5 Why it is to be performed. 6 Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. The nature of this ordinance may be understood by this plain de∣scription. It is a teaching or unfolding the grounds and principles of Christian religion by way of question and answer. There is nothing here needs explication, and therefore we may passe it the sooner over: It teacheth the grounds and principles, reduceing the parts of religion to some few heads for the better preserving them in the memory. Our Saviour comprized the whole body of the law, into two parts. To the love of God, and to the love of ones neighbour, Mat. 22.37. So∣lomon draws the whole duty of man into two parts also; viz.
to fear God and keep his commandements, Eccl. 12.13. Paul draws all unto faith and repentance, Baptisme, Imposition of hands, the resurrection and of judgment, Heb. 6.1. So doth cate∣chizeing, draw those truths that are enlarged in preaching like an open hand into the closed fist of some larger head, that it may be the better remembered understood, and taught both by the catechist, and catechized. SECT. II. This kind of teaching artificialy is to be caried on and ought to be performed with a great deale of circumspection, or then it may rather marre then make a young beginner. It must be done 1 Orderly. In this the laws of method must be exactly per∣formed, he that would teach that God made the world out of nothing, must first teach that God is Almighty. 2 Plainly. The subjects trained up in this exercise, are usualy such persons as cannot understand high and sublime matters, as a tender Mother will spreak to her spradling and smiling Infant, such words which it can understand, so must a wise catechist to those whom he desires to informe, saying without tropes and figures. Come children, &c. Psal. 34.11. 3 Tenderly. Where there is a fayling if it be possible for him that catechises to hide it without errour let it never be disclosed, the smalest bone cannot be joynted when broken without pain, so neither can the smalest error be made manifest without shame. Encouraged all ought to be, That is thus taught, and this is one way, to passe over their failings in publick if it be possible. As David said touching Absolom, Deal gently with the young man for the Lords sake. 4 Frequently. A Catechisme is almost never learned, for when a man hath done he must begin; there must be a repitition. Every year must the Israelits instruct
their Children touching the doctrine of the passover, Exod. 12.26, 27. As young beginners will often run over their letter with a dry pen, so must tender Christians often go over their Catechisme untill the doctrine, therein contained, be∣come familiar. 5 Soundly. Corrupted doctrine, is not fit for a Catechist, this were to give poyson in stead of milke to a new born babe if the principles of religion he to be planted in a young Christi∣an, be sure that they be ound. Rotten Timber in the foun∣dation, is dangerous; so corrupt princiles for the ground∣work of Christianity is deadly. SECT. III. Touching the persons, who must be so taught we must  as large as ignorance. Where ever we find ignorance to dwell,  it is a proper place for a catechist, but yet for methods cause, we shall take a particular view. 1 All that are born in the Church▪ All that are baptized with water, ought to be taught the principles of that doctrine they were baptized in, The Jewish children, were taught the nature of their Sacraments, Exod. 12.17. so ought the Christian Infant to be trained up in the doctrine of Gospel ruth 2 Tim. 3.15. 2 All such as are converted to the Christian faith those that forsake the vanity of the heathen, the Infidelity of the Turke; The Errours of the Iew ought to be taught and instructed in the foundation-principles of the Catholick faith. If any should renounce the Superstition of the Romanist he were rather to un∣learn some principles then be taught new there being no prin∣ciple of Catholick concernment, wherein the universall Church differs from that of Rome. 3 All the unlearned of what age soever It is but a poor plea, to drop out of the world in ignorance because men are of age, if
they have lived under the power of the Gospel, their want of knowledge, will but make them full of misery. It is no dis∣grace to learn Christ at any time, and necessary for him that would raign with Christ at the end of time. However in this there is much caution, and moderation to be used, and even a respect is to be given to age, and an honourable mentioning of their name, &c. SECT. IV. It may appear by what hath been spoken, who are principally en∣gaged in this kind of exercise, and the prsons upon whom more especialy this duty lys. 1 Parents and masters▪ we shall joyn them together for brevity's sake: Deut. 6.7, 20. Gen. 18.19. Lemuel a Prince was taught by his mother, Prov. 31.1. and how Boaz principled his servants appears by their holy salutations and greetings each to other, Ruth. 2.4. Timothy was carefully trained up by his mo∣ther and Grandmother, 2 Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. and the fruit of Abrahams government appears in the piety, faithfullnesse and discretion of his steward, Gen. 24.12. They have the greatest advantages of any other, by their dayly society, & by their autho∣rity. And God in giveing the law, charges the master with his son and servant, touching the keeping of his sabbath, which is a circumstance of time; he is therefore to instruct them in that and not forget to teach the essentiall points of faith. 2 Ministers or Priests, It was a charge given to all pastours, in the person of Peter, Ioh. 21.15. to fed the lambs of Christ, there are them that are not able to retain a Sermon, or under∣stand a Sermon; or apprehend the parts of a Sermon, now this sincere milke of Catechising may make them grow in knowledge.
But what shall we say, the fewnesse of ministers the Num∣ber of the people, even makes this doctrine Impossible to be performed. There are many (I will not inquire the cause) that can, and have cut out worke enough for a minister to do, yet it had been wisdome to have considered how much one was a∣ble to do. Mens flesh is not of brasse, nor their strength the strength of stones, to execute all that which men will lay upon them; and God himself will require no more then what man is able to do: where many iorns are in the fire, they cannot all heate, the work that most of the clergy of England especi∣ally in the country hath before them, denotes an Impossibility to have all exactly done, and for this the truth is, in some cases, and for some persons, it must in some sort be layd aside, and preaching preferred, that being the most ordinary means, for the trslation of sinners from darknesse unto light: but of this hereafter. SECT. V. When this is pressed, there is nothing urged but what is rational and pious; no greater burthen laid upon mn then what God hath bound them to bear and carry: the necessity of this kind of teaching appears, 1 The young as well as the old must appear before the judg∣ment seat of Christ; that child that thou seest playing in the streets, shall one day be stripped naked and stand before the thone of God, Revel. 20.12. let it know this, that it may be afaid of sinning. 2 It is a hard thing otherwise to profit under the most power∣full ministry: there are termes in divinity which in pulpits can∣not be shunned as, Justifie, Elect, Adopt, and these can never be soundly understood without inspection into a cate∣chisme.
3 The law of equity binds men to do it, if thou beest a parent, thou hast conveyed some part of thy corruption where∣by thy Infant is infected and is naturaly a Child of wrath, now art thou not bound to give him counsell and teach him the fear of the Lord, which may keep him from dying through that poy∣son thou hast given to him, and make him a child of grace. Art thou a master, shalt thou teach him, how to be faithfull to thee, in the right managing of thy affairs, or teach thy ser∣vant in the principles of thy art, that he may live, and neglect to instruct him, in the doctrine of faith that he may be saved? Art thou a Minister? then thou art a Steward of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. and so tyed to give children that meate that is proper for them, and strong men what is fitting for them. 4 It is a soveraign meanes to preserve religion from corrup∣tion, when the heads of young Christians are filled with the particular branches or parts of catholick truth, they will be the better able to stand out against the Hereticall tenets, and perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds: and being fixed in the truths of the Gospel, when they are young; they shall not be easily removed from them when they are old. 5 They will be learning either good or bad, and good they will learn with ease if it be taught them, if the Fathers cry Hosannah unto Christ they can do so likewise; Math. 21.15. and if they call an old prophet, a bald prophet they can do so too, 2 King. 2.23. They will learn quickly to tell lyes, and to swear oaths, if the truth be not taught them, and swearing forbidden. 6 Unto this practise did our saviour yeeld himself, when he was twelve years old, Luk. 2.46. Noble T heophilus was thus taught, Luk. 1.4. Elequent A∣pollos submitted to this teaching, Act. 18.26. and can we follow better copys?
SECT. VI. Questions resolved. Quest. 1 Whether catechising differ from preaching. Quest. 2 Whether preaching be to be preferred before it. Quest. 1. Whether Catechising differ from preaching. These two ordinances of the Church are in end and scope the same, each of them being appointed for the perfecting of the Saints, and edyfying of the body of Christ, and at ordination are both layd upon him, and with all authority, yet as we may say of two eyes or two hands the one is not the other. Preaching differs from Catechizeing. 1 In respect of Amplitude or fulnesse, what preaching draws out, to an ample and large discourse, Catechising contracts into some few words, by pring off the exuberant parts of a con∣tinued speech, retaining the cheif point, matter, or spirit of the doctrine. 2 In respect of its activity and singlenesse. In cathe∣chizing there are some called out for assistance, the catechist hath not all the work, but in preaching there is no second, to assist; that is a taske wherein none claims a share, wherein none are co-workers, but the preacher himself is the sole agent and efficient.
3 In respect of its object and partys: preaching reaches to all persons old or young knowing or not knowing, high or low, now catechizing is properly for the ignorant and un∣learned. 4 In their subjects and actions preaching is peculiar for the ministerial function, catechizing proper to none, but common to woman and man: no sex but may have hand in this exercise of catechizing, and no person is a tyed to it. Quest. 2 Whether preaching be to be preferred before Catechizing. There is a generation, that supposes if a minister spend one half of the sabbath upon catechizing, that it is through idlenesse and sloath, whereas if Catechizing be soundly performed there is no labour nor study saved, yea possibly more undergone. Others again, would make no account of preaching holding that a pro∣per dish for a feast, and not for ordinary fare, conjectureing they are not blame-worthy if the ordinance of catechising go for∣ward. In humble submission, it is thought they are both out of the way, and besides the truth. It is not safe to make the ordinances strive with each other, or one to jostle out another, to the purpose in hand, let us distinguish of places and of persons. 1 Some places, are rude plaine and ignorant: without much travel we may fall into country parishes, whose ignorance is so grosse that it is incredible: there Catechizing may be of much use; and though they love it not it may do them most good. 2 Some places are more orderly, civil and knowing: there may be populous places, and parishes in which generally the people may be knowing; and by reason of schooles and other
advantages Catechizeing may go forward without much troubling the Minister. In which places there is no losse if it yeild to preaching, especially on the sabbath day, lest the gen∣rality of the people make no account of their assembing to∣gether. And as touching persons there are men whose parts, and genius are not fit for Catechizing, their excellency may ly in preaching, others there are whose excellency may ly in Catechizing: the fewnesse of ministers craves that that be done by which their genius and parts may do most good in the Church of Christ, yet by ex∣perience I know, shortnesse of dayes, infirmity of body, &c. must and will cut one short: the pre∣heminence therefore is to be given to preaching; for, 1 That is the most powerfull way for the convinc∣ing of sinners; the strength of reaon, and the force of application in a Sermon are powerfull meanes for the opening of the heart of man and causing him to see his errour which would from a Catechist be Im∣proper. 2 That was cheifely the practise of Christ and his Apostles, he and they both went into the Synagogues and taught the people, expounding Scriptures and setting them home to the eares and consciences of their people. 3 Preaching is of most general concernment, there are sins of the age and times, wherein the Catechist may faile, but preaching disclaiming these, detecting those, is most profitable: there are providences some∣time sad, and sometimes cheerfull, which is to be observed, and noted, and people taught accordingly: these oftentimes may not fall under the cognisance of a Catechist; and if they should, he would put a block in his own way, and give occasion of stumbling to them for whose sake Catechizing is most ued. More∣over preaching extending it self largely meets with the
tempers, sinnes, dispositions of most, whereas a Catechisme tys up and limits the Spirits of him that teacheth by it that he can reach but a few, if any, his of∣fice being only to lay down the truth touching some head of divinity, to convince the understanding and no more. 4 It puts a greater chearfullnesse in the spirits of the most knowing, to come to Gods service, when Christians have been in the days of their minority trained up in that way by question and answer. To be kept continualy to it might flat their appetite, and blunt the edge of their devotion, especially in publick places, where, by relation, in former times, when Catechizing swallowed up preaching, halfe the sabbath was loosly, not to say prophanely kept and spent, the Ministers gifts may not be for that service, nor his parts though otherwise eminent, for such teaching, which may in time breed a slighting of him, among his own people, what gifts God gives to teachers, by which they may most advance the end of teaching which is the edi∣fication of the Church, those ought to be most exercised by them, and by this rule men may know what is best to be done.
CHAP. II. Of Preaching. WE come now to that ordinance, which is the power of God unto Salvation, though some in this age account it foolishness and vanity. In this ordinance we shall see, 1 The nature of it. 2 The manner of it. 3 The necessity of it. 4 The ends of it. 5 Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. This ordinance of preaching by which men are saved, if they keep it in memory, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2. may be thus described. 1. It is an opening, expounding or unfolding the meaning of the Holy Ghost in Scripture. 2. According to Scripture. 3. And applying it for the edification of the Church, or perfecting of the Saints. 1. It is an openning, expounding, &c. of the meaning of the holy Ghost in Scripture] That the Scripture is the mind or meaning of the Holy Ghost, is blasphemy once to be doubted, Heb. 3.7. Acts 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. and his expressions are sometimes so lofty, and at other times so dark, that the un∣derstanding of man is naturally ignorant of his purpose, yea when highest, not able throughly to apprehend his meaning. Man may read all day, & at night lye down upon the restless bed of uncertainty, not understanding the nature of the thing read.
Now preaching unfolds it, expounds and interprets it, gives the sence and meaning of the Spirit of God in it; by which the hearts of the Elect are turned from the world unto God, Acts 19.19. and made to burn towards God, Luke 29.27, 32. and go towards heaven with rejoycing, Acts 8.35, 39. 2. According to Scripture] There are those that will ex∣pound the Scripture by their own fancies, and make the Ho∣ly Ghost by an irreverent compulsion speak that which he ne∣ver thought, but what they would have others to believe; such were the Pharisees of old, Mat. 5. and such are our up∣start Preachers now, who assoon as they find some portion of Scripture that they can coulourably wrest for the defence of their own fancies, immediately cry to their Proselites, Rejoyce with us, for we have found, &c. and where any ap∣pears that is not so easie to be drawn by the wier of their brain, they can lay it aside, and flee to the Penthouse of the light within, but Scripture is the lst Expounder of it self, for as it is the mind of the Spirit that is written, it is the tongue of the Spirit that must interpret, Isa. 8.20. The Scripture that is dark in one place, must be opened by the Scripture that is light in another place, otherwise it is not preaching but seducing, 2 Tim. 4.3. 3. Applying it for the edification of the Church] This is the great end of preaching, and the end of Gods sending Preachers into the world, Ephes. 4.12. and in this, this ordinance dif∣fers chiefly from that of Catechising. Paul having spoken much of the doctrine of faith, Heb. 11. makes application thereof, Hebrews 12. having treated of judgement, makes application thereof, 1 Thes. 5.14. When a Preacher hath opened the sence and meaning of the holy Ghost in a portion of Scripture, by Exhortation, Reprehension, Confutation, Consolation, he ought to set it home to the hearts of his hear∣ers, For the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephes. 4.12.
SECT. II. This ordinance of preaching ought to be performed ac∣cording to the will of God in this manner. 1. Orderly: God is a God of order, and all his works are orderly; he will have his word orderly, every one is not to assume the office of a Preacher in the congregation of the El∣ders. Every man must keep in that Calling wherein God hath put him, and he that presumeth to preach without his call of which we have spoken before, breaks order. 2. Plainly. He that preacheth must condescend to his hear∣ers capacity. Our Saviour when he preached was often plain, that we might understand his meaning as easily, as we under∣stand a hens call when she would gather her young ones under her wings: yet sometimes as a judgement God may give a commission to a Preacher to speak things not easie to be un∣derstood, Isa. 6.9. For this reason, our Saviour sometimes preached in dark parables. Now preaching is plain. 1. When it is sent home to the heart and conscience. 2. When it is without flattery. 3. When it is without deceit. 3. Impartially. The Scribes scape not the lash of Iohns Doctrine; let the soul be afraid that his Maker will cut him off that Accepts any mans person, or that gives flattering title unto any, Job 32.22. 4. Authoritatively. Let their words be such as command attention, who ascends the Pulpit stairs: whatever they say, let it be in the Lord, Thus saith the Lord, ought to be the pre∣face and close of a Sermon. 5. Freely. Courage and spirit ought to be in his bosome, that undertakes to deliver the Lords mind. Men naturaly have hard hearts, and he that would preach savingly must have an hard brow, Ezek. 3.9. Ephes. 6.19, 20. 6. Zealously: he must so preach, that it may appear he de∣sires in soul his people to shun what he reproves, to perform what he exhorts, he ought to be jealous over Gods people,
that is a shepherd of the flock of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. 7. In the power and demonstration of the spirit, he ought so to reason the case with sinners, to convince the Gain-sayer, to reprove the unruly, to open the Scripture so sincerely, and comfort so strongly that men may see and know the spirit of God to be with him of a truth, 1 Cor. 2.3. SECT. III. Touching the necessity of submitting to this ordinance much might be said; we shall confine our discourse to these few things. 1. It is the Soveraign means appointed by God to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. There are some who hold it necessary to convert heathens, but will not admit it, usual for the confirming of Saints, but it is otherwise. It is need∣full to beget a Saint. to uphold a Saint, to perfect a Saint: They may account it foolishness as they do, yet such as it is the wisdome of God hath appointed us to hear it, Rev. 1.3. 2. It is necessary for Preachers to be at all times preaching, 2 Tim. 4.1. Wo unto them if they preach not, which declares, wo shall befall the people if they hear not. 3. The people is lost, and is known to perish that have it not, Prov. 29.8. They are as it were made naked to their shame, they have nothing to shield them or shelter them from the stormy blasts of divine wrath, where this Candlestick of preaching is removed, or where it was never placed, there is no place for Christ. Gods presence is with his Church, and his walk only among his Candlesticks: All other places are in darkness, and he that walketh in darkness stumbleth and pe∣risheth. 4. There is a special charge not to despise it, 1 Thes. 5.20. and therefore it is much to be regarded: he that contemneth it, contemns him that appointeth it, which is God; he is not to be cast our irreverently that preaches it; lest the dust of the earth judge them, and therefere it is to be reverenced of all such as would believe for the saving of the soul.
5. It is effectual for the bringing of future and present ge∣nerations nigher and nigher unto God, Ephes. 2.17. there are still young coming into the world, who by nature are children of wrath. Whose fathers being Amorites, and whose mo∣thers being Hittites, are aliens from the spiritual Common∣wealth of Israel; now this ordinance of preaching, is a proper instrument for the circumcising of the heart, by which they are made Citizens of the New Ierusalem, and by faith made sons and daughters of the faithful Abraham. SECT. IV. As to every purpose under heaven there is a time; there is an end for every thing under the Sun. All Gods ordinances are designed for some end or other, besides his own glory, the end of all his purposes, designs and undertakings. Preaching he hath ordained for these ends, viz. 1. That sinne might be discovered more convinceingly, the whole Law or Word of God reproves and holds out sin, but preaching by mustering and collecting all Gods threatnings together, and laying them in the sinners sight, holding them to his face, seems to make him startle, and really to tremble, Acts 24.25. Mat. 3.5. 2. That they may be condemned more inexcusably. Sin∣ners might plead their ignorance at the barr of Justice, and excuse their sin, in regard of the Scriptures deepness. God therefore to clear himself from the least imputation of injustice, stirs up his servants to open, expound, reveal and apply his Word, giving by them unto his people line upon line, precept upon precept, shewing them their sin, and making them know their transgression, whereby their condemnation is the more just, and their ignorance the less inexcusable. 3. To set out the freeness of Gods grace the more effectu∣ally, the grace of God appears in every line of the Scripture, and each line may lead us to admiration, yet this of preaching
laying mans sinne before him, with all just heightning circum∣stances, discovering mans nature, with its abomination, opening hell with all its torments, and then making known mans inability, weakness, and unworthiness, and withal, shew∣ing the grace of God freeing a soul from all, doth very much tend to the advancement of free grace, and the love of God. 4. To set home the cross of Christ more powerfully: In reading the history of our Saviours passion, what soul can but be affected, yet when the Preacher cloathed with a com∣mission overshadowed by a divine ray in the congregation, and his tongue made like the pen of a ready Writer, declares his agony in its order, time, causes, parts, nature, greatness and effects, what heart can be so rocky as not to break. 5. To keep down pride in man the more strongly. Scripture shews man that originally he is but dust, as the wild Asses Colt, that he is worse then the beast that perish, that he is as water spilt upon the earth, that his days are swifter then a weavers shuttle, and that his life is but as a vapour; these be∣ing set forth in popular Sermons with the advantages of Ora∣tory, judgement and invention makes the eyes of the poor mortal to see the face of his nativity the clearer, yea, on his eye lids to behold the shadow of death. SECT. V. Questions resolved. Quest. 1. Whether Gospel-Preachers ought to have a seled maintenance. Quest. 2. Whether an Heretical or upstart Teacher may be known from the true. Quest. 3. Whether a Preacher once setled in a place, may leave that place. Quest. 4. Whether it be expedient to permit one to preach constant∣ly in a place that hath neither order from the Church, nor charge of the people.
Quest. 5. Whether he that is a Gospel-preacher may lawfully own civil Titles of honour. Quest 1: Whether Gospel Preachers or Ministers ought to have a setled maintenance? There is a crew or company in this age, who either through igno∣rance or malice, or both, cryes down, and speakes against a setled maintenance, for the body of the Ministry; affirming that they are purely to live upon charity, and depend upon the good will of the people; but not to  and longer upon a Preface, this Tenant seems to be unjust. 1. From that certain and competent allowance given to the Ministers of the Jewish Church. God took a special care that they that waited at his Altar, and served him in his Temple, should have certain and honourable maintenance for so do∣ing: what by first fruits, by tithes, &c. the Levites had a libe∣ral substence, nay as it is recorded from Scripture out of an hundred bushels of corn, the Levites were to have nineteen, besides their forty eight Cities with the fields about them, which in the land of Israel was no small portion: he that ap∣pointed so liberally, and provided so certainly for his servants under the Law, did without question never design those under the Gospel should be beggers. 2. From that certain and unavoidable charge that dayly he is put to; what Ministers buy they pay for as other men, they are at the same charge and expence, as others are; which to do, and in the mean time be at an uncertainty how to clear that charge, is in reason not to be admitted. Except the world were free to them, reason (not to say religion) would never leave them to be free to the world. 5. From that uncertainty, yea probability that he might have, of having nothing. Charitas as of old Astrea, hath
took her leave of the earth, there are Nabals that would give none of their earthly goods to him that gave them hea∣venly food. They would not buy heaven for a certain act of charity, and rather then they would be at any charges, they would go without a Teacher; which thing being known to the Minister, we may know what the issue of it would be. 4. From that snare and temptation that it might lay before men; Ministers, though they be Angels in office, yet they are but men in nature, though they be chosen vessels, yet they are but earthen ones. Now for them to live at the good will, and by the charity of others, might keep their tongues from speaking the word of the Lord in that bold, sincere, upright manner wherein they ought to speak it, for fear of displeasing their people, or angering their hearers, lest they should as Laban, either change their wages for the less, or take from them their wonted charity altogether; the very thoughts of which ought not to come within the compass of a Mini∣sters soul, and therefore the occasion of them to be farre away. 5. From the ends of those men that affirm such Doctrine, it is not so much for the ease of themselves, as for the rooting out of the Ministry: they know what a few years would pro∣duce in the Nation where this should be practised, i which though conscience might make the Ministery that now is, to go through their callings in fastings and watchings, or else go and exercise their gifts among the heathen, who with the Aegyptians have given lands to their Priests, yet men might have no encouragement to bring up their sons to learning, and therefore put them to other callings, which in time would bring Ignorance and Atheism upon them. The end these men propose to themselves in crying down a setled maintenance, that their ignorance might be thought learning, their impu∣dence might pass for zeal, and their errors for Orthodox Tenents; but before they obtain this end, Let them grin like dogs, and grudge that they are not satisfied: Let them howl like Bears, and eat up their flesh with envy. 6. From the practise of all civilized Nations, whether Heathens, Turks, Jewes or Christians, who alwayes had a
care to mantaine the honour and dignity of their priests, particularly Pharoah, who would furnish the priests from his own table, rather then for want, (when the whole world wanted) they should sell their lands, Exod. 47.22. What God under the law appointed for his priests, cannot be unknown to them that know the Scripture. They had citys and suburbs, tithes, free-will offerings, first ruits, and their part in sacrifices of all sorts, that swere to be parted. And under the Gospel in which time as God appointed that they which minister about holy things should live of the things of the temple, and they that wait at the al∣tar are pertakers with the altar, even so hath the Lord ordained, that thy which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13. Now God appointed certaine mantainence to them that served at the Altar, even so hath he ordained that they who preach the Gospel should have certaine subsistance. And where ever the Gospel got footing, and Christ preached, there was a certain allowance for the ministry throughout the whole Chris∣tian world. 7 From that dampnesse that would fall upon the active Spirit, were it not so, what man is there but would have en∣couragment in his work to go throw it with joy? and truly when it is considered ministers would have some encouragment too; The Priests and Levits who had been scattered in the Idol∣atrous reign of King Ahaz, when gathered together by godly Hezekiah, the people are commanded to give the portion of the priests and levits unto them, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, and the people bring in abundance of the first fruits of corne wine and oyle, and honey and all the increase of the field, and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly, 2 Chron. 32.4, 5. to say no more, the ministers of the gospel are even to receive outward encouragment, otherwise they may go out and see if they can find a place to sojourn in. There are some that find out a way to prevent all these in∣conveniences, they are so much in frendship and in love with their minister, that they could wish him to learn some trade, and so he might live comfortable, and for his example they produce him Paul.
But to that we give this brief reply. 1 The other Apostles worked not, 1 Cor. 9.6. The Apostle vindicating himself declares that he and Barnabas hath a power to forbear working as well as other the Apostles; he therefore haveing no engagement upon him by God for his so doing is not to be brought as a staning president to the ministry of the Gospel in that particular, he haveing a power to forbear working as well as Peter and the other Apostles and we are sure Paul had no commission to work. 2 Paul for all his working made but a poor liveing, so basely covetous were the Citizens or Corinth that he could not get a subsistence among them, for all his preaching, for all his working; but took wages of other Churchs to supply his necessity. 2 Corinth. 11.7, 8, 9. And because he took it from those Churches unto whom at that time he did preach, he calls it a robbing of them. 3 He seemes to give us his reason of so doing, 2 Cor. 11.12. The false Apostles in that City glorying that they preached the gospel freely (the same which our Hereticks do now,) which the Apostles of Christ did not, made Paul in that City to take a way the occasion of their so glorying by his free teaching, which is no rule for them to follow unto whom God and the laws hath given a certaine maintainence, and yet for his work∣ing was despised of those false Apostles, ver. 7. so desirous al∣ways are those that are not true teachers, to find something a∣gainst them that are. Another reason of his so doing is the Corinthians covetous∣nesse; If he had but took from them so much as would have maintained him, the gospel had been hindered, and Pauls doctrine by reason of charges had been neglected, and therefore is not to be brought as a rule for the ministry of the Gospel, now since Church rents are setled and Christianity esta∣blished. 4 Those Immediate inspirations wheewith those holy men of God were inspired are now ceased in the Church, Paul might worke, and yet his preaching never be the more erron∣ous,
his lips being guided and that immediatly by the un∣erring Spirit of God, but these gifts now fayling. Men ought to study, search, and ponder upon what they are to deliver, which indeed is sufficient (considering other necessary divertis∣ments) to imploy the whole man without following a trade, except we would preach as they do, and lead our people into by-paths, and by what I know of those preachers if they knew no better how to handle their needle, their axe, their aul, or their plough, then they do a text, they would never get a living by their trade. 5 These men are injurious to the whole Church of Christ, they long to see her again in persecution, pursued with fire and faggot. Is it possible that they are ignorant of that text, where∣in the Apostle makes it one of his miseries that he must work with his hands, take his own words, 1 Cor. 4.9. For I think that God hath set forth us, the Apostles last, as it were men appointed to death. For we are made a spectacle unto the world, to Agels and to men, &c. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwell∣ing place, and labour working with our own hands; shall any man hence take occasion, to affirme that it is a duty of a true mini∣ster of the gospel to live in want and misery, and to have no certain dwelling place, if so, even those trades-men must passe for false teachers. That then that Saint Paul groaned under through persecution and affliction, shall it be a standart unto all others, in times of peace, and setle∣ment. To conclude then; these men are angry that the Church hath gotten victory over her enemies, in regard her ministers have bread, and a habitation. Let me assure them that when the wise disposer of all things shall see fit to visit the Church with persecution (which they long for) they may see many, not only chuse to work, rather then the Gospel shall go down, but chuse to be burned and to dye (as there hath been many;) rather then the faith shall want defenders.
Quest. 2. Whether an Heretical or upstart teacher, may be known from the true. The markes and tokens or symptones of an Heretick according to a very able and good man are these following. Church his miscel. Philo. Theolog. 81. 1 He preaches ambiguously, in dark phrases] there is a new kind of canting language got up among our Here∣ticks now; I have heard some of them an hour together, and so darke were their expressions that it would have puzled a wise man to have made even nonsence of it, which the ignorant take for inspiration. 2 He delivers some doctrine against the fundamental points of religion] there is nothing more common with many of them then this, some deny original sin, some the divinty of the holy Ghost, some eternal judgment, other, the doctrine of baptisme, others the Inbeing of sin in believers, &c. 3 He opposes the faithfull preachers as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses] This text they have the Impudence to apply to the true ministery opposing them, though they have no call to shew that they are sent of God whether inward or outward, and the ministers of the gospel can show both, however Wiz∣ards, Witches, Seducers, are their ordinary language, though God account them, as the starrs in his right hand. 4 He is not in the same tale in his chamber and in the pul∣pit, to his followers and to others] this experience abundantly testifies, this piece of pollicy the jesuit hath learned him, who often times in bookes seemes as made up of devotion, and yet in their closets and practises are full of all manner of In∣iquity. 5 He boasts of illuminations and revelations] this is like the popes infallibility, which the heretick flys too in cases of ne∣cessity
sometimes they will take the boldnesse to praedict or pro∣phesie, touching Christs second coming, the downfall of An∣tichrist, by which they mean the Clergy, but their spirit hath so often deceived them, that I hope they by this time see it was a lying one. 6. He challenges Disputes, in which they falsify the Scrip∣tures and learned Authors, pretending they are on their side] In this last Rome hath an excellent faculty, and in the first, our Hereticks hath a strange confidence. Vaine glory is the stirrup by which he mounts and popular applause the breath by which he lives, which he hopes to receive by challenging, and indeed he may be very Impudent, I should have said con∣fident in his disputes, that resolves before hand never to be convinced which is his property. 7 His followers betray him,] They are either the holow Hypocrites, who generally favour the Heritick in his te∣nents, or the Idle person, he that lives without a calling shelters himselfe under the garment of an Heretick, that it may be thought its religion makes him leave the world, in a word young curious boys, weak bains, silly women gene∣rally makes up his congregation. 8 He is most bitter against them that opse him,] This makes the ordained ministers to be the Butt he most maliti∣ously shoots at; he is the greatest eye soe in the world to the seducer, because he is to discover him, point him out, unto his people that they may shun him: wherefore he hates him and yet let me assure him, he shall as soon keep the sun from shining upon the world, as get ordination out of the world. 9 He ever makes a gain of those wom he seduceth,] he calls his preaching either free, or if he do get it is only the peo∣ples free gift and not certain to him; however generally a collection is made at the close of his speech, and like Ido∣laters who can give their Jewels and their ear-rins to make a golden clfe, yea give their sonnes and dauhters unto Devils, they give him sometimes a large contribution, some have refused this publick way, yet have under ground sayd
such pipes as have brought in a large quantity of creature com∣forts. It is a great blessing in their account if any be sedu∣ced that hath large portions of this life, for by some secret deeds of conveyance, they are all sonnes and daughters, a∣dopted; and sharers of his goods, and like greedy horse leet∣ches never leave sucking untill he be as poor and empty as ever he was full. But I long to make an end of him. 10 He comes to disgrace in the end, denyes what he affirmed before, or else casts it into a new mould, and mince it, and alter it, and tells, he was not rightly understood. Were he∣resie a standing dish, in time it might be swallowed down by many otherwise adverting enough, but it never continues in one stay. It cannot be licked unto one form, he denyes this tenet this day, He must strengthen it by denying another to¦morrow; his hearers may be are in love with a new religion, he must set up shop again, and that he may have trading he must varnish over his old stuffes with some new glosse, and to his new Proslytes teacheth for doctrine some new fan∣cy, and like a man in danger of drowning catches at any opi∣nion, though never so false, before he clearly be shut out as a deceiver, which oftentimes by good laws or Church censures falls to his lot. Quest. 3. Whether a Preacher once setled in a place may leave that place. There are some that touching this Question are one the extreams of both sides, by on party it is affirmed he ought not at all, by ano∣their partly it is held, that he may doe it when he will, we shall not at this time fall out with either party, yet there are some ground that salva conscientia, a
Minister may remove from that place whrein the law hath set him. As 1 When the activity and excellency of parts deserve it, un∣to whom God hath given eminent gifts, it is lawfull to ma∣nage that place that is sutable for those gifts, if it were not so, the places of most concernment in the Church might be worse supplied, and he whose parts the Church stood in most need of might be buried in a corner, he than that con∣ceives his parts might be sayd out for the good of the Church in a more powerfull manner in such a place (unto which I sup∣pose him lawfully called) then in that wherein he now is, he may remove himself) and that from the nature and end of his office, which is the perfecting of the Saints, One of lesse and of inferiour parts may in that place wherein he is now ac∣complish the same end as well as he and his parts can help it more forward in that place unto which he is now remo∣ving. 2 When inability of body and weaknesse of parts call for it. A man may not be able through severall infirmities to undergo the duties of one place, and yet the same man be sufficient, to execute all the parts of his office in another. In this case he may remove by the Law of Charity, for God will have mercy and not sacrifice. 3 When the affections, crossenesse of people seem to com∣pell it, people as the Galathians may stay in their affecti∣ons, and their hearts for some cause or other be alienated from him they formerly loved. In this case a Minister may remove by the Law of reason, for where there is not love to the person, there will hardly edification be got by the doctrine; he may go where he is better beloved, and the people may receive or choose another in whom they more delight, and in my judgement both changes for the better, this relinguishing is justifiable from the end of preaching which is the edification of the Church.
4 When the Covetousnesse of the people or small∣nesse of the meanes force it. As was sayd before, a Mi∣nister is at certain charges common with other men, he may have a familie which ought to be provided for, he may be sick and must then have attendance or perish. Now not to have wherewithall to answer his necessity, or supply him in his need, he may remove by the Law of nature, which binds him, to edu∣cate his Children, to provide for his family, if this place wherein he is will not do he may leave it, and his relinqiushment is Justifiable both before God and man, God will keep no man in his vineyard, nor bid any go in but upon good termes, and competent allowance and men will allow every Tradsman, Shopkeeper to live by his calling and profession, why therefore ought not a minister to live by his function, and office. Indeed if men make a custome of removing from one place to another without some emergent cause it is both sin∣full to themselves and dangerous to the Church. As Warre therefore is to be made with good advice, so a choice is to be made with mature deliberation. Quest. 4. Whether it be expedient to permit one to Preach constantly or weekly in a place that hath neither Order from the Church, nor Charge of the people This Question hath no eye to them that so preach in a Church not setled, or in a nation not yet converted, but to places where∣in the Gospel is by law established, and the ordinances by law de∣fended. In such places constantly to preach without authority from the Church, or charge of the soules he preaches to, seemes not at all convenient, for
1 Preaching is not only necessary for the Churches good, the Administration of Sacraments is also to be observed, and many things may occurre by providence, necessary to be done for the Churches edification, which such a one is not able to performe. 2 It may breed an occasion of difference between the setled Minister and his people, he that hath both authority from the Church, and Charge of the peoples soules, may by this per∣son secretly be brought out the affections of the people, there may be diversity of gifts, one of them in speech may be bold, the other in doctrin more found, one eminent in prayer, the other more powerfull in preaching, this may open a door of division, and be a fire-ball of contention between them. 3 It gives too much liberty to passion, no face so fair but there may be found some blemish, no heart so holy but may have some lust, no man so upright but sometimes may halt, no preacher so sound but may preach errours. Now to suffer one constantly to exercise his faculty of preaching among a people if he have erroneous tenets, he may freely utter them, having no engagement against them, & though he by the law of the Church should be made to recant, or leave off preaching yet those whom he corupted might never be reduced to order. Mr. Brown of Northhamptonshire, who was the Father of the Brownists, though he renounced his errour, and took orders from the Church of England, yet those whom he had sub∣verted, would never reform. It is good therefore to pre∣vent the worst, that men oblige themselves to that form of doctrin, by law established, which will make them rather stu∣dy to defend it, then for the pleasure of any to pick a quar∣rel with it. 4. It is none of those ways that God hath ordained for the building up of his Church; such a constant Preacher can ne∣ver be designed for the work of the Ministry: for they are Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, which had extraordinary calls for that purpose, and are now gone; or Pastors or Teachers
which have ordinary calls, and to this day remain, Ephes. 4.11. These men therefore having no call that is ordinary, and the extraordinary themselves confess they want; we may con∣clude to be none of those that God hath appointed for the carrying on of the work of the Gospel in a publick way. 5. By the experience and relation of the aged, such tolle∣ration made faction, and gave shelter to untained spirits, when men would not through wilfulness and peevishness conform themselvs to the Laws of the Church by good and found ad∣vice established, they were then protected under the notion of Lecturers, who to please unsetled heads, and some fond persons, could inveigh at liberty against the Government ecclesiastical; and when Law did lay hold upon them, then call out persecution, persecution. In a word, we say, he that hath an unchast wife, is to keep fast his back-door: so those that would have the house of the Church freed from the do∣ctrine of Incendiaries, had best keep a bolt upon this Po∣stern gate, and suffer none to reach without either of the two things before mentioned. Quest. 5. Whether he that is a Gospel-Teacher may lawfully own civil Titles of Honour. There are spirits, and they would be thought holy that are of∣fended if a Preacher be called, Lord; and there are others, (they are near of kin) that are angry, if he be called Master, however both may lawfully be done, and owned by a Church-Officer. 1. From the dignity of their office, they are Masters in Israel, and Doctors of the Law, they are in high places, and to them is committed such great power that Whom they bind on earth are bound in heaven, an whom they loose on earth are
loosed in heaven, Mat. 18.18. Unto whom God hath com∣mitted such great power, they may have honourable titles given them conformable to that power. 2. From the acceptance of it by former Prophets, and practise of it under the Gospel: Elijah was a Prophet, yet he could hear Obadiah, say unto him, Art thou that my Lord Elijah, 1 Kings 18.7. and not be angry. Obadiah feared the Lord greatly, verse 3. and his religion taught him to give honourable titles to Gods Messengers, and the Messenger takes them without a check, yea, that these, or such, were the common Titles of Teachers by those that feared God, may appear, by these instances. The Sunamite coming and falling down at the feet of Eli∣sha,Elisha is also called Lord by the Inha∣bitants of Ier. 2 Kings 2.19. Did I desire a son of my Lord? and yet she is not re∣proved, 2 Kings 4.28. neither is Elisha to be thought proud in receiving it. Nichodemus came to our Saviour with the title of Rabbi, and our Saviour owned him for a Master of Israel; Iohn the Baptist is called Rabbi, Iohn 3.2. 10.26. and his Disciples call Christ by the name of Rabbi, which is to say, Master, 1 Iohn 38. These titles being mutually given and taken by such, makes it not unlawfull to receive the same titles of re∣spect and honour now. 3. From the Laws of the land: if the King, who is the foun∣tain of honour, put such a peece of Honour, whether by Patent, or otherwise upon any Church-officer, there is there is nothing in the Scripture that contradicts the lawful∣ness of its receiving. Ministers will sometimes own upon the same account, the title of an Esquire: why may not another own the title of Lord? 4. Them that are against that sinless practise, they are such as would be very well pleased, if there were no Church-officer to be called a Lord, that they might lord it over their lands and tenements, yea, would never be angry at the title, if they could obtain it themselves; and they who would not have them to be called Masters, are such as would have them trod under foot, and be Masters of their Pulpits: considering
this denial of theirs, or anger of theirs against these titles, is the less with wise men to be regarded. Touching that place of Scripture against exercising Lord∣ship, Mark 10.42. As it takes not away authority, out of the King of the Gentiles hands, so neither doth it make it un∣lawfull for a Church-Officer to be called Lord, so he lords it not in a tyrannical and oppressive way; that Text purely teaching humility and love: and yet we know of late dayes, none was more tyrannical, none more exercised unlawfull au∣thority, nor lorded it over the Clergy, then those meek Lambs, (yet wild foxes) that refused to be called Lords. As for that place urged against a Ministers being called Master, Mat. 23.8, 9, 10. where our Saviour condemns the Scribes and Pharisees for using of it, who were not worthy of it in regard it blew them up with pride: when they under∣stand those words going before, Call no man Father, they are able to know their error in this particular, Be ye not called Masters, both being equally a sin, and equally reproved and forbidden by our Saviour. And thus have we gone through both the nature and circum∣stantial adjuncts of publick teaching, we must now come to speak of private, which we shall cast into the body of the third direction given above for the words indwelling, which was to confer about the Scripture, to communicate with each other touching the great concernments therein contain∣ed.
CHAP. 12. Of Conferring. THat part of the Text, Teaching and admonishing one another, is now to be the subject of our discourse; of authori∣tative or publick teaching we have spoken, which is proper to the Ministerial function: of charitative or private teaching we must now speak, which is common to all the royal Priest∣hood, and that which is chiefly enjoyned in the Text, as ap∣pears by that word, one another. This we call conference, and hath two parts, Teaching and Admonishing: touching their difference we have in part spoken before. Learned Interpreters by Teaching, understand the doctrine of faith, not done, or not believed, because not known, and by Admonish they understand things known, but not done of each in order. Teaching one another, (i.e.) in the matters of faith, as touching the doctrine of creation, redemption, of the au∣thority of Scriptures, the union of God and man in the per∣son of our Mediator, the necessity of the Sacraments of the new Testament: of the publick worship of God, of the slate of the dead, and of eternal judgement. All which is profitable to be done at convenient times, and in convenient places, where and when Christians meet together. Seeing it is the duty of all Christians, at all convenient times to teach and instruct each other about the things of God, to press this, is within the compass of our undertakings, and therefore touching it we shall consider 1 The necessity of doing it. 2 The manner of performing it. 3 Resolve some Questions.
SECT. 1. That it is an ordinance of God for Believers to build up each other in the most Holy faith, and to instruct their families, Gen. 18.19. to comfort and edifie one another, 1 Thes. 5.11. and that the aged should be teachers of good things, Tit. 2.2, 3, 4. and that their communication should be such as might minister grace unto the hearers, Ephes. 4.49. may appear by these Argu∣ments, viz. 1. Every one must give an account of the Talent given him, Mat. 25.19. according to the measure of knowledge given to man, and grace infused in him, must he give an account to the Lord of heaven and earth: we are not only to present him what he gave us, but to produce what we have gained for him, otherwise we shall be but unprofitable, wick∣ed and floathful servants, that knowledge therefore and light that is in us, ought to guide the feet, and instruct the soul of him that dwelleth near us. 2. All ought to be sensible of the infirmities of those that are amongst them, there are imperfections in the souls of men, and the brightest light may want and stand in need of snuffing, what through ignorance, forgetfulness, dulness, how many are there that go astray, and what through Satans watchfulness, lifes shortness, how many may perish in the midst of their sinne; to prevent which this duty and ordi∣nance of private teaching would be a soveraign help and re∣medy. 3. All ought to walk as members of each other, Eph. 4.25. As the hand will assist another part of the body when it is di∣stempered, and the eye will pitifully behold a member that is out of case, and weep over it: so ought every Christian to spy out the spiritual distempers of his christian brother, and give him to his power help accordingly. We are not made Christians for our selves only. But to exhirt one another dayly while it is called to day.
4. All are bound to give to their very enemies natural re∣lief, therefore much more to the ignorant Christian spiritual help, as there are corporal works of mercy, which some re∣duce to seven, Visito, poto, cibo, Redimo, tego, colligo, condo. So there are spiritual which are reduced to the same num∣ber thus, Consule, castiga, Doce, Solare, Rmitte, Fer, ora. As we are bound to feed the hungry, refresh the thirsty, cloath the naked, harbour the stranger, visit the sick, redeem the captive, and bury the dead: so we are bound to teach the ignorant, to correct the obstinate, to counsel the doubt∣full, to comfort the afflicted, to suffer patiently, to forgive charitably, and to pray for each other servently. It is but half good neighbourhood to regard the outward estate or condition of one that dwelleth near thee, and take no thought of that ignorance that dwelleth in him. 5. From that practise of Christians conferring each with o∣ther about worldly affaires, may we draw an argument inforce∣ing the duty now pleaded for. Men will be apt to discourse of that mans nature, of the others neglecting of his person, of anothers bad husbandry, of his health and of his estate, and give their opinions, judgements and counsels accordingly. Ought not men also to regard the ignorance, weakness, sinfulness of others, and give instruction, doctrine and ex∣hortations surable thereunto. 6. Grace naturally will be doing, and it ought not to be stifled, as the kingdome of heaven is like leaven, so is the kigdome of grace. It will endeavour to dilate, extend and inlarge it self, it will as fire be striving to bring every thing to its own nature: Grace in the religious soul will beger grace in anothers, and true godliness will be satisfied though it walk towards heaven, desiring still to have companions in a holy course. The meetings of Christians ought to be Christian
meetings, in building up each other in their most holy faith, and true grace will take an opportunity to insinuate it self into the bosomes of others, that God may be all in all: yet in this beware of these three mistakes. 1 Take not thy passion nor thy prejudice against a thing for the spirit of God, Luk. 9.55. 2 Take not thy opinions in matters of Indifferency to be ne∣cessary points of faith. 3 Take not thy Brothers judgment, in his opposing thine in cases of indifferency, to be infidelity in him. There are apt seasons wherein men may speak and instruct each other for good, in points of faith, for other discourses usually engender strife: however when God seemes to put forward such discourses, the prudent may take the advan∣tage and follow them, and the Christian will charitably manage them. SECT. II. To performe this in such a way as a Christian Brother can accept these necessary qualifications must go along with it. 1 Love and friendship, the faith of Christ can never be foundly taught in choler, nor received in rage, passion is no good teacher, nor will religion be rooted, in anger. It is but labour in vain to point out the way of heaven in heat of blood, to him that is in thy presence, he hath reason to sus∣pect that fury not zeale makes thee a teacher, and upon that flight the doctrine taught. Love like a small and thick shour can open the ground of the heart, and soften it whilest passion like great shoury drops, hardens it, and causes it only to become the more hard, whereby the thing taught slides off, and is not received into the bosome of him that is reached, and so becomes ineffectu∣al to his edification. 2 Humility and meeknesse. Let not him that is taught per∣ceive
that thy end is to shew thy own excellency above his, that may marre thee in thy purpose: let him rather behold that thou desires he should see his own ignorance, which may make his soul to blesse thee; and his soul to be saved through thee. 3 Zeale and earnestnesse speake of God, of Christ, of the scripture, of judgment, and of eternal glory as to affect the hearts of them thou wouldest instruct, so as to burne again: if thou do it in a cold or carelesse way it will be heard after the some forme and manner. 4 Order and patience, we are not to suppose that what we teach, must be Immediatly got by heart, our teaching may but open a door to let in those instruction; of another which are to perswade to Godlinesse, we are therefore to have patience. Paul may plant grace, but not live to see it grow, a minister may plant, or water what another hath planted, and yet the fruits of that plant may be rea∣ped by another, have patience, then build thou orderly, and lay a good foundation, God perhaps hath ordained another to lay the roofe, and to furnish the building. 5 Truth and simplenesse. What men teacheth in points of faith ought to be the word of Christ, not their own inventions, and the word of Christ ought not be mixed with carnal ordi∣nances, but given purely and sincerly to the weak Christian that he may grow thereby, if otherwise, we teach not but pervert, we instruct not but deceive. This is done 1 By discovering his errour from the word of Christ, we ought in this case to let men see the scriptures rather then our selves against his judgment, to undertake to reprove a man for his errour, when it is not reproved by the word of Christ, is but to procure to our selves a staine or a blot. 2 To demonstrate the necessity of believing the thing taught from scripture, what we reach in matters of faith is to be man∣tained from scripture only, that being the meanes to be get faith and to nourish it, there is nothing to be taught as necessay for salvation, but what can be proved a duty fom thence, and therefore presume not (if thou be wise) to do the contrary.
SECT. III. Questions resolved. Quest. 1 Whether private or night meetings might lawfully be upheld. Quest. 2 Whether it be lawfull for Christians when they meet to make mery one with another. Quest. 3 Whether the conference or private meetings lately used in England were agreeable to the power of Godly∣nesse. Quest. 1 Whether private or night meetings might lawfully be upheld. To affirme that Christians ought not to meet at all times or at any time to instrust and edifie each other, were to affirme that a sin, which is both practised, and taught by the saints both of the old and new testament, Mala. 3.16. But yet those meetings that were formerly in England seems not to be approved. For, 1 Their meeting was not so much out of zeale as for other causes. When the practise and conversation was seen in the world they nothing out-stripped other men. They were sin∣gular only in this, that when others had come from the pub∣lick temples, they were then going to prepare for private meetings, if religion had made them set about this over night, it is to be supposed that it would have singularly remained with them next day, but that not appearing, some other cause might be inquired after which shall not at this time be insist∣ed on.
2 They seemed to be unthankfull to God for that liberty he had given his Church, blessed be God: if it be good that they teach it might be done at noon; if evill, the night hideth not from him that seeth all things. Intimes of persecution the Saints worshiped, wandering in deserts, and in moun∣tains, and in dens and caves of the earth. Heb. 11.38. but now to do it were a peece of unthankfullnesse and in∣gratitude. 3 Their actions seemed to speak evil of dignities: they said in their harts, that our Soveraign Lord the King was not the de∣fender of the Faith, In as much as they durst own their doctrine, in the face of Authority, by which tacitly they rather behold and declare him for a persecutor. 4 The doctrine therein taught, was generalty in opposition to the doctrine established in the Church of England: by relation it was usuall with those meetings to in veigh against that which by good and sound advice was established, and in the generati∣ons following used, whereby many were drawn from their obedience, and allegiance, given and plighted to their mo∣ther Church, unto the factious humours, of some zealous pre∣tenders, who in most points did appear to stumble at nats, and swallow camels. Their generall doctrine was erroneous in one particular before mentioned, (viz.) Their taking things of In∣differency to be necessary points of faith, which the unlearned not being able to difference were led a way by those meetings to the disturbance of the Church, unto whose doctrine they were baptized. 5 They gave too much cause to suspect their actions there, finding them in the day time to be no better then others, their meetings in the night, when law had forbid it, had something of everence of under earnese and of refractorinee in them, theeby their bst ations might justly be suspected to have some incture of pride, of discontent, and edicion. 6 The Spawn or seed of the late troubles in all pro∣bability, had its being fro them, and its rise of them: but, &c.
Quest. 2. Whether it be lawfull for Christians when they meet, to make merry one with an∣other. There are them who are eminent in godlinesse, that con∣sidering the multitudes of dutys thatlye upon Christians, can find no time nor leasure to make mirth. There are others who out of a Stoicall sullennesse, think it a sin even to laugh, and he is often causelesly condemned who offends them in that particular. Not to censure the former sort, their own practise may be a ground upon which they build so general a proposition as no Mirth is to be used, but withall we may truly say they lay a yoak upon the neck of the disciples, which all are not able to beare, and the spiit may be willing but the flesh is weak. Touching the latter, laughing being the immediate effect, of a rational soul, and a gift that God hath given to be in man, with man, as he is man, without question it may therefore be used by the sons of men. Notwithstanding that it is the Christians duty at fit times and opportunities to instruct and teach the ignorant, in matters of faith and doctrine, yet it is not unlawful but oftentimes expe∣dient even for believers, to meet, and in their meetings to make merry each with other. Seeing. 1 Samson that man of God, at his marriage feast propose∣ing Riddles (a usual peece of mirth) for his companions to an∣swer, in which sport he begun, yet the spirit of the Lord was with∣him, Iudg. 14.12.19. 2 God threanes the remove all of natural or carnal mirth, from a nation, Ier. 7.34. now God threatening it as a judgment, shews, that to enjoy it is a gift of God, and a mercy from him, and therefore may be used. 3 The want of irth is greatly lamented by the prophets, Isa. 24.11. many judgments, were lamented, and that the
mirth of the land was gone is not forgotten as a sore one: 4 Our Saviour graced mirth, by honouring a wedding with his presence, Iohn 2.2. and both scriptrue and experience restifie that marriages are attended with mirth, whether Saint Iohn was the bridgegroome as some suppose, I know not, but both he and his fellow disciples were at the feast, which might Justify mirth even in the best, for we always find gladnesse an∣nexed to that ordinance of mariage, Ier. 7.34 & 16 9. & 25.10. Isa. 62.5. 5 Our Saviour graced mirth by makeing it the ground and bottome of severall parables. Luk. 15.6, 9, 25, 29, 32. In which places, he sets out that joy that is in Angels for the conversion of sinners from death, or from their errors, by that mirth that it was meet parents should make or men and women did make, for the recovery of their goods or children. 6 The refreshment that it yeelds to the body, whereby the soul is more quickned and enlivened even for the service of God, seemes to approve its lawfullnesse, we must remember that the body is the Instrument, by which it runs, speaks, and acts: and if it be not looked after, the soul may have a good will, and a good arme, yet it will never do much without a good and chearfull body, which like a sharp axe, shall make a quicker and a better dispatch of any businesse she undertakes. Mirth is oftentimes like physick, taking away those corrupt me∣lancholy humours, which otherwise might infest the whole body; and that would produce no good effect unto the mind. As men cannot always, be in the mount with God, so nei∣ther can they ever be in the valley of Baca, which made God give his people those solemn times of Feasting, of which we have spoken before, wherein they did eat heir meet with gladnesse and made great mirth, Nehe. 8.12. That place, Ephe. 5.4. against feating makes nothing against this truth. For  if we joyn it to the words going before, we may understand foolish esting, which in the scripture ence is wicked jeasting, and this is not at all pleaded for. Or 2 The
word translated jeaing is , scuilily that is biing, jeasts, such as a have teeth, such as tend to a main disgrace, shame or dishonour, which who so doth is rather a scoffer then a jeaster. To conclude this Question recreation mirth, sports in themselves are not sinfull but according as they are used, and being done according to these following qualifications may irreproverbly be used. 1 If they be such as are not against the Law of God. It is not fit out of mirth to put a woman in the attire of a man, or a man in that of a woman, D. t. 22.5. or either of these in the shape of a beast. 2 If they be not against the Law or customes of the place we live in. 3 If we spend not too much time in them, recreation like a whetstone may put an edge to the soul, but like the same if we continue long in it, it may make it the more blunt. In this case a whet and away. 4 If they be such as answer to the end of recreation, which is a refreshing of the mind. Whether it be by pre∣senting some pleasant object before it to behold, as wit and harmlesse jeasts, historical passages or artificiall musick, or by giving it some slight yet serious imployment as that harm∣lesse sport of riddles, &c. which makes that by many dice are condemned, there being nothing in that but purely a shaking of the elbow. 5 If mens hearts be not too much upon them, to be pondering over night what recreation men may goe to the morrow, if frequent, may call in question the lawfullnesse of that act, to spend dayes and nights in it, is not good, to spend the morning in it, is not safe he hath no right to recre∣ation, nor title to refreshment, that was never weary, and we ought to know that sleep it self is a refreshment, re∣creation often like Wine is not convenient in a morn∣ing.
6 If mens ends be good in following of them, this indeed makes some generally condemn all sorts of plays, in as much as for lcre sake they give themselves to these divertis∣ments, which is their fault not rhine, at cheffe there∣fore or tables to mind more out own refreshment, then our Brothers money cannot make the playing unlawfull, or if it be determined that the gaines be spent in a civill, or∣derly neighbourly way, for the upholding of Charity, it is not blame worthy for a man in those games, to be as deli∣gent and watchfull as possibly for the freeing of himselfe, yet ever honest without hurting his Brother. Quest. 3 Whether the conferences or private meetings lately used in England, were agree∣ble to the power of godlinesse. This question reacheth not the doctrine handled in these private meetings, but to the practise of them whether such things as were done in them or came from them, were to be en∣dured. In doing of which I shall not present the Reader with the half of what I know, but yet give him two or three reasons for the denying of the question. 1 They seemed to be, and indeed were great occasions of pride and puffing up. When Doctors and learned Preach∣ers must as it were study a week to give every fond boy and ratling woman, an answer to her fond and foolish Que∣stion, gave great occasion for them to conceit highly of their own parts, and in time they grew up to that degree of knowledge, that they were even above that ordinance of conference, and many of those that tarryed with them thought themselves, (being of such a ones Church) the only Saints, and all others highly prophane, as is as well known, as we knew the men that were of those congre∣gations.
2 They very much conduced, to sow division and discord in the Church of Christ. They made themselves, and look∣ed upon themselves as Churches distinct from others, mak∣ing people shake off that minister who by Law was set over them, and own only him for their pastour whose meeting they came to; the others were but as wolves and not to be regarded, and that pastour again to preach to his people in publick, but as a man should preach to heathens, or at least as a stranger to Christians, beholding them not as his flock, in regard they were not of his private Church, which made a vast breach between the people amongst themselves, set∣ing one part against another, and brought an alienation of the peoples affections to their ministers, and again of the Mi∣nisters toward them, which hath made such a heart-burning in his age, of one towards another, that will hardly be quenched, or cured. 3 They gave above all things the greatest life to Hypocrisie. No preferment, no place of profit could be obtained generally throughout England, but he only was thought worthy of it, that was of such a gathered Church, no certificate would passe except subscribed by some of the godly party of that place, which godly party when it came to be framed, w.s some or either of those congregated sinners, all the other being never written in their book of life, which made and it was visible that they made many of those that were aspire∣ing after great things, who had no religion no principles, to go and declare the houre time and manner of their con∣version, this question, this Chapter, that book, that Sermon, which haply was preached by some one of that conference con∣verted them; and this made them babes of grace, and by a certain repetition of their former life, their former sinnes, by way of confession, wherein their parents sometimes, (whether dead or alive I know not) met with some re∣proachfull expressions: after this it was put to the vote, and the party entered into the Church, and ever after he was the godly party, and a pretious young man, and to be short
the first preferment offered it self, was surely to be his, though a known Hypocrite, and a known dunce, before the learned'st and Godlyest that was of another judgement, hav∣ing not studyed the art of dissimulation, so well as the o∣ther. Many other things upon certain knowledge might be deli∣vered touching those conventicles, I should have said Con∣gregationall Churches, but being loath to discover the shame and withall hopeing to hear no more of them, here shall be an end. CHAP. 13. Of Admonition. FRom teaching in matters of faith we are brought to ad∣monishing in matters of fact common with teaching to all Christians, Mat. 18.15, and an ordinance of God long practised in the Church, and owned by all the faithfull. Who ought to have n Fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of dark∣nesse but rather reprove them Ephe. .11. And a wife reprover upon an obedient ear is like an earing of gold, and ornament of fine gold, Prov. 25.12. It hath reference to things that are known but not done, or not well done, the subject or party that is to have it, must be one that goes contrary to the truth revealed in the Scripture. See we any man that is contentious, a busie body, an Idle person, a flaterer, a tale bearer, an unruly person, a covetouse or an extortioner, he is a person fit for admonition.
In this ordinance we shall consider. 1. The nature of the duty. 2. The necessity of it. 3. The manner of it. 4. The time of it. 5. The person who must do it. 6. The duty of the Admonished. 7. Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. The nature of this ordinance partly  from what alrea∣dy hath been spoken, yet for orders sake take this discrip∣tion, 1 It is a reproving of the vices of our brother, 2. In love and meeknesse, To reclaim him from his sin, and reduce him to the obedience of God. 1 A reproving of the vices of our brother,] Admonition supposes transgression, and where sin is found reproof ought not to be wanting, but it is the vices of our Bother, by which we understand the Christian, for others would but blaspheme the name of Jesus for whose sake they are admonished to return and repent. For▪ 1 The Scripture says a Brother, Levit. 19.17: and Mat. 18.15. one of the am blood with me, begotten, by the word of truth whereby  also was begotten in a ively hope 2 Others would be apt  blasheme the holy name of Christ should a urke be admonished to renounce his erros in matter of fact, or the Jew his in regard that the Law of Christ is against them, he would but like a swine turn again and rent you.
3 Solomon, adviseth his Son, not to reprove a scorner, Prov. 9.8. and Christ counselleth the same, Mat. 7.6. those persons who after many admonitions remains incorrigible, and mocks at religion when they are desired to be holy, are dogs and swine, and he that reproves them may get to himself a blot. 2 In love and meknesse] herein lies the manner of ad∣motion, according to that doctrine, of that great Gaaliel of the Church, St. Paul, Gal. 6.1. but of this hereafter. 3 To reclaim him, &c.] here is the end both of publick and private teaching, admonition hath amendment, for its ob∣ject and its aime, if it be received it may turn the offender from his sin to God, by mortification; if it be slighted it may turn the sinner out of the Church by excommunication; Of which hereafter. SECT. 2. There are many that say with, Cain, am I my Brothers keep∣er, Gen. 4.9. and by this shifts of this duy, but these with the rich Man in torment, may remember that they had five, yea many brethren, Luk. 16.28. Let us therefore in this our day be carefull for our Brothers goo, and admonish or warn them that are unruly, 1 Thes. 5.14. 1 From those places of Scripture that calls to have it, and shews us that it was done, Psal. 141.5. Easter. 4.13. Levit. 19.17. Gal. 2.14. Eph. 5.11. 1 Sam. 3.13. Nehem. 13.10. 2 Sam. 6.21. All which places with many others, gives a clear testimony not only of the duty, that it is to be done, but that it is profitable if done, and dangerous if undone. 2 From the growing nature of sin, evill men will wax worse and worse, admonition may reclaim him now, but not afterward; a reproof at first may reduce the sinner to obedi∣ence, when stripes afterward may but harden him in his errour, to curb sin in the bud or blosome, and restrain it in the dayes of youth, is an easier task by much then afterward, the longer sinne stands, like a tree, it takes the faster root
and that the longer it runs like a river, will wash away banks and enlarge its dominion; let one sin this day goe unreproved, it will be afterwards acted, with more strength, will and delight. 3 From that guilt that connivance brings upon a mans self, silence is not alwayes a verte but someties a vice, when thou hearest or seest a Brother offend, be sure that is a time to speak, otherwise thou makes it thy own sinne and mayst be judged with him, he for begetting of it, and thou forgiving it education, the sinfull security of old Eli, touching his slen∣der reproof given to his sonnes, when they had wickedly of∣fended, 1 Sam. 3.13. made God send upon him, a punish∣ment eminent and visible. 4 From that affection that we are to bear towards each o∣ther, when we see a man we see one of the same nature and lineage with our selves, one that hath a soul, which must either shine in glory, or burn in torment, that must either injoy the heavenly paradise; or the habitation of darknesse, whose potion must either be with God and his Saints, or with the Devill and his Angels, to see such a one going in the broad way which will end in death, common charity will teach us to advise him, forwarn and to desire him to leave it, as it, eacheth us seeing a man lying in a ditch, or drowning in a river to assist, help and relieve him. 5. From that advantage that Satan gets by every one sin; as a sinner grows in his sin Satan groweth in strength, not in him alone, but against the body of the Church in general; there is one more lifted in his army to fight against the Saints; it is good therefore to call the sinner off, before he buckle on his armour, least with the scorner, he smite him that reproves him, and he that reproveth purchase to himselfe a blot,Prov. 9.7.
SECT. 3. The royall preacher speaks of a wise reprover, Prov 25.12. and indeed a reproof ought to be wisely given, and in this, if in any thing, men ought to make their moderation appear. Not to insist upon all the wayes of Christian admonition, it must chiefly be performed. 1 In meeknesse: Gal. 6.1. To reprove a soule in passion, or in wrath, brings the admonisher upon a threefold inconve∣nience. 1 He makes himself justly to be reproved, first he must be commanded to pluck the beame out of his own eye, before he undertake to bing the moat out of his brothers. 2 He may irritate the party against himself, to come boysterously, and furiously upon a sinner will but make him the more hastily buckle on his armour to resist thee. Thy Cho∣ler will only take away his hearing, never clear his eye∣sight. 3 It may make him defend his sin; when he compares thy fury and his trespasse, the nature of the fault with thy pas∣sionate aggravations, the fault indeed may seem nothing, yea, in nature it may be nothing when compared with those coneptions thy Choler makes of it, all which are prevented by a meek and sober check. 2 Reprove in love: he that reproves out of malice, and hatred, having the disgrace and shaming of the party rather before his eyes then his bettering; from such a one a reproof shall never be taken. 3. In knowledge: be sure that you discover to a brother his errour, and that you point him out his sin, It will do the travelor no good, but the informer hurt, to perswade him
he is in the wrong way except you shew him the riht, he that goeth about to reprove for that which is no ault, wor∣thily gets to himselfe a shame. But something must be spoken more of this in the next Section. SECT. 4. The time when this reproof or admonition is to be given, comes now to be considered, before which we must know that it is ei∣ther to be done privately or publickly. 1 Privately; and it is either more or lesse, by one that knows, seeth or heareth the offender first sin, which is the most private, or by two or three that are chosen by the offended Brother, to confirme his admonition, which yet is private in regard the offence is not come to the eares of the Church officers, Mat. 18.15, 16. 2. Publick, when the offending person is reproved openly in the audience or face of the Church, 1 Tim. 5.20. Gal. 2.11. But the private must ever precede this, to trumpet abroad a mans fault, is against both honesty and religion, let him hear of his sin first himselfe, and his soul may blesse thee. And if thy zeale follow the admonition upon his reject∣ment, by two or three witnesses let none of them be an enemy to the admonished, nor such as beares the least grudge a∣gainst him, if the sin be private known only to thy self. 1 Let thy reproof be given as soon as the sin is committed, if the sinner be capable, to check him for his sweating as soon as the oath is named will make a man see it in its natural shape. By this 1 Thou wilt discover thy self to be no flatterer. 2 The reproof take the more impression.
3 It may prevent the like sin for the future. 4 Something may fall out, which may stop thy mouth for the time to come, quarrels contentions, trespasses, discords may fall amongst brethren, and after these to re∣prove thy freind of his fault committed, may be con∣strued to proceed rather of wrath or malice, then love or charity. We say if the sinner be capable to reprove a man for passion in his passion, may but turne it to ury and to informe a man of the sin of drunkennesse when he is drunk, is but casting pearles be∣fore swine, there being an incapacity in the offender at that time to learn wisdome and receive instruction. If the sin be puplick or known to more then thy self, to admonish him of it in their hearing who hard him sin. For, 1 If they be righteous they will take thy part. 2 It will be an argument to make all beware that sin, thou re∣provest thy Brother for. 3 Thou shalt discover they self a friend in deed and in truth. If the sin be private, and thou out of conscience endeavorest to make it something publick, by taking with thee two or three, to reclaim thy offending Brother. Let them be, 1 Such as beares thy Brother no ill will. 2 Such as are able to convince him of his sin. 3 Such if possible whom he loves and reverences. 4 If it may be, some able and reverend Divine, to be one of them, may hasten and forward the businesse. SECT. V. The person who is to give this reproof to his Brother comes now to be considered. To be brief.
1 He would be well skilled in the doctrine of the Scriptures, It is that by which we know sin, the judgments that belong to sin, the degrees and aggravations of sin, and how to do it in that manner as to bring the sinner to amendment, and to re∣prove with respect to the party, to his dignity and honour, to un∣dertake to check any for an offence which cannot from scrip∣ture be proved an offence, is but a sign of rashnesse and pas∣sion, not good will or affection, yet we shall find that the most ignorant are most guilty of rash censuring. 2 It were convenient that he were free of that sin he ad∣monishth his Brother of. 3 He should be such a one as hath the glory of God and the good of his Brother before his eyes, our Saviour was often re∣proved, but he knowing the root whence it came, regarded neither their offence taking, nor their reproofe giving. SECT. VI. When a Christian hath heard from the scriptures, that his act is a sin not supposed only, but really and in its own nature, he ought to take the admonition. 1 As from God, 1 Sam. 25.31, 32. 2 Meekly, as from thy Brother. 3 Thankfully, as from both. SECT. VII. Quest. 1 Whether a Heathen may not be admonished? Quest. 2 Whether Admonition be alike to be given to all.
Quest 1: Whether a Heathen may not be admo∣nished? In reard that the Scripture calls upon us to admonish a Brother, we are not altogether to neglect any of whom we have hpes of bering of what professio soever he be. For, 1 By nature, all men are our Brethen, we are all of one stok and kind, as through that relation may admonish him when he doth offend. 2 By providence, the Heathen Turke or Jew, may be our neighbour, and upon that relation he may be admonished, at least as to civil crimes, and as far as you can do good in spiritual, but if he will not hear, never bring it before the Church, since she judgeth none that are without, 1 Corinth. 5.12, 13. 3 By Law he may be our kinsman, and this will lay a more particular engagment upon us to give him our best ad∣vice in things that may conduc unto his good, bt for the making of any judiciall processe for reclaiming of him in an Ecclesiastical way it is not to be done, the Church leaving such wholly to the judgment of God. When the Scripture calls upon us to reprove a Brother, it holds out, that above all others we should most heed a Christian, not that altogether we should neglect any in whom we see the least hope of good. Quest. 2. Whether admonition be alike to be given to all. Though admonition be to be dispenced and given to all without ex∣ceptions,
yet it is not to be given without respect of persons? we shall lay down several distinctions, and so close this chapter. 1 Betwixt age and age, we ought to have a respect to gray hairs, and reverence the hoary head. 2 Betwixt person and person, some are of a more bashfull and good nature then others. 3 Betwixt calling and calling, some are Ministers of the Gospel, some not. We ought to behold him as a Father. 4 Betwixt sin and sin, there are degrees of sin, and there are degrees of temptation, which the wife reprover is to observe. CHAP. 14. Of Excommunication. That ad monition which re∣spects ex∣communi∣cation must not be for sins of infirmity, but of a deeper dye, and colour.This is the effect of rejected Admonition, so desirous is God of mens good, that if they will not amend by wholesome reproof, they should be corrected with the sharper censure of Excommunication; the last refuge of an offended brother, is the Officers of the Church, and if their reproof be not accepted, it ends in this severe cor∣rection; which is, either the lesser or the greater. 1. The lesser excommunication, is a keeping back the of∣fending Brother from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper un∣till that satisfaction be given to the Church-Officer, for the sin committed, which is an acknowledgement of his sin be∣fore the Church in general, or the Churches-Officer, and the party offended in particular.
2. The greater Excommunication, is not only a keeping him back that is obstinate against the Churches admonition, from that Sacrament of the Lords Suppet, but a judicial cutting of him off from the body of the Church, which is the Body of Christ, and leaving him as a heathen to be judged at the Lords coming down to judgment: Of this greater ex∣communication we shall speak of these following heads. 1 The nature of it. 2 The ends of it. 3 The form of it. 4 Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. The nature of this greater Excommunication will not be unknown to him that considers this description. It is a judicial casting out of r factory stubborne and obsti∣nate offenders, from the Church of Christ, and delivering the n over uno Sathan, for the preservation of the Churches peace and honour. 1 It is a judicial casting out] It is not to be done out of rash and furious passion, but according to the Law and Rule of God, and that not by every one, but those to whom the power of binding is given, and he not by his own au∣thority, but by the advice, or at least, the knowledge and consent of the most worthy Members of that Church from which the party is to be cast, 1 Cor. 5.45 2. Of stubborn, &c.] this is to be done after all admoniions, counsels and reproofs of the Church are slighted and con∣temned. It ought to be the last Act of the offended Church, and all means are to be tryed to reclaim an offended bro∣ther, before this be put in execution and practise an obsti∣ate
offender is properly the Subject of Excommunication. The offence is not necessary alwayes to be in matters of fact, Drunkenness, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Perjury, Bls∣phemy: but it will and ought to be extended to matters of another kind, as Teachers of false Doctrine, Disturbers of the Churches peace, and Infringers or Contemners of her Laws, 1 Tim. 19.20. Tit. 3.10. 2 Thes. 3.6. 3. From the Church of Christ] Not to speak of those kinds of Excommunication which were used against Offenders in the Church of the Iews, proportionable to these now used in the Church of the Christians. It is affirmed, that the par∣ty so judicially cast out is not a member of the Church of Christ, nor was not before, that is, since his refusal to hear the Church in her admonitions; at that time he began to be a Heathen and a Publican, and these are not of the Church of Christ: then he began to be as a Dog and a Swine, unto whom holy things are not to be given, Mat. 7.6. The Church therefore doth but pronounce, the sinner to be what indeed he is, that is, not a member of the Church; by which sentence the Church looks upon him, as cast out, or cut off from their body. 4. And delivering them over unto Sathan] this is the fear∣full issue of Excommunication, and yet no other then the Lords mind against that Corinthian for his sin of incest, 1 Cor. 5.7. And Pauls practise for the Apostacy of Alexander, 1 Tim. 1.20. Out of the Church, is to be out of Christ, and to be cut off from Christs body is to be thrown among the branches to be burned. As a Judge by his sentence by vertue of that Commission given him from the supream Magistrate, gives the Prisoner over unto execution, being dead before in Law, as soon as his fact was committed: so the Church-Officer by vertue of that Commission given him of Christ, Iohn 20.23. assisted by the Church-Members, as Justices, gives the sinner over unto Satan, whose he was as soon as obstinacy appeared in him. 4. For the preservation of the Churches peace and honour] the end of the Church in this act is not the sinners damna∣tion,
but his salvation, Christs honour, and her own peace: but these things fall more properly under the next Section. SECT. II. The Church in this her Discipline hath before her eye, and in this judicial sentence, proposeth to herself these ends. 1. The glory and honour of God, that his name might not be abused, nor his worship defiled by such obstinate and refractory persons, 1 Tim. 1.20. 2. For the Honour of the Church, that her enemies should not have occasion to triumph and boast, that she consists of impure and wicked wetches. Christian religion might suffer through the wickedness of such men; and therefore the Church disowns them, and affirms they are not Christians but hea∣thens, 2 Thes. 3.6. 3. For the prevention of sin, a little leaven will leaven the whole lump; one notorious sinner being suffered to go with∣out this Church discipline might infect others, which when this is set will not so easily be done; he is punished that others might fear, and be kept pure. One arm may, and in some times must be cut off, not for hatred to it, but being rotten, the whole body is in danger, the like case is here, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. 4. To bring the sinner to the obedience of Christ, when such a judicial sentence is pronounced, and when the Mem∣bers of the Church withdraw from him, as a leprous person, so far as stands with necessity and order; and knowing what is done on earth is ratified in heaven, the terror of God with him that is not past all sense, will so follow it, and the shame of men will so fill him, that he is brought to his knees craving pardon of the Church for his obstinacy, and desiring to be received again into her body, is absolved and forgiven, and receives the ordinances of the Church, and for the future walks more humbly and holily then before, which was the fruit of the Corinthians excommunicating that incestuous per∣son, 2 Cor. 26.7 8.
But if there be any so pervers, that this Church-censure will not reduce to obedience, the Laws of all Christian stares takes that sinners case into consideration, that God be not blasphemed, and by them he is punished. SECT. III. To let pass the several wayes that the Church useth to re∣claim the sinner, which is different according to the Lawes and customes used in several places, the sentence of Ex∣communication is pronounced by the Minister of that Con∣gregation where the offender lives, in this, or the like form. Forma ex∣com ab Imerto Au∣thoriae.A. B. Having been lately a Member of this Church, hath con∣tumeliously and obstinately fallen into the sin of — and hath renounced his Fellowship in this Church, having re∣proached the same, and the whole Ministration of Gods or∣dinance therein, of all which he hath been tenderly and ear∣nestly admonished sundry times in private, and hath been publickly called to repent and turn from his sin. And for as much as the Church finds her tender admonitions to be fruitless towards him, she is compelled, though with great unwillingness and hearty sorrow to vindicate her honour, and provide for the peace and safety of her Members, by ex∣ecuting that severe chastisement on him, which Christ her head and husband hath authorized her to inflict on such re∣bellious Children, who thus do renounce and cast dirt in the face of her that bare them. For as much then as the said, A. B. doth utterly refuse to hear the Church calling him, with much long suffering and tender love, to returne to the unity and Fellowship and to make a just acknowledgment and renunciation of his sin of — but doth per∣tinaciously declare both by word and deed, his obstinate prsist∣ing therein.
Therefore after solemne calling upon God and having his glory before our eyes, the credit of the Gospel, and the prosperity of his Church; I do hereby according to the commanment of Christ, and by his authority committed to me as minister of thy Church, and with the consent also of the same, solemnity pronounce and declare in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, the said, A. B. to be cut off from this Church, and body of hrist, as a most obstinate and impenitent — and do leave him to that fearefull judgment and fiery Indignation, denounced against such, and do warne and beseech you to withdraw from him that he may be ashamed, and to lay him aside to be dealt withall when the Lord Iesus Christ shall come, Which sen∣tence is nothing but a declaration of that which the sinner is, before he be judicialy sentenced by the Church. Yet it is to be noted that this casting out of the Church, is not absolute save as touching external rights and priveledges of the Church, from which Excommunication fully keeps him, but as touching internall right he hath unto the same it is only conditional, that is upon his persisting in his errour, and there∣fore if the excommunicate will leave his wicked deeds, confess his sin, be reconciled to the Church whom he hath offended, signifying this to his minister, he is again to be restored to all the rights and ordinances of the Church, and to be absolved from that sentence passed upon him, that Satan geat no ad∣vantage over him, or left he be swallowed up of too much sor∣row, 2 Cor. 2.7. The sinnes for which the sinner hath this sentence of Excom∣munication passed on him are not alike in all Churches, for according to the laws and orders established in severall Church∣es, crimes, sins and offences may be different, according to the Constitutions of those Churches, that is of those offences which are made against the laws in those places commanded for the honour of the Church though not directly required by the law of God.
SECT. IV. Quest. 1. Whether the Reformed Churches, are legally excommu∣nicated by the Pope. Quest. 2. Whether Kings ought or can be Excommuni∣cated. Quest. 3. Whether excommunication debarres from all society of the Church. Quest. 1. Whether the reformed Churches are legally excommunicated by the Pope. The Bishop of Rome in regard of the separation made from him, by the professors of the religion called the Reformed, hath passed his sentence of excommunication, upon them as Heretical but unjustly. Fo; 1 They are not Hereticks but Orthodox professors] they have left that upon which their souls could have no sure hold. There is no point that ever Christ taught, or the Apostles preched, or the primitive Church knew that is denied by the reformed. 2 He hath no power to exclude them out of the Church, who himself is scarce a member of it] he is in the Church only as Antichrist in the temple of God, and in as much as he exalts himself above all that is called God 2 Thes. 2.4. (viz. all Kings and maitrates) in which regard in some measure his Church∣ship might be denyed. 3 The Church of Rome her self is most hereticall] if that be Heresy, to preach down what God commands, to blot out what he hath written, to adde to what he hath spoken, and dispence with what he hath enjoyned, the Church of Rome can∣not
be found, they ought first to cast the beame out of their own eyes, and then they can see the better to pull the mote out of ours. 4 The Pope or Bishop of Rome hath no authoritative power over the Churches of other countries] The power of excom∣munication ought to proceed from one who hath authority over that Church from which the party is excommunicated▪ now the Pope what ever power as another Bishop he hath in his own Diocesse, there is no power he can in the least lay claim to, over other places. They being by God put under the goverment of others over whom the Pope or Bishop of Rome hath no power, and therefore cannot excommunicate. Quest. 2. Whether kings ought or can be excom∣municated. Untill the days of Gregory the seventh Bishop of Rome, the Imperial Crown was never touched with the thunder of excom∣munication, of him it is written, hic primus Imperatorem ex∣communicavit, & potestatem constituendi Imperatorem sibi. arrogavit, and indeed after him it was the usual practise of the Romish Bishops to extinguish the light of Imperial Majesty by disobliging subjects from their duty and allegiance to their lawfull princes by letters of excommunication. Queen Eilzbeth of blessed memory was excommunicated by three Popes successively (viz) by Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth and Septus the fifth, but that is no great wonder; for her Father, Henry the eight was so sentenced before her, with all his prote∣stant Children. Yet of late, the Popes mouth is something stopped, that he seldome doomes, and his arme in some measure dryed up that he cannot draw out this sword so often as formerly: not because he wants will, but because he wants no wit, knowing that now the world is grown so wise as not to regard his threat∣nings.
The Datch word for a pres. as he is Antiepico∣pall. Gal. Instit. l. 4. c. 12. S. 7.However there is a generation, known by the name of Pres∣byters, or Guiless whose doctrine joyns to the popes in this, touching the excommunication of Kings. My oul never knew Treason but as our Saviour knew sin, (viz.) by speculation only. I am affrayd to see the word King and the word excommunication stand together; lets alter phrase, and speake of the magistrate, and in our discourse we shall une stand the chei Magistrate of Genevah, since it is mantained by the Patriarch of that see. It seemes neither Christian nor rational to bring magistrates under this censure. For, 1 Grant that the supreme magistrate might be excommu∣nicated for any cause, we should find him sentenced for no cause. As t was a custome of the Bishop of Rome to censure Kings and Emperours at every time he took distate, so these Guisels (as they stand in opposition to Episcopacy haveing passion and spleen as natural to them, as the faculty of breathing) should at the fist supposed offence, (and they will ever be offended except they be highest) divest majesty of its grandeur by their citations, irreverent admonitions, and frequent yea causeless Excommunications. 2 It may open a doore for Treason, and rebellion and coun∣tenance it by law, to make the supreme magistrate by law no better then a Heathen, and the Christian Governour, no other in his dominion then the gerat Turke in his, may pro∣voke Spirits to attempt that which at this time we will not name. They distinguish that they may not be mistaken, that they excommunicate, not the magistrate but he Christian (cunning gamesters) may not another say he kills not or rebells not a∣gainst the Prince but an excommunicated person, (cunning executioners) we have seen the sad events of such distincti∣ons, and the oberver of them deserves to be civily excom∣municated or banished, or delivered over to the Executioner, rather then he should have any opportunity of performing his desires, or of uttering his mind in this particular; seeing it is so destructive to all peace and order.
3 The Church never could be bettered, by magistrats ex∣communication, this ordinance is appointed for the preserve∣ing of the Church in peace, and for the honour of the Gospel, which ends we may know shall never be obtained by this. How the Excommunications of the Emperour by the Bishops of Rome did make for these ends, both the Emperours and the Popes know; what quarrels, underminings, scandals to religon, would be between the incensed King, and the furious Guisel is easy to be foreseen. 4 The arguments brought to defend this Papal practise, are such as have no strength in them. Is it not, think you, a neat knack of a Guisel that he can deliver the magistrate over unto Satan, cast him out of the Church as a rotten member, and all his subjects must be made behold him no better then a meere Heathen, and yet not hurt the magistrate at all, nor rob him of that majesty which officially is in him. The story of King Uz∣ziah is brought in to Justify their practise, mentioned, 2 Chro. 26.18. but when the sequele of that History is ob∣served, they will find it farre different from Judicial ex∣communication; his being cut off from the house of the Lord, was for his leprosie, no leper being admitted thereunto, and indeed by this Instance it is discovered what was said before, for by reason of his naturall leprosie he was not only debar∣red the house of the Lord, but also deposed from his throne, which act, indeed the Pref. might, and we have cause to suspect, would do, when they have judicially excommunicated the magistrates, so that by this meanes they would procure to themselves the power of pulling down one and setting up another. That passage of Ambrose toward the Em∣perour Thedosius is much talked of, but when all parts of it are considered, it was nothing lesse then Pres. Ex∣communication.
That distinction of the Magistrates being but a man, is worthily to be delivered over unto Satan, he is more then a man. We read that he is worth ten thousand mn, 2. Sam. 18.3. and when in Scripture it can be produced that 2 wicked Saul, and idolattous Iereboam, a Murtheous Ma∣nasseth, or ungodly Iehoahaz, undergoing the  of the Church of the Iewes they shall have liberty  against wicked magistrates, the Church of the  otherwise the distinction of good and bad  a∣mounts to nothing, Saul was a wicked Prince, but we ought to look upon him as the Lords annoynted, and in that re∣gard fear to touch his person, or smite him with the tongues Saul must be untouched because he is King must be reviled, made a Heathen, nay possibly murthered because he is Saul say, rebells. Now which shall we follow God or man. It is true excommunication is an ordinance of God, so is the shedding of the blood of them who hath shed blood, Gen. 9.6. Why was not Saul put to death then slaying the Lords Priests Kings are in Scripture looked upon with a watchfull, eye by God that none harm them, is not Saul a prophane wretch, a notorious murtherer, one forsaken of God. Yet who can stretch forth there hand against him and be guiltlesse, 2 Sam. 26.9. And though they should deserve stripes, yet they are not to be stricken for equity, Prov. 17.26. for against him there is no rising up. Prov. 30.31. yea who ought to say what doest thou, Eccle. 8.4. not excluding a just reproof or admonition, for so John the Baptist reproved Herod, and Elijah Ahab, and severall o∣thers, but Kings being Gods immediate deputies upon earth who call them in question though rage universal as to punish him for this faults, or correct him for his crimes, who first even the Pope upon the one hand and Guisel upon the other. These two, though at odds between themselves,
yet ever agree, and goe and in hand for the takeing a∣way of that honour annexed by the King of Kings, to his vicegerents upon this inferiour world: before which be done let them goe about day by day and grudge that they be not satisfied. That distinction of the moderate and rigid Presbyterians may be by this time may come into the readers mind, a distin∣ction that hides many an ugly face, and treacherous heart, possibly the moderate Pre. will with more gravity, and de∣liberation, pronounce the sentence of excommunication against the chief magistrate, then the other, and comes to it with more sorrow of heart, through the greatnesse of the crime then the other, but yet he will do it, being a princi∣ple with the Pres. (that is the factious one, or the Antiepisco∣pal on, for otherwise Pres. is an honorable title and catholical) as such; and touching the distinction it is as a just one and grounded on nature, there being as great difference be∣twixt these two, as there is between staring and stark mad, the one drives like Iehu furiously, the other like the Spaniard is more grave, stayed, slye and cunning. Quest. 2. Whether excommunication debarres from all society of the Church In regard that we are exacted to withdraw our selves from such, and not so much as to eare with them, thi  on is not to be passed over, It is said then that exomu∣nication hinders not.
1 The practise of those duts that are grounded on the Laws of nature; as the duties of Husbands and Wives, Fa∣thers and Children, Masters and Servants, Princes and People. 2 Nor the practise of those dutys that are grounded on the law of nations, as traffique and commerce. An Excommuni∣cated person must be to us as an Heathen, and with these we may have trade. 3 Nor the practise of such that are grounded upon the law of Common charity. For we are bound to feed the hungry, cloath the naked, though they be, or should be, as Heathens. 4 It debars not but in some cases from the hearing of the word. Unlesse they be scoffers (it being the meanes for conver∣ting of very heathens) they are admitted to it and ought to be exorted to it, but in no other ordinance do they enjoy any so∣ciety with the Church, and in no familiar or unnecessary deal∣ing have we any thing to do with them, but are bound to avoyd them, that they may be ashamed and returne to the Church by repentance, from which they were cast out through ob∣stinacy.
CHAP. 15. Of Singing. THis is the fourth and last direction given above for the words in dwelling; and one end why the Apostle would have the word of Christ, to dwell richly in the believing Colossians, though some who would be thought unblmeable before God in love, blames the Church for her keeping up this holy practise of singing Psalmes. This gospell ordinance, being set aside with others by some of this generation, we come in the last place to defend; and let us see, 1. The nature of it. 2. Some arguments for it. 3. The manner of performing it. 4. Resolve some questions. SECT. I. The nature of this ordinance is better known by practise then it is or can be by art, which might be the reason why so many have handled it, and few or none define it: we shall give some description of it for methods sake, and because mo∣tus naturae velocior est in fine, we shall be the briefer. It is a calling upon God, by prayer or praise, with an eleva∣vation of the voice and prolongation of the words.
Davi sung unto God by prayer and emptied his mind unto him by confession of sin, this way Psal. 51. and again praised and magnified his name for all his mercyes, Psal. 18. The same words wee utter quickly and expresse suddenly in praying or reading, by keeping them upon our tongue, and pronouncing them in parts, with an heightned voice, gives a being to that ordinance we call singing: suppose we were to read and sing Psal. 35. Lord plead my cause aainst my foes, confound their force and might. Fight on my part against all those, that seek with me to fight. The same words being quickly read over, and the letters joyned hastily together, makes it a prayer read, which delibe∣rally uttered, with a separation of the letters, through the striking of the tounge and teeth, makes it a prayer sung. That of Saint Iames. 5. Iames. 13. contradicts not what hath been sayd: the words not being preceptive but declara∣tive, showing only that in times of mirth the heart is better disposed to sing then otherwise, and in times of trouble it is more apt or fit to pray then for any other duty. SECT. II. Were it not that there were some unreasonable men who want faith, this practise need not now to have been disputed, but without question used. for, 1 God hath shown himself eminently well pleased with it 2 Chro. 20.22. he declared his mind and pleasure touching this ordinances, when in the celebration of it he sent destru∣ction to his peoples enemys: he may give us victory now o∣ver our sins, as well as them over their foes then.
2 Scripture commands it, and calls for it, Eph. 5.18. 19.  5.13. it is not an ordinance of humane or mans inventi∣on, but is enjoyned us of God, and we cannot find that ever those precepts was revealled, and therefore they are now bind∣ing. 3 The spirits and affections need it, this ordinance by ex∣perience doth warme the blood and raises the heart in a holy quite to perform divine service, men are sometimes dull in there devotion, and crosses oftentimes damps their zeale which this act of singing helps and stirrs up. 4 The Church of Christ had a promise of it, Rom. 15.9. of the times we live in was it promised that this should by us be performed and therfore what ever fond people say against it it is not to be neglected. 5 The Church of God in all age; hath used it, we read of it under Moses, Exod. 15.1. and under the judges, Iudg. 51. under the Kings, under the gospell, Mat. 26.30. Acts 16.25. no time can we find that ever had a Church, but in and by that Church was this ordinance upheld. 6 To no age did God ever limit it, It was appointed pra∣ctised, to and in all ages, when or where it was to cease was never made known or divulged, by which we are as much en∣gaged to sing Psalmes with grace in our hearts in England, as ever the Collossians Phrigia. 7 The Church militant, above all other ordinances comes nearest to the Church triumphant by it, In heaven thereis nothing but a continuall singing and praising God both by the Angels and spirits of just men made perfect, Revel. 14.1. 2.2. read they do not hear Sermons they cannot, receive Sa∣craments they need not in performing this they cease not, and by this ordinance above all, is the communion of Saints help up that it perish not.
SECT. III. After what manner men are to sing the Scripture is not darke; but clearing commanding that it be done, 1 With understanding, Psal. 47.7. 2 With grace, Gal. 3.16. 3 With affection, Eph. 5.19. SECT. III. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1 Whether it be lawfull to sing Davids Psalmes in a publick Congregation. Quest. 2 Whether those psalmes containing direfull imprecations ought to be sung: or how with a safe conscience they may be sung.
Quest. 2. Whether it be lawfull to sing Da∣vids Psalmes in a Publick Congrega∣tion? Some who are for the blotting out of every thing though never so good, just, lawfull or laudable that was practised by the ancients sentence, the Church for her singing -Da∣vids Psalmes, chiefly in publick, in respect of those spiritual graces which are sometimes exercised in the composing of them, as Psal. 131. wherein he attests that he is not puff't up in mind, but this is not sufficient for us to suffer our selves to be deprived of this holy practise For 1 It is lawfull to read them in our congregations, those that would thrust out the singing of those Hyms, and bring in their own songs instead (as many of them presumptuously do) may upon the same reason, cancel them out of the Bible, and teach for doctrin their own inventions. As many of those that are professedly of our Church by their practises give much Apostates too too occasion to per∣forme. 2 It hath been the ancient way of the Church of God both of Jews and of Gentiles since the establishment of the Church. There were prophets and holy men of God when the whole Church of Israel used these Psalmes in their congregation, and yet never was it condemned for so doing. We may assure our selves that God was as tender of his own name as ever these men were, or are, and since
he let those Psalmes be sung by all in a Church where he so often was visibly present, they may be used in that Church wherein we have his promise he shall spiritually be untill the end of the world. 3 Davids Psalmes seem most deserving, if wee looke upon the worth of them they are much to be preferred. For, 1 For matter they are infallible, they were composed by the unerring spirit of God, and therefore their extem∣porary raptures, and inventions are not to be put in the bal∣lance with them. 2 For number they are various, the soul can bein no con∣dition, state or temper, but in the book of Psalmes there are expressions that suite with that condition, state or tem∣per. 3 For the users of them, they have been the most ex∣cellent; the whole body of the Church of God under the law used them; Christ the Son of God at his last Supper used them. Math. 25.30. It being a custome of the Jews at their passover to sing one of those Psalmes betwixt the 113. and 118. Our Saviour submitted also to this Lawfull custome, though in his Fathers law not commanded: and for some reason we conjecture he and his Apostles to have sung the 116. and since his dayes the noble worthies of the Christi∣an Churches in all Nations used the same. 4 Those prophesies that are in them; touching Christ call upon beleevers for the siging of them our faith may be con∣firmed in the doctrine of our Lords passion, his resurrection and if a Jew be in our congregations he may learn to believe on Jesus the Son of Mary, whom his fathers crucified, by our very singing.
Touching what is Objected against our singing the 131. Psalm, when some of the congregation may be puffed up, we gve this short reply. 1 They judge others proud, in regard they are so full of pride themselves. 2 As a Prince he was not proud of his glory and Kingship, though he was taken from the sheepfold. 3 As a Saint, and so at that time the grace of humility might be eminent in him. 4 This as well as other scripture is written for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction, so that by this we shew others what we are, or what we ought to be. 5 It is very lawfull to read it, meditat upon it, and by con∣sequence lawfull to sing it. Quest. 2. Whether those Psalmes that con∣taine direfull Imprecations ought to be sung or how wiht a safe conscience they may be sung. THis is one grand argument brought against the Churches practices That there are many curses pryed for, in se∣verall Psalmes, as 109. and 69. &c. Which seemes to be much against that charity that ought to be in Christian meet∣ings, but this zeal or charity not being grounded on knowledge is not sufficient to disswade us from the using of so holy and an∣cient a practise. For,
1 They are not curses but prophesies, the Spirit of God promised them to speak of those things that were to come hereafter. When David was not moved by the spirit of pro∣phesie he fasted and prayed for his enemies, but when that stirred him, he prophesied, because he fore saw their destru∣ction. As before it is lawfull to reade them, to have them much upon our mind, therefore it is not against Christian love to sing them. As touching the second part of the question we are to sing these, 1 not with any consideration of our enemies, let them curse but let us blesse. 2 With consideion of the incorvertible enemy of God: rather then the Church should perish let them become as dung for the earth, Let God arise and make them that hate him flee before him. 3 With serious meditation of Gods justice against sin, and sinfull men, which may induce us to mortifie the old man, and crucifie the lusts that are in us. Thus farre of the ordinances referring to the word, the first part of what in the beginning we under∣tooke.
Fides Catholica: OR, THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholick Church: Referring to the Sacraments. With a particular DISCOURSE Touching the Ordination of Confirmation. By WILL. ANNAND Minister of the word and SACRAMENTS. LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, at the sign of the Crane in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1661.
To The Worshipfull and Hopefull young Gentleman Iohn Wells, Juni. Esq of Heath, in the Parish of Heath. SIR. BEing necessitated to divide where a uni∣on was both principally and primarly intended, I am emboldened to divulge my thoughts of the Churches Sacra∣ments, under the umbrage and tuiti∣on of your name and eminent vertues. To despond of your favorable Acceptance, were to make my self the Subject of their Censure, who are more acquainted with that innate candor which attends your refined Abilities. Your Education being in the same Colledge with my self, makes me more intencely ambitious of
your Happinesse and Honor, of which last Divinity shews (and to her in this Philosophy agrees) there are four species or sorts. 1 Naturall by birth, Our Saviour being of the Royall Trybe, was born a Gentleman; of this you have a part. 2 Civill by riches, Abraham was a mighty Prince, of this you have a Competency. 3 Moral by a vertuous life; this made Jabez more honourable then his Brethren, in this you have outstrip'd many of your companions. 4 Celestial by being Crowned with glory, and such honour have all Gods Saints, which to ob∣tain a firm standing unto, and a worthy receiving of the Churches Sacraments, are essentiall helps and furtherances. In this tract you have their natures Catholical∣ly handled, and purely, though plainly, taught, un∣to which, if you take heed, you shall do well, and passe for a true Son of the Church, in the Register of the faithful, and receive the sure reward, of a Saint in the new Jerusalem the Mother of us all, which is the prayer of him who is. SIR.  Yours in all offices of love and duty, Will. Annand.
CHAP. I. Of Sacraments. THe seals of the Covenant of Grace are called Sacraments, quia Sacrament tractari debent, a word though not found in Scripture as the word Trinity, yet Sufficiently grounded in the same. It signified of old that Oath or Engagement souldiers made to their Captain of their faithfulness and fidelity, before they were listed in an army; and without this military Sacramental Oath, it was not lawful for any to draw his sword in a field. Christ is the Captain of the Christians salvation, and these Sacraments are Bonds and tyes on mans part to be the Lords, and to be faithful unto him until death. The doctrine of the Sacraments is the second work that we un∣dertook in this backsliding generation to defend against the ca∣lumnies and reproaches of ignorant and unlearned men; in pro∣secuting of which we shall in the general behold 1. Their nature. 2. Their end. 3. Their parts. 4. Their number. 5. Resolve some Questions. SECT. I. THe nature of the Sacraments may be thus known. They are holy and visible signs ordained by God, as seals of his promises, representing that inward grace and goodness which he bears towards, and intends to shew unto his people through the Lord Iesus.
1. They are Holy and visible signs] God was pleased in all ages, to deal with his people in This way of Sacraments, holding forth his mercy and will toward them by some visible sign presented to them; Thus the trees of life and of knowledge, Gen. 2.9. were Sa∣craments to Adam; and Manna from Heaven, and water out of the rock, were for a time Sacraments to the Iews, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. and water, bread and wine are standing Sacraments or visible signs of Gods love unto Christians. Therefore they are called Holy figures, Marks, Badges, Prints, Forms, Patterns, Representa∣tions, Memorials, Symbols, Seals, or Signs, Evidently holding forth Christ and all his merits, Gal. 3.1. 2. Ordained by God] Sacraments are in themselves not cir∣cumstantial, but essential parts of Gods worship; and therefore he onely is to be the giver of them: none ought to inrrude that as a part of worship unto which God hath not given his consent. Er∣roneous therefore is the Church of Rome even in this particular, in binding her Members to five Sacraments more thn ever God made, or the Chatholick Church knew. God must give the grace, gift or mercy signified by that sign: therefore it is fit he appoint the sign himself; he appointed circumcision under the Law, Gen. 17.10. and baptisme under the Gospel, Iohn 1.33. 3. As seals of his promises] God hath declared in his word that he will forgive his peoples iniquity, and remember their sins no more, Ier. 31.34. and hath appointed the Sacraments as seals to this pro∣mise, and all others of the like nature. The Sacraments may be considered in a three fold manner, and usually are: 1. As instruments; and so they awake and stir up the soul to lay hold upon Christ, as God exhibites him in the Gospel. 2. As signs; and so they represent Christ and him crucified; which is common to them with the Gospel. 3. As seals: and so they declare that the receiver is pardoned, concerning that truth or deed written in the Gospel, Math. 26.28. 3. Representing that inward grace, &c.] Israel was Gods pe∣culiar people, whom he had taken out from among all nations to behold his glory; and the outward sign or token of that, was their
circumcision in the flesh, Ge. 17.11. which as baptisme unto us, signified, and sealed their regeneration, justification and sanctifi∣cation through Christ; Deut. 30.6 Rom. 4.11.. 4. Through the Lord Iesus] This is the thing signified in all the Sacraments of the Church: he is eat in the Manna, and in the passeo∣ver: drank in the water out of the rock; he is in the baptismal water, to wash the soul and take away its pollution: and in the Eucha∣ristical bread and wine to strengthen and comfort the soul; God intending Christ to be the way wherein he will meet the sinner, and the door through which he will admit him into his presence.Some calls it a natural sacrament which is as much as to to say, it is no sacra∣ment at all. There are who make the Rainbow a Sacrament unto Noah Gen. 9.12, 13. and when they shew that Christ is signified thereby, and his merits represented by it as by a sign, and his mercy de∣clared as a seal, to all that are beholders of that bow, or the par∣ties to whom that covenant is made, which was with every living Creature, I shall be of their judgement; not before. SECT. II. THe ends for which God appointed Sacraments in his Church, are chiefly these. 1. For helps against our weakness: we can understand spiritual things and heavenly mysteries the rather that they are represented to us by bodily and visible signs; we are the more able to appre∣head the efficacy or the manner of the blood in washing or puri∣fying the polluted, when it is mystically represented to us by wa∣ter. Our memories are fraile, and the death of Christ may more powerfully be though on by us, when it is signified by bread and wine: which is one cause of that Sacraments institution, Luke 22.19. 2. To confirm us against our doubtings. the penitent hath the promise of the forgiveness of sins made unto him; but the Sacra∣ment gives him Gods hand for it. God hath written it in his word, and Christ hath sealed it by his last supper, Matth. 26.28. 3. To quicken us against our dullness; Sacraments are bonds,
tyes, covenants, engagements, and visible contracts that the soul makes of new obedience; they are as it were spurs in the sides of a lingering heart, making him with a holy compulsion to bear up to the Lord Jesus in points of worship and of practice, 1 Cor. 10. 16.21. 4. To discover that we are of his inheritance: by his Sacra∣ments his own people are distingushed from such as believe not in him, or call not upon him. Goliahs being uncircumcised, 1 Sam. 17 36. was an argument to David that he belonged not to God; by baptisme we are at this day known from all such as look not for salvation through Christ, that being performed in his name as Saviour of the world, Acts 2.38, &c. 5. To represent our Union with him, and our Communion each with other: bread and wine becomes flesh in us and of us, and blood of our blood, Christ received by faith becomes flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone; we are made spiritually and my∣stically one body with him, Eph. 5.30. And as the Catholick Church believes the remission of sins, so she holds out the Com∣munion of Saints, of which the Sacraments are lively types, tokens symbols, and signs, 1 Cor. 10.17. In a word, the Sacraments to our understandings are as it were glasses darkly to behold Christ, Gal. 3.1. To our memories they are as Monuments to make us remem∣ber Christ, Luke 22.19.? To our assurance they are as seals, confirming us of our interest in Christ, Rom. 4 11. SECT. III. THe parts of a Sacrament are these two: viz. the sign, and the thing signified. 1. The sign, that is the outward visible and natural Element, sanctified and set apart by God (the onely Lawgiver to the Church) to be used in that ordinance for such an end and purpose. Thus
water, and bread and wine are appointed, and instituted to be memorials, representations, tokens, signs and Elements in the Sacra∣ments of the Gospel, as circumcision and the Paschal Lamb were of the Law, Iohn 1.33. 1 Cor. 11.23. 2. The thing signified, that is the inward, invisible and spiritual thing, which is mystically reprsented to the faithful receiver by the natural Element thereunto sanctified and set apart, which is Christ, who in presenting of the Elements is proffered, and in the receiving of them is applied by the believer for his own good and comfort. How grosly doth the Church of Rome oppose the very being of a Sacrament in their transubstantiation? for if the very body and blood of Christ (which is the thing signified by the bread and wine in the Sacrament of the supper) be received by the Communi∣cant, then where is the sign, the outward and visible, which must necassarily be in this Ordinance? if they say (as they do) that the figure and colour of the Cake is the sign, my faith must be par∣doned in that particular, until it be shewn that the whiteness or roundness of the wafer or bread was appointed to be the sign, by him that hath the sole power to give the thing signified. Between the sign and the thing signified in the Sacraments, there is a certain harmony and sweet similitude & proportion; how aptly did the circumcision of the flesh represent to the Iews: the circumcision of the soul, heart or mind? Deut. 10.6. and the Pas∣chal Lamb, that Lamb of God whose blood being upon their hearts, saves them from the destroying Angel. What a Holy harmony is there between a Christians being washed with water in the name of the sacred Trinity, and the blood of Jesus which washeth us from all our sins? 1 Iohn 1.7. and being washed with baptismal water for our natural and outward impurity, we ought to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. The like of the other Sacrament, which shall be discovered in due time. Now when the Church of Rome shall finde out so exact a pro∣portion between that which they call the sign in the supper, and the thing signified, they may bring possibly a true Catholick one step nearer her then for the present probably he may be; we y
but a step; for admit the proportion be never so exact, yet if the sign be not instituted, it can never be a memorial of the thing signified. SECT. IV. VVE have them that would make the Sacraments fewer in number then God hath commanded: and there are some that have made more then he hath approved. Two there are, no more no less, (viz) baptisme, and the Lords supper, which must be observed. For the observation of these we have promises and precepts, Mark 16.16. Matth. 3.11. Acts 2.38. Luke 22.18. The Jewish Church had ordinary but two, (viz) Circumcision, by which they were visibly entered into the Church, and Sacramentally born again to this our baptisme Answers: and the Paschal by which they were nourished in that Church into which by circumcision they were admitted: to this our Lords supper Answers. And as a man is but once born, though often fed, so he is, but once a receiver of that Sacrament of baptisme, yet ought to be a frequent partaker of that of the supper. We say, Ordinary the Iews had but two: for that Manna from Heaven and water out of the rock, were extraordinary, and but for a time, during Israels abode in the wilderness. We need but to be born in Christ, and then continue in him, which is accomplished by these two, without any other. By baptisme we put on Christ as a garment, Gal. 3.27. and by the supper we feed upon him as meat, Luke 22.19. having therefore food and raiment by these Sacraments, we ought to be content. To all this consent the reformed Churches, of Helv. Art. 19.20. of Basil Art. 5. of Bohem Art. 11. of France Art. 34. of Belg Art. 33. of Sax. Art. 12. of Wr. Art. 9. of the four Cities Art. 16. of Irel. Art. 85, 86. of Scotland Art. 21. of England Art. 25. The Article it self is this.
Art. 25. of the Church of England. Sacraments ordained of Christ, be not onely badges or tokens of Christian mens profession, but rather they be certain sure witnesses and effectual signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us, by which he doth work invisibly in us, and not onely quicken, but also strengthen our Faith in him, &c. SECT. V. Questions resolved. Quest. 1. VVHether those five Sacraments added by the Church of Rome be Sacraments? Quest. 2. Whether the effect of the Sacraments depend upon the worthinesse of the Minister? Quest. 3. Whether the Sacraments differ from the Scriptures? Quest. 4. Whether the Sacraments of the old differ from those of the New Testament? Quest. 5. Whether two Sacraments be sufficient under the Gospel? Quest. 1. Whether those five Sacraments added by the Church of Rome be Sacraments? God unto his People under the Law gave two Sacraments, as signs and tokens of his good will and favour to them; the con∣temners or neglecters whereof were in danger of the Judgement; (viz.) Circumcision and the Paschal he hath also given to his Saints under the Gospel, Baptism and the Supper as Sacraments or means to hold forth Christ and him crucified. Unto these two Rom hath added five more, which are these.
1. Confirmation, or Laying on of hands. 2. Pennance, or satisfaction for sin committed. 3. Orders, or ordination before the work of the Ministery be assumed. 4. Matrimony. 5. Extreame Unction, or the anointing of the sick with oyle before he depart. But none of these are Sacraments▪ for, 1. None of them was instituted by Christ for such an end; Let all the Gospel be searched, and we shall find non of these instituted, and sanctified to be as means for the applying of the merits of Christs death unto the soul. It is not sufficient for the nature of a Sacrament, to affirm there is ground for it in Scripture: so a fa may be a Sacrament, Matth. 3.12. but that the sign be appointed to signifie such a thing, and to that appointment a blessing annex∣ed; ye though we finde most of these in Scripture, and appointed to be done, yet never as Sacraments, but as discipline proper for the Church, Heb 6.2. and order to avoid confusion in the Church, Acts 13.3. and that fornication might be avoided by the Mem∣bers of the Church, 1 Cor. 7.2. and as an extraordinary sign of an ex∣traordinary cure by the Elders in the Church, Iames 5.14. As touching pennance, there is nothing of that in the least (as it is used by Rome) spoken of to the Church. 2. They are not proper nor peculiar to the flock of Christ. Sa∣craments of old and now were given onely to the people of God, and by receiving of them are men known to have a relation to him; but Marriage one of the five, is common to the Christians with Turks, Iews, and Heathens: marriage we n as honourable in all; but since there is neither sign of it, nor form of it instituted by Christ, the Catholick Church dare not make a Sacrament of it. 3. Sacraments are common to the people of Christ; we shall alwayes see those Heavenly ordinances enjoyned to all that are Members of the Church: but now this Sacrament of Ordination, they confine it to the priesthood onoly; of this the people of God and Saints under the Gospel cannot all be partakers, particularly women; Ordination indeed is an ordinance of God, and so is Con∣firmation but neither of them Sacraments.
It is worth observation, that this Sacrament of order hath seven degrees in it; the lowest of which is to be a Porter in the house of God, and the Highest is to be a Priest, between whom there is the Exorcist, the Lector, the Aolte, the Subdeacon and the Deacon, all which degrees are made visible signs, by which grace is conferred on the partaker, so that in truth they have in all fourteen Sacraments, nay by some of them they are owned as Sa∣craments. Et dicuntar hi ordines Sacramenta, quia in eorum per∣cepiene res sacra,Lob. lib. 4. Dst. 25. id est gratia consertur, (egregiè dicis Domine Lombard) quam figuran qua ibi geruntur; so that if they want real or inward grace, it is not for want of visible or outward signs: but twelve of their Sacraments having neither outward Ele∣ment prescribed, nor form, nor blessing, nor promise made to them as such, they are rejected, and the Church that teacheth them is condemned. Touching the Sacrament of Extreame Unction, the very rehear∣sing of its form and manner (which are not at all instituted by Christ) is sufficient confutation; it is this; When the sick party is just upon deparing, the Priest usually, or in case of necessity any other Person (for it is dangerous to dye without it) takes Oyle hallowed by a Bishop,Si ex con∣temptu, vel negligentia sacramen∣tum hoc paetemittic peiculo∣sum est & damabile. Lom Lib. 4. Dist. 24, B. and annoints the sick Person upon the eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands and feet, using this form of words, In∣dulgent tibi Deut per istam sanctam unctionem (which possibly the sick man may not understand) & suam pissimam misericordiam, quicquid peccaum permissum, &c. God out of great mercy and by this Holy Oyle forgive thee thy sins committed by thy eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands, and feet. All the Angels, Archangles, Patri∣arcks, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs; Confessors, Vit∣gins, Widdows, Infants, heal thee. He that finds that text of Iames (who was but a servant in the Lords house) Iam. 5.14. upon which this practice is grounded, shall not onely see a vast difference between the anointings, but may easiely perceive than a Sacrament as they would make it, is not there intended. 4. They are generally condemned; by the reformed Churches of Christ in the Articles above mentioned; and of the Church of England, Art. 25. the Article it self is this.
Art. 25. of the Church of England. Sacraments ordained of Christ, be not onely badges, &c. (as be∣fore) There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel; that is to say, baptism and the supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirma∣tion, Pennance, Orders, Matrimony, Extream Vnction, are not  be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have grow partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scripture, b yet have not like nature of Sacra∣ments with baptisme and the Lords supper, for that they have not any visible sign or Ceremony ordained of God. Quest. 6. Whether the effect of the Sacraments depend upon the worthiness of the Minister. The Church of Rome makes the being of the Sacrament depend upon the Priests good meaning and his true Latine; and some a∣mong us would have the effect or fruit of the Sacrament hang upon the Ministers holy living, concluding that baptisme either wholly null, or in part void, that is administred by an evil or scandalous person, but both are besides the truth. For 1. Sacraments are administred onely in the name of Christ; from him they have their power, by his authority, according to his word, in his name are they they dispensed, and therefore their ef∣ficacy depends not upon the power of any created being. 2. Sacraments under the Law depended not upon the merits of the Minister; Circumcision was a token of the Covenant, and was equally in that respect a visible sign powerful in it self to de∣clare the circumcised to be one of Gods people, and give him an interest to the priviledges of the Sons of God, who ever it was, a good or bad Officer that cut off the foreskin; therefore baptisme now is of force for the same use, howbeit a scandalous Person ap∣ply it. 3. By this we should never have certainty of a Sacrament; there
is no man but hath sin, more or less in him, and so according to his sin, the Sacraments would be more or less ineffectual, however in all there would be some hinderance; and since the heart of man is deceitful, we might call in Question our baptisme, for he might be an hypocrite (that is, a notorious sinner) that baptized us. Without Question, this doctrine was never so much sown with∣out assistance from Rome, whose doctrine in this particular is near to this, in regard that she makes the Sacraments to depend upon the intention of the giver; the people must either doubt at all times, or act implicite faith for ever according to her tenents. And he that is of the judgement that Sacraments depends upon the merit of man, as it derogates from Christs honour, so it takes from the conscience all peace and settlement; why shold I pre∣pare for the Lords supper, since all will not availe me if the Mi∣nister be not Holy? and we can never be perswaded of the great benefit of that ordinance, nor receive comfort from it, sin being in the best. 4. The form of the institution of the Sacraments is not con∣ditional,As it were presumption in awicked man, to ex∣pect to be bettered by the holiness of any; so it is distrust for a good man to imagine he shall be worse for a prophane man. that is, the word to baptize in the name of the Father, &c. according to the institution is effectual to be a declarative sign of the baptizeds interest in the Father, though the parties life be not exemplary Holy, in regard it is not annexed to that pre∣cept; which it should have been, had the ordinance depended upon it. So in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, he that is a receiver of the bread and wine conscecrated, sanctified, and set a part as in the Gospel, receives the body and the blood of Christ in as ef∣fectual a manner when the Minister is prophane; as when he is Holy; holiness in the Officer being not a condition required for the consecration. And therefore as some said, Now see to thine own house David, we say Look to thine own faith O Christian. 5. It is against the judgement of all reformed Churches. In those Articles above mentioned, and of the Church of England, Art. 26. the Art. it self is this.
Art. 26. of the Church of England. Although in the visible Church the evil be ever be mingled with the good, and sometime the evil have chief authority in the Mini∣stration of the word and Sacraments; yet for as much as they do not the same in their own name but in Christs, and Minister by his commission and authority, we may use their Ministry, both in hear∣ing of the word of God, and in receiving of the Sacraments; neither is the effect of Christs Ordinance taken away by their wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith and rightly do receive the Sacraments Ministred unto them, which be effectual because of Christs institution and promise, although they be Ministred by evil men. Nevertheless, it appertaineth to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry be made of evil Ministers, &c. Quest. 3. Whether the Sacraments differ from the Scriptures? This is not positively determined; since, in some things there is a difference, and in other things no difference, we shall there∣fore in a few words discover both these, beginning with their dif∣ference, which consists Syntag. Dis. Theo∣log. Pag. 1074.1. In that the word is preached, delivered, opened unto all, the Sacraments given onely to the faithful. 2. The word hath the priority of order, that ever going before the Sacraments, they alwayes coming after it. 3. The word begets and creates faith, the Sacraments nou∣rish faith and make it to grow. 4 The word is received by the ear, the Sacraments by other senses. 5. The word is simply and ordinarily necessary for salvation, and sufficient without the Sacraments to sanctifie the soul; the Sa∣craments are not simply necessary for life, and their efficacy de∣pends upon the word; the want of the Sacraments is not damning, but the contempt or neglect of them.
Again, The word and the Sacraments differ not, but agree, and are one 1. In their Author: God, is the Author of them both: he spoke the word, and instituted the Sacraments. 2. In their instrument by which they are both effectual: that is, the Holy Ghost, he makes both the one and the other to be effe∣ctual unto salvation. 3. In their Object; both of them are for men onely, and for their glory. 4. In their subjects; both of them hold out Christ with all his merits, purchasing and proffering pardon. 5. In their end; both of them are designed for the glory of Christ, and salvation of the elect. Quest. 4. Whether the Sacraments of the Old differ from those of the New Testament? As before this is not directly to be Answered, they differing and not differing in some points; they differ 1. In the matter and quality of their signs:Syn. Trip. Pag. 864. theirs was a cutting off the foreskin, and in eating of a Lamb; ours are bread and wine. 2. In some external rites and ceremonies, they were to circum∣cise precisely the eight day, and eat their Lamb at such a time of the year; ours are tyed to no time, to no place. 3. In the easiness of the duties: compare our baptisme to their bloody Circumcision, and we shall be brought to bless God for our freedom. 4. In their duration: the Sacraments of the Old, were but to endure for a season: but those of the New Testament are not to be altered while the world endures. They agree and are one 1. In their give: Christ the only Law-giver to the Church in∣stituted both the one and the other. 2. In their signification: what baptisme signifieth now, Circum∣cision signified; regeneration, or a being born again, and was by both held forth; Christ was signified by their Lamb, so he is by our bread.
3. In their application; they received theirs by faith, and our Sacraments are applied by the same grace. 4. In their end or effect; the invisible grace, goodness and mer∣cy of God were represented both to them and us, in the external and visible signs. Quest. 5. Whether two Sacraments be suffici∣ent under the Gospel? The Church of Rome maintains the necessity of seven; not to stand upon the mystery and perfection of the number, she teaches their necessity, upon this ground, (viz.) There are seven things she accounts necessary for preserving the natural life of man, and therefore there must be seven things to preserve the spiritual life of a Christian. 1. It is necessary that there be a birth, thats baptisme. 2. That there be a grouth, thats Confirmation. Hytia non sunt multi∣plicanda sine neces∣sitate.3. That he receive food, that is the Lords supper. 4. That he receive Physick, that is pennance. 5. That he receive Cordials, that is exteame Unction. 6. That he be governed by Laws, that is Order. 7. That he multiply in a lawful way, that is Marriage. Unto which they might have added a thousand more, some of these being necessary for mans well being only; and so are shoos and stockings, hat, fire, houses, &c. but passing these over, we de∣fend that two Sacraments are sufficient under the Gospel. 1. The Scripture that contains all thing necessary for salvation, binds us to no more, mentions of no more; if more had been ne∣cessary, would not Christ have told us, given us the Element and the form, and promise of it, all which are necessary unto Sacra∣ments? but not a syllable of any of these more then unto two; there∣fore there are no more necessary. 2. Two Sacraments were sufficient for the Iews, to uphold them in the faith of the promises, (viz) Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb. Unto which now answers baptisme and the supper, there∣fore they are sufficient for us. For
1. God shewed as great a care over them as us. 2. They were as dear to him as we are. 3. They were as subject to frailty as we are. 3. Two Sacraments are sufficient to all spiritual mercies a be∣liever can ask for and hope for. They seal, testifie, assure, and re∣present Adoption,Wisdoms seven pil∣lars, Prov. 9.1. it is a groundless, and roof∣less foun∣dation, be∣ing neither able to hold, nor keep out water. Justification, Regeneration, Consolation, and Eternal Salvation, and what more would a Christian require? CHAP. II. Of Baptisme. HAving spoken briefly of the Sacraments in general, we come now to the several Sacraments in particular, which are baptism and the Lords supper; Two Ordinances that above all others meet with most opposition; we shall therefore through the light and gui∣dance of the good word of God, discover unto you their several natures, beginning first with baptisme, that being the first Ordi∣nance the Church gives to her Members, and the first that by her Officers they are invited unto, Matth. 3.6. Iohn 3.5. Acts 2.38. Acts 9.18. Acts 10.47. Acts 17.15.33. In it we shall unfold. 1. The Nature of it. 2. The Elements of it. 3. The End of it. 4. The manner of doing it. 5. The parties who ought to do it. 6. Resolve some Questions.
SECT. I. BEfore we come to describe what baptisme is, it is requisite to know that there is a twofold baptisme. 1. Inward, which is the invisible application of the blood of Christ, to the soul of the sinner for its justification; which is called a Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Matth. 3.11. 2. Outward, which is the visible application of the Element of water in the name of the Holy Trinity to the bodies of them that are fitted for, or desirous of baptisme, which is called a baptizing with water, Luke 3.16. Of this last we are at this time to speak of; and it may be thus defined. It is a Holy Ordinance instituted by God, whereby a man by be∣ing dipped or sprinkled with water, in the name of the Trinity, is de∣clared to be admitted into Communion with him, and entered into the body of his Church. 1. We call it a Holy Ordinance] It appears to be so in many re∣spects. 1. In regard of him in whose name we are baptized, which is in the name of the Holy and undefiled Trinity, Matth. 28.19. Holy is the Father, Holy is the Son, Holy is the Spirit, Holy, Holy Holy is the Lord God of hosts, Isa. 6, 3. 2. It is a Holy profession which the party is baptized into; he is baptized into the Holy Gospel, into the most Holy faith; he is brought at this time before the Father of spirits, that he may stand before him in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of his life, Luke 1.75. 3. There are promises at this to oppose what ever is unholy; we engage either by our selves, or by our sureties, to oppose all the enemies of the Cross of Christ, and when we are of age we are bound to perform what was promised for us in infancy by our sureties, if ever we expect to receive any benefit by the death or
blood of Christ Sacramentally applied unto us in baptisme; but of this afterward. 4. In regard of that holy body into which by this we are en∣tered; we are by this Ordinance entered in an open and professed manner into the body of Christ, which is the Holy and Catholick Church; (not to speak of the invisible which is secret and hid) Baptisme takes them as Barnabas took Saul, Acts 9. and declares that they have seen the Lords Christ, and the Church beholds him as one of them, and he goeth in and cometh out with them of Ierusalem (i.e.) the Lords people. 2. It is instituted by God] Baptisme is no humane Invention, but hath for its being a divine sanction. For 1. God first appointed the Person that did baptize, Iohn 1.33. 2. The Element wherewith that Person should baptize, Iohn 1.33. 3. Gives directions how it must be done, Matth. 28.19. 3. Whereby a man by being dipped in or sprinkled with water in the name of the Trinity] Women from baptisme are not to be with∣held, since Christ is necessary for them, Acts 8.12. Man is here only expressed as being of the more noble sex, and first created of God. The word baptize signifies not alwaies dipping, 1 Cor. 10. but any kinde of washing, sprinkling, with dipping, as shall be demon∣strated in due time. 4. Is declared to be admitted into Communion with him, &c.] baptisme makes not a Christian, nor makes one to have Commu∣nion with God; but declares him so to be; for as Circumcision was a sign only of that faith which the believer had before he was Circumcised; and as every Son of Abraham was of the Church before his foreskin was cut, even so all are Members of the Church by faith, either actual or habitual, before they be washed by the word with water, that onely testifying or divulging that right, which either by their own or their Parents faith, they have to and in the Church.
SECT. II. THe Element or visible sign with which this Sacrament is to be Administred according to the institution, is water, signifying the blood of Christ washing or sprinkling the soul: for it is the blood of sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1, 2. and this spiritually poured forth upon the off-spring of the faithful, Isa. 44.3. and promised to the seed of the true believer. Now between the sign and the thing signified, is a sweet and holy harmony in these following circumstances. 1. Water is a necessary Element to preserve the life of man; next unto aire, water must be accounted of absolute necessity, ye unto all creatures; is not the New birth, the spiritual washing of the soul, the blood of Christ applied, necessary for such as would enter the Kingdom of God? Iohn 3.5. 2. Water is a cheap Element: in most places water is almost free as the air: and if it be bought, the carriage is rather paid for then the water. It is self generally easie to come by, Christs Blood, Kingdom, Merits, Glory, is had for asking, Is. 55.1. 3. Water is a comfortable Element; it refreshes and cherishes the spirits of every living thing. It makes the birds to sing, the fields to laugh, revives the heart of the strongest, Iudges 15.18. Nothing makes the soul look more lovely or beautiful then to be reconciled unto, and adopted by God, throgh the application of the blood of the Covenant unto it by the spirit of God, Tit. 3.5.6. 4. Water is a cleansing Ilement: things that are soul, water makes them clean. Among other miseries that that New born in∣fant (typically the natural or unregenerate man) Eze. 16.4. groan∣ed under, this was one, that it was not washed, yet God washed it with water, vers. 9. and made it clean, the blood of Christ applied to the most polluted soul, makes it become white like snow, Psal. 51.7. 5. Water is a Copious Element: the Ocean is an inexhaustible Fountain, there is enough in that to furnish all the world with wa∣ter;
of water there is great plenty; so Christ blood is an inexhau∣stible Fountain; the Saints since the beginning of the world have been drinking of it, yet it is not diminished, they have been bathing in it, yet not straitened, Zacha. 13.1. 6. It is a Common Element; the Sea, the Rivers, are as Com∣mon to the poor as to the rich, and as sweetly glide by the fields of the whistling plowman, as by the furrows of the great Prince, and being drunk refresh the one as well as the other. So is Christ and his merits, he is free to all, and tyed to none. be that comes weary with the burthen of his sins, shall finde ease and rest with as much haste as he that shall come groaning under the same, with a present of gold in his hand, Matth. 11.28. SECT. III. THe ends why God appointed this Ordinance to be continu∣ed in his Church, are best known to himself; we are to submit to the practice of it, contenting our selves with his pre∣cept, without urgeing his reason: yet a Posteriore we may know be designed it. 1. For the distinguishing our profession; baptisme is Character Regius. We know a foot-boy by his habit, a Souldier by his colours, and by baptise we know by whom the baptized expects to be saved; by it we are distinguished from Turk, Iew, Pagan, and from all that looks not for salvation through the Son of God; as a Kings servant is known by his badge, so a Christian by this sign. He that is baptized hath put on Christ. 2. For assureing us of our regeneration; baptisme is an outward visible sign of our being washed or sprinkled with the Holy Ghost, Mat 3.11. which is called a baptisme with fire, following after that, of water, so that even from the baptismal water may a believer draw an argument of his salvation, and the assurance of his sanctifiati∣on, Acts 22.16. hence it is that baptisme is said to save us, 1 Pet. 3.21. that is, seals unto us, or is a sign of that redemption purcha∣sed
sed by Christ; whence also it is that baptisme and remission of sins usually go together in the Gospel, Acts 2.38. Mat. 3.6. Eph. 5.26. 3. For the quickening of us unto mortification: Gospel repen∣tance is the fruit and consequent of Gospel baptisme. It is the end of that Sacramental water to bring the sinner to a spiritual ac∣knowledgement of his sin, and engages him against the time to come, to be more watchful against it, if he be adult; And also causes sorrow of heart for his not closing up to the terms of that Covenant, which by baptisme he is tyed unto, if he received it being an infant, Matth. 3.11. 4. To assure us of a comfortable resurrection, by baptisme we Sacramentally are buried with Christ, and therefore certainly shall rise with him, leaving nothing behind us but our grave clothes, our sins, and our lusts.Sin is by de¦grees aba∣ted, at length abo∣lished when the party is dissolved. Not that here is defended that doctrine of the Church of Rome that baptisme wholly takes away Original sin; but where God is pleased to cause the thing signified to ac∣company the sign, there corruption begins to lose ground, espe∣cially if the party dye in infancy: for then God will sanctifie it by water, through the word, Rom. 6.4, 5. 5. For the Christian Parents consolation; if Rachel among the Heathen have her Children taken from her, she may make great lamentation, and there is none to comfort her, in regard that she being out of the Church, her Children are without God: but the Christian Parent, unto whose seed salvation is entailed, having the promise made sure both to him and them, may comfort him∣self, knowing that his baptized infant had all things requisite and necessary for salvation, had the visible sign of the invisible birth, was baptized with water, after which follows the baptizing with fire; not that we tye this last unto the first; for unto such as be∣long to the Election of grace the want of baptisme is not imputed as their sin, but a sin it is and shall be to their Parents who neg∣lect this Ordinance, appointed by God as a sign of their childes sanctification, and a declarative mark of their New birth, and a visible token of their being cleansed from Original sin. Acts 2.39, which made believers call for it with speed, Act. 8.36. Acts 16.33. Acts 22.16.
SECT. IV. THat this Sacrament must be Administred by water, on all hands is granted; but the manner of the application of that water is by some controverted, whether by sprinkling, or by dipping, or any other way that is decent and comelys the word baptize signifying either of the two former, and is put for any kind of washing, as of cups, pots, tables, Mark 7.4. the Greek reading is when they come from the market, except they baptize, they eat not. And many other things they do, as the baptizing of cups, pots, tables; some other sence therefore must be given to the word then dip∣ped. And from those places wherein mention is made of baptize∣ing at a river, as Mat. 3.16 it cannot be proved that the party was stripped of his garments, and was wholly dipped in the water; be∣sides we read of diverss baptized, and no river mentioned▪ Acts 16.47. Acts 16.33. for any thing that can be produced the parties might go down to the river, and come up out of the water, yet not be plunged in, but sprinkled with the same, in regard that whereever I finde the word baptize, I may truely understand ei∣ther, or any other kind of washing, the word being of a large sig∣nification, and will not naturally, nay cannot be limited to any one sence. Yet to grant what for the most can be granted, the Primitive Christians did dip, and other Churches, yea the Church of Eng∣land, allows no other way save in cases of necessity, by appointing dipping, So it be discreatly and wvily done, and usually performs it so to any whom she baptizes adult, but approves also of sprinkling if the parties be weak and ordinarily that way is performed; in regard of infants: So that dipping is put aside, not as unlawful, but as inconvenient; and sprinkling used, not as necessary, but as most proper; for however in the Eastern and hot countries they might dip their infants in water without harm, yet in our Northern and cold climate as it is the first Sacrament given, so it might be the
last act done so a living ; the next might be to bury it. We conclude therefore at since the particular manner of the application of the outward gn is not expresly set down in Scri∣pture (but in a word that generally signifies dipping, sprinkling or any other kinde of washing.) this left to the practice of the Church to do which way she thinks to be best, keeping that gol∣den rule, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done desenly and in order; for since God hath not tyed her, she is not to be bound, either to dipping or sprinkling, but may indifferently use either; the appli∣cation of the outward Element of water to the party baptized, is all God requires; but to what place is ought to be applied, and how much water must be used, the Scripture is silent in. SECT. V. THe Sacrament of baptisme hath suffered a double injury: first in being limitted only to dipping, which is absolutely denies, as hath been in part proved, and in the next Section, God willing, shall be further demonstrated; 2ly. this dipping to be performed by any gifted brother, at all times, or by women in case of necessity, as is maintained by two of different yet both he erodox perswasions: for the present we defend that baptisme can only lawfully be Ad∣ministred by the Gospel Minister thereunto appointed by Apo∣postolical Ordination. For 1. Those only have a commission to baptize, who have a visible commission to teach, Matth. 28.19. Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them, or as it is in the Original, Disciple all nations, ba∣tizing them, &c. teaching them: That the Apostles were out∣wardly visibly called by Christ, though extraordinarily, to preach to the world the things concerning the Kingdom of God, whereof baptisme is one, and after their call that Christ called no other in that exordinary way, is clear from Scripture, whereof Paul is an eminent instance.
And that the Apostles might be encouraged in this great work, he goeth on saying, I am with you alway even unto the end of the world; Now the world is not yet ended, and Peter and Iames are gone, with you therefore must be understood to be meant not of the whole multitude of believers, but of them that are outward∣ly visibly called to preach all things that Christ had commanded in an authoritative way as the Apostles were. And as it is said that Kings never dye, that is, regally and successively, though personally they do: so the Apostles never dye, that is, successively, though personally they do; for to the end of the world so oft as any is visibly and outwardly ordained and commissioned to teach and baptize, the Apostles are not dead, but alive, and Christ prospering and blessing the doctrine of any so ordained in his being with his Apostles (that is, with them who are outwardly commissioned to teach) to the end of the world. To the multitude of belevers then was never the power to baptize given, because not the power of teaching, because not thereunto ordained, as hath at large been discovered above, unto which for brevity sake the Reader at present is referred. 2. The nature of the Ordinance is against it; baptisme is a decla∣rative sign of the parties admission into the Church, and not only so, but an outward sign of the parties inward regeneration, and a seal of the covenant of promise, a manifestation of the forgiveness of sin Heb. 10.22. Acts 2.38, 39. Tit. 3.5. And therefore to be given by none but by them unto whom the power of keeping the seals are given: and in no age, in no time, in no place, in no Text did ever God give the power of his seals to a multitude, or appointed them to be used, by any that d indeed real gifts, without an ordinary call even outwardly after the constitu∣ting of the Church. Stephen, Nicanor, &c. Acts 6.3. though full of the Holy Ghost, presume not to exercise the office of Deacons, with∣out an ordinary call from the Apostles by imposition of hands, the Church being constituted, in their Election. So Paul and Barnabas though full of worth, and eminent in gifts, yet must be set apart (having given testimony of their abilities) by ordination, for teach∣ing and baptizing, by the Church, Acts 13.13, 2. Thus also was Timothy set apart for the same work by a Pres∣bytery, 1 Tim. 4.14.
The baptisme therefore of these Lay persons or gifted brethren, whence is it? From Heaven or of men? if from Heaven, shew it from the Apostles (for since them Christ ordained and set apart none) and we shall believe it; if of men, let them Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; or produce the Text that gives power to uncommissioned men purely upon the account of their gifts to exercise the power of the keyes, and Administer the seals of the Church, and that constantly, and then their baptisme shall not be speak against. The ability that a man hath to be a Minister is one thing, and his putting into the office of the Ministry is another thing. Saint Paul thanks God that he had both, 1 Tim. 1.12. and we know by the Scriptures he had both; by inspiration was he inwardly quali∣fied, and by ordination outwardly called; he was separated unto the Gospel, Rom. 1.1. by fasting, prayer, with laying on of hands, Acts 13.2, 3. 3. It is not to be found in all the New Testament, implicitely or explicitely, that ever any baptized upon the account of their gifts without an outward call from Church officers; when those of this perswasion produce a man baptizing in the Church al∣lowed of by the Church, upon the account of his gifts, then it may be a good argument for him that hath gifts to baptize without a visible commission. 4. It would open a door to all irregularity and to all confusion imaginable; Once make it lawful for any to baptize upon the ac∣count of his gifts, we should find that Sacrament to be attempted by many that have no gifts at all; what will not arrogance and pride puss men to? what will nor ambition cause men to act? this do∣ctrine hath taken grace away from some, and shame from many; each Heretick laying a foundation for a new heresie, by this man we are taught that preaching is not tyed to the Gospel Ministery and therefore not baptisme, but the spirit that bloweth where it lift∣eth) makes men sitted for that work, and by it sufficiently called. This being granted, by another, teaching is not tyed to men, but common also with them to women, since in Christ there is neither male nor female, &c. It is time for thee O Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law, Psal. 119.126.
5. It is against the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches of Helv. Art. 24. Of Bohe. Art. 9. Of Pran. Art. 23. Of Belg Art. 30. Of Ausp. Art. 14. Of Wirtem. Art. 21. Of Irel. Art. 71. Of Scot. Art. 22. and of Eng. Art. 23. The Article it self is this; Article 23. Of the Church of England. IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of publicke Preaching, or Mini∣string the Sacraments in the Congregation, be∣fore he be lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge Lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work, by men who have publicke Authori∣ty given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard.
SECT. VI. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. VVHether Dipping be essential unto Bap∣tisme? Quest. 2. Whether Infants ought to be be baptized? Quest. 3. Whether Baptisme is or ought to be readministred? Quest. 4. Whether witnesses at Baptisme according to the Law of the Church of England be to be approved? Quest. 5. Whether the Cross at Baptisme according to the Law of the Church of England be to be approved? Quest. 1. Whether Dipping be essential unto Baptisme? That dipping is lawful, is not questioned by the Church of Christ; but whether it be essential, that is, If Baptisme be not Baptisme without it; or whether none is, or cannot be baptized, without he be dipped, is the ground of our Quere. It is to be denied. Dipping is not essential to that Sacrament: for, 1. The word baptize, used in the Scripture for that Sacrament, signifies not onely dipping, but sprinkling, or any other kind of washing as hath been before discovered. To limit therefore the Ordinance of Dipping, is to diminish the very sence and mean∣ing of that Word  by God to express that Ordinance, which is a wrong both to him and the sence of the word. 2. The word Baptize is used in Scripture, where the word Dip∣ping cannot nor ought not to be understood. 1 Cor. 10.2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea.
Now let the History of the Iewes passing though the red Sea be observed, and it will be found that not a man of Israel was dipped in either. Some drops out of the Clouds might, and questionless did fall upon the Tribes in going through the red Sea, but that they were dipped in the cloud, is non-sence to affirm in reason, or that they were dipped in the Sea, is false to affirm in History. 3. The word baptize is used in Scripture where it were incon∣venient to understand the word Dipped, Acts 16.33. Acts 8.38. At this time this Sacrament was performed in haste, and with all possible speed, and the Eunuch as soon as baptized, goes on his way rejoycing. Now Dipping requires deliberation; and provision both before and after, to put off clothes, & to put on fresh cloths, both for the baptizer and the baptized, requires that, which for this time cannot with conveniency be granted either for the one or the other 4. The word Baptize, joyned with the word River, doth not ne∣cessary imply dipping in Scripture; and we find the word Baptize spoken of, and no River mentioned in the Gospel, Matth. 3.6. Iohn 3.3. Act. 16.33. Acts. 10.48. Act. 8.36. That place,The word Originally is  from the water, which he might do in that being dip∣ped in the water. Matth. 3.6. And Iesus when he was baptized went up straight way out of the water, holds not forth Dipping necessari∣ly, but rather that our Saviour was not baptized in Harvest: For in Harvest Jordan overfloweth all his banks, Ios, 3.15. at that time being much dried up, Iohn and Christ both, might be truly said to go down to the water, and to come from or out of the water, with∣out lying dipped over head and ears in it, and without carrying ei∣ther for dry cloaths, or dry shirt; we find him immediately driven to the wilderness, Mark 1.12. and I am prone to suppose that it had not been very healthy for Iohn to have stood up to the middle in water so long a time, and so much together, as the multitude of the baptized would require, if dipping must be necessarily un∣derstood in his Baptisme. And what though Iohn also was baptizing in Enon, because there was much water? Iohn 3.23. In the Original, it is many waters, being a convenient place (in respect water was not every where to be had) where he and his Disciples might in seve∣ral places baptize those multitudes that came to be baptized, which
possibly in other places, particularly at Iordan, could not so easily be done. Besides there is a great difference, between many waters, or much water, and deep water, or a river of water, none of which in Scripture is spoken of concerning AEnon; so that dipping is not necessary to be seen, or heard felt or understood about Salim, and therefore cannot stand without something else to hold it up, which is that grand errour that baptisme signifies onely dipping. 5. If dipping had been essential to to the Sacrament, that is, that none ought to have been held as baptized without being plunged in a river, without Question, the Holy Ghost would in some place or other have told us of it, and not to have left us a word of a large signification; the spirit of God that leads us into all truth would have informed us in so necessary a point of do∣ctrine; in no place is there so much as a breathing for dipping; yet we have sweet breathings of the spirit for that of sprinckling both in the Old and New Testament. For 1. It is the usual sign of signification under the Law; when things are hallowed, or persons to be set apart for Gods service, it was done with blood sprinkling, Levit. 16.14. Levit. 4.6. Heb. 9.13, 14. 2. It is a Gospel promise, I will sprinckle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, which is the outward sign; and I will put my spirit within you, which is the thing signified, Ezek. 36.25.26 and again, I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, the outward visible seal: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed: the thing, inward invisible grace sealed, Isa. 44.3. both those Texts in Leviticus and these in the Prophets, have a shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1. &c. 3. The Apostle makes inward graces to be strengthened and given by outward signs. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil consci∣ence; the inward grace; and our bodies washed with pure water, the outward sign: he outward sprinkling or washing with water, is an e∣vidence of our hearts being sprinkled with blood, with what blood? with the blood of Christ, which for that reason is called the blood of sprinkling, 1 Peter 1.2. Heb. 12.24. could but one such Text be produced for dipping, how might our adversaries boast? and
since we have such sure footing for our sprinckling (besides the signification of the word baptize) let us never be ashamed. As it is not necessary for men to swill themselves (with reverence it is spoken) or drink large draughts of wine at the Sacrament of the supper, a morsel being a sufficient sign of inward grace to remis∣sion of sin; so it is not essential for men to plunge or dip them∣selves in large rivers at the Sacrament of baptisme, sprinkling (or any other decent application of water) being a sufficient sign of our justification, if adult, of our regeneration being infant. Further admit that dipping were essential to baptisme, (which it is not) yet we may Question whether they be baptized that are dipped among them; the water of baptisme being not applied to the flesh signifying the application of the blood of Christ to the soul. It is to be doubted whether it be applied to theirs, whose bodys are not washed with water, for they usually do it in rivers, wells, or horse-ponds; (as it is known for certain they have done) in their shirts, shifts, and drawers;a sweet Bath. and that ever the outward sign of baptisme was to be applied to such gear I suppose they will not affirm; the baptismal water ought immediately to be applied to the body, and the flesh washed with it, as it is Sacrimen∣tal; To say that Christ was so baptized, is hard to affirm, and the improbability of it hath already been handled. And to say that he and all that came to Iohn, were stripped naked, is easie to be de∣nied; baptized he was we are sure, and many others, but that they were all dipped we have no certainty. To conclude this Question, dipping is not thought unlawful in the Catholick Church, (not that ridiculous kinde of dipping used by some Hereticks of this generation,) who dips sometimes the adult, by setting them upon their knees, and dipping their heads in the baptistry, pronounceth the words of the institution, and infants after the same manner, where without danger it may be done; witness the reformed Churches of Helvet. Art. 21. of Sax. Art. 13. The Assemblies direct, Chap. 28, and the Church of Eng∣land in her Rubrick or book of Common Prayer.
Quest. 2. Whether Infants ought not to be ba∣ptized? By infants we understand such as are born of Christian parents, unto whom the promise of salvation is only made and given, Acts 2.39. The infants of others, viz. of Heathens. of Infidels, being without God, are also without Christ, and so without hope of Eternal life, Ephes. 2 12. That such infants as are born within the pale of the visible Church, may be baptized, that is, dipped, sprinkled or any other way decently washed, in the name of the Lord, appears from these following reasons. 1. From the end of that Ordinance; there are marks or distincti∣ons that the Church of God ought to be known by, and never was without, one of which is baptisme, as circumcision was to differ the Iew from all that were without God; unto which baptisme suc∣ceeds, as shall anon be proved. Now to difference therefore the children of believing parents from the children of such as be∣lieve not, baptisme may be Administred to them and ought. 2. To them the Covenant of grace, or promise of remission of sins belongs, Act 2.39. the promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that are afr off,Children not yet be∣gotten, are not said to be afar off, but very near in their fa∣thers ins Heb. 7.10. that is, the promise of the remission of sin, of which baptisme is an outward sign; and if our Adversaries were not wilfully blinde, they would know what it were to be a∣far off. Ephs. 2.13. Now the promise of the forgiveness of sins be∣longing to infants through the largeness of grace, what should hinder but the sign of that ought to be given by the Churches cha∣rity? And when shall the Adversaries of this truth finde out one place that the Covenant of grace made to believers under the Gospel, is not so large as that to believers under the Law, which included not themselves only, but all their seed? Gen. 17.10.11.12. Never, Never, Never. 3. Unto them belongs the Kingdom of Christ, Luke 18.15. All the graces that lead to Heaven, and all the glory that is in Heaven,
belongs and is appointed for them, and such as them. This testimo∣ny of him who is Truth it self, hath sufficient proof to discover the lawfulness even of Baptisme to such, since that is a sign or ear∣nest of their inheritance. 4. Infants are Disciples of Christ: He that receives one of them receiveth him, and it is dangerous to offend one of those little ones, that believe in him, &c. Matth. 18.4 5, 6. Of whom doth our Sa∣viour speak this? Of that little child before him, or of them that are little in the account of the world? We say, (or then we say falsely) that he speaks of both, and whereas our adversaries then concludes it were dangerous to offend or anger children: We conclude with them, and truly it is dangerous to offend one of those little ones, if it be purely upon the account that they belong to Christ, as we know hath been done by Turks, Jewes and Papists, not otherwise: for in some cases, that may be a sin even against the Gospel, not to offend them. 5. Infants under the Law were circumcised, therefore under the Gospel they are to be baptized. Hence it is that Baptisme is called Circumcision, 2 Col. 12. where the Apostle throws off cir∣cumcision of the flesh, and placeth baptizing in the room of it. And as all Iewish Proselytes were circumcised before they were owned as Gods people, and therefore called upon to be circumci∣sed; so all converted to the Christian Faith, were baptized before they were owned or declared Christians, (though both the one and the other belonged to God by faith before) and were therefore called to be baptized. In a word, let the use and end of Circumcision be inquired after, and Baptisme exactly answers it in all points. It is true, Circumci∣sion was given onely to the Male, because the Female was unca∣pable of it; but both Sexes are capable sufficiently of this Sacra∣ment, and therefore to be denied to neither, Acts 8.12. 6. Christ gave commandment that all Disciples should be bap∣tized, Matth. 28.9. Disciple, all Nations; (for so it is in the Greek reading;) Baptizing them, teaching them, so that all that are Disciples in all Nations, are to be baptized. And that even Children are Disci∣ples, appears, Matth. 18.4.5, 6. For whosoever receiveth even one
of them in his Name, receiveth him; and he who offends one of them, offendeth him; of whom can this be said, but of Disciples? 7. Infants are holy, and have the promise of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 7.14. If the Parent be holy, and within the Covenant, then the child is holy also; to say that by Holyness here, is meant not bastards, is to say nothing to the sence and scope of the place, and to say fondly, to preserve their own Diana, except Holy in the Language of the Holy Ghost, in another place be taken in that sence, which they shall never be able to find. It is also promised the Beleiver, that his child shall have clean water poured upon him, which is the Sign, and the Spirit powred upon his seed, the thing signified by that water, Isa. 44.3. Can any man therefore forbid water, that these children should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Acts 10.47. 8. From that Opposition made against Christian liberty by some Jewish Zelots, may we draw an Argument of weight. There were some that were alwayes pressing the point of Circumcision ac∣cording to the law, to have the Christians not altogether to eye Baptisme, but with it Circumcision, Acts 15.1. Now that Circumcision was administred upon Infants, is clear; and as clear it is again, that the Iewes seeing that liberty that Christians assumed under the Gospel, would have had them lay a great part of it aside, particularly baptisme, which they might have seen believers to administer upon all their seed; and this makes them press Circumcision the more eagerly, an Argument more then probable, that the Christians baptized their Infants in those dayes when that opposition was made. 9. There is nothing in the Scripture that makes against it. God had but two Churches, that of the Iewes in which children and In∣fants were marked with that Initiatory ordinance of Circumcision, and by that were within the Covenant, and Members of his house, whereby the Parent had this comfort, that God was not onely his God, but the God of his seed; the other Church was that of the Gentiles, every member of which is a son of faithful Abraham. Now when God made Lawes for the Gospel, would he not have in some place or other shew that he intended not the seal of the
Covenant, which is the initiatory Ordinance of Baptisme, to extend to the Infants of Believers under the Gospel though he did to those under the Law, but leaves them, and hath no more to do with them, then he hath to the seed of Infidels and Hea∣thens? God would not without question have left his Church in so great and necessary a point as Baptisme without instruction, if it had not been his Will, that the seal of the Covenant should be as large now, and extend as far as it did then. Let the Scriptures be searched, and the Bible exactly veiwed with the most piercing eye, and it shall never be able to find that Text that abridgeth or straightneth the Covenant made under the Gospel, but every way shall be found at large as that under the Law, which reacheth not to Abrahams person onely, but also all his seed. To say that the Covenant made with Abraham was onely tem∣poral, or carnal, that is, that Canaan should be his, and Circumci∣sion sealed, that brings dishonour to the faith of Abraham, and tends not to Gods honour or glory: that he should onely regard his people so far, as to give them a Land flowing with milke and honey, and assure them of that by Circumcision; but that he was their God to save them any more then he was the Aegyptians, never to give them a sign, seal, or assurance, takes away abundance of that comfort which the Heavenly-minded soul might enjoy: be∣sides it is most false; for both before and after Moses, we know Circumcision was given to many that never did, nor never were to inherit the land of Canaan: so that Circumcision was a mystical seal of Abrahams faith in God for spiritual mercies, unto which ex andante, by way of Augmentation, the promise of the plea∣sant land was made; he eyeing and seeking first the Kingdom of God, had that kingdom of this world over and above given to him. 10. Infants were typically baptized under the Law, 1 Cor. 10. 2. All of Israel both small and great, were baptized with the sprinkling drops or shours that fell from the cloud, in their pas∣sage through the sea; this denotes that all the faithful both old and young, may lawfully be baptized unto Christ, since the type holds
forth the Antitype, and the one is fulfilled by the other, 1 Cor. 10.2. If it be here said that by the same Text we may give to infants the Sacrament of the supper; for all of Israel did eat of the same spiritual meat, and drank of the same drink; it it is Answered, in∣fants shall have the Sacrament of the supper given unto them, if they can finde no Text that requires any other duty to be per∣formed by the receivers of the one, then there is for the receiving of the other. 11. The Apostles in their going through the world did ba∣ptize whole housholds, Acts 16.15. Acts 16.33. 1 Cor. 11.16. Now in Scripture the word House implies all within the family, even children. Gen. 30.30. As soon as Ioseph was born. Iacob began to provide for his own house. If children in these houses had not been baptized, without doubt they had been excepted; And it is most in∣credible in all those families there should be no woman fit to bear children, but all prove barren and unfruitful, which to prove were some thing a hard taske, and until it be proved, I may truly conclude that the children in those houses were baptized. If it here be said that there is no express mention made of chil∣dren in those houses, we may say again and as truly, that there is no express mention made of servants, and in some of them, not of wives; it may be Answered these are included in the word houshold; it may be replied, children are included also, the word house holding forth even them. 12. The evil fruits and consequences that follow the denial of this, with wise men might be an argument to maintain it. As 1. The denying of Original sin; the Hereticks acknowledgs that if Infants had Original sin, this Sacrament were not to be denied them it, being a seal of the remission of sin; to hold up the one they must of necessity deny the other; and so all infants born of Heathen parents are not holy just and righteous, contrary to the doctrine of the Catholick faith, which teacheth that by the offence of one (viz: of Adam) judgement came upon all men to condem∣nation, and by the disobedience of one many were sinners, Rom. 5.18, 19. and also to their own experience, who see death fall even upon the young as well as upon the old, which is the wages of sin, Rom. 6.23.
2. The denying of Scripture consequence: the Anabaptists be∣cause they can finde no express Text for infant baptisme, there∣fore they deny it; the Bedalists upon the same reason deny the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, there being no direct place in Scri∣pture pronouncing that; yea by this reason we may charge the Holy Ghost with a notorious untruth,That place is not to be sound in all the Scri∣pture, but by conse∣quence. Iames 4, 5. and by the same ground may deny great and glorious truths, as the souls eternal condition as soon as out of the body, &c. there are many things darkly revealed in Scripture and not to be found but by compa∣ring Text with Text, and we finde as good consequence, and grounds this way for baptizing infants, and better and more sure, then ever they shall be able to finde for dipping of men and wo∣men, as by the argument above given may be discovered. 3. It is the usual trap-dore unto all error; when men begin to Apostate, from truths of grand concernment, they usually begin to quarrel, with this: denie first their own infant baptisme, and then how or rather whether are they not hurried with every wind of doctrine? This is a Catholick principle, a foundation stone, a fundamen∣tal truth, Heb. 6.2. he that falls from it, it will fall upon him, and break him to pieces; how many thousands have perished upon this in our dayes, and how many souls are run into perdition, by fal∣ling from all truth, that at first but quarrelled at this. The very final obduration and hardening of the hearts of many, that but fell first from this in our dayes, is an evident token that God hath branded this sin, that it might appear a Capital offence against his Majesty. 13. The reasons that the seducers give for their denial of this, are false and insufficient, and maybe reduced to three chiefly. 1. Because it is said teach and baptize all nations, Math. 28.19. therefore none are to be baptized say they, but such as are taught, which infants cannot be, to which (as before hath been spoken) we may Answer, that not teaching, but make Disciples is our Saviours word, baptizing and teaching them &c. And it is to be wondered at that they will leave his words. Why our Translators Englished that word Teach, as I have no sure knowledge of it, so for the present I have no purpose to han dle
it. Of this I am sure, that our Saviour with his own mouth commanded his Disciples to baptize before he commanded them to teach according to the order of the words of that Text. It is a rule given us by the Rabbies, Non datur prims & posterius in Scripturae, that being first put in on place, which is last in ano∣ther, and contrary. Unto the case in hand, we find baptizing ac∣cording to the words going before preaching, Mark 1.4. 2. They find no express Text for it in Scripture; such an Argu∣ment as this taught the Traskit to deny the Christian Sabbath: but to touch these men nearer home, have they any express Text for dipping? for preaching upon the account of gifts, or administring the Sacraments? for spending the first day of the weak in holy ex∣ercises? for administring the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to women? or dipping in a River? either naked, or in linnen gar∣ments? when they shew express Text for these and many other things, I shall shew them one for Infant Baptisme. Yea before. For, When our Saviour expressly commanded his Disciples to make Disciples of all Nations, and baptize them, who or what meaned he? Whether the Earth or Ground of all Nations, or the inhabitants that were upon that ground? if them, then whether Ma∣sters or servants, husbands or wives, parents or children, who can say, or dare say, that he meaned the one and not the other? he meaned all without a peradventure: so that there is in this precept as express a command to baptize children, as to baptize either men or women grown in years. 3. They finde Faith in Scripture required of all as a necessary precedent grace unto baptisme, so do we, in persons that are grown in years, as the Eunuch, Cornelius, and the Jaylor was; but that faith was required of the seed of them that once believed, as a grace necessary for baptisme, is not yet by them demonstrated, nor never shall. Our Saviour having a little child before him, Mat. 18.6. faith Who so shall offend one of those little ones that believe in m, &c. This is spoken of all that shall be believers to the end of the world, and of all that were about him, and of that child also that was in the midst of them; so that children cannot be said to be without faith,
though little ones, by which onely God is well pleased: If children have no faith in Christ, or God, then why doe they teach their Children to pray or call upon God, as I presume they do, since without faith it is a taking the Name of God in vain, a sin which they would be thought to make conscience of. Briefly, when men can make a rope of sand, then shall we or themselves be able to make something of their own opinions in re∣ference to this of Infant Baptisme, teaching that they are without sin, yet see them die; that all are born holy, ye some born chil∣dren of wrath, 2 Eph. 3. That Infants belong to the kingdom of God, yet have no interest in the Covenant: that they are saved, though they want faith, without which it is impossible to please God: to teach them to call God their Father, and yet say they are not in Christ by Adoption: when these things are reconciled and made to hang together, we shall call them a subtile generation. 14. It is against the practice of the whole Church of God, in all ages and places of the world, and at this day contrary to the Do∣ctrine and practise of the Reformed Churcher of Helvet. Art. 21. of Bohe. Art. 12. of Fr. Art. 35. of Belg. Art. 34. of Ausp. Art. 9. of Sax. Art. 13. of Wirt Art. 10. of Swethland, Art. 17. of Irel. Art. 90. of Scot. Art. 23. of Engl. Art. 27. The Article it self is this: Article 27. of the Church of England. Baptisme is not onely a sign of Profession, and marke of difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christned, but it is also a sign of Regeneration, &c. The bap∣tisme of young Children, is in any wise to be re∣tained in the Church, as most agreeable with the Institution of Christ.
Quest. 3. Whether baptisme is or ought to be readministred. It hath been the practice of some among us to throw off their first Baptisme, and as they suppose, receive a new one. Yea, Papists, who though they teach the contrary Doctrine, yet sinfully have practised it upon the children of the Reformed Churches; but however, Baptisme if given in the name of the Trinity by applying water according to the Institution, is not to be received twice. For, 1. It is against the nature, sign, end, and use of that ordinance. Baptisme is a visible sign, representing a believer to be new born: Hence it is called being born of water, Iohn 3.5. Now though men eat and drink often, and receive the Sacrament of the Supper often, that being our food Spiritual: yet we are born but once, and therefore ought to receive the Ordinance of Baptisme but once, that being our Spiritual birth. 2. It opens a gap for one great inconvenience. He can give no reason of his being twice baptized, but the same reason will make him, or perswade him to be baptized the third time, the fourth time; nec decies repetita placebit; the twentieth time. Whether this doctrine so brief and current among us, did rise and spring from the Popish Holy water, which they look upon as a dayly baptisme representing the pardon of actual sin, is worth inquiring after, and a Question would be seriously thought upon by our governours, &c. 3. Circumcision was not but once to be administred. Nay, when throughThis pro∣fane custom is thought to take its rise from. Esan, disdaining his circum∣cision. ignorance and blinde zeale some of the circumcised would have become uncircumcised (by a way not fitting to be na∣med) the Apostle commands the contrary, 1 Cor. 7.18. but will have them stick to, and own their former Circumcision; let those that suppose they are inwardly called, remember that they be∣come not unbaptized by receiving baptisme anew. 4. The sad events of rebaptizing may be a sufficient testimony
of the thing now defended, what errors wanderings, crooked paths, unheard of blasphemies of them that are so used, our ears hears toe too much, and our eyes have sufficient knowledge, &c. 5. The Reformed Churches of Christ condemn it in their pra∣ctice; and so many as have published their opinions to the world, upon that subject have condemned it in their Confessions; particu∣larly the Church of Bohe. Art. 12. of Fr. Art. 35. of Belg. Art. 34. of Sax. Art. 13. of Hel. Art. 20. The Article it self is this: Article 20. of the Church of Helvetia. There is but one Baptisme in the Church of God; For it is sufficient to be once baptized, or consecrated unto God: for baptisme once recei∣ved, doth continue all a mans life, and is a per∣petual sealing of our Adoption to us, &c. Quest. 4. Whether witnesses at baptisme accord∣ing to the Law of the Church of England be to be approved? N cases of indifferency people are not to Question the reason of a Law given them by their superiours, their wisdom in such things consisting in yielding surable obedience; yet because this Law is spoken against by some it is not amiss for others to speak for it,Atque ex hoc vitu,  &c. Jun. & Trem. An∣not. in loc. God aut lib. 6.215. witnesses or Godfathers may be approved. 1. From their unspotted Antiquity, the Iews used them at their Circumcision, and held the child to be cut in their arms, we read of witnesses, at the naming of the Prophets Son Mahershalalhash-baz, Isa. 8.2. whence learned men have concluded the rise of God∣fathers.
And since that have they continued in the Church without check from the best of men. 2. From the occasion of their further settlement. The primitive Christians seeing themselves in Jeopardy every hour of pain, death and torture, had other witnesses and Trustees besides the Pa∣rent, who undertook the education of the child in the true religi∣on, in case the death of the Parent or otherwise; new how soon the like case may befall this age, none can predict, especially when they know there was o great tract of time between King Edward the sixth of gloriou memory, and Queen Mary; in such cases God∣fathers may be as necessary in England, as they were in the Primi∣tive persecution, which is one ground of the Law. It was sad times when the Prophet seek his witnesses.3. From that love Unity and Concord that by this practice may be preserved among neighbours and believers. It is experi∣mentally known that it hath been a quench-fire oftentimes amongst hot spirits; may the very nme of a Godfather hath a power in it to work obedience in another, and create peace. 4. From that harmless profit that hath accrewed to many by that, this is so well known that it needs no inlargement; a Godfa∣thers; or a Godmothers gift is an ordinarly memorial. If it be here said that the charge is great that is undertaken by the witnesses, &c. It must be known, that the Parent is not at all disobliged from his duty, the witnesses being but asistants to him. The particulars of the Churches charge are these. b. Lit.1. To call upon the infant to hear Sermons, as soon as capable of admonition. 2. To learn the Creed, the Lords prayers, and the Commande∣ments. 3. With all other things which a Christian ought to know for his souls health, for his vertuous bringing up, so that when he is brought up in these things, the witnesses have done their duty, and are absolutely discharged, either at confirmation, of which by and by, or at furthest, at the day of marriage. It is true it seems to be usually objected, that even children were admitted to be witnesses for children;Can. 29. of the Church so England but let not the Church of England, be blamed for that abuse; for she hath appointed that No Person be admitted Godfather or Godmother, to any childe as
Christening, or Confirmation, before the said Person so undertaking hath received the Holy Communion. Quest. 5. Whether the Cross at baptisme ac∣cordin to the Law of the Church of England be to be aproved? Touching the lawful use of the Cross in baptisme, we shall speak no other then what the Church of England hath her self spoken, concerning this harmless Ceremony, in her Canons Ecclesiastical, where after a Preface touching the Princely care of King Iames of blessed memory, to recocile differences, by condiscending to remove some things that gave offence, which in history we know to be true, and in the Canon seems to be implied, commends to all her true Members these directions and observations following. First,Can. 30. of the Church of England It is to be observed that although the Jews and Ethnicks derided both the Apostles and the rest of the Christians, for preach∣ing and believing in him who was Crucified upon the Cross: Yet all both Apostles and Christitians were so far from being discouraged from their profession by the ignominy of the Cross, as they rather re∣joyced and triumphed in it; yeathe Holy Ghost did by the mouths of the Apostles honour the name of the Cross (being hateful to the Jews) so far that under it he comprehended not onely Christ Crucified, but the force, effects and merits of his death and passion, with all the comforts, fruits, and promises, which we receive or expect thereby. Secondly, The honour and dignity of the name of the Cross, be∣gat a reverend estimation even in the Apostles times (for ought that is known to the contrary) of the sign of the Cross: Which the Christians shortly after used in all their actions, thereby making an outward shew, and profession even to the astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to acknowlege him for their Lord and Saviour who dyed for them upon the Cross. And this sign they not onely use themselves, with a kind of glory, when they met with any Jews, but signed therewith their children, when they were Christened, to dedicate them by that badge to his
service, whose benefits bestowed upon them in baptisme, the name of the Cross did represent. And this use of the sign of the Cross in baptime, was held in the Primitive Church, as well by the Greeks, as the Latines, with one content and great applause. At what time, if any had opposed themselves against it, they would certainly have been censured as enemies of the Cross, and consequently of Chrsts merits, the sign whereof they could no better endure; this continual and general use of the Cross, is e∣vident by many testimonies of the ancient Fathers. Thirdly, It must be confessed, that in process of time, the sign of the Cross was greatly abused in the Church of Rome, espe∣cially after that corruption had once possessed it. But the abuse of a thing takes not away the lawful use of it. Nay so far was it from the purpose of the Church, of England, to forsake the Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, or any such like Churches, in all things which they held and preached, that as the Apology of the Church of England conesseth, i doth with reverence retain those Ceremonies, which do nei∣th damage the Church of God, nor offend the minds of sobermen. And onely departed from them in these particular points, wherein they were fallen, both from themselves in their ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches which were their first founders. In which respect, amongst some other very ancient Ceremo∣nies, the sign of the Crosse in baptisme hath been reained in this Church; both by the judgement and practice of those reverend Fathers and great divines in the days of King Edward the sixth, of whom, some constantly suffered for the profession of the ruch; and others being exiled in the time of Queen Mary, did free their return in the beginning of the reign of our late dread Soverign, continually defend and use same, &c. 3. Because inded the use of this sign in baptisme, was ever accompanied here with such sufficient cautions and exceptions against all Popish superstition and erros, as in the like cases are either fit or convenient. The Church of England since the abolishing of Popery hath
ever held and taught, and so doth hold and teach, that the sign of the Cross used in baptisme; is no part of the substance of that Sacrament;See the Lit. for Pi. Bap where no tntion of the Cross made, nor inquired after. for when the Minister dipping the infant in water, or laying of water upon the face of it, hath pronounced these words I baptize thee in the name of the Father, &c. the infant is fully and perfectly baptized; so as the sign of the Cross being afterwards used, doth neither adde any thing to the vertue or perfection of baptisme, nor being omitted, doth detract any thing from the effect and substance of it. 2. It is apparent in the Common Prayer book, that the in∣fant babtized, is by vertue of baptisme, (before it be signed with the sign of the Cross) received into the Congregation of Christs stock, as a perfect member thereof, and not by any power ascribed unto the sign of the Cross. So that for the very remembrance of the Cross, which is very precious to all them that rightly believe in Jesus Christ, and in the other respects mentioned, the Church of England hath re∣tained still the sign of it in baptisme; following herein the pri∣mitive and Apostolical Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward Ceremony and honourable badge, whereby the infant is dedicated to the service of him who dyed upon the Cross, as by words used in the book of Common Prayer it may appear. Lastly, The use of the sign of the Cross in baptisme, being thus purged from all Popish superstition and errour, and redu∣ced in the Church of England to the primary institution of it: upon those true rules of doctrine concerning things indif∣ferent, which are consonant to the word of God, and the judge∣ments of all the Ancient Fathers, we hold it the part of every private man, both Minister and others, reverently to retain the true use of it prescribed by publick authority, considering that things of themselves indifferent, do in some sort alter their na∣ture, when they are either commanded or forbidden by a law∣full Magistrate, and may not be omitted at every mans plea∣sure, contrary to the Law, when they be commanded, nor used when they are prohibited.
The usual Objection against this harmless Ceremony, is this, Viz. what need is there of it? but if Magistrates should not establish Lawes,What a Parliament esta∣blisheth, every particular man in his representative Consents to; therefore it ought to be spoken against by none. until every one of their Sub∣jects were rationally convinced of their necessity, when should there be Lawes made? and many that makes this a sufficient Argument against the Crosse in Baptisme, may remember that when they had power and fate at the Helm, there were many things commanded, of which we might have said, What need they? To conclude, what ever is established by lawful Magistrates, we are not to inquire the Reason of it: Reason and Religion commanding us to obey without all Dispute for the Lords sake;As there are many small pins in them∣selves of no great concernment, yet taken away, might endanger a whole building: witnesse the late removing of some poore Ceremonies, brought down the geat Raters both of Church and State. There being many things in the Church of Christ, of themselves low and poor, yet in regard of others so necessarie, that she may say of them, as our Saviour said of the Asse, The Lord hath need of them.
Courteous Reader, THis following Chapter was not so fully Preached as here hand∣led, in regard that the Iniquitie of the Times, wherein these things were taught, would from this chiefly have concluded the Preachers Malignancy, whereby he should have been Cruci∣fied by an Ordinance. By vertue of that Rule estote prudentes, Matthew 10.16. it was passed over in a few words, and they so clouded, that it might have appeared, the Preacher was not willing to be throughly understood.
CHAP. III. Of Confirmation. THis is not here handled as a Sacrament, but is placed as the space between the Font and the Table, it being a most so∣lemn Ordinance, that the Baptized (as in the ancient Churches) was to be partaker of, before he might be admitted to the Sacra∣crament of the Lords Supper. Before we go any further, it is necessary to speak something touching the rise of this word Confirmation in the Church, which was briefly this: In the Primitive Church, when there were any persons wil∣ing to imbrace the Christian Faith, whether Iewes or Infidels, they were not by and by admitted into the Priviledges of the Church, but by certain teps or degrees set their foot therein. 1. By hearing; they were admitted to the hearing of the Word taught, Catechized or Expounded, which was common to them with men of all kinds, whether Christians or not; yet these were more particularly regarded by the Church, and were called Au∣dientes. 2. By Catechizing; having heard in common with others some grounds of the true faith, and liked it, they were after admitted in  peculiar way, and performing some Ceremony, were admitted both to hear and see more in the Church then the Audientes were: had the Principles of Religion taught them, by eminent men purposely thereunto appointed, who were called Catechista, and their Disciples Catechumni: Hence it is said, that Theophilus is said to be instructed, or as the word Originally is, Catechized in the things of Christ, 1 Luke 4. 3. By requesting, that is, having been Catechized and making good progress in the Christian principles, and desire∣ing to be owned as professors of the same, they desired and re∣quired
the Sacrament of baptisme, which they did by giving in their names to the officers of the Church forty dayes before Easter, that and Whitsunday being the publick dayes appointed by the Church for baptizing the Catechumeni, and in regard of their number,whence the Churches custome of observing Easter Mnday, &c. took its rise. these two dayes being insufficient, they set the two days following each of the former for that service apart; from this give∣ing in their names they were called competentes, quia nomina de∣derunt, ad baptismum, & eum simul petebant. 4. By baptizing; after this upon the aforesaid dayes, they were brought to the font or Baptistery, and publickly and severally asked Credis in Dum Patrem, Believest thou in God the Father, &c. the party said Credo, &c. So was baptized; and called hence baptizati, and looked upon as Members of the body of Christ, yet incompleate and imperfect, that is, weak Christians being newly born. 5. By confirming; that is, having been baptized, and so owned as visible Members of the Church, they were brought before the Bi∣shop or chief Officer of the place, and before him openly making a declaration of his faith, and resolution to walk in the same, was con∣firmed by a solemn calling upon God in prayer, (unto which was annexed the outward sign of imposition of hands by the Bishop) that God would strengthen and confirm the baptized in that faith wherein he was baptized, and whereof he had made profession, af∣ter which prayer and imposition of hands, he was declared a per∣fect Church Member, that is, fitted for the receiving of all Church priviledges, particularly the Sacrament of the supper, unto which the Church in this had a peculiar respect; which is a great confir∣mer of the faith of the Saints; Hence they were called Fideles, and were of full age, men in Christ Iesus, and received Imposi∣tion of hands, signifying that the Lord blessed them, ut pleni Christiani inveniantur. This is confirmation, and laid down by the Apostle as a Christian Principle, Hb. 6 2. after baptisme, which in all ages of the Church it followed. We must note that though we have mention onely of the A∣dlt, or those that were converted to the Christin faith when they came to years of discretion; yet the children o believing Parents were baptized in their Infancy, and  and confirmed s the other were, before they were owned as compleate Mem∣bers
fit to receive all the Ordinances of the Church, particularly the Lords supper. As no Ordinance in itself, though never so pure, necessary and holy, but hath been corrupted through the vanity and sinfulness of men; this Ordinance among others hath groaned under great a∣buses. 1. By Remanists; Rome hath made it a Sacrament preferred it before and above baptisme,Lomb. Lib. 4. Dist. 9.B. In baptisme Rome a∣nynis the hieder part of the head but in con∣firmati. the fore part. The con∣firmed hath also given him a box o the ear, else all the fa is in the fire. Can. 60. and 61. of the Church of Eng∣land. vel quia à dignioribus datur, & in digniore parte corpris, seilicet in fronte; vel forte quia majus aug∣mentum virtutum praestet, licet baptismus plus ad remissionem valeat. And besides prayer and laying on of hands, there mst be anointing with Oyle, during the pronouncing of these words, Consigno te signo crucis, & Confirme te Chrismate salusis in nomine patris, &c. Without all this there is no confirmation, contrary and besides the Primitive institution of this Ordinance. 2. By male contents; there are ever some that will be against rule and order, except they be the only men to rule themselves; this was in several places of this Land called down as Popish and Anti∣christian, and that imposition of hands did cease with the Apo∣stles themselves, whereby the governours of his Church, though commanded by Law to their duty, in reverence to this Ordinance, the Bishop being every third year required in this visitation, to confirm all that were trained up in the faith, and the Ministers of every Parish to take care to prepare all of years and understand∣ing for confirmation against the visitation: yet some Mini∣sters neglecting their duty in this particular, and others calumni∣ating it, there wanted heads whereon to lay on hands in many places; and since our late grannd defection from all order, it hath been quite laid aside in all places,Mr. Baxter Mr. Hen. Mr. L.P. and not so much as thought on among believers, though it be a principle of our belief. Yet the deadness of this age hath done so much good, as to give the Ala∣rum and cause three great Champions to arm themselves for the reviving of this ordinance, and defend the purity and necessity of the same, in three excellent treatises, and laying it down as a sin expedient to remove our distempers, learnedly and largely. Whatever Rome doth to exalt this Ordinance in a superstitious manner, or discontented persons to debase it in a prophane man∣ner:
yet being of God, let us in a few words see 1. Its Nature. 2. Its End. 3. Resolve some Questions. SECT. I OF its Nature we have spoken already, yet for clearer illustra∣tion take this Description. It is a holy Ordinance, whereby the baptized after a publick profession of his Faith, is declared a perfect Member of the Church, and blessed by solemn Prayer, and laying on of hands. This Description needs no particular Explication to them that have read what before hath been written; therefore we shall wave that for the present, and consider 1. That the Church of England will have none confirmed, but such as can rehearse the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the ten Com∣mandements,Ch. lit. for Com. and answer to such Questions of the Church Cate∣chisme as shall be put to him; and none if possible, to be uncon∣firmed that can do it. 2. That the Baptized have witnesses of this his Confirmation; it is not inexpedient if they be the same that were at his Bap∣tisme. 3. That at the laying on of hands this Prayer is to be made by the Bishop.
Defend O Lord, this Childe, with thy heavenly Grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more,Ch. lit. for Con. untill he come to thy everlasting King∣dome, Amen. Whether his Ordinance belongs to the Bishop in particular to perform, or whether it is common to him with other Presbyters, is too high a question for us to discuss:Cal. Inst. lib. 4. c. 19.5, 4. Yet by Antiquity it seems to be the Bishops Right, and learned men hve defended it; what ever the Guisell say to the contrary, Calvin himself being witness. 4. Imposition or laying of hands is of great Antiquity in the Church of Christ, as hath been above; roved in the Chapter of Ordination, and is an essential outward Rite at this Ordinance also, Heb. 6.2. Acts 8.17 It is a usual Ceremony, boh in the Old and New Testament, and to the case in hand, by it or with it, did our Saviour bless the children that were broght unto him, Marke 10.16. SECT. II. The Ends for whih his Ordinance is appointed, are briefly these. 1. For the frther stngthning of the baptized in the Faith of Christ; he Holy Gst wa given by the lyng on of the hands, Acts 8.17. and hogh hat visible wy and miraculous long since ceased, yet tht invible wy of sanctifying the oul, and strengh∣ing of the faith of he batized is no ceased, bt may an dth accompany this Ordinnce, as Prayer, Reading, Hearing, and oher Ordinances do.
2 To Capacitate the baptized for the Lords Supper; this is t top-stone of Christian Perfection, in a visible way to approach that Table, unto which Confirmation gives a real right, and more proximate then Baptisme. 3. It dischargeth the witnesses at Baptisme of that Engagement they then made for the baptized. He now engageth himself perso∣nally to walk in the Faith and promises for himself before the Church to live accordingly: they have brought him up in the Faith, and by his Declaration, there is declared that they have done what they promised, and he himself now qittth hem: For which cause as we said before, it is not inconvenient if the Baptismal witnesses be the confirming, that they may see themselves discharged, and be witnesses to i of it. 4. To remove or prevent the coming of the ignorant and scan∣dalous to the Lord Supper; (i.e.) aliquo modo, some manner of way. It is ordered by the Church (and rightly) That none com∣municate at the Supper, but such as hve been confirmed, which would make Parents more careful of their Childrens Education, an they themselves if they have any discretion, to be more heedful of their wayes. Great a doe was made by some pretending purity concerning the celebration of the Ordinance of the Supper, though they never went about to give it. Admit the Aged was, as they set them forth, yet the younger sort might have been looked after; and by this Ordinance of Confirmation, might not onely have brought them to be worthy Receivers, but the Aged to have become knowing and Penitents. But now I remember this Ordinance of Confirmation favoured of the Common-Prayer: and they were ve∣ry tender-nosed, though very hard-handed, and hard-mouthed too, they were not able once in seven year to say the Lords Prayer, and yet the Common-Prayer at least said it four times a day.
SECT. III. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. VVHether Confirmation be a standing Ordinance in the Gospel? Quest. 2. Whether the Church might not be advantaged by the rstring of Confirmtion? Quest. 1. Whether Confirmation be a standing Ordinance in the Gospel? There are that defend the Ordinance now pleaded for, to have ceased, and coninued no longer in the Church then the giving of the Holy Ghost in that miraculous way through it; yet we learn by the Scriptures that it is no more ceased upon that account, then prayer, though the holy Ghost was gived by that, Acts 4.31. for though that miraculous way be ceased whether as to prayer or im∣position of hands, yet that secret and saving way is still continued to both. That Confrmation is a standing Ordinance ppears. It is numbrd among standing Principles, Heb. 6.2. Therefore leaving the Principles of the doctrine of Christ, le us go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works; of faith, of baptismes, of laying on of hnds, of the resurrection, and of eternal jugdement. Was not this Apostle a wise master bilder? and will these men have him to erre in the foundation; out of charity they close in to the last supposition; look to all the parts of this Text, and pick out one that was but for a time; is faith, repentance, baptisme to endure always, and impo∣sition of hand for a time? because we would hasten, It lies upon
them to produce that Tet in which imposition of hands is limited, or then by vertue of this Text, it is to stand as a principle, and remain in the world as long as faith, repentance, or baptisme. Possibly by imposition of hands they conceit Confirmation is not here meaned, (so willing are men to fight against the truth) an opinion that riseth up against all ancient writers, and modern ex∣positors, as Calvin, Piscator, Beza, and as a learned writer sayes, all interpreters agree in it except a few straglers; but come let us reason together. And 1. By imposition of hands, the Apostle must mean something that laying on of hands was used in, since he expresly mentions that Ceremony. 2. There were three acts in the Apostles time,that of do∣ing it upon the head of peninents cme not until after the Aoles at which this Ceremony was used. 1. In healing of the sick, Mark 6.5. Acts 28.8. 2. In Ordaining Ministers, Acts 13.3.1 Tim. 4.14. 3. In praying for, or blessing the baptized that he might re∣ceive the holy Ghost, Acts 9.17. Unto which last all antiquity bears witness, this of the Text is to be referred; for though the holy Ghost in that miraculous way be not given by it, yet Christ that will be with his ministers to the end of the world, gives his spirit in a sanctifying, strengthening and confirming way, by using of this as well as other Ordinances, which made the ancients bring their baptized to the hands of the Bishop of the place, as the Apostles successor, for his blessing and benediction; and it seems was of that concernment, that its do∣ctrine was a chief head in the Apostles Catechisme taught here unto the Hebrews. For, 1. Healing of the sick cannot be the imposition here spoken of, that being no Principle common to believers, nor necessary do∣ctrine to be taught such as were learning heads of Divinity; the Imposition here must be of as large extent, a faith, repentance, Ba∣ptisme, which the curing of the sick is not, nor cannot be supposed . 2. By the same reason, Ordination of Ministers is not solely to be the imposition here in the Text; that is an act of office, and not common to believers; no woman must have it, and every man
is not a partaker. Now all here in the Text is common to all the Hebrews, and are principles wherein they are all as equally con∣cerned, and as general as in faith and baptme, except a place be produced wherein this imposit of hands is limited, we must hold it to be a principle as lae and common as the other, which Ordination is not. We say Ordination solely cannot here be understood; yet since it is a standing Ordinance, and must hold as long as baptisme, that is, to the end of the world, also given with impsition of hands, it may to this place be referred, but cannot onely be understood, for the reason above given. 3. It follows therefore that imposition of hands here holds out that blessing or benediction, that was given to Christians after their baptisme by the Apostles and by their successors, that the spi∣rit might sanctifie them all the dayes of their warfar, and that they might be endued with power from above to conquer all the spi∣ritual enemies of that faith wherein they were baptized; and this being of Catholick concernment, was taught the Hbrw at their first coming to Christianity, which benediction is called Confir∣mation from the effect and end of it, and imposition of hands from the gesture it was given by, and sometimes nction in re∣gard superstition hath added Oyle to it. It is to observable that the Apostle in the forementioned prin∣ciples, puts imposition of hands immediately after baptisme, which ceremony even in practice,Mr. Han∣mer. Ex. on Cons. 1 and in all ages of the Church follow∣ed after it. In the adult shortly, and in Infants at the years of Puberty, which according to some is about ten or twelve years of age, as is fully demonstrated in one of the fore-mentioned trea∣tises. To conclude therefore, imposition of hands being ranked among standing Ordinances, particularly with bapisme, the Text must be produced that limits it, or it ought to be accounted of equal extent with it, and by consequence not ceased, though the Apostles be fallen asleep. And since Antiquity, and the best modern Interpreters do hold in this place by Imposition is meaned Confirmation, and since no other kind of Imposition of hands can be rationally de∣fended,
they discover but their pride and arrogance, or spleen or rancour that denie it. Quest. 2. Whether the Church might not be Advantaged by th restoring of the Con∣firmation. What advantage would this bring unto the Church may some say? We Answer, Much every way: For, 1. It is an Ordinance of God; and what Sacrifice can the Church offer, that will do her more good then Obedience, 1 Samuel 15.22. 2. It would in a great measure prevent Apostacy: we find the baptized fall from the Faith, and Church both, wherein they were baptized. Now a solemn Protestation in the face of the Church, might in a great measure bind men fster to her. 3. It would silence the mouths of the Enemies of Infant-Bap∣tisme. It is usually Objected, that the Infant hath no engagement to stand to its first Baptisme, in regard it promised never to keep it. It is true, they nevr promised to keep it, yet hardly was there ever so prophane a wretch found, that thence concluded he would not stnd to his Baptisme. The Church knows it is an Infant, and therefore cannot speak; yet being born within the Church,Infans à non fando. and children of the Promise, she gives them that holy washing upon the faith of others, to give it Education according to the Gospel, which satisfies the Church, du∣ring the time of Infncy and Child-hood: but at the yers of discre∣tion, he s not stised; except the party pray for himself promise for himsel to live in that Faith wherein his Winesses and Parents bptized him: b the reviving therfore of this Ordinance might th licious (and seldome groned) Objection be truly and Siprlly answered. 4. It would make Prents the more careful of their childrens ducation and holy instruction, and the child it self to give more
heed to true Doctrine, Scripture and Catechismes, whereby he might Answer the more readily to such Questions as at Confirma∣tion may be put unto him, least for his ignorance, Imposition of hands might at his presentment be denied unto him: 5. It might give fresh and new motives unto all to go forward in the duties of Mortification, and Holyness; and shame them that after so open a Profession in the face of the Church, would yet live scandalously and loosly. 6. It would make the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be more reverenced and regarded, unto which by the Lawes of the Church none ought to approach, but by going or stepping over this threshold of Confirmation. 7. It wold much satisfie the scrupulous and doubting consci∣ence, in reference to their being witnesses in Baptisme, that in the dayes of child-hood they may train their Infants up in the things promised, which is no more then a faithful Education to enable them to fight against sin, Sathan and the world: from which harge at the dayes of puberty, they are honourably acquitted, by their Infants open Confession, and solemn and personal Protestation, in this solemn Ordinance of Confirmation.
CHAP. III. Of the Communion. THere are three grand Ordinances of high and great concern∣ment that in this Age have been above all others, by the ge∣nerality of men exploded out of the Church: They are, 1. That of Baptisme, a Sacramental signe of the baptizeds Re∣generation. 2. That of Imposition, an outward signe of the baptizeds Con∣firmation. 3. That of the Supper, a Sacramental signe of the sinners Re∣mission. Of the two former we have spoken: the latter is now before us: Called by God, A Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16. A breaking of Bread, Acts 10.7. The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. And by the Church the Sacrament of the Supper, from the cir∣cumstance of the time wherein the Lord gave it, which was at his Supper: Of it we shall consider, 1. Its Nature. 2. Its End. 3. Its Necessity. 4. Its Elements. 5. What it is to receive it unworthily. 6. What it is to receive it worthily. 7. Resolve some Questions.
SECT. I. AS the Sacrament of baptisme hath been violently detained from Infants, so this of the Supper hath been sinfully kept from believers, (though both Ordinances of God) by some in this generation; yet according to the Scriptures let us do our duty, and see the particulars above mentioned in Order thereunto. The nature of this Ordinance may be known by the examining of this description. It is a holy Ordinance instituted by the Son of God, whereby a believer by receiving of bread and wine, according to Christs ap∣pointment and institution, doth declare his growth by him, and his continuance in him. 1. It is called a holy Ordinance] in several respects. 1. In regard of its Author. It was appointed by that holy thing which was to be called the Son of God, Luke 1.35. 2. In regard of its end. Arts and sciences are more or less noble according as their ends are high and low. It hath for its end the remembering of the death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26. 3. From the receivers. At several Ordinances all are admitted; but here none must approach but the Lords people, 1 Cor. 10.17. 4. From its bond or Obligation. It binds men to be holy and to walk before him in love, 1 Cor. 10 21. 5. It must be performed in a holy manner; we are not rashly nor preposterously to approach this table, but we are to examine our selves, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2. Whereby a believer by receiving bread and wine, &c.] It is not every eating or receiving of bread and wine that is a Sacra∣ment. It must be according to Christs institution, by blessing those signs for that very use, end and purpose. 3. Doth declare his growth by him] by baptisme we are grafted in him; by the Supper we shew that we are grown by him. 1. In faith; the soul hath heard much of him, and by this she
declares that all is believed, and therefore in the Sacrament of the Supper desires to see him, an seek him who is the Lord her God. 2. In love; the soul hath heard his voice and calls to the Stew∣ards of the Wine-cellers, Stay me with flagons, for I am sick of love, 2 Cant. 5. 3. In good work; the soul hath learned by heart Christs suf∣ferings, his patience and his charity, declaring by this that all in∣juries are blotted out, and the hundred pence forgiven. 4. His continuance in him fruitfulness supposeth continuance; yet for amplification it is here added; we are by baptisme entered in his schoole, listed in his army, brought into hs house, and com∣ing to this Supper declares or coninuing in it. 1. By our obedience; h hath given us a charge to eat of this bead, and drink of this cup, Luke 22.19. and we do it. 2. By our love; When he sends us word that he hath prepared his dinner, his Oxen and fatlings, Mah. 22.4. and we leaving our fam, our Oxen, and other delights, upon this invitation, demon∣strates affection; when Christns throw all way, nd go in flocks to his house, may not the Infidels say  how they love him? 3. By our honouring of him; when we trim and deck our souls for his presence, and reverently worship towards his holy Temple; and with pure souls approach his table, we declare a regarding of him. 4. By our Union one with another; as we are of his body, so by this we shew forth that we are members each of other, 1 Cor. 10.17. 5. By our triumphing over sn: it is now brought under our feet; and we come here that we may be brought under it no more, Matth. 26.28.
SECT. II. THe ends why Christ instituted his receiving of bread and wine to be a standing Ordinance in his Church, comes next to be considered; they were such as these. 1. For the remembering of the death of Christ, Luke 22.19. that our dull memories might be rubbed up by these sensible signs, are they laid before us, and to be received of us. Now there is a twofold remembering of Christ. 1. Historical, that is, the manner or the history of his death, of his being fold, buffeted, mocked, derided, crucified, which is common to the Christian with the Turk or Iew, and for that this Sacrament is not onely appointed. 2. Eucharistical, that is, a remembering of his death, and being thankful for it, as praising, magnifying, worshipping, and blessing God that he dyed for us; this is proper to the Christian, and for this, is this Supper designed, and after this manner the true com∣municant remembers Christs deah, both in its causes and benefits. 1. In its causes, which was sin; mans pride of life made him humble to the death, his looseness made him be bound, his surfeit∣ing made him fast, his prodigality made him poor, and his eating of the forbidden fruit made him dye upon the tree. 2. In its benefits; by his death man is freed 1. From paying the debt he owed to eternal justice, 1 Thes. 1.10. 2. From the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, Gal. 5.1. 3. From the power of sin and Sathan, 1 Iohn 3.5. All which ex∣cite him to thanksgiving. 2. Another end was to stir up and quicken all true and saving graces; to cherish faith, to work repentance, to enflame love, to excire hope, and to make the Christians affections heavenly. 3. To assist our dull natures; these outward pledges shew of what necessity Christ is to us; by them Christ is evidently (though mystically) crucified before us, that we may admire, love him, and mourn over him.
4. That we might declare our Communion with him. They are only his friends whom he invites to this banquet of wine. Iews Pagans are secluded from this feast, and have no portion of it, while he calls to the Christian to drink and eat abundantly, he being onely his beloved. SECT. III. THis age amongst other crimes for which one day it shall be judged, hath become guilty in an eminent and high measure of the neglect of this Sacrament of the Spper; there are many in her pretending to holiness, yet not demonstrating obdience, we may suspect their sincerity; however they suppose to escape without receiving of this Ordinance, let the sober Christian know that it is his duty to approach the table, of the Lord, and it ought not of him to be neglected. For, 1. Its an easie duty; It heightened Adams offence that the precept might have been so easily observed; the same case is here. Not that I maintain this is rashly to be approached unto, but that that Chri∣stian that gives God his knees in prayer, and eye in reading, his tongue in singing, his ear in hearing, his hand in well doing, and will not give God his mouth in eating, shall not be holden guilt∣less, 2 Kings 5.13. 2. It is by the Lord enjoyned, Luke 22.19. until there be found out a Text wherein the abstaining from this Ordinance is dispen∣sed withal, Christ may not admit them to his glory, because they remembred not his precept in the doing of this, in memorial of him: and when they are secluded Heaven, it may be they shall hear, that it is for their not eating and drinking in his presence, though in his name they may pretend to have done mighty works. 3. It is a renewing of the cop y of the pardon of sin; Matth. 26.28. to be dayly calling upon God through Christ for a pardon of sin, and in the mean time neglect that Ordinance, which is pe∣cularly
designed for that very end and purpose, as it increases sin in all, so it is a high degree of folly and strange impudence in men, to expect that God shall say thy sins are forgiven. 4. From the practice of the primitive Church, Acts 2.46. Acts 20.7. did they think it their duty to take it often, and is it no sin in us to neglect t alwaies? Are we less beholding to the death of Christ then they? or is God more beholding to us, that he can dispense with a breach of his own Ordinance more then with them? or did he require more at their hinds then at ours, or are we more indulged in our sin then they were? if not, we have cause to approach with fear, and in this Ordinance serve him with trembling. 5. We have need to confirm spiritual Communion each with other, 1 Cor. 10.17. such bonds and tyes as Sacraments, are very ne∣cessary in such a contending generation as this is; this is an act or duty that dasheth contention, strife, pride, vain glory, with all their attendance against the stones. This were a way to Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 6. The profession of the Christian saith binds men to it; shall they profess that Christ is their Saviour to save them from sin, and will not touch that Ordinance that above all others visibly holds that out? The Iew might from this infer a contradiction betwixt the believers hope and his practice 7. It is a Ordinance as well as others; shall prayer have its place, and preaching its place, and reading its place; and shall the Sacrament of the Supper onely stand without? shall they injoy qui∣etly their possessions which from the beginning they were endowed withal, and this be forced be go to Law for its right? What God hath joyned together, dare some men presume to put asunder? 8. It gives an occasion unto Schismaricks and Hereticks to scandal the Catholick faith; how shall they joyn with such who so publickly are breakers of so positive a precept? and how shall they be reproved for their not coming to praying and preaching, since they can so really report Why do not you your selves approach that Ordinance of bread-breaking? by which justly they may put us from taking a more out of their eyes, until we have pulled a beam out of our own. In a word, there are none that be of years and discretion, able to
examine themselves, and try their own faith in God, but so far they are bound to be receivers of this Ordinance, which makes the Church of England appoint that To every Parish Church or Chappel,Can. 21. of the Church of England. where Sacraments are to be Administred within this Realm, the Holy Communion shall be Ministred by the Parson, Vicar or Minister, so often and at such times as every Parishioner may immunicate, at the least thrice in the year, &c. We say, so far as they are of years and discretion, they are bound to receive this; for there are some cases wherein even such may be kept from this Ordinance, and by the Laws of the Church of England not to be admitted, as shall be discovered in its own time. SEcT. IV. CHrist was pleased to represent himself to the believers eye in the swadling cloathes of bread & wine in this Sacrament of the Supper, which bread he called his body; that is, a sign of his body; and the wine he called his blood, that is a sign of it. Now between his body and blood the thing signified, with the application of it to the soul; and the bread and wine which is the sign, with the receiving it by the Communicant, typified of old by Melchize∣deck, Gen. 14.18 who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, with bread and wine, and blessed him, as Christ here doth the believer, when he returns from the slaughter of his sins; we say between these two, stands this holy Analogy and propor∣tion, similitude or likeness. 1. Bread grows in, and rises out of the Earth; so did the body of Christ he brought it not with him, from Heaven, for it had its Ori∣ginal in the womb of the blessed virgin. 2. Bread undergoe much labour sown, dyes, quickens, reaped, threshed, winnowed, grinded, kneaded, baked; Christ body un∣der-went
the like things. It was sown in the womb of the Virgin; by Devils and wicked men, was he continually threshed and winowed; he was grinded in the high priests hall, knead in his Cross and Passion, baked in the Oven of his Sepulchre, and then presented upon this table as bread for his people. 3. Bread is broken before it can be food for man; men cannot eat whole loaves, nor whole joynts; it must therefore be broken into parts: even so must he be broken upon the Cross in satisfying his Fathers justice, before he can be compleat or perfectly made the Captain of our salvation, 1 Cor. 11.24. not that properly he was bro∣ken on the Cross, for that the Scripture should be fulfilled, a bone of him shall not be broken; Iohn 18.36. Ex. 12.46. Breaking is rent∣ing one part of a thing from another: so was Christ soul rent from his body; his blood rent from his flesh, he was poured out like water, & all his bones were out of joynt; his heart was like wax melted in the midst of his bowels (without question then broken) his bones might have been told, they looked and stared upon him, Psal. 22.14.17. It is suppo¦sed by some that Christ repeated this whole Psalm upon the Cross.4 read is common to all that are about a table; none hath a propriety in it: every one cuts sufficient for himself; unto whom is the merits of the Lord limited? have not all Saints since the Crea∣tion been feeding upon them, and all that now are, and all that shall be, every one saying My Lord and my God, and yet no scarcity nor absolute propriety, but a holy Communion! this was darkly represented y our Saviours birth what house in a City more com∣mon then an Inn, and what place of an Inn more common then a stable? shewing that the fowlest sinner he is ready to embrace, cleanse and entertain. 5. Bread naturally strengthens mans heart, Psal. 104.15. hence it is called the staff of bread, Isa 3.2. the main upholder of natu∣ral strength, without which man would fall unto his first nothing. Nothing more strengthens a drooping soul, a doubting Christian, then the application of the merits of Christ unto its heart by the holy Ghost; with a morsel of this bread men may walk many dayes unto the mount of God. 6. Bread is necessary for life, so necessary that all things condu∣cing to mans life are subordinate to it, as the Reader may know by the Lords prayer (if he have not forgot it, or slights t because
common) Christ in us Our hope of glory is most necessary; and as we know without food or bread we cannot live a natural life, we ought to know without, receiving of this Ordinance we have no ground to imagine that we shall live a spiritual. We dayly hear men, chiefly ministers complaining of their peo∣ples Apostacy; and yet since this Sacrament in its season was not presented to their faith (which might be a strong means of con∣firming) it is not to be wondered to see their people faint, stagger, and all for want of bread. Further, between the wine the outward sign, and the blood of Christ the thing signified, stands this proportion. 1. Wine is the juice of he grape pressed out by the wine press; so was Christ blood pressed out by the weights of his Fathers in∣finite justice, Isa. 63.3. 2. Wine comforteth the heart of man, Psal. 104.15. the blood of Christ drank in faith in large spiritual draughts, out of the ves∣sel or chalice of this Ordinance with the mouth of the affections, and received into the stomach of meditation will produce holy purposes, and give good spirits to the languishing Christian. 3. Wine encourageth and emboldens. It raiseth the spirits that are otherwise cast down, and makes the Gyant himself to shout at the flight of his enemy; it makes a man to forget trouble and sor∣row, Prov. 31.6. Ecles. 19. Christs blood applied to the soul makes it exceeding bold to fight against principalities and powers; it makes them that are of a fearful heart be strong, saying fea not, Isa. 35.4. and emboldens it to come to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. It makes the people to clap their hands, and shout unto God with the voice of triumph, Psal 47.1. 4. Wine is of a healing nature, Luke 10.34. the Samaritan poured in Wine with Oyle into the wounds of the bleeding tra∣veller; the bleeding wounds of an afflicted conscience, know that the blood of Christ is of a Soveraign nature, to preserve it from dying and yielding up the Ghost, Rev. 22.2. From this Doctrine we may draw these inferences. 1. When we see bread and wine, and feel the comforts of the one, and know the necessity of the other, to think of Christ and the comforts to be had in his death, and the necessity that lyeth upon believers to receive this Ordinance.
2. To strive for a spiritual hunger in our approaching to the table of the Lord; for otherwise there is no refreshment will be found at the receiving of this spiritual banquet. 3. That the Church of Rome by her doctrine of transubstantia∣tion takes away the beauty of this holy Ordinance, robbing the people of the cup of the New Testament, and by making or teaching that the Accidents of the Elements, that is, the whitness or roundness of the bread, and the colour of the wine to be the sign of the body and blood of the Lord, for which cause she is justly condemned by the reformed Churches. SECT. V THis Ordinance of the Supper is instituted to assure the peni∣tent receiver of the remission of his sins; yet all that receive it are not pardoned, in regard that some receive it unworthily, and their sins are not forgiven justly, in as much as the condition upon which the Lord promiseth absolution for his part, is not per∣formed upon their part, and because of that they are so far from having their soul eased, that it is more burthened; They being guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. by reciving un∣worthily. Now there are three wayes by which men receive unworthily. First, by not giving due reverence to the mystery in that Sacra∣ment contained. Secondly, to the ends for which it was appoint∣d. Thirdly, to the Author by whom it was instituted. 1. The Ministery in that Sacrament contained. As, 1. To the crucified body of Christ, this presents unto us Christ and him crucifed; and the same reverence or respect that we would give to Chr were he visibly present with us; we must give unto him represented before us by bread and wine. Not that we should give it to the bread and wine, but to the Person who is re∣presented to us by them.
2. All that God ever did do, or that ever he promised to do for the best and dearest of his Saints, is here fully presented and  fo, h, grace, favour, mercy, glory with all points that tend to ∣ual life, are here signified by bread and wine, and comprized  that one blessing Remission of sin, the mercy here sealed. 3. The incorporation or Union of a soul with Christ. The bread eaten, is incorporated into the body of the receiver. Christ accept∣ed and received, makes the believer one body with him, flesh of his flesh, that they are no more two distinct beings of themselves, but parts of each other, as the root or body of the vine and the branches, 1 Iohn 15.5. 4. The fellowship that believers shall receive with Christian glory; drinking of wine on earth as this Ordinane shews, That we shall drink with him in his Fathers Kingdom, and that many shall come from the East, and from the West, and sit down with Abra∣ham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, of which this Ordinance is a special representation, Math. 26.29. 5. The necessity that lies upon men to embrace and apply the Lord Jesus; he by this appears as necessry for our spiritual well-being, as bread for our natural and sole being; and as nature would decay without the one, so grace will languish without the other. 6. The perfection of the Lord Jesus; he is for all necessary things held out by bread, for all comfortable things repre∣sented by wine; there is nothing necessary for our being, nor comfortable for our well-being, but Christ is that, fully held out un∣to us in the Elements of this Ordinance. 7. The Union and affection that ought to be in all the Mem∣bers of Christ towards each other; there are many grains of wheare goe to the making of one loaf, and many grapes to the filling of one cup; yet these being together without strife, shew communi∣cants should be of one heart without contention. All or any of these mysteries not to be regarded, reverenced, or valued, denotes the unworthy receiver. 2. To the ends for which it was appointed, of them we have spoken, Sect. 2. Unto which the reader may look back. 3. To the Author of whom it was instituted. This hath the Lord Jesus for its Original, and his precept for its receiving; and
if he be not regarded and reverenced, by the Communicant, the Communicant by him shall be reproved and condemned. Now there are four sorts of Persons that put not that esteem upon Christ as they ought in reference to this Ordinance. 1. The Formalist, he comes either out of custome or curiosity; at most it is that men say not he was away. 2. The Hypocrite, he brings an Alabaster boxe, but no pretious Oyntment; it is true he bows the knee, yet puts a vail upon Christs face, strikes him, saying, Prophesie who sites thee; he denies Christs Omnipotence, and omniscience, as if he could not find out the wickedness of his heart, or were not able to punish him for it Luke 22.64 3. The impenitent; it is not they who are invited to the Lambs Supper; It is the mourning, sorrowful, weeping, repenting soul for whom this table is covered, and for whom Christ hath pardons ready sealed to comfort, refresh, cherish and acquit them; the Communion cloth dryes onely the weeping eye, and the wine onely warms and refreshes the fainting soul. The impenitent ought not to come there; and if they do, it is upon their own pe∣ril for Christ never called them. 4. The malecontent, he sins against the Author and mystery of this Ordinance with a witness; Christ was a man of peace, though acquainted with trouble; and this Ordinance is a bond of peace, and ought not to be sealed in wrath. How shall he expect to have his talents frankly forgiven him in this, who will not for∣give his Brother his pence at his own table? Christ is harmless, se∣parate from sinners; and this man therefore is to keep from him; this table is like that hep of wheat, Cant. 7.2. and therefore to be set about him with Lilies; his man being a Nettle, he is nigh to be plucked up, and cast out: Math. 22.13.
SECT. VI. BY that known rule of contraries, it may be known who is the worthy receiver, by him that understands (by what hath been spoken) what it is, or who it is that receives it unworthily; yet for further manifestation, he is a worthy receiver, 1. That is a discerner of the Lords body in the Sacramental Administrations. Secondly, of his own iniquity in its highest ag∣gravations. Thirdly, of his own graces as Sacramental qualifica∣tions. 1. To discern the Lords body in the Sacramental Administrations, 1 Cor. 11.29. that is, to discern in the Sacrament the Lords body by those outward Acts, necessary to be performed by Minister and People while the Sacrament is administring. Now they are of two sorts; some done by the Minister, and some done by the people. 1. Of the Minister, who hath five Acts in which by faith the Lords body and blood, or the Lords himself is be discerned. 1. The bread is set apart from all other bread, to be a seal to the Believer of the remission of his sin; other bread is appointed for the nourishing of the body; this for the soul; here must be discern∣ed; God the Father sering apart from all other men the Son of his eternal generation to be the Saviour of the world; that is, to as many as believe on his name.Godwin Moses and Aton, lib. 3.105. How different is this night from all other nights? says the Iew every time he eares the Passeover. How different is this bread from all other bread? may the Chri∣stian say when he eares this Supper. How different was Christ from all other men? there being none like him, 1. In nature, being God and man in one Person, 2. In birth, being born of a Virgin. 3. Office, being King, Priest, and Prophet. 2.The bread is blessed; that is, prayer is made that that bread might be to the faithful soul the body of Christ broken for its sin,
and after the institution is read it becomes so; here discern God the Father endowing his Son with those gifts and graces suitable to that office wherein he hath put him; As, 1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Counsel. 4. Judgement. 5. Might. 6. Knowledge, Isa. 11.2. see also, Isa. 91.1. 3. The bread is broken; It is not fit for food until it be in mor∣sels. In this act we most discern God the Father causing his Son to undergo the weight of his justice, and dying for the sins of men, that he might be a perfect Saviour, 1 Cor. 11.24. 4. The Minister then eateth himself; he being subject to the same sins others are, stands therefore in need of the same Saviour; we may discern God the Father holding forth and presenting his Son to be the Saviour of all that call upon him. 5. The bread is then distributed to the people, and of it every one hath their portion, signifying how God the Father holds forth his Son with all his grace, merits, benefits, to every particular be∣liever, where vf this man unto whom this is presented is one. 2. The Actions of the people; and they are two. As, 1. To take the bread in their hand, though the Church of Rome will not allow of this, (but must have it put in the Communicants mouth) yet it is agreeable to the institution, that signifies the be∣lievers laying hld upon Christ, and wholy upon Christ for his Saviour, according to the terms  the Gospel, after which God the Father onely delivers him: that is, as a King to rule him, as a Prophet to teach him, as a Priest to satisfie for him, or as Jesus to save him, and as Christ to reign in him, and over him. 2. The people eate the bread; bread upon the table or in the hand nourisheth not except it be eaten: (how fond is the Church of Rome that gives such bread as cannot be eaten, and nor without much trouble, and probable danger swallowed?) this signifies they have united themselves to Christ, and by faith are grafted in him,
and their hunger after him, and their restlesness until they have obtained him, promising obedience according to the conditions he was prosfered to them. That Covenant, Ier. 31.31, 32, 33.14. by this is sealed; God for his part remitting sins past, and the people for their part promising obedience for the time to come. The like things may be said of the wine, (which the Church of Rome wholly keeps from the layy; for what reason shall by and by be discovered) but the understanding Christian by this that hath been spoken, may know how to discern the Lords body in that. 2. Of his own iniquity in its highest aggravations; before sin can be by this Ordinance forgiven, or slain, it must be by examination and search found out, accused and condemned; there are diverse sorts of it, and it must all be looked after; these chiefly. 1. Sin Original or natural; that sin of nature in which the Sons of men are born. 2. Sin actual; those sins a man knows that his hands hath acted, must be washed off sin. 3. Of presumption. 4. Of infirmity. 5. Sins against the first table. 6. Sins against the second table. 7. Those against the Gospel. 8. Those against the Law. 9. Those of the week. 10. Those of the Sabbath. 11. Against conscience. 12. Against Counsel. After which must follow these three acts. 1. A hatred of them. 2. A condemnation of them. 3. A forsaking of them. 3. Of his own graces, as Sacramental qualifications: There are graces necessary for the true Communicant, without which in some degree or other though but like a grain of mustard seed, the Com∣municant hath no ground to expect any acceptance. As,
1. Knowledge, a grace by which the believer discerns his own misery by nature, and necessity of receiving Christ; by which re∣ceiving Christ is able to save him to the uttermost. 2. Faith, a free gift of God by which a sinner renouncing all merits of his own, casts himself onely and wholely upon the merits of the Lord Jesus for life and salvacion, as is promised in the Go∣spel. 3. Repentance, a grace by which a sinner viewing his sin, and the sad effects of it, and also Gods mercy prffered in Christ, doth heartily bewaile it, and turn wholly from it unto God. 4. Love, a holy and fervent affection that Christians bear to God and Christ; and to each other, whereby they are stirred up for the performing of all things that tend to the honour and glory of the former, or to the good whether of the soul or body of the lat∣ter. 5. Obedience, a gift or grace by which the creature diligently and hedfully observes the whole Law of God to keep it and pra∣ctice it with all Gospel sincerity and plainness. Of all which we intend no further handling, this tract being al∣ready swelled to a greater bulk then at first was intended. SECT. VII. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. WHether the Communion ought often to be reser∣ved, or how often? Quest. 2. Whether the Church of Rome hath reason to keep the Communion cup from the layy? Quest. 3. Whether kneeling be a gesture, lawful to be used at the Communion? Quest. 4. Whether it be pedi to keep prfixed times for Ad∣ministration
of the Communion, and if offerings be lawful? Quest. 5. Whether it be a sin to receive the Communion in a mix∣ed Cgregation, or if private Examination be necessary? Quest. 1. Whether the Communion ought often to be received or how often? That this Sacrament is often to be received, is above proved; yet by way of supplement we say here that this Ordinance is often to be received. 1. From its dignity. It is above all other feasts Legal or Evan∣gelical; the feasts under the Law were exactly kept by reason of Gods command, though they were but types of this, and more bur∣thensome and grievous; ought not we therefore to observe it upon Christs injunction, since it is so easie, comfortable, and re∣freshing? 2. From the time of its institution, which was the night where∣in he was betrayed, just as he was going to the Crss, a little before his death, as soon as he had put an end to the Jewish Paschal; to teach us. 1. To remember it with the more zeal: the words of a dying friend are much esteemed: and should the words of our dying Sa∣viour be neglected? 2. To perform it with the greater love. This Sacrament is the lst pledge of love wherein he hath given us all that is dear to any; his very flesh and blood to strengthen and comfort us; and ought it not to be esteemed, and oftner like a love token be seen of us? which leads us to the second part of the Question, how often this Sacrament must be taken. For this there can be no positive rule, yet from the nature of the Ordinance we may affirm, that it is often to be taken. 1. As often as men renew their repentance. Repentance is a hearty sorrowing for sin, that it may be forgiven; and this being an Ordinance for Remission of sin, it is proper to take the one: as often as the other is done. 2. As often as Gods spirit shall prompt one to it; when the
spirit is dealing with us, touching the performance of any duty, it is dangerous to let the motion go without obedience; follow the spirit in this also; it may lead thee as it did Simeon, Luke 2.27. to the table and shew thee the Lord Christ. 3. As often as providence shall put a fair opportunity in thy hand. When the Gospel Minister invites in Gods name his peo∣ple to Gods table, if thou be wise, let not thy seat be empty. This case alwayes holds not in great Parishes where possibly the Communion may be celebrated every Sabbath or every moneth. In such places let the other two rules take place. Quest. 2. Whether the Church of Rome hath reason to keep the Communion cup from the people? The Church of Rome, in her celebration of this Ordinance, is pleased to keep the cup from being tasted by the people. And when the Bohemians pleaded for the Communion of both kinds, before the Councel of Basil, that Councel sent Ambassadors to debate the matter in the City and University of Prague; the Am∣bassadors gave the Bohemians the reasons why the Church of Rome did not give the Communion in both kinds unto the people: and that the reader may see how reasonable they are, we shall present them before him. 1. To avoid errour, that the people might not think part of Chrst body to be in the bread, and part to be in the cup. 2. To avoid irreverence: for the wine might through heedles∣ness both of the giver and the receiver, be spilled and might fall to the ground. 3. To avoid inconvenience: for the wine in the cup might not be sufficient to serve all the Communicants, so that either there must be a new consecration or wine given not consecrated. To these reasons given by these Ambassadors, we may add others given by Rmish Doctors. 4. The consecrated wine might sour and turn to vineger; this in the Authors judgement might be prevented by drinking of it up.
5. In some countries wine is hard to be got; whether wine be hard or not to be got in Arabia deserta, is uncertain; sure it is not in France Spain and Italy. 6. Lay-people should then touch the cup; what great and hai∣nous sin were hs if they did? 7. Some palsie hand might shake and spill the wine. The Priest might give it him with the more care. 8. Then the People and the Priest should be alike in dignity. In this case they are both guilty of sin, and stand both in need of the same redemption. 9. Equ' donati non sunt inspiciendi dentes. A given horse ought not to be looked into the mouth; that is, it was Christs free gift to give us that Sacrament, and therefore the people are not to grumble if they have not the cup; By the same reason they might take from them the bread also, and by the sam the people are to have the cup. For if the Sacrament be a free gift, none ought to diminish that present; if a horse be given to one young, sprightly and lusty, and the servant present one old and decayed, it may be looked in the mouth. 10. Some men have long beards, and the wine might stick thereon; surely those men might wipe their beards dry again. 11 Some sick person would be distempered if they drank wine; they might drink the less. 12. Because the blood of Christ is really received in the bread, that is by transbstantion, that is as soon as the Priest says hee est corpus moum, this is my body, to himself; no body hearing, and speaking true Latine for, corpus mea, or mins, or mea, would spoil all, and also if the priest intend a Sacrament: for otherwise its none: when all these things meet together, the wafr is turned to the very real natural flesh of Christ; and is no longer a wafer: which being granted, the wine they hold nor necessary. This doctrine of transubstantiation, puts the most subtil to their shifts, what to think if a Worm or a Mouse should chance to eat some of the Wafer: some conceit that Christ altogether leves the Wafer, others think he doth not: but the Mouse eats the flesh of Christ; Loa that is the great Doctor of all, and undertakes to reach all, professeth he know ot what the Mouse eats: Deus
novit; but how ever it be, he must do penance forty days that suffer∣ed this to be done; and if the poor Mouse can be found, she must be burned and buried under the altar; others more tender will have her ripped; and if the Wafer can be found, to be carefully preser∣ved until it consume of it self? but if the Priest will eat it, it is a high piece of service, specially if he be fasting. One of the Kings of France (which to this day receive the Communion under both kinds) asking his clergy, why others might not receive so as well as he, had this Answer, that Kings were anointed as well as Priests, and therefore he might have the cup as well as they; for that Text bibite ex hoc emnes, Math. 26.27. was only spoken to the Apostles as Apostles, not as believers, and therefore priests may hae the cup but not the people, is their doctrine. When these reasons are weighed, and the Commandement of Christ examined, the parts of the institution well studied, it may be said to the Church of Rome, for all her reasons (which are altoge∣ther void of reason) that she hath made void the Commandements of God through her tradition. For this Rome is condemned of the Reformed Churches, of Helvet. Art. 21. of Basil. Art. 6. of Bohe. Art. 13. of France Art. 36. of Blg. Art. 35. of Ausp. Art. 2. of S. Art. 14. of Wirt. Art. 19. of Irel. Art. 97. of Scot. Art. 22. of Eng. Art. 30. the Articles it¦self is. Art. 30. Of the Church ofEngland. THe cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay-people; for both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christs Ordinance and Comman∣dement ought to be Ministred to all Christian men alike.
Quest. 3. Whether kneeling be a gesture lawful to be used at the Communion? Before we positively Answer this Question, we shall premise, 1. There is no gesture in Scripture enjoyned;That man that holds any one ge∣sture neces∣sary since God hath commanded none is a will wor∣shipper, and highly superstitio in that ge∣sture. we find our Saviour instituting it with bread and wine: we find the Saints often using it with great eagerness; and Saint Paul perswading to a holy doing of it with great earnestness; but in what gesture it should be taken, they all remain in silence. 2. That our Saviour sat nor. All the Evangelists that mention our Saviours sitting, do it by a word that signifies lying, the com∣mon gesture of the Iews both at that time and long before. It would be an odd ight with us to see 6, or 7. beds cast down and the Communicants lie upon them, one leaning upon anothers breast as Iohn did on Jesus, Iohn 13.23. which gesture was ordinary a∣mong the Iews, Ezek. 23.41. and Amos 2.8. for which cause they plucked of their shoes, Mat. 26.20 , Mark. 14.18.  Luke 22.19 and washed their feet before they did eat. But how came our Saviour to sit or lie, since in the institution of the Passeover he ought to have stood, and the Iews also, Exod. 12. How or when this alteration was made, or whether made by Ezra or no, we have no certainty; yet in regard that standing is not en∣joyned in the repetition of the Law, the Church altered standing into lieing; signifying their rest obtained, which was used also by our Saviour. 3. What gesture soever he used, binds not without his precept: and for this we have none we conclude then kneeling to be law∣ful. For, 1. It is a decent gesture; where there is no particular act requi∣red in Scripture, it is most lawful for us to betake our selves to general precepts. In the case in hand, being there is no gesture re∣quired, our Saviours sitting binding us no more then his receiving in an upper chamber, or after Supper doth, we may betake our¦selves to that general, 1 Cor. 14.40. and kneel accordingly. 2. It is an humble gesture. The ancients worshipped God often by prostration, signifying how unworthy they were to stand in his presence who was the God of the whole Earth; that is now out of
use: yet the signification of the same excellently held up by ge∣nuflexion: by bowing we signifie our apprehension of his great and infinite Majesty. 3. It is a sitting gesture. This Sacrament is given by the Church with a charge to pray: and if the Communicant have a conscience, he will pray: now let the Scripture be searched, the Saints practice be inquired after; and what gesture is fitter for prayer then kneel∣ing? It is true that usually we sit when we pray at meat; yet to reason from a prayer in private business, to one that is annexed to Gods solemn worship, will not in all things hold: and if it should, we are not pleading the necessity of kneeling, but its lawfulness. 4. It is of all gestures the most suitable: to behold a sinner where God is, and he in Christ, where Christ is, and he by the spirit sealing to a poor soul, and holding forth a pardon, what is more agreeable to the nature of the thing, then the sinner to re∣ceive that pardon upon his knees? If it here be said that sitting signifies familiarity with God: we can easily Answer, that many are more bold with God then welcome: and this familiarity is a figure of their own election: the true Christian had rather shew his humility. And when they have searched, they will find that in Gods house sitting is not very often used in the time of prayer, with which that Ordinance is to be re∣ceived. The Church of Rome useth it also, though Originally she never begot it, it being a gesture almost as old (if not altogether) as Chri∣stianity: yet we must dispise it no more then throw away a Com∣munion cloth, which is decent and harmless, though the Papist have it: and even so is this though at Rome it be practised. These things considered, let iniquity stop her mouth, and bring no rayling accusation against the piety & dignity of the Church of England, for ordaining her members to kneel at that Ordinance, that gesture being by law established.Can. 7. of the Chuch of Eng. No Minister, when he celebrateth the Communi∣on, shall willingly Administer the same to any but such as kneel under pain of suspension, nor
under the like pain to any that refuse to be present at publick prayers, &c. Quest. 4. Whether it be expedient to keep pre¦fixed times for Administration of the Commu¦nion, and if offerings be lawfull. When the Church appoints this Sacrament to be received at such a day of the moneth, or at such a time of the year, it is not be∣cause those times or dayes are more holy then others, but for other reasons: the Communion in it self being often to be taken, the Church may prefix a time, as the first day of every moneth, and it is expedient that it be so. 1. For Orders sake, to keep decency and to prevent confusion; it is and may be ordained that the Communion be thrice in the year received, and Easter to be one of the times, which tends to the Churches Order as much as families dineing together at or about noon, an ancient and old practice, Gen. 43.16. 2. For travellers sake; when men are upon heir lawful occa∣sions distanant from home, and knowing a time before them, wherein the Communion will be delivered in all places, his de∣votion may stir him up to preparation, and that to a conscionable conversation; which could not be done if it were left to the plea∣sure of every Minister; for so thousands might go long without receiving that holy thing, whose zeal and piety might carry them forth to a reverent and frequent breaking of that bread, and drinking of that cup. 3. For the ignorants sake. The Minister may be more suddain in his warnings then some peoples preparation will permit, and again more slow then their zeal will allow; which inconve∣nience is preventented by a prefixed time, in regard of which the ignorant may be before hand prepareing, and at the time be fully prepared. 4. For the Churches sake. Subjects will keep the days of their Princes inauguration, and people the times wherein they obtained some notable victory or great deliverance: the Iew will keep in memory the days of Purim: may not the Church in memorial of
her Saviours resurrection from the dead, as at Easter, appoint her Members to partake of that Ordinance, without being railed at? If it be said she hath no Commindement from the Lord for so doing; let them know, she hath no Commandement from the Lord against it in time: and the thing commanded is the very mind of the Lord in nature; moreover she doth not do it through neces∣sity, but for decency. 5. For the Lords sake; we may see by woful experience that since these prefixed times were not thought suitable, there hath in most places been no time wherein this Sacrament was thought seaso∣nable. Our Saviour joyned to it a Remember, yet of all Ordinances it was most forgot by Ministers in their Pulpits, and by people in closets. It was very observable, that in the most populous places and Parishes, the drunkards complained most of the want of this Or∣dinance. I always took it to be of God; good ministers said no∣thing, nor good people, (that is such as were so accounted) God would have it spoke on, and therefore opened the mouths of these Asses to reprove the madness of these Prophets; hoping for bet∣ter things, we leave them, to speak something touching Offerings or Oblations given to the Minister by the people at the times of Communion. These are both ancient and laudable, and a high part of Gods service and worship, whom we are bound to honour with our sub∣stance, commanded in the Law, Ex. 25.2. confirmed by our Sa∣vior, Math. 5.23. And all the precepts of that Sermon must be kept under the Gospel, Math. 5.19. and the wise men shewed their respect to Christ by their offerings. Though they be acceptable at any time, for they were free-will offerings, yet at some time they have been more necessary. As, 1. When the Church was in want, when there was no stock nor treasure in the hands of the Church Officers to furnish the Church with those things it wanted, Ex. 35.4. 2. When we have received some signal and eminent blessing from God, Psal. 76.11. 3. When holy and solemn Festivals are to be kept; when the three high feasts of the Lord were to be performed, of which the
Paschal or Easter was one, None must appear before him empty-handed Deut. 16.16. but must bring gifts or offerings, partly for the Sacrificia, and partly for provision for the Levites; from which rule the Churches of Christ of old came not to the Sacra∣ment of the Supper empty-handed, but brought an offering to the Lords servant, filling or putting into his hand a temporal blessing who had filled their hand with spiritual food. Quest. 5. Whether it be a sin to receive the Communion in a mixed congregation; and if private examination be necessary? By a mixed congregation the age makes us to understand 1. A congregation wherein any Communicant is not of the same judgement, principle or opinion, though in things circum∣stantial. 2. A congregation wherein there are some Communicans that have sin in their mortal bodyes, though it be repented. 3. A congregation wherein there be drunkards or sweaters, though adhearing professedly to the doctrine of the Gospel. Unto which we will add this also, though he was never repro∣ved nor admonished by us. The Question is then, whether a man that hath prepared him∣self, by sound, hearty, real, and holy examination for that Ordi∣nance, may altogether forbear it; and omit it upon the account of his knowing or foreseeing that such a drunkard will be at that holy banquet. It is answered in the negative, he ought not to forbeat up∣on any such pretence. For, 1. That Ordinance is not arbitrary. It is not left to our own will and discretion, that we may, or may not as we will; we ought to do our duty, and prepare our selves to be worthy receivers; if another neglect his, and yet receive, let him look to it, the Lord is at hand. 2. We might neglect other Ordinances as well as that; we might refuse to read the Scriptures, to pray, to hear upon the same reason; and indeed this doctrine as it hath kept some from the Chancel that is, from receiving it hath kept others from the Church that is from hearing, and this again hath kept some from the Scri∣pture,
resolving to keep company with none but such as are al∣together without sin and therefore the light within is their rule. 3. God requires no such condition; he craves faith, repeat∣ance, and new obedience on my part, but not that my companion should have the same, or then I to be refused, and my offering not to be accepted; one Christian shall never be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, because another of the company wants the wedding garment. 4. It is plainly against that Text, 1 Cor. 11.29. he that eaeth and drinketh unworthily,. eateth and drinketh damnation or judge∣ment to HIMSELF: therefore not at all to another; he that prepares himself aright, need not fear what the unworthiness of others can do against him. 5. It would clearly take away this Sacrament out of the Church; who would prepare himself to come, if he should be cursed by anohers unworthiness, or approach that table though full of faith with boldness, except he knew that every heart at the table were as holy as his own? and others that were as full of faith as he, might hang down the head, least his unworthiness procure unto them a judgement, and so the devotion even of the devout, should re∣ceive a bar; nd be shut from all comfortable actings and holy duties. This is not spoken to countenance prophaness, but to inform the weak and tender conscience, there being Laws in the Church to dbrth; scandalous from that table and also th ignorant, which may and ought to be put in execution, by the Church Officer, after his admonishing the one, and instructing the other; for to exclude either of these without tryal (save in case of necessity) is arrogant, and rash, and without Authority; but upon certain knowledge to deba such, is both religiously and lawfully done. No Minister shall in any wise admit to the receive∣ing of the Holy Communion,Can. 26. of the Church of Eng∣and. any of his cure or flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious without repenance; nor any who have maliciously and openly contended with
their neighbours, until they shall be reconci∣led, &c. The scandalous are found out by the ear, and secluded by Law; the ignorant cannot be found but by discourse, conference or ex∣amination, which leads in the second part of the Question, Whe∣ther private examination be necessary? There is a twofold examination in reference to the Sacrament of the Supper. 1. In respect of God, 1 Cor. 11.28. men are bound, and it is necessary for them to examine themselves. 2. In respect of the Church, that the ignorant and unlearned make not that Ordinance undervalued; the Question is of this latter, and amounts to this Whether the Church Officer may law∣fully debar a sober pious Christian, or one of whom he neither sees nor hears evil, purely upon the account he will not submit to his examination? a practice of late too commonly known, nay se∣veral thousands have been excluded, except they came under the tryal, not of the Church Officers only, but of his lay-Elders, an of∣fice not heard of in the Church until these late years, and are parts of the Church no more, then those Anticks, whose mouths supplie the places of spouts unto the temples; but to let them pass, it is denied, private examination in this sence is not neces∣sary. For, 1. The Scripture would have given some Item of it, when the nature of the Sacrament is stated, and examination required. 1 Cor. 11. No word that tended in the least to this is written, but every man enjoyned to examine himself. 2. It cannot be shewed that ever the priests examined the fit∣ness even legal, of those that aproached the Paschal, and yet the danger of unworthy receiving the one, seems as great as the other, 2 Chro. 30.20. 1 Cor. 11.30. 3. That Parable, Matth. 22.9. is against this practice, wherein the servants are appointed to bring in all that they could find, without Order to try if they had the wedding garment; the want of which condemned the party, but not the servant. Yet by the
Law of the Church, particularly of the Church of England, none are to be admitted to that Ordinance until they have given suf∣ficient testimony of their knowledge in the principles of the Chri∣stian religion. Which Law though not expressed in Scripture in direct terms, yet consequently it is approved. In regard that the Church Officers are called Watchmen, Stewards, Shepherds, &c. which titles denote what a care they ought to have of their peo∣ple or flock. This, even this, being not taught unto the people, was a fire∣brand of division between the Pastor and his people in these last days, examination being by them required and that rigidly, not declaring it as necessary in respect of the Church, (which would have satisfied the minds of all sober Christians) but as from Scri∣pture, when the people knew that no such thing was required, and they themselves not being able o produce the Text wherein in it was enjoyned. It was pretty sport to hear men publickly and privately affirming, that those who submitted not themselves to examination, ought to be secluded for breach of that Order or discipline they them∣selves erected, and yet not conforming themselves to those Or∣ders that by Law had been established. By which two things, to all of understanding occurred. First, their arrogance to make Laws and compel the people without au∣thority to submit under the pain of leser excommunication. Se∣condly, their stubbornness in opposing those Laws made by law∣ful power; and when punished, eey call out of persecution. They held it an undervaluing of themselves to crave this ex∣amination of their people, by any Law made by the Church; and yet no presumption to press it upon them by vertue of their own association, in the mean time producing no Scripture, wherein directly these things were either to be done by them, or obeyed by the people. Thus far have we gone touching the doctrine referring to the Sacraments, the second part of that work, which in the begin-was by us undertaken.
FIDES CATHOLICA: OR, THE DOCTRINE OF THE CATHOLICK CHURCH, Referring to Prayer. With a farther defence of the Book of COMMON-PRAYER, Of the Church of ENGLAND. By W. A. Presbyter. LONDON. Printed for Edw. Brewster, at the sign of the Crane in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1661:
To Mr. Francis Winton. Robbert Downs. Richard Dogget. Church-wardens, And to all other officers and Inhabi∣tants of the Town and Parish of Leighton, &c. Gentlemen and in Christ dearly Beloved▪ WHat I first entered upon about three years ago in another place,Weston. Octo. 25, 1657. I brought to perfection within these few days in your audience; and truly for their sakes for whom the foundation was layed, was the roofe chiefely fitted and squared. I am emboldned to affix your names to this trea∣tise, judgeing that as your patience and charity gave it hearing from the pulpit attentively, your zeal and affection, will entertaine it from the presse kindly.
It happened to be your lot (after the nations un∣settlement) to receive orders, for providing me a book of Common-prayer, as a means judged by our superiors for the Churches tranquillity: you hve here in a few words that book defended, by which our submission, (not for necessity but for conscience) unto it may be justified, and God be praised, that he was pleased to give you that honour, as in the least to be helpers in a publick way of that distressed Church, into whose doctrine you were baptized. Enter into this treatise and learn how to behave your selves in prayer, to God and men, and for men to God, and to some men chiefly for God, and to all men in God, that with all Saints you may be glori∣fied by God, unto which end, he shall further con∣tribute his prayers and endeavours who is. Your Minister in the Lord Jesus. Will. Annand.
Of PRAYER. CHAP. 1. 1 Thes. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. GOd who at all times is rich in mercy, and ready to forgive yet will have his people to call upon him for that mer∣cy, and make known unto him their de∣sires, or suits in that particular, to sig∣nify not his straitnesse or backwardnesse unto them, but their duty and depen∣dance upon and towards him. This is the third ordinance we un∣dertook to defend cryed down in this generation by some that pretend to the Spirit, and therefore to be held up by all that give attention to the word. The misapplying of the word in our dayes, The neglecting of the Sacraments, hath raised such division, and broached such foolish questions, which gender strifes, 2 Tim. 2.23. that the gift, or spirit of prayer (thogh mch boasted of, was never lesse possessed, that chiefly consisting in love and Cha∣rity.
Yea that gift of prayer that was, became much spoyled (not to speak of them that altogether threw it down as a thing of naught) by some mens unnatural uncharitablenesse, heedlesse impertinencies, strange extravagancies, apish ge∣stures, ugly faces, and ridiculous tones, which yet was no more to be wondered at, then to see a stranger wander that either willfully hath left, or cruelly murthered his guide. Their flighting or disgracing that rule of prayer given to the Church by our Lord and Saviour, was without question the ground or stem upon which these errors grew, and stood, and the matrix or wombe wherein their Heterolite peti∣tions, were conceived and bred, but for the present to let them passe. In prayer there are three things. 1 Petition, Iohn 17.51. 2 Confession, Psal. 51.5. 3 Thanksgiving, Rom. 6.17. We shall chiefly speak of the first, the other two naturally following it, will come and present themselves to our medi∣tations freely, without a particular summons: for which cause it is by way of eminency called, and  for the present be entituled prayer. In which we shall 1 Its Nature. 2 Its Ground. 3 Its Parts. 4 Its Rule. 5 Its Hinderance. 6 Its Form. 7 Resolve some questions.
SECT. 1. The Nature of prayer shall not be unknown to him that exerciseth his understanding about the parts of this de∣scription. It is an immediate, hearty calling upon the true God, through Christ, according to his will, for the obtaining of any bles∣sing to, or diverting of any judgment from our selves, or others for whom there is hope God will be entreated. 1 It is an immediate, &c.] This excludes praying either to Saints or Angels, and according to the rule of prayer, shews that immediately it ought to be made to our Father which is in heaven without making any direct prayer to Saints be∣sides God, or indirect, by Saints to God, though they be in heaven. 2 It is an hearty calling, &c.] It is not only a speaking lip, but a praying heart, that shall be accepted, when the mouth is pleading and the mind not closing there is a more just cause of Gods complaining then of Delilahs, Iu. 16.15. How canst thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? he that would have God to have a pittying eye, and a powerfull arme must in himself have a praying heart: hence it is called a lifting up of the soul, Psalm. 25.1. and a pouring out of the soul, 1 Sam. 1.15. In a word quod cor non facit, non fit, that prayer that is not hearty is but babling, not praying, an act of disobedience, not duty, heighting sin, not removing judgment, nor procuring mercy. 3 Upon the true God] Daniel and his companions prays unto the God of heaven, Dan. 2.18. David to the Lord God of Hoasts, Psal. 84.8. Moses Comes in the name of the Lord God of the Hebrews, Ezek. 7.19. The God of Abraham, The God of Isaac, and The God of Jacob, is the God of the Christi∣ans, and to him, the vow only is to be performed, there is
God can deliver after that sort, he doth, let prayer there∣fore be made only to him, and daily let him be praised, let none say any more to the work of mens hands, ye are our Gods; for in him only the fatherlesse findeth mercy, Hos. 14.3. 4 Through Christ] before the fall, men might have wor∣shipped without a mediator, but since we must make Christ, as the Tyrians did Blastus, Act. 10.20. our friend, he is the eye by which the Father sees the miserable, the ear by which he hears the humble, the hand by which he helps the impotent, the feet by which he hastens to re∣lieve the oppressed▪ and the heart by which he delights in the prayers of his people. 5 According to his will] This is a necessary qualification in prayer, and must not be wanting, 1 Iohn 5.17. If it be thy will, must be the bridle of our desires, as it was of Christs, Mat. 26.39. But here we must distinguish, Prayer is of two sorts. 1 for things temporall, for such things as concern this life, as our health, our wealth, which must ever have this limitation, If it be thy will. 2 For things spirituall, for such things as concern the life to come, as pardon of sin, grace, faith to subdue lust, these things we are assured God wills already, both by his word and oath, and therefore without this condition must be asked, and God must be importuned, yea heaven must be taken by violence. For the obtaining of any blessing, &c.] whether to our soules or bodies, whether temporal spiritual or eternal, inward or outward, at home, or abroad of what nature soever the blessing desired be, must be asked of God, for from him comes every perfect gift. 7 Or diverting of any judgment] That is either feared, or felt, whether it be upon our selves, or others, magistrates, Ministers, private persons, male or female, whether bond or free, for all Saints, Eph. 6.18.
8. For whom there is hope God will be intreated] there are creatures for whom no prayer must be put up, God re∣solving to accept no sacrifice, nor burned offering. Such are, 1. The Devils. 2. The Damned. 3. The Dead. 4. The Sinners against the holy Ghost, 1 Iohn 5.17. though the Church of Rome affirm that sin only, is not easily pardoned. SECT. II. This calling upon God, or this lifting up of the heart, hath for its bottom or grounds chiefely these following par∣ticulars. 1. Mans necessity. Man is a creature whose frail and weak nature shews that he wants something without himself to pre∣serve him from perishing in those troubles that continualy an∣noy him; Ingens telum necessitas, even Children will call out upon God to help them: Three things there are that cheifly lifts up the heart to pray. 1. Outward trouble. A storme made Jonas Mariners to pray. Jona. 1.5. The Disciples to cry to their master. Math. 8.25. The want of Children made Hannah pray. 1 Sam. 1.12. Iacobs fear of death made him struggle with God, Gen. 32.26. When Davids eneys came about him like bees, then he lifted up his voyce, Psal. 3.4. How many prayers take their rise, from fea∣vers, pains, aches, sores, gouts, pestilence or fa∣mine? 2. Inward fear. When the soul is startled or touched with horrour by reason of sin; then prayer takes to her self wings and flies aloft both from good men as from Da∣vid,
Psalm. 51.11. or from bad as Simon Magus, Acts. 8.24. 3. Future punishment, men feeling a present judgment, through guilt, looke upon it, often as the forerunner of a greater, and prognosticate a heavier sentence yet to come, which makes them pray with all earnestnesse, as experience shews, and is apparent by these two men above named. 2. A second ground of prayer is Gods mercy; there are sever∣all acts and properties observed to be done, and to be in God, which excite a knowing Christian to this duty of pray∣er as, 1. His promise to hear prayer, Ier. 29.12. 2. His compassion in the act of prayer, Iob. 42.10. 3. His observance in the time of prayer, Act. 9 11. The properties that are in God do in a wonderfull man∣ner enflame the affections of the devout, to a chearfull pray∣ing. As: 1. His power to help. Isa. 44.27. he hath power which can do much, he hath omnipotency that can do all, Gen. 17.1. 2. His wisdome to Invent. 2 King. 7.2. he can take the wise and the proud in their own cross foolishnesse, and turn Achito∣phels wisdom into foolishnesse. 3. His grace to pity. Exod. 3 7. he takes no delight in the death of sinners, nor in the teares of his people, This poor man cryed, and the Lord delivered him. 3. A third ground is Christs intreaty. He is dayly makeing Intercession, For the ransgressours, Isa. 51.12. The Christian believes that Christ is at the right hand o God, that he is an Advocate for them with the Father, which confidence puts them often to their devotions being strengthned by three acts, that are in the prayers of the son of God. 1. Soundnesse and perfection, Rom. 8.27. 2. Fervency and affection, Rom. 8 34, 35. 3. Delight and acceptation, the one on his part, the other on Gods, Ioh. 11.42.
4. A fourth ground is prayer it selfe pressed as a duty, God will be enquired after for all those mercys that his omniscience knows his people want, and his omnipotence can supply; yea his hearts desire, that they may receive, Yet he will be called upon in the day of Trouble, Psal. 50.15. this puts his Saints to the practise of prayer being thereunto strenghtened by three consi∣derable considerations. 1. Christ would receive nothing but by way of prayer, Matth. 26.53. 2. Christ never gave another way to procure mercy, Matth. 24.20. 3. The Saints in former generations used no other way to receive mercy, Dan. 9.3, 4. SECT. III. We are now to see the parts of this petitionary kind of prayer, and they are cheifly three. 1. Supplication. 2. Postulation. 3. Intercession. 1. Supplication, that is for the removeing of evill of what kind soever, whether of sin or punishment whether of soul or body. This hath four things in its eye, in reference unto evil. 1. That the evill may be prevented, and never come, that it may passe away as a cloud, and the place wherein it is feared, may never know it, 2 King. 22.13. 2. That the evill may be removed, if God will have it come then prayer is made that God would remove his scourge and
plague, and turne away his anger, Daniel 9.16. 3. That the evil may be lessened, if Gods anger be not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, then they pray, Domine ne in furere, if God will correct they would not have him do it in anger, and if he will chasten they would not have him do it in his hot displeasure, Psal. 6.1. but yet if he will visit their Iniquity with stripes, then more strength is called where∣by they may be the better able to bear it, 1 Corinth. 10.13. 4. That the evil may be sanctified, that the judgment in∣flicted might have such an influence on the party affected, as to make him more watchfull over his sin, Psal. 39.9. and that grace might come with it to sustain the soul in the time of its abode, 2 Cor. 12.8. 2. Postulation, that is for the procuring or obtaine∣ing of any good, of grace, Psal. 73.29. as nature, Matth. 8.2. As 1. For things sutable to thy calling, 1 Kings 3.9. 2. For things necessary to thy nature, Mat. 6.11. 3. For things covenient to thy temper, Pro. 30.9. 3. Intercession, that is such petitions as are put up for the good of others; each Christian must and ought to be sensible of anothers want, and willing if it were but by prayers to relieve them; whether they be our Equals, Inferiours, or Superiours, 1. Tim. 2.1. There are five sorts of persons cheifely need our prayers, and we sin, if they want our charity when we aproach the throne of God; they are, Magistrates or Princes, Ministers or Evange∣lists, Apostates or backsliders, Heathens or Idolaters, Saints or Religious. 1. For Kings, Magistrates or Princes, whether we be under good or bad governours, that God that hath set them over us commands prayer for them from us, 1 Tim. 2.1. good men have done it for wicked, cruel and Idolatrous Princes, Gen. 20.17. Dan. 4.19. Dan. 6.21. also for good kings, 1 King. 1.29. and thy are the sonnes of Belial that do it not. For,
1. Their frailties and Imperections stand in need of it, kings are but men in nature, and have their failings, witnesse Davids Ambition; Hezekias forgetfullnesse, Iosias rashnesse, and Solomons wantonnesse. Non tutum est semper bonum dare con∣silium Regibus, was an old saying. 2. Their dangers and their labours to procure our good de∣serves it, they are higher then others, so their care is great∣er then others; no crown but hath its crosse, if not visibly to their subjects, yet sensibly to themselves. Bonus Rex servus est publicus. It was a true speech, and had much under it, that was uttered by the Emperour Trajan, that the Sea and the Empire were pleasant to look upon, but troublesome and dangerous to be upon. 3. Our Christian profession binds us to it. If we would not be thought to be infringers of the laws and examples Chist and his Saints have layd before us, we are not to forget our Soveraign, when we minde our selves, and justly may God shut that part of our prayer from him, that is not attended with this piece of loyalty. We may think it a slight matter to oppose magistracy, but God is strong and mighty to uphold his own ordinance, and through justice seldome can we see Traitors go in peace to their graves. Scripture shews us that Zimry had no peace who slew his master. 2 Kings 9.31. and though they should scape on earth, first or last they shall receive damnation, Rom. 13.2. This is a scripture truth, and a secure or deluded conscience, shall never be able to ward its blows. Let a prince be a hunter after Innocent blood. Let him be a known Hypocrite. Let it be known that God hath forsaken him, let it be known, that an evil and wicked spirit possesses him, let it be known that God hath designed another to succeed hi, all which we know to be true of Saul, yet who can put forth his hand against him and be guiltlesse, seeing he is the Lords annointed, 1 Sam. 26.9. Every true Christian will pray with David, the Lord forbid that I should, v. 11. The Macedonians had a law that condemned and put to death five of their nearest kinred that were once convicted of trea∣son.
In a word our goods our bodys, our lives, and our prayrs are to be laid out in the service of our Prince, or else we are traitors to the King of Kings, and may be punished by his depu∣ty here on earth. 4. The good or the evil that they may be the cause of, may force us to i An oversight in the general, may ruine a whole army, a single errour in the pilot may sinke a rich ship, Kings and princes like great oaks, if they fall, will spoyle thousands of the lower shrubs that are about them: they are the eyes of the nations, to prevent dangers, and perceive conveninces. It went ill with him in scripture that cryed out My head My head, 2 King. 4 19. Regis ad exemplum, totus componitr orbis. It is observable in sacred writing that Israel after their rebellion from the house of David never had good Kings, all of them being successively wicked, which made the people desperatly prophane, untill God swept all away for ever but in the house of Iudah, which did cleave to the house of David, we find good Princes, making their people good, and sometimes wicked Princes makeing their people sinners, such influence hath the lives of Princes upon the practises of their subjects, which consideration will make the Christian pray for his sove∣raigns happinesse. 5. Their true title and lawfull succession calls for it, since in their persons they must dye like men, to avoyd future danger we are to pray for their successours, that God would out of their loyns raise up seed to sit upon the throne: the first Saint we find praying for a King is Abraham, and his prayers are for the Kings seed, Gen. 20.17. a local alleigance we owe to every Prince in whose country we are, nd a natural to that Sove∣raign, under whom we are born,' a great part of which con∣sists in this doing; for Abraham was a stranger and a sojourner in Gerar when he prayed for posterity to King Abime∣lech. 6. The best of Saints both to the good and wicked Kings have done it, 1 King. 1.34. 1 Sam. 10.24. 2 King. 11.12. Act. 28.29. Vivat Rex, or, regnes in aeternum, was a usuall comple∣ment
the Pinces of Persia gave their Heathen kings, D. 5. 10. Dan. 6 6.Sn. de con. chap. 1.32. the same is used by Daniel, A man greatly be∣loved, then, to the same kings, and by all true subjects to this day throughout the world, whether Christian or Heathen, Dij te servnt, was the Romans prayer at the Installment of their Emperours.S Mr. Pryanes signall loyalty, &c. In which this truth is fully, larnedly, clealy and truly hand∣led. Dj te servent, Feliciter Imperator es, cumfilio im peres, was the prayer of the inhabitants of Tysdrum, when Gordianus was proclaimed Emperor. Antonie Pie, Dij te ser∣vent. Antonie Clments, Dij te servent, Antonie Clemens Dij te servent, vincis Inimicos, hostes exuperas Dij te tuentur, did the Roman Senators cry out having read some letters from Antonius their Emperour; and God save the Kng was the usual petiton of the Hebrews, at the anoynting of their Kings, and the same is the acclamation of the Chistian at the Coonation of their Princes. What shall we say since the days of Gambrivins who accord∣ing to Authors was the first that ever ware a crown,He raigned over the Germans. A.M. 2117. 80, years before the birth of Joseph.  or royall Diademe, never had people mor reason to pray, Give the King thy judgments O God, then the people of these nations: and for such as do is not, let them know, that the subjects of the South shall rise up in judgment against them, and condemne them at the last. 2. Ministers, pastors or Evangelists, must be partakers of our prayers, and ought to be remembered of us, when we appea, before God. When those Cedars, as Sylvarus, and Timotheus men of the highest rank seeme to be pillas in the cath of God, want the prayers of the people, and call for it, 1 Thes. 5.25. Rom. 15.30. Ephes. 6.18, 19. Heb. 13.18. Pil. 1.19. shall others that are but as shrubs, and in comparison of them, seem to be but smal pins in the temple of the Lord go without our prayers? These things ought not so  b. For, 1 Of all men they have the greatest discouragements in the works of their calling, there is a wo from God if they do not preach, and they shall be cursed by man if they do, the preach∣ing of the will and mind of God is like that little book, Rev. 10.9. sweet and pleasant while it is in their own mouth, and
thoughts, but when it is in the belly, and sent down to nou∣rish the members of the body of the Church it is oft times bit∣ter like gall, as appeares by mens bitter words. Not to speak of Devils, the fury, spleen, malice, rancour, hatred, dis∣respect, and evill speaking of men is the usuall reward of a true preacher, and though they think themselves possibly wise, and conceit that it is good so to do, yet St. Paul is of another mind, as appears by the severall titles or names that he gives them, as , absurd men, men of no to∣picks, wholly made up of incongruityes, unreasonable, whose lives,; whose words, whose actions will not be bridled, nor kept in by law and order though it by the law of God, , troublesome;Hall in Gods ap∣pearing &c. p. 15. cumbersome, wicked vexing persons;, 2 Thes. 3.2. , Men of no logick, bruit beasts, speaking evill of the truth because they will not understand it, that is to walke ac∣cording to it, 1 Pet. 2.12. They would be thought wise, though they be as the wild asses colt, or as the mules and horse, foaming out their own shame, When they speak evill of these things they understand not, and will not learn. By these and such as these are the Priests of the Lord troubled and continually vexed, so much that if God pulled not men fom their studies, by a secret impulse, as he called the A∣postles from their boats, that office of the ministry would faile. Let prayers therefore be made for them that are called un∣to that imployment, that they may open their mouthes bold∣ly, and be delivered from wicked and unreasonable men, 1 Thes. 3.2. Te best and most knowing are farre short of perfection, there are and there will be something wanting in the Mini∣sters now as well as formerly there was in, Paul and Bar∣nabas, and Peter, though they be as eyes, yet they cannot say to the hands, I have no need of you. Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, yet thought it not below him to learn the
way of God more perfectly, Acts. 18.24, 26. let prayer there∣fore be made for them, that by their mouths, God may day∣ly be more and more praised, by his revealing of himselfe more and more unto them that they by them may be led into all truth. 3 Ministers pray for their people. It was the Apostles practice of old, 1 Thes. 3.10, 11, 12, and 6, . It is the close of every Epistle, The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, be with you, and grace be unto you, and peace from God the Fa∣ther, is the usuall proem to their letters, the same is now done by their successors, and followers, the people then in reason no requite their prayers, with prayers again. A heathen could say qui beneficium non reddit, non magis  quam qui non dat, and there will be found at the last  difference betwixt them that open their mouths and curse them, and them that shuts up their mouths, and speaks not for them, and even this will aggravate their crime that they were prayed for, which by the law of the the Raliations, would have prayers made for them a∣gaine. 4 Their subversion and overthrow, is sought after more then others, predicare nil aliud est quam derivare in se fu∣rorem mundi; said Luther, I might adde Gehennae have they not been in all ages looked upon as the off∣scourings of the world, fit only to be thrown away as dust or dung. What breast so strong or hard, but hath been pierced with sharp arrows even bitter words, whom did Ieruslem slay more then the Prophets that were sent un∣to her; who are more spoken against in this age, then he tribe of Levi, and that by men of all professions, and by  of no profession and by men of great profession, and he that stands to the true catholick principles, is h  is most filled with contempt by them who would be account the meek of the earth. If we look on the right hand there they are defamed, it on the left, they are condemned, and by both as
they dare they are stoned, Papists and Sectaries like the up∣per and neither milstone, unites their forces and their strength to gnd them to powder in their good name, and then by the wind of persecution to blow them away, these two comes about the Evangelists like bees, carries in their rails stings to sting him, and except he had the honey of a good conscience to annoint himselfe withall, they would wound him to death. The Sectary strikes him into the Popes hazard; damning him Antichristian, and therefore to be destroyed, so many Bishops thy pronounce as so many Popes, and so many ordain∣ed Preachers, so many Bastards of the whore of Babol, and therefore to be excluded the Lords congregation. The Papist with his racket strikes him back again into the others Hazard, damning him as Schismaticall, and Heretical, no death therefore more proper for him, then staking and burning. These two parties hath two sorts of persons who are most futious and eager in there persuites against the reformed Cler∣gy, they are the Jesuiticall society, and the quaking sinner, for the former we will pray as David in the case of Achito∣phell, 2 Sam. 15.31. Lord turne their counsells unto foolish∣nesse, and for the latter as the Father for the Child, Matth. 17.15. Lord have mercy upon them for they are lu∣natick. 5 Their slips and errours are most dangerous. As befor it is an errour in the pilot, and therefore dangerous; a mistake in the generall, and therefore may be destructive, it is a pain in the head and may be deadly; It is a fault in the Phisician, and therefore may be poysonous, and so much the more dangerous then any of these; as it may wound the soule, and make it cry to all eternity, Gal. 2.11. The very presence of a Bishop in his own Diocesse, at a wedding is interpreted by the Law a licence, and so the marriage passeth without dispute, and errour oftentimes coun∣tenanced by a preacher, may ipso facto be imbraced and re∣ceived
for truth, prayer therefore ought to be made for him, that he may discern between the precious and the vile, and rightly divide the word of truth, as a workman that needeth not to ashamed. 6 Their want and losse is a ruine to any people, It were asie to be shewed by former ages, that when ever God remo∣ved those Gospel ordained Preachers from a people, confu∣sion, darkness and Atheisme was the consequences of it. In times of peace, God gives them to his Churches for Shepheards. In times of danger they are for watchmen, in times of seduction they are as guides, in times of war they are chariots & horsemen, & never did the enemys of the Churches peace get more ground, then since their hands have been weakned, and their faces blurred, by the violence and malice of wicked, proud, and ambitions men. 7 Men cannot profit under them as they might without praying for them. It is certain that non can justly expect that blessing from God, which they never asked of him; if some would but spend as much time in praying for Magistrates and Ministers, as they do in barking against them, they might in mercy receive more good by them then ever they are o∣therwise like to have, they may in anger be crossed, per∣plexed, by them, when in mercy they might live quietly, peaceably, and holily under them; yea in a great measure they bring upon themselves the guilt of their magistrates and Ministers failings and miscarriages, for who knows but the power or fervency of thy prayer, may stirre up God to hold him by the hand in his stumbling, that he might engage the soule the more unto him, as people will give the nurse good things for love of the Child; so God may give those nursing Fathers gifts and graces, if not for their own, yet for thy sake, &c. 3 We are to pray for apostates and backsliders. When we see any turne from the Lord, we are to turn for them to the Lord. When any leaves the paths of uprightnesse, to walke in the wayes of darknesse, as those wicked ones, Prov. 2. 13. least the Lord suddenly shoot them, and they fall into the
pit, we should  with the Prophet, Lord forgive, Amos. 7.2. 1 Because of the great and unavoidable perdition that they are likely to fall in, who are guilty of that sin in the least, the shortest step men can make in it carries them a great way towards that sin unto death, that sin against the holy ghost, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. we ought therefore to strive in prayer for him. 2 The truth of Christ is the more confirmed by their re∣covery, trees shaken and totterring by the winds opens the earth, and in calm gets a faster hold then before, being bet∣tered, rooted by that blast: these soules that are shaken by the wind of false doctrine, may be afterward (if they returne, which yet we seldome hear of) better established and rooted in the faith then before. 3 Our own glory shall be the greater in heaven, Dan. 12.3. It is a gloious and happy thing to have a hand in the con∣version of a soul, a multitude of sins is hid by con∣verting a sinner from the errour of his way, Iam. 5.20. and if God should harden his soul to proceed in his back-sliding yet the prayers made for him, return seven fold into the bosome of him, that made them. 4 We must pray for Heathens, Infidels, or Idolaters, there is a generation that have gone a whoring from God, and cast off the thing that is good, that have altogether broken the yoak and burst the bands, and others there are that have not the knowledge of his law, these must be thought on, and for them God must be intreated by those that call upon his name. For 1 Certaine damnation will be their portion, they that depart from God, whether in point or in point of worship of practise God will depart from them. Neither is there any name given under heaven by which men can be saved, but the name of Iesus Christ, whom men killed and God raised from the dead, that he might be the justifier of them that believe, but now how can men believe on him of whom they have not so much as heard Let us pray therfore that the Lord of the harvest would send forth laborers into his harvest
And that God would open a doore of faith unto the Gentiles, Act. 14.27. And return to the many thousands of Israel. That Jacob may tak root, and Isral bud and blossom, and fill the face of the world with fruit, Isa. 27.6. 2. They are of the same common nature with us: they have the same kind of souls, we have, and for ever must lye in flames or shine in thrones, when the earth and the Sea, Death and Hell gives up the dead that are in them, they must also appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and if we know these things, what ought we to do, but be jealous over them with a godly jealousy that they may be builded together with us for an habitation of God through the spirit, Eph. 2.22. And so all Israel shall be saved as it is written, Rom. 11.26. And all Flesh see (as well as we) the salvation of God, Luk. 3.6. 3 It will much rejoyce the soul of Christ to see this accom∣plished, if the Angels rejoyce at a sinners conversion, how shall Christ abundantly be satisfied, since he poured out his soul as an offering for their sin: verily, verily, there is joy in the heir of heaven over one sinner that repenteth, let us therefore fulfill his joy, and pray that his other sheep may be brought home. Which in time ast were not a people but now may be made the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now may obtain mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. and that he may see of the travell of his soule and be satisfied, Isa. 53.11. 4 The Certainty of Christs aboad in heaven untill this be accomplished might of it self presse home the duty pleaded for. The heavens must containe him until the restitution of all things, untill all things spoken of him in the Scriptures be fulfilled, the end shall not be, he that waits therefore for the coming of the Lord, and longs to be cloathed upon, must wait at the throne of God, util the fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles become in, then shall come out of Zion the deliverr, and shall turne away ungodlinesse from Iacob, Rom. 1125. That there may be but one sheep-fold, as there is but one sheepheard, Iohn. 10.16. and when we see these things then know that sum∣mer is nigh.
5 God hath promised to bring in all the elect even in our dayes, (viz.) In the lattar dayes which in the old Testament, signifies the beginning of the Gospell, Isa. 2.1. And in the new, the end of the world, 2 Tim. 3.1. if God hath promised that in our time he will do this great work, O let us Pray and Importune God, to build up his Church by the home-bring¦ing of the Iews, and in calling of the Gentiles, and amongst other arguments let this be one, That the time to favour Sion, yea the set time is com, that th Children of Israel may returne and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and fear the Lord and his goodnesse in the latter dayes, Hos. 3.5. To open thir eyes and to turn them from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgivenesse of sinnes and inheritance among them that are sanctified, Act. 26.18. 5 We must pray for the Saints pious or religious: such as worship God in the beauty of holinesse, are to be beauti∣full in our eyes, and because the most fresh colour is soonest apt to fade, we must pray that they may be alwayes plump and wel-favoured. For, 1 They pray for us; to be sure they make supplication, and prayer for all men, knowing that it is acceptable in the sight of God our Father, 1 Tim. 2.1, 3. And if there be anything pure, lovely, or of good report, (as this is) they think on these things: Let us therefore shew so much kindnesse to our friends as to Pray for them again, and love them in some de∣gree at least that loveth us so much, left the Publicans come and take our reward from us. 2 They are the very pillars of the world Psal. 753. In some sence the earth is not hanged upon nothing, and in ano∣ther heaven moves not by intelligences, the Saint keeps all up: take them out of the world & then it is like Lot out of Sodome remove them from the earth, then it is like Moses separate from the congregation of Cora; when these are gathered together then comes the end, let prayers therfore be made that that they may be strong in the faith, strengthened with all might, That they may be stedfast, unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. That they may be filled with the fulnesse of God, Eph. 3.19. And that they may be perfect and compleat in all the will of God, Gal. 4.12. 3 They are the Teachers and Doctors of the world. It is they that teach their Children what the Lord hath done for them, they are Schoolmasters, leading the age wherein they are to Christ, by the word of his grace, and washing with water, It is they that speakes of the Law, when they rise up and when they lye down, and are ever mindfull of his Cove∣nant, we are therefore to pray, That as strangers and Pil∣grims they would abstaine from fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. That the manifestation of the spirit might be given to every man to profit withall, 1 Cor. 12.7. And that they might seek to ex∣cell to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. And grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. 4 They are not without their faillings, they see but in part, and known but in part, and their unbelief would be help∣ed, The time is not yet come wherein they shall know as they are known, feares, passions, troubles, sometimes in∣terposeth themselves between them and aven, and their graces suffers an Ecclipse, and this  to be observed and prayer offered up, that they might have life more abun∣dantly, Iohn 10.10. That they might be enriched by him in all utterance, and in all knowledge, and that they might come behind in no gift, 1 Cor 1.5, 7. And that their faith might grow exceedingly and that the Charity of everyone towards each other might abound, 2 Thes. 1.3. For these several kind of persons ought prayers to be put up, whether they be our friends or foes, whether good or bad, whether tyrants or scandelous, their office, their danger, their condition requires it. Yet in supplication against evil, we must not forget to justifie God in sending that evil, but must confesse that we have sinned and have committed iniquty, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, Dan. 9.5. And in postulation, to obtain mercy alwayes remember with Josephs Brethren to bring double money in our hands, thanks to pay for the last mercy we did receive, and faith
to obtaine that me cy that for the present we come to crave. For know in every thing (therefore in prayer) We are to give thanks, 1 Thes. 5.18. SECT. VI. When God brought his people out of Egypt, he gave them a cloudy pillar to be their guide, to prevent their wandering, Neb. 9.19. In our passing unto heaven we are to observe a rule or we shall easily loose our way. It is not our own good meaning that will defend or justifie evill practises, (though a string much harped upon in our dayes) for the case in hand, we are not only to pray but to pray fter this manner, John 6.9. For as good intentions never justifie bad actions, so unsavory or uncharitable petitions will never be tollerated, or allowed through a good mean∣ing. The rule o prayer is twofold. 1 More generall, that is the whole Scriptures of God. 2 More particular, the prayer composed by the Son of God: commonly called the Lords prayer, and commonly refused by the ungodly Saints of this generation: and not without reason, as by and by shall be seen. 1. We shall first speake of the generall rule which is the scriptures; and in them we have seven things which may be our rule in prayer. 1. The precepts that are enjoyned therein: what ever duty we find God obliging his people to performe, whether moral or ceremonial, we may make either of them rules for our pray∣ers, and what ever grace tends to the right performing of it, or quickening up the herts of men to do it, may be lawfully called for; if morall, for the thing it self directly, as for know∣ledge
that we may love him, or if Ceremonial, for the thing signified, as circumcised eares, and hearts, that we may be his people. 2. The promises that are made therein; what ever God pro∣mised to give his people, or his Church in generall, or what∣ever concerned the soul in particular, or the body in things ne∣cessary: (for his promising David a Kingdome in special is no rule to us) we may pray for the same thing, as for raine in its season, Zac. 10.1. and for a new heart, and new spirit, Ezek. 36.26. 3. The threatenings that are denounced therein, what ever judgment God threatens for sin in general, or for any sin in par∣ticular, it is lawfull for us to pray against that punishment, in the commission of that particular sin; It is therefore agreeable to the Scriptures, to beg that God would not dispise our feast dayes, not our solemn assemblies though we have sinned against him, Amos 5.21. 4. The providence observed therein, when we see God in out-goings giving to this or that Saint such a particular grace, sutable to the place wherein he put him, or drawing him out of that misery; this or that way wherein he was pleased to cast him this may be a rule for us to pray accordingly, so Magistrates may pray for wisdome, 1 King. 3.9. and subjects to be delivered from all that oppresse them. 5. The protestations that are declared therein, what ever it be that God for the vindication of his honour or exaltation of his grace, hath declared to the sonnes of men in reference to their sins or soules, to there temporall or eternall estate, may be eyed by us in our prayers, and therefore boldly may we aske, that we dye not the death though we be sinners, Ezek. 33.11. 6. The expostulations that are found therein. We find the Almighty chiding and checking men for their wilfulnesse; lazinesse, idlenesse and prophannesse which humbly we may make use of in our pleadings with God, thus Ierusa∣lem may pray that suddenly she may be made clean, Ierem. 13.27.
7. The Saints practises that are recorded therein. What ever we find the Saints prayed for, and were answered, ether ad voluntatem, or ad utilitatem, whether to their will or to their well, may be a rule for us to pray by, and therefore we may pray to be delivered from unreasonable men, 2 Thes. 3.2. or the buffetings of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.8. 2. We come? now to the particular rule; Which is that prayer composed by Christ, and recommended to his Apostles as a prayer, Luk. 11.2. and to be a rule and standard, of all other prayers, Mat. 6.9. Unto which rule, scale or ballance should we bring most of their prayers, and petitions who refus∣ed this form and rule, especialy those that had reference to things lately acted upon the stage of these Kingdomes, and the reason why they did so pray, we might write over them and upon them, MENE, TEKEL, Dan. 5.25, 26. In this rule or pattern of prayer their are four things to be observed, 1. The Preface or Introduction to the whole prayer, In these words, Our Father which art in heaven. 2. The substance or the petitions themselves, which are asked in that prayer: In these words, Hallowed be thy name, &c. 3. the greatnesse or excellency of the person, unto whom that prayer is directed. In these words. For thine is the king∣dome. &c. 4. The confidence of the petitioner to be heard in the things prayed for. In this word Amen: All which in gene∣rall shews, 1. That we are to make a holy decent and honourable en∣trance or preface unto our prayers. It is but blunt to hear men bolt forth thir petitions without giving God some holy title, as Almighty God, or holy and gracious Lord, or Eternal God, A Centurion beseeched him saying, Lord, I have a servant lieth at home sick of the palsie, &c. Math. 8.6. 2. That when we come and appear before God, we are not
alwayes to be swelling in titles, but have some enlargement by way of request, contrary to the practise of some in our days that pretend they do appeare before God, and speake of high things, yet as if it were below them, they will aske nothing of him, but let us do otherwise, for we have not been so learned by Christ. 3. That when we come to God to receive from him, we are not to go from his presence except something be given to him from us, we are at least to be thankfull, unto him which is done, when we divest our selves of all power, worth and merit, ascribing all the glory unto him. 4. He that prays, ought not to waver, or be regardlesse, but full of faith, and desire to obtaine the things he openeth his mouth unto the Lord for, and faithfully as well as heartily say Amen. But to be more particular, In the preface there are two things by which our prayers are to be ruled. 1. What God is: Our Father 2. Where God is, which art in heaven. He that comes to God must not only know that God is, that is, that there is a God of himself, but also what God is to him, as that he is his Father, which is by Christ, and neither can he so call him but by the spirit. So that the three persons in the Trinity must be all believed by him that would pray as he ought. Again God being our Father teacheth us, 1. To love him. 2. To fear him. 3. To obey him. 4. To honour him. 5. To depend upon him. 6. To love and pray for each other. 2. Though it be said he is in heaven, we are no to suppose
he is confined there as if he were not upon the Earth, for as a King though he be in all parts of all dominions by vertue of his laws, and officers, yet chiefly and in a more eminent and majestick way he is at the Court. So is God our Father said to be in heaven: being there in his greatest glory, Majesty and Dignity. From this we learn, 1. That we pray to none, but to them whom we are assu∣red to be in heaven. It is foolish to pray to them, of whom we have no certainty that ever they were, and dangerous to pray to them, of whom we have no great hopes that they are in heaven; In both these respects therefore the Church of Rome had better reforme her self, that her prayers may be answered. 2. That we pray to none in heaven, but to them that begat us, to our Father only are we to pray; now all others that are therein both Angels and men acknowledged themselves to be our fellow servants, and therefore, though in heaven, not to be prayed unto. 3. To have no earthly Imagination or thought in our heart in the time of prayer, whether in respect of the glorious Trinity whom we pray to, or of our selves or others whom we pray for. As heaven is in our mouth, so it ought to be in our affections. 4. To have raised desires, lifted up hearts, all the time of prayer. Heaven is high above us, and we must lift up the voyce of our soul to be heard by our Father there, and truly men ought so to compose their prayers in the length of them, as not to destroy their own, or their peoples fervency, a thing not much noted and observed in our days. 5. To be ever disposed and and fitted for prayer, where ever we are, in what place or dungeon we be, God is above and heaven is above, our fathers mansion house, so that no time shall we misse of him, nor no time shall he be from home. 6. To have ever a strong confidence and faith to be heard in prayer. Men may hinder much good doing upon the earth, and may encompasse the Saint like bees, then his hope is this, that
their hands are but short, they cannot keep his prayers from ascending, and therefore with confidence he may send them up. 2 The next considerable thing in this prayer are the peti∣tions that are in it.Rome will have seven and were there no greater difference between her & the reformed Churches, we should quickly a∣gree. In number they are six, as Hallowed be thy name, &c. From them in generall we learn. 1. To pray for things of moment and of weight. All the petitions are of great concernment, and indeed necessary, to come to God begging trifles, is below his Majesty and Grandour, a Dis nihil pretendum nisi bona simpliciter. 2.To pray for nothing but what is good. There is nothing in the petitions that is hurtfull either for the soul or body of man; this should learn us to be farre from cursing or wishing evill to any person, and indeed the curse may fall upon them that makes it, he whom thou art so cursing may be praying. Let him curse, O Lord, but blesse thou. If this part of prayer had been eyed by many, there had not been so many uncharitable petiti∣ons put up as there was. These six petitions divide themselves into two parts. Three of them concerns God. Hallowed be thy name, &c. Three of them concerns man, Give us this day our dayly bread, &c. Those petitions that concern God, goeth before the other, shewing that before all things we ought to seek the things concerning the Kingdome of God, and of all those things, the Glory of God ought to be most and first in our eye. Hllowed be thy name, being the first petition, God being above all things most Jealous of that, and will have it hallowed. 1. Over all. 2. By all. 3. In all. That it may be hallowed by us, we pray next for the coming of his Kingdome. 1. Of grace in our hearts. 2. Of glory in the clouds.
He had need have a good cause that prayes for the coming of the Judge, we must have his Kingdome to come in our hearts by grace, or then that in the clouds will never come to our souls in comfort, and without these his name by us shall never be hal∣lowed. But grace inwardly tends not much to edification if it be not acted outwardly and therefore we pray againe, that his will might be done in earth as it is done in heaven. Obedience is better then sacrifice, and what better pat∣tern can we have before us, then heaven: Now there is a two∣fold heaven. 1. A sensible or visible heaven, wherein he hath put a taber∣nacle for the Sun, which keeps the ordinances, he gave it from the beginning. 2. A rational or invisible heaven: this is the Saints and Angels, (though cheifly the Angels be here understood) who spends their eternity in doing the will of God. 1. Fully. 2. Freely. 3. Cheerfully. 4. Speedily. 5. Satisfactorily, 6. Unweariedly. And in all these things we ought to indeavor to be like the Angels of God, by which meanes it will appeare that his King∣dome of grace is established in us, and therefore his kingdom of glory shall be hastened for us, and then his name to all eternity shall be hallowed by us. Those petitions that concern man, are either to his body, as give us this day our dayly bread, or his soul, Forgive us our trespasses, &c. In which this number is observable, that there is but one petition for the things of the body, and two for the soul, shewing that in prayer our care, labour, zeale for the good of the soul should at least be double to that of the body.
Two of these are for the obtaining of good, give us this day our daily bread &c. and one for the avoiding of evill, lead us not into temptation, shewing that if we by faith struggle hard for grace, though it be but like a mustard seed, yet it shall prove effectuall to keep us from a great deal of evill, and by conse∣quence prevent a great deal of sorrow. That for the body shews that in prayer we should aske no∣thing but what is necessary for us, as bread, in which is in∣cluded drink, sleep, rayment, and what is necessary for the life of man. Yet we must understand that according to mens states and conditions, their necessities are either more or lesse. It is ne∣cessary for a King, a General of an Army, or for a Judge what is not for me, and according to that state and quality they may pray for a supply of their necessity. From the body by a short transition or cut, we are brought by our Saviour to look upon the soul, upon which we are bound to dwell longer by one petition at least, for ater our dayly bread, we presently pray for forgivenesse of sinnes, &c. noting, 1 That there may be danger in long feasting. 2 That there may be sin committed in a short meale. Indeed when men have eaten and are full, they are in dan∣ger of sin, and to prevent judgment, it is fit to pray, forgive us our trespasses, (or debts) as we forgive them that trespasse against us. In which there is, 1 A petition, Forgive us, &c. 2 The rule of that petition, as we forgive, &c. Which shews that in our prayers we are to be full of love: and charity, as Sons of consolation, not of wrath and hatred, as was in those sons of thunder. But we must know that our forgiving others, is not the meritorious cause of Gods forgiving us, but a declarative sign of it, a certain condition of our part, & cause sine qua non of our forgivenesse.
It is a very mocking of Almighty God, to beg forgivenesse for sin after we have eaten, except the bread be our own, he in this case of rape requiring restitution, which some in this age refusing to do, laid aside this prayer, they eating that bread, which to enjoy, they had possibly banished the owner, murthered the Parent, and made the Child an exile. Through the fraily of nature, and subtilty of the tempter, God becomes no sooner mercifull then man becomes sinfull, which makes our Saviour next to forgivenesse of sin, shew that we must pray for Deliverance from it for time to come, as we have forgivenesse for the time past in these words, lead us not into temptation, &c. In the former petition we pray for the justifying gift of God that our sins be not imputed, in this for the sanctifying grace of God, that our natures may be purified, before which can be had, the former must be obtained. Now, 1. Satan tempts us to evill. 2. Wicked men tempts us to evil. From both which we are shewed it is our wisdom to be freed that God might not leave us to our selves, nor we be drawn from the simplicity that is in Christ by our inadvertan∣cy, yet if God suffer either the one or the other to tempt us as he did Iob, we are to pray againe, deliver us from evill. That neither the one nor the other make us to sin, or charge God foolishly, but stand through his assisting grace. 1 Against the tempters. 2 Against the temptation. 3 Against (above all others) the evill One, that is Sa∣tan, the other being but his instruments. This notes, that what ever grace or blessing we have asked & obtain'd, we ought to sue for the grace of perseverance
that we may bear up against all temptations, that are cast be∣fore us, to destroy that grace given. And as Gods glory or the Hallowing of his name, is to∣ward him the chief thing to be asked, so our own eternal hap∣pinesse in a constant perseverance of the truth is to be the end of all our petitions towards our selves. And not to our selves only, but as this prayer is divided between God and man, so our prayers are to eye the honour and glory of God, and the good and prosperity of all men, and then our petitions are according to our Saviours rule and institution, not otherwise. 3 The third considerable in this prayer is the greatnesse or excellency of the person unto whom this prayer is directed, In these words. For thine is the Kingdom, &c. Which words both for matter and form are a thanksgiving, ascribing all wisdom, power and glory, might, majesty and do∣minion, to be in our Father, nothing to be in our selves, and these to be the Lords peculiar property, and sole prerogative; shewing that having come to God with some honourable and glorious tittle at our entry, we are to give an honorable respect unto him at our close, both in private and publick addresses. The body of our prayers are not to be without some gratulatory expressions, but thanks to be returned to his name. 1 For his spirit, that teacheth us to pray. 2 For his patience in the time of our prayer. 3 For his mercy in answering our prayer. 4 For his Son in whom he hath accepted our prayer. 5 For all his favours, given without our prayer. And as this glory is his due for ever, so must we ascribe it unto him for ever? that is, 1 When ever we pray. 2 Where ever we are. 3 What ever we suffer. 4 When we shall be for ever with him.
For though the Kingdome may be ours, by gift and do∣nation, yet we must ever acknowledge it to be his, and his Christs. 1 By nature. 2 By inheritance. 3 By dominion. This form of thanksgiving being ushered in by an illative practice, For, shews that we must in prayer reason with the almighty and give arguments to move him to mercy, the Kingdome is craved of him; for all power is his, his name is to be hallowed, for the glory is his. We shall frequently see the Saints pressing God, with ar∣gument and reason, sometimes drawn, from the Topick of his own glory, as Help us O God of our salvation; why should God help them? Deliver us for thy name sake, 79.9. and sometimes from the common place of their own misery as turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me, Why? for I am desolate and afflicted, Psal. 25.16. And againe O keep my soul and de∣liver me, and let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee, Psal. 25.20. From this clause the Church of Rome may perceive her er∣rour in making prayers to St. Peter, Paul, Mary, Ioseph, or Bcket, in regard that neither the Kingdome, nor the power nor the glory is theirs for ever: nor only as the word ever eyes the eternity past (if we may so speak) which she will grant, but as it eyes that which is to come, Peter and Paul yea all the holy Apostles, evergiving to the only wise God even our Father and the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Kingdome the power and the glory. Yea admit that prayers might be made unto them as Fa∣thers of the Church, now glorified in heaven, yet is it not a strange solecisme to call upon the Virgin Mary, or any other female Saint, Our Father, &c. Ave Maria, may and doth, suit better with her being a woman, then Pater noster, ex∣cept it can be proved than since her assumption, she hath alter∣ed her sex as well as her condition.
4 The last considerable in this prayer, is confidence of the petitioner to be heard in things prayed for, in this word, Amen, This word is a mother word in all languages, and as Jesus (a Greek word) is understood by all hearers; so this (though Hebrew) is used by all people, and in Scripture notes two things. 1. A wish that it may be so, 1 King. 13.6. 2. A confidence that it shall be so, Rev. 22.20. He that says Amen, consents to the Petition offered up, in affection saying, Amen or so be it, as Benajah: or Amen, so shall it be as the Church, in those places above cited, what care therefore ought men to have of the nature of those peti∣tions they put up especially in publick, nonsence, blasphemy, heresie, fury might have been written upon the prayers of ma∣ny in these late yeares, unto which no true Christian could say and we know God did not lay Amen, that ever requiring a full assent and consent to the prayer made. Let this inform Rome and other Hereticks of their error in making the people say Amen. 1 To those prayers they understand not, in regard they are made in an unknown tongue, a language of which the people hath no understanding. 2 To those prayers, which people apprehend not, through the confusion, disodrer, discontinuing and rawnesse of the pray∣er made, arising from the ignorance, presumption, and wil∣fulness of the prayer-maker that they who hears, can no more remember what they have sayd Amen unto; then Nebu∣chadnezer remembered his dream. This is not written against any that hath parts and abilities, fluently & (as the modern phrase is, extempore) to express them∣selves unto God for the people in prayer, but to check some presumptuous pretenders to the same gift, who are usually so much in the spirit, (to speak in their own language) that they are without understanding.
Yet these were the men by whom this prayer of our Lord was undervalued, in every respect for which it was composed, they using it neither as a form of prayer, nor for a rule of prayer, and not being content with that, blasted their verdure with the breath of malignancy who used it to any of these ends, but some there were (to glory be it spoken) that were neither ashamed to use it in their closets, nor affraid to carry it to their Pulpits, both as a rule and as a form Blessed be the Lord who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth, our soul is e∣scaped, as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers, the snare is bro∣ken and we are escaped, Amen, and Amen, Psalm. 124.6, 7. SECT 5. We are now to proceed in discovering what must be shun∣ed and avoided in prayer; in which we shall not barely shew the things but the causes and the cures of them. We are chiefly to beware of these particulars, as great hinderances of Prayer. 1 Sinfull distractions Math. 6.6. which are of two sorts. 1 Brought upon us by others, whether Satan or wicked men, these are our affections. 2 Brought upon us by ourselves, these are our sins; and of them chiefly we are to take care. They proceed from these grounds primarily. 1 By thinking too little of heaven, or of God, they are so seldome in the thoughts of men, that it is a hard matter in prayer to keep our hearts upon them but a few minutes. 2 By thinking too much on the earth, or world. The picture of the world is so lively upon some mens spirits, that when they go to pray it fares with them, as he that goes to
bed, who dreams usually of those things that most possesse his mind, so they when before God, are distracted with those thoughts they are more conversant withal, &c. To cure which disease, or remove this kind of distraction, consider, 1 That nothing is more against the goodnesse of God; he is hearty and real, and serious in all his dealings, and car∣riages towards us, therefore we ought to be upright in our spee∣ches towards him, &c. 2 That nothing is more against that reverence we owe God, he knows the wanderings and aberrations of the heart, and seeth the contradiction between our lips, and affections, which knowing we are to come before him with sutable carri∣age, least we charged, with contempt to his Maiesty, our blood be mingled with our sacrifices. 3. Nothing is more contrary to the signs we make to God, bended knees, lifted up eyes, would require humble hearts and devout desires: for the eyes to be beholding heaven, and in the same time the heart to be hugging the earth, is but before God to be known a perfect hypocrite. 4 Nothing is more able to hinder benefits from God, his eares are not at all open to such a prayer, and if he stretch forth his hand it may be to strike, the offence is so much the grea∣ter, that it is in an ordinance in which God is so nearly ap∣proached unto, &c. 2 We are to avoid in prayer causelesse hesitation, we will not say in this case, he that doubts is damned, but he that doubts is doomed, he shall receive nothing from God, Jam. 1.7. qui timide rogat docet, negare This ariseth, 1 From a partiall apprehension of God: they consider him, as just, great, powerfull, but see him not good, kind, mer∣cifull, &c. 2 From a total apprehension of themselves, they behold and that truly, that sin, wickednesse, wrath, &c. are whol∣ly and universally in them, by which they doubt that God will not hear them nor regard them, &c.
To cure which disease, or to remove which doubt∣ing. Consider, 1 Nothing more can provoke God to call in question his mercy, his long sufferring, his goodnesse, and to imagine he will not hear a sinner though he cry, is in a great measure to doubt if he be God, &c. 2 Nothing is more against the word of God, that calling up∣on men to draw near with full assurance of faith, and to come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. 3. Nothing by this is to be had from God, he hath decla∣red his mind touching that man that prays doubtingly in plaine letters, that who so runs may read it, Iam. 1.6, 7. 4 Nothing more dishonorable to be Son of God, to doubt that he will not hear us because we are sinners, calls in questi∣on all the sufferings, of Christ, or at least the perfecti∣on of his sufferings, together with the goodnesse of his na∣ture, and fellow-steeling of our infirmities; Heb. 4.15. 3 We are to avoid direful imprecation: above all things we are some do it to shun cursing or wishing evill or destruction unto any, yet. 1 Through passion. 2 Through hatred. The cure of this distemper may be wrought by these means: considering. 1 Nothing more is against the Law of God. We are to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, Tit. 3.2. in our ordinary language, sure therefore to wish no evill in our ordinary devo∣tions. 2 Nothing more against the rule given us of God: every petition in that form of prayer composed by our Lord is for good, and he that prays after that manner as all men ought, he is to wish no evill upon any. 3 Nothing more contrary to the mind of God, he would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of his truth. 1 Tim. 2.4.
4 Nothing more contrary to the practise of the Churches, if any man will be furious or contentious the Churches of God know no such practise, when they are reviled, they pray, when they are cursed they blesse, if any of them as Stephan, be stoned to death, they dye not before they ask forgivnesse for their persecutors, Acts 7.60. 5 We must avoyd damnable objurgations. To chide, re∣prove or rebuke God when our former petitions are not an∣swered, is a greater sin, then some that pretended to pray by the spirit make it, who would most unmannerly, to say no more, rail at him. 1 By pride. Thinking that their intimacy and familia∣rily with him was slighted. 2 By fear that their stratagems and designes by his long si∣lence, would be frustrated and disappointed. This ought to be cur'd, for its a deadly distemper, for which end consider. 1 Nothing is more against the practise of the Saints of God, they say if we shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will grant us this or that, but if he say I have no delight in you, they will let him do what seemeth good unto him, 2 Sam. 15.25, 26. They will indeed complain unto him, but never of him. 2 Nothing more unbefitting him that calls upon God, doth he think God is worthy to be prayed unto, and at the same time deserves to be chidden: there is no Syntax  be∣tween a bended knee and a reproving tongue; a bend∣ded fist is much more sutable, and beats a better pro∣portion. 3 Nothing is more rejected of God, he can bear with any thing better then with chidding, and hear any thing with farre more patience the a reprose.
4 Nothing favours more of that Spirit that is directly a∣gainst God, the first that ever we find accuse him, was the Devill, Gen. 3.5. yet not to God himself but to Ezra, those men that in prayer can chide or accuse God to his face, may goe to Satan, and he will learn them not to blas∣pheme. 5 We must avoid vain repetitions, Mat. 7.6. , use no heart∣lesse, idle, vain trifling repetitions. This ariseth, 1 From inadvertency, when men fit not themselves be∣fore hand, by setling and composing their thoughts. 2 From stupidity, when their shallownesse, emptinesse, or ignorance, makes them for want of new matter to bring over the same trifling, vain or heartlesse petitions again and again, not being able to supply themselves with new matter. To remedy these consider, 1 It is against the rule of the Son of God, his prayers is ex∣cellent for brevity, order, and perfection: there is nothing in it that is overmuch; nor any thing that is two little, such ought our prayers to be: rather short, with pertinent, pro∣per and significant expressions, then long, with vaine trifling, and frothy repetitions. 2 It is contrary to the honour of God, even before men it were ridiculous to be running over impertinently unto great men the same petitions we had formerly asked. It were a a disrespect to earthly majesty to hear confused repetitions: and sure it tends not to Gods honour, to hear vain battologies. 3 It is contrary to the nature of God, as he is serious, cor∣diall in all his workers, and sayings, he deserves to be heartily spoken to in all our addresses, and reverently in all our prayers. 4 It is contrary to the practise of the Saints of God, search the Scriptures, and never a vain word, nor a trifling word is uttered by them who are most familiar with God, but more of this by and by.
SECT. 6. It is not the body alone that constitutes a man, but the form, that is, the soul must-go with it, and by that soul, the body lives, moves and hath its being; the forme of prayer by which it receives, its , and by which it moves from earth to heaven, and by which it is seen to live by man, and known to be healthy by God, comes now to be considered. It is twofold. 1 Internall, consisting in the affections of the soul. 2 Externall, in the gestures of the body, of these in or∣der. There are severall quallities God requires in every true prayer, and conditions he makes with every one that calls upon him; we shall set down some that are chief, with reasons enforceing their practice. 1 Prayer must be made incessantly; that is without, ceasing, 1 Thes. 5. 17. Not that we are to be alwayes in that act of duty, that being impossible for our frailty, and for that engage∣ment God layes upon us for performing other dutyes, both to himself and toward each other. To pray without ceasing. Notes, 1 That we be much and of in this duty, It is not to be a strange peece of worship to us, but through frequency to make it our familiar exercise to be often calling, and of∣ten knocking at heaven gates, Luke. 18. 1. Ephe. 6. 18. 2 That we be ever disposed to this duty, to keep our selves ever in such a frame of Spirit, that we may be sit to pray, a liberate man is not alwayes giving to the poor, yet he is alwayes disposed a Christian, though not alwayes upon his knees, yet ought to be ever fitted for it.
3 That we give not over untill we be blessed in this duty, to pray for such a blessing and leave off at first, is contrary to the practise of that importunate widow, Luk. 18. 1. Who is said by her daily comming to pray. 4 That we do not weary in this duty, that we droop not that we may not saint, That we may pray alwayes, with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, Eph. 6. 18. For this that above mentioned widow is said alwayes to pray. 5 That we lay hold on all fit oppertunityes to pray in times of leisure, retirement: to pray, is always to pray thus Cor∣nelius a Captain is said to pray alwayes, Act. 10. 3. This unwearied diligence ought to be in men. For 1 Satan is incessantly seeking to devoure them. 2 Sin is incessantly working in them. 3 Death is incessantly creeping upon them. 4 God is incessantly requiring it of them. 5 Wicked men are incessantly seeking to subvert. 6 Christ is incessantly praying for them 7 The Church is incessantly in need of them. 2 Prayer must be made reverently, we ought to have aw∣full respect, and speciall apprehension of the Majesty of him prayed to, Psal. 2. 11. We are not to come to him as to our companion or our equall; as some bold pretenders, to the spirit lately did, whose boldnesse was but rudenesse; and whose familiarity was but fawciness. To brings us to a reverent frame of spirit we may consider our selves and our God. 1 Ourselves: and that severall ways. 1 Originally but dost, at best and ashes. 2 Naturally but enemies and rebels. 3 Contractedly seven times more the Children of Satan then we were born having in our lives and actions been, 1 Heedlesse of his Law. 2 Carelesse of his Honour.
3. Despisers of his Majesty. 4. Stiflers of his Spirit. 5. Dishonourers of his name. 6. Abusers of his creatures. 7. Haters of his being: all which considered will bring us before him with awfull thoughts, and reverential ges∣tures. 2. Our God, and that also several ways, as 1. His Justice. 2. His Holinesse. 3. His Power. 4. His Omnipresence. 5. His Majesty: Which when thought upon, with the Angels we may cover our faces, as affrayd and ashamed of so great a majesty as he is, and of so much guilt as we have. 3. Prayer must be made faithfully, we ought to pray in faith nothing doubting without this grace prayer wants one wing to fly a lost and be heard in Gods holy temple, Iam. 1.5. There are severall things we must necessarily believe in this duty of prayer; relating to God and to our selves. In relation to God we are bound to and must believe. 1. His good will to hear our prayer. 2. His power to give that for which we pray. 3. His readinesse to grant the same. In relation to our selves we are bound to believe that God will hear our prayers. 1. What ever Infirmities lye upon us. 2. What ever Satan hath to say against us. 3. How-ever for the present God deales with us. And truly it may be wondered that we do not always pray with abundance of faith, considering. 1. The many promises God hath made to hear prayer. 2. Christs continual Intercession by prayer. 3. The Constant communion of the Saints is cheifly in a way of prayer.
4. The wicked have been heard in the time of prayer, 1 King. 21, 27. 4. Prayer must be made in sincerity. God will have truth in the Inward part, Psal. 51.6. This sincerity in prayer cheifly, consists. 1. In the satisfaction that the soul takes of Gods see∣ing and of his hearing, though man do neither, Matth. 6.5. 9. In having a right end and design touching the thign pray∣ed for, Iames 4 3. and the ends of prayer are breifly these. 1. Just. 2. Charitable, religions, for what ever we aske, ought to respect one of these ether to our selves, to others or to God. 3. In a union, and agreement between the tongue and heart, in the time of prayer, and also touching the thing pray∣ed for. 4. In a sober genuine acknowledgment of all our sins in our prayer without any degree of extenuation, and an exact enume∣ration in some degree. 5. In a diligent useing of the means to obtaine the thing de∣siered by prayer, some in our days makes religion a support for Idlenesse, but when we have prayed for our dayly bread, we ought to labour for it. Now men ought to be sincere in all their ways and in all their prayers. For, 1. God is Infinite in knowledge, he knoweth all hearts, and seeth all thoughts. Heb. 4.13. 2. Transcendent in in goodnesse, he is sincer in whatever he did for man, man ought therefore to be sincer unto him, and not flatter him with his lips. 3. In exorable in Justice, He hath prepared Hell for Hy∣pocrits, Matth. 24.51. other sinners are but inmates to them, Hell being their proper habitation. 5. Prayer must be made zealously,  is to boyle, shew∣ing that our bosomes are to be hot as fire in the time of our de∣votion. This zeal, Is a holy affection of the soul putting forth it self in all earnestnesse for the obtaining the thing desired: earnest we ought to be.
1. For God. 2. For our selves. 3. For our neighbours. 4. For the things excellency. This zeal in prayer consists, 1. In the souls watchfullnesse in prayer: now their is a two fold watchfulnesse mentioned in Scripture. 1. Unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4.72. In prayer, Col. 4.2. 1. Unto prayer that is, 1. A removeing of all Impediments that may hinder prayer. 2. A laying hold on all advantages that may assist prayer. 2. In prayer: that is 1. To avoyd all distraction, dulnesse of body, drouzinesse of spirit, suggestions of Satan. 2. A restlesnesse untill our suit be granted. 3. An eye solely to the glory of God, Iohn his zeal was not zeal but ambition, 4. In a found knowledge of things prayed for: we must un∣derstand what we pray that our zeal may be according to know∣ledge, and our Amen, agreeable to religion. 5. In a constant making conscience of the duty for Gods glory; our own and our neighbours good. This grace in prayer is very necessary. For, 1. It is a servent of zealous Prayer that will avail for any thing, Iam. 5.17. 2. It is a servent prayer that will only obtaine heaven, Mat. 11.12. 3. It is by it only that the true Christian can be distinguished from the Hypocrit. Math. 23.14. These are the graces that constituts prayer and makes it move toward heaven, and indeed without these, prayer is no more a prayer then 2 dead coarse is a man, these being the very form and inward life of it. — Read pag. 513. before, p.512.
made by him therefore he is great honour by it, 1 Cor. 6.20. 2. God hath redeemed the body as well as the soul, he cures the deseases of the one as well as pardons the sins of the other. 3. God will glorify the body as well as the soul. 4. We can only give a good example by the body not by the soul, how shall our light shine to others but through the lan∣throne of our outward man, and where this light appears not; It is to be suposed there is no light in them. For were they burneing they would also be shineing lights, Iohn 5.53. SECT. VII. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. Whether men by Industry may obtaine a promptnesse in prayer. Quest. 2. Whether the wicked be bound to pray. Quest. 3. Whether the set forms of prayer used by law in the Church of England, be lawfull. Quest. 4. Whether there be not vaine repitions in those formes. Quest. 5. Whether it would be convenient to altar any part of those formes. Quest. 1. Whether men by Industry may obtaine a prompt∣nesse in prayer. This question taketh its rise, from the practise of those igno∣rant pretenders to the spirit of prayer; whose devotion in a great
2.The external forme which consists in the gestures of the body must be considered, God will be worshipped with the whole man, that is both soul and body. We have them that pretending to inward worship, will not give God outward service; but we shall find the Saints both in the old and new Testament using their bodies in this duty of prayer, both in the generall and some particular parts of it. 1. The body in general, and that in different gestures, as pro∣stration, Numb., 16.22. Kneeling, Acts 20.36. Standing, Luk 18.13. Lying, Isa. 38.12. (a) Sitting 2 Sam. 7.18 leap∣ing,(a) This gesture we read of only in this place and that privatly. Act. 3.8. 2. We have some particular parts of the body exercised in this ordinance in a particular sort, as the head, eyes, hands mouth or tongue. 1. The head, and that bowed down, 2 Chro. 29.30. noteing the reverence they bore to him in their hearts. It is also called a bowing with the face, and once was done so low as the very ground of the pavement, 2 Chro. 7.3. 2. The eyes and they, sometimes cast down, Luk. 18.13. noteing humility, and sometime cast up, Iohn 12.41. noteing, faith. 3. The hands, and they spread abroad, noteing fulnesse of grief, Ezra. 9.5, and also fulnesse of joy, 1 King. 8.22, holding forth anger to throw a way the thing prayed against, and a desire to receave the thing prayed for. Again the hands are lifted up, noteing zeal of Gods glory Psal. 63.4. and sincerity of heart, Lam. 3.41. In praying and noteing an appeal to God inswearing, Gen. 14.22. Dan. 12.7. further they finite some parts of the body at the breast, noteing sorrow, Luk. 18.13. as the thigh noteing shame and guilt, Iere. 31.19. 3. The tongue: this needs no proof it is so clear and so com∣monly known. And was there not a cause, to use the severall parts of the body in his service; did the Saints do this without a reason? 1.The body is Gods as well as the soul, it is a creature
measure, consisted in hums, and haws, way faces, and strained words, not being prompt in their extemporary deliveries, which to a voyd, and that the weak Christian may have where with to expresse himself in a prompt and decent manner, let him practise those known following rules. 1. Be observant of the providences of God to themselves or others, that they ether know, hear or see, this evil befalling now upon such, and this good being given to others, our own deliverance in such a danger, and anothers being left in the same danger; will afford abundance of matter in prayer. 2. Be studious of the Scriptures of God, by observing and heading the promises, threatnings, and passages therein, a great furtherance shall they be to him that intends to go to God by prayer. 3. Be often in the pactise of prayer. In this use may go a great way, and bares a great stroake, men that have great parts may lose them by not useing of them, and they that have small parts with exercise, may abundantly improve them. . Be frequent in examinings the turnings and windings of the heart, the vanity, and folly and wickednesse that lodge therein, will bring in great store of provision to that part of prayer, Con∣fession. 5. Be strengthening the heart in the doctrine of faith, this will make a man bold, confident, which will also make him prompt and fluent. 6. Be studious in reading practical Divinity which treasures the soul with abundance of found knowledge, and that affords matter of meditation, and that again in prayer is brought forth with abundance of advantage. 7. Call upon God for the Spirit of prayer, not that I mean thou shouldst desire the spirit imediatly to act upon the heart and mind, and then upon the tongue, (as some fond ones in those dayes) for it may be aquestion whether that prayer would be lawfull, in regard that whatever is sayd upon that ground is equall to what was delivered by the Apostles, and equally bind∣ing
the whole Church of God, and to be a rule and canon of faith to all that hears thee so pray, and Indeed some mens zeal in calling up a spirit of prayer, gave breath to their Impu∣dence who pretended a spirit of preaching; which spread so farre that even womens preaching hath been taught to be as Infallible as St. Pauls, and their sayings to be received under the pain of damnation, as well as the sayings of our Lord. By the Spirit of prayer therefore we understand two things. 1. The spirit of Justification, to sprin le the soul of Christ. of sanctification to wash away all uncleannesse, called the wash∣ing of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. which spirit wherever it is, is ac∣compained with a desire to pray, and disposeth the soul to pray, though it were but in groans, and wishes, Rom. 8.26. and by ob∣serveing the rules before given, having obtained this gift, the soul may not only grone, but speake unto God its de∣sires. 2. The graces of the spirit, or fruits of the Spirit, as Faith, Humility, Charity, &c. with whcih graces whosoever prays by the spirit, and the humble or faith∣full soul, shall by putting in practise the rules before given make known their humble and faithfull petitions with good, apt, orderly and found words, as well as with unseigned lips. Quest. 2. VVhether the wicked be bound to pray. That none are exempted from this duty but that it is to be performed by all, good or bad, wicked and prophane, by the sound Christian, and by the formall Hypocrite, p∣peares. 1. The duty of prayer is as large and as universall as that of reading, hearing, &c. therefore to be practised by all.
2. Prayer is a converting ordinance. It is a meanes appoin∣ted for the obtaining of pardon of sin of the Holy Ghost, of drawing nigh unto God, and therefore no sinner exempted from it. 3. The neglect of prayer is charged upon them as a sin, Psal. 14.2. Psal. 10.4. 4. The consciences of wicked men accuseth them when they have not prayed. 5. God hath sometimes accepted the prayers of very wicked men, even of them that have sold themselves to do wickedly, 1 King. 21.27. Quest. 3. Whether the set forms of Prayers used by law in the Church of England be Lawfull. Before this question be directly answered we shall premise a few things. 1. That the book of Common prayer had never been defen∣ded in this nature, but that the crossnesse, and peevishnesse of hot spirited men, and passionate writers hath so defamed the the thing it self, and also the users of it, that it appears to be thought by them a sin unto Death, Publickly, or privatly to own it in the Church. 2. That this defence doth not at all imply its necessity. I am perswaded the Church of England might stand without it, and may stand in purity by it. Unifomity is necessary for the well∣being of the Church, as was known to the publishers of the Di∣rectory, and if the Magistrate will have uniformity another way, it may be had, and if this way, it may be used. 3. That much of the Common-Prayer is in the Masse, may be acknowledged to its honour. It is but a furious and blind zeal that makes men inveigh against the Churches practise in this,
because of its affinity to Rome; since we are to preserve the peace of the Church to our utmost, we are not to decline too far from any opinion or practise that is lawfull; the Jews preists did Sacri∣fice, so did Baals. The Papists uses this or that form of prayer, if it be lawfull, so may I, that the breach or quarrel may appear to be one his part, not on mine; what ever is in the Masse that is lawfull and according to godliness is not to be despised, and what ever is otherwise is to be condemned and shunned. 4. That the book of Common-prayer might be altered, and otherwise framed, in some points bettered, is not rationally to be denyed, what book was ever composed by the wit or art of men, but others might alter it and in some measure better it. Let the Guisels view their Directory, and I doubt not but they will find that somewhat might be left out, and something put in, part of it expunged, and part of it en∣larged. 5. That by no meanes it ought to jostle out preaching is granted, and is easily to be defended. Prophecying is that ordi∣nance that cheifly discovers the secrets of the heart, that deceit∣full part of man. Prayer and Sacraments hath done vertuously but this excells them all, and therefore for none of them is it to be disesteemed. 6. That the Author hath competency of gifts (for which he desires to be thankfull,) to do without Common-prayer as well as others; Can they baptise, pray, bury, marry, &c. without it? (absit a verbo I. Etantia) so can he; can they visit or pray su∣tably over the sick without it? so can he; can they promptly and readily vary their petitions at any time sutable to the duty in hand? so can he. In obedience to authority he useth it, and so ought others, though their gifts were more eminent then they are. These things being considered we come now to answer the question. And, That the Liturgy, Service book, or Common-prayer of the Church of England is lawfull, and with a safe conscience may be used, appears by these following reasons. 1. From the piety, eminency, and godlinesse of its com∣posers, they were men eminent and famous in their generati∣on
opposers of, and to death some of them suffered for their not compliance to popish superstition, when they were rooting out popery and disclaiming the Pope with all his adhe∣rents was that book compiled, shall we Imagin the Guisels, when they were composing the Directory, were establishing Episcopacy? if it were found to conjecture that, why ought we to conceite the other in collecting the formes of that book of Common-prayer were confirming popery, when of any other they most opposed it, and suffered most by it. It will not be a needlesse digression to spend a little time in shewing the occasion of compiling the book of Common-prayer and see the compilers. The occasion of it was breifly this. When Edward the sixth was by the Grace of God Crowned King of England, &c. and it being in his mind to perfect that re∣formation begun by his Father, made many glorious acts for pu∣ryfying of the Church from Romish superstition, particularly for administring the Sacrament of the supper under both kinds: there were some in that time obeyed the King and some that did not: so that the Sacraments were given by some one way and by o∣thers another way; some were for the King, some for the Pope, and some were neuter: to rectify which abuse, and to extirpate popery with as little voyce as could be, a writ is directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury (who afterwards was burned by Queen Mary for his adhering to the Catholick or (as the terme now is) the protestant faith) by the King and his counsell requiring him with others to meet and consult how to prevent for the future, and remove that confusion for the present, the service of the Church being then various, after the use of Sarum, Of York, of Bangor, and of Lincolne, and besides them diverse other formes, and bookes called Antiphoners, Missales, Graites, Processionals, Manuells, Legends, Pies, Portuasses, Couchers, Iournalls, Or∣dinals, In a word every man used what form, fashion or man∣ner pleased him best. This writ being sent to those persons hereafter to be menti∣oned, they meet, and after much debate consulting with the antient liturgyes of the Church, expunging from them all what
ever was not either in or agreeable to the word of God, presen∣ted to that Godly King a book entituled, The book of the Com∣mon-prayer and administration of the sacraments, and other rites and Ceremonys of the Church, after the use of the Church of Eng∣land, at the reading of which his Majesty being very thank∣full both to God and man, presented it to both his houses of Parliament assembled at Westminister, November. 4.1548. and being by them perused, after thanks returned to the King for his care and pains he is petitioned to let it passe unto an act, and by Authority it was enacted that in all Churches and Chappels, Sacraments and all other ordinances, within the compasse of that bock, should be performed solely, and wholy by it; ap∣pointing penaltys to the not users, or defamers of the same. It might very well be Inquired considering the premisses, and our practises, whether a set for me may not be as necessary in our days, as it was in those, considering how various men are in their form, manner, place or gesture, in the administration of ordinances, not that I would have mens gifts hindered, but their spleen, rancour and rage stopped, unto which well compos∣ed for me would be a proper remedy, which truly as it is to be suspected is the cause why a forme is by many called down, knowing that it would cut be their extravagant notions, their a∣bilitye and parts being neither so high, nor so great, but a liturgy might be used by them, but to let them passe. The compilers of the Book of Common-prayer were. Doct. Cranmer Arch Bishop of Cant. Doct. Goodrick Bishop of Ely. Doct. Skip Bishop of Hereford. Doct. Thirlby Bishop of Westminster. Doct. Day Bishop of Chichester. Doct. Holbeck Bishop of Lincolne. Doct. Ridley Bishop of Rochester. Doct. May Deane of Pauls. Doct. Taylour Deane of Lincolne.
Doct. Heynes, Dean of Exeter. Doct. Redman, Dean of Westminster. Doct. Cox, King Ewards Almoner. Doct. Mr. Robinson, Arch-Deacon of Leinest. All these being then owned for sound professors of the faith, & afterward great sufferers, by death, exile or banishment, for their not yeelding to the errors of the Church of Rome. Shall their work be thought to be unlawfull, which after much deliberation they composed for the edification of the Church, were they dif∣stracted, or mad or Hypocrites, that they should thus put down and erect Popery. For all the zeal of the Guisel, before Latimer shall be accused as a Papist, let him be indicted for an Atheist; he that so says, fearing neither God nor regarding man,Dr. Taylour when he was going to be mar∣tyred as his last legacy give his wife the Common∣prayer which he constantly used himself during his impriso∣ments. had that holy soul no religion when he gave his body to be burned? I do now imagine I smell Cranmns flesh burning through the Cruelty of the Pa∣pists, and let my right hand forget her cunning, if I should not rather kisse the straw he lay upon, and bow to th chain he was fastened to the stake by, then kick the ashes he was burned to, or condemn him for a cheat, a dissembler, for a Papist, which consequentially must be affirmed, when that book of Com∣mon - prayer is reviled, and corned, and as Popish as∣serred. 2.This book of Common-prayer appears to be lawfull, from that authoity by which it hath been established. It is strange that that young Iosiah, of England, For Acts and Mon. 1385. (viz) King Edward, studying to root out Popery, should so farre befoole himself and his coun∣sel, as to be glad at that bookes compiling, if it had strengthn∣ed the Papal power, was there nor a wise man in all the Parlia∣ments of his time? was there no religion in Q, Elizabeth? was she such a notorious dissembler, as under a pretence of throw∣ing the doctrine of Rome aside, would hug the Pope the closser in her armes? or if she had been such, was there never a holy man, nor a religious Parliament in her time to rectifie that abuse  was King Iames, and his Parliaments all out of the way? and King Charles of glorious memory and his Parliaments all Papists or
Ignoramuses that they knew not what they did when they esta∣blished this book? Certainly those glorious Princes and wise Parliaments in esta∣blishing successively that book, did find in it nothing that was unlawfull or that was contrary to true Godlinesse. 3.From its conformity to sacred Scripture. Let the Common∣prayer be abserved, and the matter of it be marked, and bring it to the Bible, Old or new Testament, to Moses, the Prophts or the Psalms, and if there be a word, sentence, petition, or prayer that is not agreeable to either of these, all of these, or a part of these, the Author of these lines at this present engages himself to recant publickly what either here or elsewhere he hath written in defence of that book, and become a proselyte to the profession of the Guisels. In the book of Common prayer there are two things consi∣derable, 1. The matter of it. 2. The Ceremonies in it. 1. The matter or subject of the book of which it is composed to passe over scripture, is either 1. Holy songs. 2. Pious prayers. 3. Godly exhortations. 4. Christian confession. 5. Scriptural Comminations. Which may be again subdevided, into 1. The Priests Versicles. 2. The Peoples Responses. In all which there is nothing but what is agreeable to holy writ, and the will of God revealed in his Scriptures. The Ceremonies in it, which are those particular gestures, or acts to be performed in the administration of such and such par∣ticular services, and they are cheifly these,
1. The crosse in Baptisme. 2. Kneeling at the Supper. 3. The Preists standing at the north side of the table at the communion. 4. Marrying with a ring. 5. Standing at the Creed. In giveing obedience unto which ceremonys there is no more scripture to prove it a sin, then there is to maintaine it unjust to be thrice asked in a Church before marriage, as the Guisels in their directory enjoyn, or to be married by a minister which there by them is also thought to be expedient. 4. From the sutablenesse of it to the Common Christians ca∣pacity. The service of the Church of Rome were it not repug∣nant in other points to the word of God, yet in this it is sinfull, that it is performed in a strange tongue, which the common sort of Christians understand not. In the Church of England there is no ordinance, no service but the exhortations, thanks∣giveings, and confessions therein are all of them so plain, so easy that the bluntest understanding may reach them, and the shallowest capacity may upon a certain knowledge say, Amen, So be it, unto them all. 5. From the agreements of it to the set formes of other Churches, to those of Geneva, Sweden, France, yea to the Church of Rome so farre as they are agreeable to scripture, and to those formes that were of old used, and at this present are in the Easterne Church, doth the sevice of the Church of England agree and correspond, an argument of it self, were there no o∣ther of its excellency and dignity, the wise composers of it having drained the errours from all other formes and thrown a∣way what ever was a misse in other liturgys, retaining what was pure, and holy, agreeable to found doctrine and religion, which being methodicall, digested and composed, was presented to the King, and ratified by Parliament, as a standing rule, to be used in the house of God, which is the Church. 7. Fom the excellent order and uniformity that is in the
Church because of it, when men have spent their lungs in dis∣puting, they shall be forced, though in broaken expressions to confesse that uniformity in doctrine and worship becomes the Church, as Jwels become a bird, or ornaments one to be es∣poused. It was to obtaine this that the Common-prayer was com∣posed, and it was apparent that the act of removing it, was but the midwifery to confusion and disorder both in Church and state, it helps the weak who are not prompted in that duty of prayer, it puts boundarys to the prompt that they be not ex∣travagant in prayer, it restrains them that are uncharitable in prayer, and is a platforme unto all to prayer. 8. From that universal practise hath been in all the Churches of the Saints, let the Scripturs be viewed, the History of the Churches whether under the law or Gospel, whether old or them that now are, from Calvins study to Knoxes reformation, the Father and Grandfather of the Guisels, and the use of set formes is accounted lawfull, and practised, the Church of Eng∣land hath a Collect for the day which once a year is to be used in her service. The Church of Israel had a Collect for her tithe, which ought to have been used once in three years in her service Deut. 26.12, 13, 14, 15. Jesus taught his disciples to pray as Iohn taught his, but our Saviour taught his, disciples by a set forme, It is therfore more than probable Iohn also, taught his by the same way. 9. From that stop, and tye that it puts upon factious, fiery and seditious spirits? what fruit we have reaped from some mens prayers is not unknown, and what burnings, murthers, and plunderings, hath followed upon that liberty given to men to preach and pray, this age hath cause enough to lament. Now it would shame men to pray according to the Common-prayer in the deske, & call for the contrary thing in the pulpit, or speak a∣gainst it in the chamber, this makes some to keep their mouths open to raile, they will not bow the knee to pray; least their Hypocrisie should appear to all prophane men, as their folly and disloyalty, appeares to sober men. 10. From that opposition that is made by all sorts of Here∣ticks and factious spirits against it, one drew an argument to
prove the Christian religion to be good, because, such a mon∣struous Tyrant as Nero hated it. Let the whole rabble of Here∣ticks be spoken withall, discourse with men that throw off God, and deny the holy Trinitity, renounce the doctrine of faith, Baptisme and of Judgment, go into the societys of them that are of all religions, of no religion and with one consent they in∣veigh against this book of Common-prayer which to me is an argument that there is nothing frothy, vain or empty in it; for if so, some giddy religion or profession would love it, were it but for that. It is easily to be seen that every sect sends out a squadron to fight against the Common prayer being com∣missioned to burne and slay; at the head of which army in quer∣po, march the Guisel, who differs from the other as the Cap∣taine from his company; he being more neat spruce, and gallant then they are: all their motions, actions, gestures are according to his command, their arguments that they bring against God, against the ministry, against baptisme, against Common-prayer are such as he hath forged out for them, as in some measure hath been before demonstrated. 11. From the direfull sad effects that have hapned in the Church since its removall, what bloodshed, battels, treasons, Heresys, burnings, murthers, animositys, contentions, wrath, sedition, variance, darknesse followed upon its crucifying, is too large here to be inserted; yet written in indelible characters in the hearts, faces and families, of orphans and widows. It is true much of this was seen before the publication of the Act for its abolishment, by which as they supposed it was quite killed, but the cheif of these was not seen! untill the strength of it was abated, and its power, and honour lessened, by the fury of discontented persons and madness of a giddy multitude, who threw the first stone at it, and at its defenders and sup∣porters, under the notion o a reformation. 12. From the nature, practise and actions of those men who more eminently persecuted and opposed that book, those dis∣gracers of religion, those changers of religion, those scan∣dalers of religion, those novices of religion, oppugners of
religion, haters of religion, hinderers of religion, under∣miners of religion, Inventers of religions, under a pretence of stickling for religion, were the persons, who called through the open sepulchers of their throats, and pestilenital ayre of their rotten lungs, Crucefie it crucifie it, which denotes its excellency, glory and Innocency: truly leading. 1. To Order. 2. To Uniformity. 3. To Edification. Otherwise, it had been never opposed by such a headlesse, con∣fused, and prophane generation. 13. From the fondnesse, weaknesse, and emptinesse of those arguments that the adverse party bring against it. When their passionate expressions, their scolding language, their vaine and unbeseeming Jeares, their scurrilous language, their bitter in∣vectives, are taken and drawn out from their works, their reasons and arguments may be blown away, and broak as easily, as boys break bubles from a walnut shell. They may be reduced unto these cheifly. 1. Its affinity with the Masse. It hath so near a relation unto this according to the fond con∣ceits of some that they call it the Masse, unto which we shall give this breif reply. 1. That we shall not strive about words, a fault with which this age may justly be taxed, if by Masse they mean the word Masse, we shall not long dispute, let them call it, Ha∣cum, Glivan, Boma, words that are insignificant, as by many leaned the word Masse is thought to be, for that is not ground sufficient to create a quarrel. 2. But if by masse they understand any Idolatrous or unlaw∣ful service, sinfull petitions, any prayers to Saint or Angel, any countenancing of purgatory, the Popes Infallibility, Auricular confession, we deny that it is Mss, and except they can shew these things to be in the Common-prayer, they but discovr their own ignorance, malice, uncharitablenesse and stuborn∣nesse
in opposing a book for mantaining those things, which it utterly disowns, and for having in it such things, which cannot be found. 3. Granting its affinity with masse, it cannot thence be ra∣tionally inferred, that the Common-prayer is to be disused, for so farre only the Common-prayer agreeth with the Masse, as the Masse agreeth with the Scripture, and so farre the Masse it self is not to be contemned, since truth can never be disowned (though spoken by the Devil) but the spirit of God who is the Author of it, must also be slighted, which is the reason why we em∣brace truth from Heathen writers, from Fabulous Poets, and so farre as true, make use of them in pulpits and in Sermons. 4. Besides it was never in the thoughts of the Reformers of the Church of England to leave every thing done and taught, in the Churches of France, Spaine, or Italy: (for so they should have denyed the Lord that bought them) but the errors or false worship of those Churches. It is a cause of laughter to read what use men make of that letter the Pope sent Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, pro∣miseing to ratifie the Common-prayer if she would restore his Supremacy. It is as clear as the Sun that the Pope and the Gui∣sel, will both of them (according to the Proverb) play a smal game before they stand out. It was lately their main study how to reconcile themselves to the independent, who had got the start of them, and they have now studyed a new art, how to reconcile themselves to the Lord Bishop, he being now a corner stone in the Church of England, if the Pope use the same po∣licy of all men under heaven they have least cause to declare it, since they will truckle with Quaker, Ranter, & they whole brood of bastardly Hereticks to procure unto themselves a supre∣macy. It is worthy of observation, that by this the Pope could not pick a quarrel even with the Common-prayer: all things therein being so lawfull, that he had not impudence to speake a∣gainst, and so exactly composed that he would have esta∣blished
it by Papal Authority without diminution or aug∣mentation. And yet it gives no strength at all unto his Kingdom that having these three pillars. 1. Infallibility. 2. Supremacy. 3. Purgatory. All which the Common-prayer disowns, and renounceth, yet the Pope will licence it, as he doth English bibles, that is because he must he will play at a sml gae because he hath hopes to win the set, he proffered to ratifie Common-prayer not for love to it, but to get his hand into the Kingdom of England, knowing (or at least hoing) he might get in his arme and by degrees his whole body: for the same reason▪ the Guisel, truckeled formerly under the Independent, and lately with the Anabaptist, and now would hold the stirrop to his spii∣tual lordship not for love of either, but to keep self in credit with the world, being concious to himself, that from him, came all the evils that have befallen either Church or state in the by-past years, and least with Cain he should be∣come a vagabond, is desireous of any that will befriend him. 2. Its giving offence to tender consciences. This is a high note and often heard: but 1. Who discovered or layd the ground of that of∣fence. 2. How easily might that offence be removed if in popular Sermons, the innocency and purity of that book were preached: the people have for 16▪ years heard much a∣gainst it, and now they hear nothing at least from you for it, no wonder therefore if they be not affected with it. We say affected, for it seemes to be but a prejudice against that book not conscience, that maketh them to oppose the same: that being guided by Sripture and reason, not spleen and passion.
When we behold that service rayled at, scorned, shunned, contemned, condemned, and the users of it scandaled, and yet not one sentence, word or petition, proved unlawfull, or not according to scripture, we have ground to conjecture that it is stomack not religion maketh them to do so, and the over-flow∣ings of their gall not tendernesse of their consciences, that makes them to flee out into such depraveing and abusive language. They would appear so holy, that it is dangerous to offend them, or lay a stone of stumbling before them. Yet what greater offence can be given then to abuse a national or person∣all Church, by defaming the prayers therein established, or by the other made, when in the meane time in all their findings, one sentence unlawfull in these prayers they cannot find: were they as tender as they would seeme to be we should have more argueing, lesse rayling. The greatest number of them that pretend to receive of∣fence, are of that disposition that they desire not to be informed touching those set formes; whether by discourse, preaching, or reading, and the other part can produce no unseemly thing in them;When the Direct, was in force and the Guisel in power no tender con∣sciences nor offended Brethren were then pitied, but Quakers, Ranters and Anabaptists, and should these be to∣lerated and not the Gui∣sel it were but just. See, Jdg. 1.7. and yet they being established by good laws, and Just authority, give still occasion to conjecture, that not consci∣ence but wilfulnesse, and obstinacy, is the mother of their non∣conformity. There is a God above who often brings mens wicked devices upon their own pate. It was piy to see commis∣sioners apointed in every county, and ministers as their assistants, turning cut ministers from their places, to the ruine of their familees, for not subscribing to the directory, or for reading Common-prayer when they were bound by oath, law and alle∣giance to the same, and now men that are enjoyned or desire∣ed to read Common-prayer pretend conscience and cry out they are offended, and the same persons, com∣plain of persecution when the true owners are restored: but, &c. The Reader can bear us witnesse that we have not mentioned
that act of Popish Queen Mary, who at her first coming to the Crown, seeking to Erect popery in England, repealed all acts made in the favour of the Common-prayer: and altogether abolished it, to facilitate that work. Nor of the Practise of those Recusants who being under the penalty of a fine if they came not to the publick Churches of this nation, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, would commonly re∣fraine themselves from hearing Common-prayer and not enter Church (being in this Puritanicall) untill the preacher was in the pulpit, which are arguments of no smal weight, to defend that the Common-prayer is not popishly affected: the Papists themselves being wit∣nesses. To conclude this question, seeing that some men do not grow strong and well favoured through holynesse, knowledge and sobriety by other ordinances of the Church, Common-prayer which they scornfully call poage is fittest for their weak stomacks, and sickly constitutions, while those that are strong, and of good digestion, may receive the more meat, and grow in grace, and knowledge, by their eating, that is, by a holy using the set formes of the Church, together with other dutys. Quest. 4. Whether there be not vaine repetitions in those formes. This is a grand argument brought by many justifying their non con∣formity to the Churches liturgy,See King Charles his meditation upon the or∣dinance a∣gainst the common-prayer. and most heard from those men, whose publick prayers were for the most part carried on by empty, or at least by many repititons. To be brief we must distinguish of repetitions: there is a bare repetition and there is a vain repetition. 1. Bare repetitions, if repetitions of themselves were un∣lawfull
lawfull to be used in prayer that is to repeate, or bring over a∣gain and again the same thing before asked, then many of the Saints of God must be blamed, and the son of God must not be Justified, who in one prayer repeated the same petition thrice over, Mat. 26.44. It is a desireable faculty to vary in prayer yet every one cannot do it, and they that can will repeate somtimes. Of prayer, 452.1. Through pinching necessity this made Christ cry earnest∣ly in the garden that the Cup might passe from him, and upon the Crosse that God had forsaken hm, men in a ditch will cry help help, and in a Town fier, fier and yet no vain repeti∣tion, a soul may cry Lord have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, O Christ hear us, and be singularly de∣vout. 2. Through holy affection, Thus Daniel often calls Lord hear, Dan. 9.17, 18, 19. So Solomon often repeats. Then here thou in haven thy dwelling place, and forgive or do, which is above 7. times prayed for in a prayer, 2 King. 8. 3. Through strength of faith, so the Psalmist. Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen and Amen, so the Church Reve. 22.20. In a word if repetitions barely considered as such were un∣lawfull, the Church must be blamed for singing, and the Psal∣mist for composing the Psalm. 163. and the 57, and the 42, and the 67. In all which Psalms that there are repetitions in the? sence above spoken is apparent, and that they are, and may be used without sin, is not to be questi∣oned. 2. Vaine repetitions, which are to be shunned in prayer, and of them we are forwarned by our Saviour, Mat. 6.7. of which we have above spoken. Now repetitions are vaine. Cabbet. prayer, 455.1. When they are affected as strains of Eloquence, and signs of wit, when to show the quaintnesse of the expession, that it may be observed, it is brought over again, and again, such were those of the Gentiles and Heathens.
2. When they are Impertient, empty, frothy, unprofitable, when there is no Spiritual life nor hear, holy zeal nor activity, and such vaine repetitions can never be in a book, they being in the cold heart and, dul soul of a Christian. 3. When they are Idolized, when men conceit that God either will refuse to heare them if they repeat not, or that he will here them the better for them, that is a vaine repetition. Thus the Gentiles thought they should be heard for their much babling or speaking, Mat. 6.7. 4. When they are pretended, when men sets themselves to repeat, that they may be thought to spend much time in prayer, and so be accounted religious, which is indeed a taking Gods name in vaine, and abusing of his eare, by their vain and needless repetition. From which we conclude, that no vain repetitions are in the book of Common-prayers, they being of that nature that the soul and heart of man may zealously and holyly close withall. And let me declare my thoughts in this particular, since the reestablishment of the Common-prayer I have seen more ardent zeal,I make no doubt but a man may be very formal in the most extemporary variety and very fer∣vently de∣vout in the most wont∣ed expressi∣ons. King Char. med. 16. upon the c. p. more watery eyes, more lifted up hands, and re∣verent deportment in the publick Churches, at the using of those formes then ever I saw in my life at extempore de∣liveryes. Not that I am against those prayers whose rise is immediatly from the heart, whether in the house top or in the closet, but this I say, if set formes were used as they ought to be (by laying aside prejudice) they would never be spoke against, and if con∣ceived prayer or (as the phrase is) extempore, were more used, it would not be so much undervalued as it is. If he that hath ut∣terance in prayer and promptnesse on a sudden to expresse him∣self be thankfull, he doth well, but if he think himself the bet∣ter Christian because he seeth another use a forme, In this he is not to be praised. Men of themselves may make vaine repetitions,See my Pa∣nem qua∣tidi. p. 25. ad fin. yea vaine petitions, yet the same request that to the, and by the is vaine, may be to another, a holy, ardent, and affectionate request, condemn not therefore the service of the Church, which in
all things is well ordered and sure, but thy own heart, for not having life enough to answer Amen, and Amen, to all her holy repetitions, but of these things we have spoken else∣where. Quest. 5. Whether it would be convenient to alter any part of these formes. This question shall not be directly answered being a matter wherein I ought not to be positive, but shall lay down my thoughts concern∣ing both the negative and affirmative part, resolving to acquiesce in and submit unto lawfull Authority. When those formes are considered, and the nature of its adversa∣ries marked in strength of reason, it seems inconvenient to alter those formes. 1. From the wisdom and opinion of King Iames, of blessed and glorious memory, who in his Proclamation for ratifying Common-prayer prefixed to that service, after the Hampton Court conference, resolved never to give way to any alteration by the frivolous suggestions of any light Spirit, not being igno∣rant of the Inconveniences that do arise in Government,Proclamati∣on before Common∣prayer. by admitting Innovation in things once setled by mature deliberation, the danger that followes such alterations, we shall for the present leave to Statsmen to consider. 2. It would incourage, brain sick people to proceed further in their opposition; to pleasure them in this, is but to make hem bold in asking a reformation or alteration in higher matters, let them in this be satisfied, they will but boast, and create fresh strength to bawl for something of another nature, to let the Common-prayer stand as it doth will be a barre to keep them from approaching higher, and shall be a bone for them to pick upon, and busie themselves about, that his Majesty and his counsell may dive and follow their designs with the lesse
trouble, the Kings Crown may at last come under some mens censure, if every thing be altered with which they are dis∣pleased. It is good therefore to prevent an evil at first, and let those formes stand for the future, as they do for the present. 3. It will bring the Liturgy itself under contempt, not only by Forriagners, but natives, what reverence or devotion can the generality of people have to it, when at every crosse humour of malecontent persons, it must be altered, and reform∣ed, and again reformed, and again reformed, which considera∣tion moved the glorious King Iames, in that forementioned Proclamation to assert, That such is the unquietnesse and unsted∣fastnesse of some dispositions, effecting every year new formes of things, as if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would, make all actions of State rediculous and contemp∣tible. 4. It would never please the party now offended. Let their pretences be what they will, it is the book in the bulk of it with which they are displeased, a forme that hath in it a pray∣er for a Bishop will never be digested by many except they be of that society or dignity themselves, if they should be quiet this sring, yet next curow time they would be mad again, and the alteration will not please them, except it be altered into a Directory, and that will not please the people neither; so that no satisfaction, peace, quiet or content can be rationally hoped for, therefore it were best to let Common-prayer live as it doth, and and remaine as it was brought by law unto us, since the alterati∣on will never make us more quiet in matters of religion, but the worse, as appeareth, by the second argument. 5. It would give a fair opportunity for taking away the wh; I desire no to reflect upon the actions of some men, whose gravity is venerable, and piety exemplar, yet it is worth our consideration, that when his Majesty out of free grace, did indulge his subjects, with their own liberty touching the Crosse in baptisme and wearing of the Surplice, except in Col∣legiat and Cathedral Churches, and Colledges, what effect did it produce, but embolden some to petition his Majesty
that the Surplice might not be enjoyned there also, expede Her∣culem, by this we may judge what an alteration may do, to can∣cell such or such a phrase, out of such or such a service, would but open their mouths, to beg a blotting out of the whole pray∣er, and therefore it were fittest o let the prayer stand or to pro∣rouge the alteration, and in the mean time to command these men to instruct the people touching the nature of the Common-prayer, and then if the people will not be satisfied to pro∣ceed to alteration, as it shall seeme Good to them in au∣thority. For truly notwithstanding what hath been said, I may truly say of altering the Common-prayer, as St. Paul said of a single life, 1 Cor. 7.26. It is good for the present distresse so to be. 1. That many able men that are now dissenters might read it with courage and confidence, which it might be presumed they would do if it were altered. The reason is, because in the days of their errour, they roved, and rayled at the same, and cannot now, yea dare not touch it with one of their fingers, for shame and blushing, but when it is in the least altered they will bow and and confess we have done these things which we ought not to have done. It would stop some mens mouths at last and take them out of their studies to the Desk with cre∣dit.2. The book itself as it stands, is not of absolute necessity, and therefore for the peace of the present age, or at least of this year, and for to have some quietnesse in the Church, by stopping the mouths of men in that particular, the book of Common-prayer might in some few things be altered. 3. The same ends for which the book was composed at first, and for which it is still preserved, might be obtained by an alter∣ation, how ever it were fit that the deprovers of that book and the dispisers of them that use it were looked after.
CHAP. 2. Of an Oath. SWearing being an ordinance of God, and by many being made a part of prayer, we shall speak of it by way of ap∣pendix to the foregoing ordinance, and that breifly. There is a vow, and there is an oath. A vow is properly that kind of oath that is made by man Im∣mediatly to God, whether publick, as is probable that of A∣braham was, Gen. 14.22. or private as that of Iacobs was, Gen. 28.20. An oath is properly that kind of vow made directly to man, sometimes made by God unto him, who swears by his great name, Jer. 44.26. by his right hand, Isa. 62.8. by his life, Isa. 49.18. and somtimes it is made by one man to another, In or by the name of God. Thus David did swear unto Bathheba, by the Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 1.30. and Gideon, As the Lord lives, Judg. 8.19. To let passe many distinctions, we shall speak of an oath be∣twixt man and man in matter of judgment and shall see 1. Its nature. 2. Its ends. 3. Its forme. 4. Resolve some questions.
SECT. I. The nature of an oath from reason and Scripture may be thus discovered.This was never pub∣lickly de∣livered. It is an ordinance of God, wherein he is called, to bear witnesse to the truth asserted, for the ratifying of Covenants or deciding of controversies between man and man. It is true that we find swearing used by the Saints before God did appoint and institute it as a law, in Deut. 6.13. and 10. and 20. God in those places only rectifying or giving caution, that oaths should not be made to any God but himself, wicked and heathenish men doing it in the name of Idols. When the truth of a thing spoken of is doubted, and the co∣venant that is made cannot be firmly ratified by a ye, and nay, to prevent further strife, and take away the cause of suspition, an oath may, and doth, and did alwayes take place: for these and the like causes did Abraham say to King Abimelech, I will swear, Gen. 21.24. and Isack did swear, Gen. 26.21. and Iacob did swear, Gen. 31.53. and David did swear to that Egyptian once, 1 Sam. 30.15. and to Ionathan often. SECT. VII. The ends why God did institute this part of worship are these cheifly. 1. For the glory of his own name: he looks upon it as an af∣front to his Majesty to swear by any God but himself, Ier. 12.16. he being only able to search the heart, punish the offender, pro∣tect the innocent, and also being every where present, and therefore alone sees the contract, and hears the promise, which are necessary conditions in witnesse bearing.
2. For the greater confirmation of the thing promised or at∣tested, to take a way all cause of doubt in the least degree, thus God did swear in his holynesse to David, Psal. 89.35. and the An∣gel by him that created heaven, Revel. 10.6. and St. Paul to vow that before God he lyed not, Gal. 20.1. Yea, this made God swear to Abra∣ham that he would blesse him, Heb. 6 13. That no ground might be left of desponding or calling in question the thing promised or affirmed. 3. For the putting to an end all striffe and contention among men, there would be but affirming and denying, now an oath puts a stop to that, Heb. 6.16. Its true a man may falsly swear an oath, and if it can be known or proved there is a punishment for him that so doth, yet this is an ordinance for that purpose designed and therefore not to be thrown off though by some Misused. SECT. 3. In swearing men verily ought to swear by the greater, Heb. 6.17. and therefore an oath is to be made. 1. By no creature, Mat. 34.35.36. Iames 5.12. 2. By God only, Ier. 12.16. and to him after this manner. 1. Reverendly, with fear, Eccles. 9.2. 2. Cautelously, with care, Gen. 24 5. 3. Lawfully when Authority requies it, Exod. 22.10, 11. we shall find that Besides the magistrates cll or authoriy there are three things that makes an oath lawfull, Ier. 4.2. these are when the oath is made. 1. In truth, from a certaine assurance of the thing promised or reality of thoughts of him that promiseth, or from a knw∣ledge of the truth of that which is attested. 2. In judgment out of prudence or deliberation, not raslns ignorance or passion. 3. In righteousnesse, for the lory of God, the finding  truth, composing of differences, not out of faud,  or cousenage.
SECT. 4. Questions Resolved. Quest. 1. Whether swearing be an ordinance of, or under the Gospel. Quest. 2. Whether the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, required by the King of England, &c. May lawfully be taken. Quest. 1. Whether swearing be an ordinance of or under the Gospel There are them that live about us and among us, who denies that swearing is any part of Gospel worship, and therefore though called thereunto, refuse least they should sin, but erroneously. For, 1. Swearing was no part of the Ceremonial law, but used long before Moses, and the ends of it are morall, and therefore it is not abolished by the death of Christ. 2. It is prophesyed that the Church of the Gentils shall swear by the Lord, and by the God of truth, Isa. 65.16. Ier. 4.16. Implying that whereas they did swear by Baal and other false gods, they should by knowledge be brought from that Idolatry and give that point of worship to the God of Heaven who alone is the true God. 3. By a holy Apostle it is frequently done, even by him who was an eminent preacher of the Gospel; (viz.) St. Paul, an oath is nothing but a calling of God to witnesse of the truth of that which is done or spoken, that it may be received with the greater belief, now how often doth that eminent servant of the
Lord Jesus, deliver himself in the very substance of an oath: as God is my witnsse, Rom. 1.9. God is my record, Pil 1.8. God is my witnesse, 1 Thes. 2.5, 10. God knoweth, 2 Cor. 11, 11, 31. Before od I lie not, Gal. 1.20. I say the truth in Chistin Christ I lie not, Rom. 9.1. As the truth of Christ is in me, 2 Cor. 11.10. I speak the truth in Christ and lye not, 1 Tim. 2.7. All which are as substantial oaths as any we read of in the od pensation. 4. Even in the close of the Gospel we find a holy Angell to swear, Rev. 10.6. we pray that the will of God may be done by u as it is done by the hoy Angels, and hear we have an Anell for greater certainty sealing his threatning by an oath. From these reasons we may without errour conclude that the odinance of swearing is in full force and power un∣der the Gospell, to all intents and purposes, any thing that our adversaries can bing to the Contrary notwithstand∣ing. Those texts Math. 5.34. and Iames 5.12. speaks of swear∣ing in our common communication, and of such oathes as are sworn by the creatures, as may appear by the contexts, not of Judicial swearin o any other kind of oathes, when necessi∣ty and authority draws men to it, for clearing of the truth and ending of controversie against which the Gospel speakes not one word but confirms it by severall passages, yea, St. Paul writing to the Hebrews says. Heb. 6.16. That an oath for con∣firmation is to men an end of all strife, not that it was, but it is (q.d.) while I am writing and preaching, now when the found of the Gospell is gone over all the world, is an oath the end of strife, and that not to some only but to men (i.e.) to all sorts of men whether Jew or Gentile, now had it been a sin to have used an oath under the Gospell, for that end we should have heard of it in this most proper place, or in some other. And if any will be contentious, let them consider that Pauls, before God I lye not, 1 Gal. 20. and the Angells by him that lives for ever is more then yea, yea? and yet who dare reprove either of them of sin.
To this doctrine consents the reformed Churches of Helva: Art. 30. of Ausp. Art. 16. of England. Art. 39. the Art itself. is this, Art 39. of the Church of England. As we confesse that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Chri∣stian men by our Lord Iesus Christ, and James his Apostle so we judge that Christian religion doth not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requireth in a cause of faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching, in Iu∣stice, Iudgement and truth. Quest. 2 Whether the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy required by the Kings of England, &c. of their Subjects, may lawfully be taken. That Covenants or oaths in cases of necessity or suspition, may be made by the subjects of a land to their lawful Prince, ap∣pears by that Act of Iehoiadah, at the Coronation of King Ie∣hoash, 2 King. 11.17. where we have the footsteps of a Coro∣nation, and allegiance oath, but to come to the matter in hand, either of these oaths may lawfully be taken; For, 1 Swearing is a Gospell Ordinance, and therefore under the Gospell may be performed being ratified,Edwyn the first who ruled in Scot. Am. 3870 was the first King that caused his subjects to be sworne, Lan. Chro. 3 Parts 187. taken and used by a holy Apostle and blessed Angell. 2 There is nothing in them oaths that is contrary to the word of God. God who made the heavens is only called, to testifie the reallity of the intentions. 3 The taking of them gives assurance to his Majesty of his Subjects faithfulnesse and loyalty, and indeed as the case now stands, he may be suspected of disloyalty that will not satisfie the law in that particular. 4. It is but equall that subjects swear to defend his Maje∣sties honours and prerogatives, since he hath sworn to main∣tain his subjects rights and properties.
Next, swear not at all, the grand objection is his Majesties su∣premacy, But 1 It is under Christ, none acknowledgeth him as absolute head of the Church, that being his sole prerogative who is King of Kings, and it would be considered whether God hath not made as good, and as many Laws touching the government of the State, as he hath for that of the Church, yet who will thence conclude, that the Magistrate is not supreame in civill affairs, that is next & immediately under God. For no other∣wise is he head that is governour of the Church. 2 It is only to exclude the Popes Authority. His holinesse at Rome, looks upon all Kings and Emperours as his Vassals and servants, and did he not exalt him above all that are called Gods, he would want one mark of the Antichrist, 1 Thes. 2.4, & by the way they being called Gods, we are to know that none on earth, no, no Presbytery their superior, nor contain the Pope therfore pretending a power over the Church, & making himself or giving out himself, as head of all civil & Ecclesiastical officers, and withall making the Church to be so absolute a distinst body from the state, that no state officer, whether the King, though he only be supream, ought in the least to meddle with it, or if he do, to be excommunicated or deposed for his presumption, this power is by this Oath taken from the Pope, and given to him that is the true, as the Pope makes the Church to be so absolute a distinct body from the state, as that the state hath nothing to do with it, or in it, there are them in our dayes to be quit with the Pope, that would have no Church officer in the least to med∣dle with the state, supposing such an absolutnesse in the one, that it hath no coherence with or dependance upon the other (in this absolute sence the author desires only to be understood chap. 9. Quest. 5.) and such infallibillity to be in a Pres∣bytery that the Laws thereof ought not, should not be deba∣ted in a counsell, this also by this oath denyed, and that justly. To exclude therefore chiefly the Popes authority is his Ma∣jesty to be accounted Supream in all causes, and over all persons, that is hath jurisdiction and power over all men, whether Cler∣gy or others not the Pope.
When God instituted the Church o the Jews the Priests and the Levits had their orders and laws for their spiritual govern∣ment, as clear and open as the Presbytery can plead for in the new Testament, yet that Kins had power over them, and made Laws for them, and were obeyed of by them, is clear to him that not manum sub pallio. 3 It is in his Majesties own dominious, his jurisdiction is bounded within the limits of his own territories, right and do∣minions. All which considered, it is no derogation to Christs honour, to accept that oath, but consequentially a supperiater, and up∣holder of it. Thus much of the third and last ordinance we undertook to defend in the beginning which was prayer. Laus Deo dedit enim vlle etiam & perficere, Si quid novi∣sti rectius istis utere si non, his utere mecum. FINIS. ERRATA. OF the errours that happened in the printing of this treatise, these following are some of these, (viz.) p. 7. l. 16. r. slighting p. 11. marg l. 1. r. use p. 17 l. 16. r. altered & 27. r. fondly p. 18. l. 7. r. Inst. p. 21. l 25. r. such laws p. 29 33. r. commanded p. 29. l. 7. r. will not p. 33. l. 1. r. regard p. 39. l. 1. r. creature, p. 41. l. 36. r compleated p 45 l. 35. r. benecessi p. 53. l. r. persecuton p. 57. l. 10. r. perform without p. 62. l. 33. r. own p. 73. l. 23. r. inlarge p. 81. l. 30. r. Adoption p. 86. l. 6 r. praedicantisses p 104. l. 9 r. Word p. 150. l. 9. r. explanatory p. 107. l. 26. r. intlligenta p. 118. l. 2. r.  p. 159. l. 16. r had p. 169 l. 1. r. refute. p. 173. l. 17. r. but and 18. r. grand p. 177. l. 3. r. Mtta. l.25. r. were not p. 181. l. 21. r. p. 193. l. 5. r. Some p. 2. 13. l. 26. r. lively p. 252 l. 13. r. concupiscence p. 255. l. 22. r. Bvt. Noble, p. 266 l. 13. r. feast p. 275. l. 33. r. vigorous. p. 277. marg. l. 28 r veneras l. 40. r. 111. p. 214. l. 25. serve p. 288. 22. r. sacred. p. 294. l. 18. r. bulk. l. 25. r. fonts p. 30.7. marg. l. 5. r. pleading l. 11. r Offer them p. 328. l.▪ 16. r. sacred. p. 294. l. 1.  p. 361. l. 2. r. Guisel. marg. l. 3. r. Antiepiscopal p. 37.5. l. r. repealed p. 383. l. 10. r. figurat ea & 25. r. per visum marg. l. 3. r. 24. permittitur & l. 13. r. 23. p. 10. l. 5. r. Reipturis p. 422. l. 10. r. praestat p. 490. l 11. r. Mathew, The o∣ther faults are left to the Readers charity and inquisition: the Author being necessarily detained from the presse.
