A492 12487844 62298
GOD'S ANGER, AND MAN'S COMFORT. TWO SERMONS, Preached and Published BY THO. ADAMS LONDON, Printed by Tho Maxey, for SAMUEL MAN, at the signe of the SWAN in Paul's Church-yard, 1652.
TO The Most HONOURABLE, and CHARITABLE BENEFACTORS, Whom God hath honoured for his Almoners, And, Sanctified to be his Dispensers of the fruits of Charity and Mercy To Mee, In this my necessitous and decrepit Old age, I humbly PRESENT This Testimony of my Thankfulnesse: WITH My incessant Apprecations to the Father of all Mercies, to reward them for it in this life, and to crown their Souls with everlasting Joy and Glory, in the life to come, Through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen. THO. ADAMS.
GOD'S ANGER. PSALM 80. ver. 4. O Lord God of hostes, how long wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth? IT hath been said of Warre, that it is Malum, an evill, but it may be Necessarium, a necessary evill. It is good sometimes to hunt the Wolfe, though it is better to fod∣der the Sheep. They speake of a drowning man, Etiam ad Novaculam, that he will rather take hold of a knife, then of no∣thing. A very coward will catch the edge of a naked sword, to save his life; though it cut his fingers. Man being cast out of Paradise, and that Paradise guarded with a sword in the hand of a Cherub, durst not attempt a re-entry, be∣cause he was guilty. But Commonwealths that have lost any part of their Territories, or just Priviledges, by forraign invasion, and hostile vi∣olence,
may justly venture upon the sword, and fair∣ly hope for a recovery, because they are innocent; & hanc picem amolire gladio. Irene signifies Peace; Yet the Turke could sacrifice his beuteous Irene to the God of Warr. If Warr in it self were utterly unlawfull, God would never have accep∣ted this Title, The Lord of hostes. Yet in this stile he takes such delight, that he is oftner called the God of hoasts in the former Testament, then by any other Title. In those two prophesies of Isaiah and Jeremiah, it is given him no lesse then an hundred and thirty times. All creatures are mustered, and trained, put into garison, or brought forth into the field by his command. Which way can we look be∣sides his Armies? If upward into heaven, there is a band of Souldiers; even a Luk. 2. 13. multitude of the heavenly host praising God. If to the lower hea∣vens, there are a band of Souldiers: it Gen. 2. 1. was universa militia coeli, to which those Idolaters burnt incense. On the earth, not only men are martialled to his service; so Israel was called the host of the living God: but even the brute Creatures are ranged in arrayes. So God did levy a band of flyes against the Egyp∣tians; and a band of frogs that marched into their bedchambers. He Pro. 30. 37. hath troops of locusts, and armies of caterpillers. Not only the chari∣ots and horsemen of heaven, to defend his Pro∣phet, but even the basest, the most indocible, and despicable creatures, wherewith to confound his enemies. If Goliah stalke forth to defile the
God of Israel, he shall be confuted with a pebble. If Herod swells up to a God, God will set his vermine upon him, and all the Kings guard cannot save him from them. You have heard of rs that could not be beaten off, till they had destroyed that covetous Prelate, and of a flie that killed Pope Adrian. God hath more ways to punish, then hee hath creatures. This Lord God of hostes is not properly a ti∣tle of Creation, but of providence. All crea∣tures have their existence from God, as their Ma∣ker: and so have they also their order from him, as their Governour. It referrs not so much to their being, as to their martialling; not to their naturall, but militant estate: Nor only as crea∣tures do they owe him for their making, but as they are souldiers, for their managing. Their order is Warlike, and they serve under the colours of the Almighty. So that here, God would be respected, not as a Creator; but as a Generall. His anger therefore seems so much the more fearfull, as it is presented to us under so great a Title; The Lord God of hostes is angry. They talke of Tamberlain, that hee could daunt his enemies, with the very look of his countenance: oh then what terrour dwells in the countenance of an offended God? The reprobates shall call to the rocks to hide them Rev. 6. 16. from the wrath of the Lamb: If Ira Agni, the wrath of the Lamb doth so affright them, how terrible is Ira Leonis, the wrath of the Lyon? It may justly trouble us all to hear, that the
Lord God of hostes is angry: in the sense wher∣of the Prophet breaks forth here into this expostu∣lation; O Lord God of hostes, how long wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth? Where∣in we have these five propositions, or inferen∣cies naturally arising out of the text. 1. That God may bee angry; for that is manifestly implyed in the Text; He is an∣gry. 2. That his anger may last a great while: O Lord, how long wilt thou be angry? 3. That his anger may extend to the whole na∣tion: how long wilt thou be angry with the people, all the people 4. That his anger may fall upon his owne people, even his peculiar and chosen flock; How long wilt thou be angry with thy people? 5. That his anger may dwel upon them in their devotions, and not be removed by their very prayers. How long wilt thou be angry with the people that prayeth? Yea, against their prayer? Now God is never angry without a cause: he is no froward God, of no techy and pettish nature: a cause there must be, or he would neverbe angry. There can be no cause but sin; we never read that God was angry for any thing else. Some he hath corrected without re∣spect unto sin, as he did Job: but he was ne∣ver angry with any man, but for the sin of that man. It is the sin of the people that hath thus grieved God, and it is the anger of God that hath
thus grieved the people. Sin must be supposed to run along with his anger throughout the text, as the eclyptick line does thorow the Zodi∣ake. 1. If it were not for sin, God would not be angry. 2. If it were not for the continuance of sin, he would not be so long angry. 3. If it were not for the universality of sinne, he would not be angry with the whole people. 4. If it were not for the unnaturall ingratitude of sinne, he would not be angry with his own people. 5. If it were not for the base hypocrisie of sin, he would not be angry with his people that prayeth. Thus then the argument lies fair and plain be∣fore us. 1 It is sin that makes God angry. 2 It is the continuance of sin that makes him long angry. 3 It is the generalty of sin that makes him angry with the whole people. 4. It is the unthankfulness of sin, or the sin of un∣thankfulnesse, that makes him angry with his owne people. 5. Lastly, it is the hypocrisie of sin, or the sin of hypocrisie, that makes him so long angry with his people that prayeth. 1. We provoke him by our rebellions, and he is angry.
2. We continue our provocations against him, and he is long angry. 3. Wee provoke him universally, and so he is angry with us all; not with some offen∣ders here and there, but with the whole peo∣ple. 4. We provoke him by our un kindnesse; for whom he hath done so much good, and up∣on whom hee hath heaped so many blessings; and so hee is angry with his own people. 5. Lastly, we provoke him by our dissimu∣lations; approaching to him with our lips, and keeping back our hearts: we pray un to him, and yet live against him: we call upon his Name, and rebell against his will: and so he is angry, and long angry, and long angry with the whole people, and long angry with his own people, and long angry with his people that prayeth. 1. God may be angry, and sin is the cause of his anger; thats the first Proposition. Man may be angry without sin, not without perturbation: God is angry without either preturbation or sin. His anger is in his nature, not by anthro∣popathie, but properly; being his corrective Justice, or vindicative Justice. Iratus videtur, quia tunquam iratus operatur. Our anger is an im∣potent passion: His a most clear, free, and just operation. By this affection in our selves, wee may guesse at the perfection that is in God. The dissolute securitans think that God doth but smile at the absurdities of men; that ludit in hu∣manis: that their drunkennesse and adulteries ra∣ther
make him merry then angry. Like some carnall father, that laughs at the ridiculous beha∣viour of his children  to whom their wanton speeches and actions are but a pleasure; and in which he rather encourageth, then chides. Psal. 2. 4. Indeed, God is said to Laugh; He that sits in heaven laughs them to scorn: but woe be to the men at whose fooleries God laughs. It is a dissembling falshood in man, to smile and betray, as Judas began his trechery with a kisse: Such are likened to those bottled windy drinks, that laugh in a mans face, and cut his throat. But this laughter in God, argues not so much what he does, as what they suffer; when by frustra∣ting their sinfull purposes, he exposeth them to contempt and scorne. Dei ridere, est homi∣nem ludibrio exponere. If a little ant creeping out of a molehill, should march forth, and prof∣fer to wrastle a fall with a gyant, there were yet some proportion in this challenge: but there is none of a finite power to an infinite. Au∣dacious sinners, that dare provoke the Lord of hostes! What are all the Armies and Forces of Tyrants, to oppose the omnipotent God? Rev. 19. 18. He will make a feast of them, for the fowles of the Aire, whom he invites to the flesh of Captains, and to the flesh of Kings. Let earth and hell conspire, let there be a confederate band of men and divels; how easily can he command the one to their dust, the other to their chains? What power have they of either motion or being, but from him against whom they fight? Our God
is a consuming fire; and he will consume them not only in anger, but in laughter. The Catastrophe of all rebellion is but the Sarcasmos or bitter scorn of God. There is no lesse difference between Gods an∣ger and his favour, then between death and life; death in the most dismall horrour; and life in the most comfortable sweetnesse of it. Psa 30. 5. In his favour there is life: death in his anger; Ps. 90. 9. for when thou art angry, all our days are gone. There is great light given to contraries by their comparison: look first a little upon the favour of God: Ps. 36. 7. Oh how excellent is thy loving kindnesse, O Lord? Thy Saints shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatnesse of thy house, and thou wilt make them to drink of the river of thy pleasures. What followes upon his fa∣vour, but satisfaction, and peace, and joy, and e∣ternall life? When the deluge of water had de∣faced that great book of Nature, Noah had a copy of every kind of Creature with him in that famous Library, the Arke: out of which they were reprinted to the world. So he that hath the favour of God in the Arke of the Covenant, hath the Originall copy of all blessings: if they could all have perished, yet so they might be re∣stor'd. God is the best Store-house, the best treasury: O happy men that have their estates laid up there! Though friends, goods, and life forsake us, yet if Gods gracious countenance shine upon us, that wil be life, and goods, and friends unto us. These benefits and comforts flow from his favour.
But alas, how terrible is his anger? He hath scourged some in very mercy, till they have smar∣ted under his rod. Job complaines, that the ter∣rours of God do fight against him. And David says, Job. 6. 4. Ps. 88. 15. 16. From my youth up thy terrours have I suffered with a troubled mind. If he will do thus much in love, what shall be the judgments of his wrath! If he hath drawn blood of his dear ones, what shall be the plague of wilfull sinners! If this be the rod of his children, what are the scorpions provided for his enemies! what comfort can any find in all the prosperous fortunes upon earth, with whom God is angry in Heaven? If that mighty Pagan could apprehend this, he would finde small safety in his guard of Janisaries, and lesse pleasure in his brutish Seraglio's. It is a vain conceit of that Potentate, who refu∣sing the name of Pius, would be called Foe∣lix; Happy, not Godly. But there can bee no felicity without Gods blessing, and he will not blesse, where he is not blessed. But Sylla, sir∣named Foelix, accounted it not the least part of his fortunes, that Metellus sirnamed Pius was his friend. Piety is the best friend to Felici∣ty, though Felicity doth not alwayes befriend Piety. That is but a wretched prosperity, upon which God looks in anger. If the Sun were wanting, it would be night, for all the Starrs: If God frown upon a man; for all the glittering honors of this world, he sits, in the shadow of death. Let him bee never so rich in lands and waters; yet his
springs have lost their sweetnesse, his vines their fruitfulnesse, his gold hath lost the colour, his precious stones their value and lustre: I mean, the vertue and comfort of all these are gone a∣way with the favour of God. If our house were paved with a floor of gold, and walled with pearls and Diamonds, and yet the roof wide open to the violence of heaven, would these shelter us from storms and tempest? Would we be so lodged in cold winter nights? Or were our house roofed with Cedar, and the walls hung with arras, yet if the floore be rotten, and under it a bottomlesse pit, could we sleep in quiet? There can be no safety when God is angry: his wrath may come thundring from heaven, and suddenly sink rebel∣lious sinners into hell; and then where is all their honour? When their mortall part lies in the dishonourable dust, and their immortall part suf∣fers in unextinguishable fire. Thus terrible is the anger of God: now what is he angry withall, but sinne? That is the per∣petuall make-bate betwixt God and us; the fu∣el of the fire of his indignation. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God. For this cause Isa. 59. 2. he looks upon us as a stranger, yea as an enemy. But they rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit: there∣fore Isa. 63. 10, he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought against them. But they rebelled: mans occa∣sion of offending God, is but a But, a nothing, no cause at all: Gods occasion of being angry with men, is a therefore, a cause sufficient, and that cause is sin. Search the holy Book all over, and
you shall never find God angry but for sinne. Nor doth the flame of his wrath break out upon every sin; but when sin grows impudent and past shame. We were wont to say, that veritas non quae rit an∣gulos: but now, vitum non quaerit angulos: It doth that in a bravery, with which the false Pro∣phet was threatned, that he should do in fear; 1 King. 22. 25▪ it runs from Chamber to Chamber, from house to house, not to hide it self, but to boast it self. We so provoke the Lord, that we do not only anger him, but are angry with him. If the winds do not blow, and the raine fall, as wee would have it; if any thing falls out crosse to our desires, we even vexe at God himself; as if he were bound to wait upon our humours. No marvell if God be angry with us, when we dare be angry with him: by murmuring at his actions, and calling his providence into question. Jon. 4. 4. Doest thou well to be an∣gry, O man? No, it is exceeding ill, and dan∣gerous. We may tremble to think that the pot should fall out with the potter, and man be angry with his Maker. It is the meretricious and shame∣lesse forehead of sinne that angers God: And in this anger wee here finde him, but let us not so leave him: and yet the next point tells us that his wrath is not suddenly pacified: 2. He may be long angry: that's the second Proposition. Usque quò Domine? It is not for a fit, like some flash of powder, but may burne long. Psal. 79 5. How long, O Lord, wilt thou be angry? for ever? And shall thy Jealousie burne like fire? 2 Sam. 21. 1. He visits his own Israel with a long dearth:
During all those three years of drought and scar∣ctiy, Gods Altar smoaked with daily sacrifices, and Heaven was solicited with continuall prayers; yet still he was angry: and why may not David complaine, in this Psalme, of that famine? Wee are not at the first sensible of common evills: in Warr, Dearth, or Pestilence, wee thinke onely of shifting for our selves, or finding out conveni∣ent refuges, (like Foxes in a storm, that runne to the next burroughs) and study not how to remove the publick Judgements. But the continuance of an affliction sends us to God, and calls upon us to ask for a reckoning. An evil that is suddenly gone, is as suddenly forgotten: as men strucken in their sleep, cannot quickly find themselves: so the blow doth rather astoinsh us, then teach us. But when the burden lies long upon us, we will at last com∣plaine of the weight, and seek to ease our selves. Indeed, there be some sinners more insensible, more insensate then beasts: if we finde the hun∣gryest ox feeding in the meddow, and cannot with many pricks of the goad make him remove from his place, we wonder at his stupiditie. Yet the insatiate world-affecters, though God not only af∣fright them with menaces, but even afflict them with many scourges, cannot be gotten from their covetous practises. So long as they can by any means grow wealthy, they will not beleeve that God is angry with them. As if there were none Psa. 73. 7. that have more then heart could wish; yet live all this while in the sphere of Gods Indignation. We
can read Gods wrath in a storme, not in a calme yet  may be most angry, when he least expresseth it. Ezek. 16. 42. My Jealousie shall depart from thee, and I will be no more angry with thee: Oh that is the height of his displeasure  Jer. 14. 13. The Prophet speaks of a true Peace: True, were a needlesse epithet, if there were not a false peace in carnall hearts. How fondly doth the secure sin∣ner flatter himself, in the conceit of his own hap∣pinesse? All is well at home: he quarrels not with himselfe, for he denies himselfe no sensuall pleasure. God quarrells not with him, he feels no checks of a chiding conscience, he sees no frowns of an angry Judge: nothing but prosperity shines upon him. He sees no difference in the face of heaven, whatsoever he does, or says: the same en∣tertainment is given to his blasphemies, as to his prayers. Sure, he thinks himself in Gods books above other men. And so he is indeed; in Gods book of debts, in Gods book of arrerages, in his book of Judgments: so he is farr in Gods books. He owes such men a payment, and they shall have it. Alas, this is not the sinners peace, but stupi∣dity: not the Makers favour, but his fury. All this while he is very angry, though he suspends the exe∣cution of his wrath. Thus long sin lies like a sleeping bandog at the door of their hearts: They look upon the cur as if he would never wake: or if he did, yet as if hewere so chained, & clogged, & muzled, that he could never hurt them. But when once God row∣zeth him, then have at their throats: then they shal feel what it is to have lived so long in the anger of
a God: When the Almighty shall put himself in∣to the fearfull formes of vengeance, and the ever∣lasting gulph of fire shal open to receive them into intolerable burnings; the mercilesse divels seising on their guilty souls, and afflicting them with inces∣sant torments. It is some favour, when we have the respite to cry, How long, Lord, wilt thou be angry with us? He is not throughly angry with us, when he suffers us to breath forth this expostulation. There is some hope of remedy, when we once complain of our sicknesse. It is not change of climate, but change of dyet, that recovers us: when we grow to for∣bear the surfets of sin, there is a fair possibility of comfort. Yet God may be long angry, and long con∣tinue sensible testimonies of his anger. Ps 92. 10. Forty years long was I grieved with this Generation. He had smitten Israel with divers punishments, and threat∣ned them with with more grievous calamities; that Ps. 9. 17. 21. every man should eat the flesh of his own arme; Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; and they both against Judah: And yet he had not done with them, his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still. Davids pesti∣lence of three dayes, was a storm soone blown over, though it were bitter for the time: Gods displeasure hath dwelt longer upon us. But how then doth the Prophet say, that he retaineth not anger? Well enough: for he never retaineth it on moment longer, then we retaine the cause of it: So soon as ever we cease sinning
against him, he ceaseth to be angry with us. Af∣ter Davids humiliation and sacrifice, the Angell struck not one blow more with the sword of pe∣stilence. He measures out the length of his anger by the continuance of our rebellions. So that if we expostulate with him, Lord how long wilt thou be angry with us? He replies, O ye sons of men, how long will you be rebellious against me? Let us not look that the Lord should begin first; that his pardon should prevent our repen∣tance. There is great reason, he that hath done the offence, should be first in making the peace. Every day we expect comfort from God, and e∣very day God expects conversion from us. E∣very week we look for some abatement in the bils, and every week God looks for some abatement of our sins, for some amendment of our lives. So long as we continue guilty, it is in vain to cry, O Lord, how long wilt thou be angry? Our hard hearts are not yet broken with remorse: alas, what should be done to break them? Psa. 29. 5. The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedars: he Psa. 18. 7. breaketh the mountains: he breaketh Isa 64. 1. the heavens, he 1 Kin. 19. 11. brea∣keth the stones; and yet his word cannot break our hearts. But if he cannot break us with the rod of Affliction, he will breake us with a rod of iron, and Psa. 2 9. dash us in pieces like a Potters vessel. God is long patient before he grows angry; why should he not be long angry before he be appeased? He is not easily provoked, why should he be so easily pacified? yet so propense to mercy is our
gracious Father, that the fire which was long a kindling, is soon quenched: His anger, that is not blown into a flame without many and long continued sins, is yet put out with a few penitent tears. When our houses are burning, it were but foolish to cry out, we are undone, alas the fire ra∣geth; and we all the while forbear to cast on water. The Usque quo of Gods anger waits for the Quousque of our repentance. He will not give over-striking, till we fall a weeping: and we may do well to weep before him, for (sure) we did ill to sin against him. His anger doth now long offend us, but our wickednesses did farr longer of∣fend him. We have provoked him many yeares; and shall not his wrath burn many days? Still it flameth: let us make hast to bring our buckets of water, filled at the cisternes of our eyes, and derived from the fountaine of our hearts, to quench it. Let no hands be wanting to this bu∣sinesse: for if some bring in the water of tears, whiles others cast in the fewell of sins, this fire will burn still. But from the higehst to the lowest let us come in with repentance: and that all of us, even the whole people: for so far Gods wrath extendeth. 3. He may be angry with the whole people; which is the third proposition. He hath been angry with a whole family, with a whole Army, with a whole City, with a whole Country, with the whole earth. With a whole family: so he cursed the house of 1 Kin. 14. 10. 11 Jeroboam: that him that dyeth in the City, the dogs shall eat, and him that dyeth in the field, shall the fowls of the aire eat. Ps. 37. 36. With
a whole army; so he slew of Sennacheribi host in one night 185 thousand. With a whole city; so the city of Jericho was cursed with an universal desolation, never to be reedified without the ruine of the buil∣der. Josh. 6. 17. 21. With a whole country; So Saul was charged to destroy Amalek; man and woman, infant and suck∣ling, 1 Sam. 15 3. sheep and oxen, and all that belonged to them. With the whole earth; whenit was become corrupt, Gen. 6. 12. he drowned it with a floud. Yet observe how God hath qualified his wrath; with his hand of favour snatching some out of his hand of anger. When he 1 Kin. 14. 13. Josh. 6. 17. cursed the whole Family of Jeroboam, he excepted Abijah. When he doomed to death, the whole City of Jericho, he excepted the family of Rahab. When his wrath burned Sodom, he excepted the family of Lot. When his anger drowned the whole world in a deluge, yet his mercy excepted Noah, and his o∣ctonary houshold. But his anger is very grievous, when it extends to the whole people. Throught he Isa. 9. 19. wrath of the Lord of hostes, the land is darkned, &c. What makes him thus universally angry with us, but the universalitie of our sins against him? when the passengers ask: Wherefore hath the Lord done thus to this great City? Answer is made, Because Jer. 22. 8. 9. they forsooke the Covenant of the Lord, and wor∣shipped other Gods. To such a fearfull height may the sins of the children bring the mother, that that Church which now enjoyes such abundance of truth and peace, may be poisoned with he∣resie, and wounded with schisme, and suffer an utter direliction. The whole people is guilty of sin, and why for their sins may not God be angry
with the whole people? Yea, and long angry too: for it will be very long before that fault will be amended, which hath so long been commit∣ted. God came to low conditions in the behalfe of Sodome: Abraham brought him down to ten. He came to lower conditions in the behalfe of Gen. 18. 32. Jerusalem; he brought himself down to one: See Jer. 5. 1. if you can find a man, if there be any that seeketh the truth in the whole Citie, and I will pardon it. O how epidemicall is that wickednesse, where not one escapeth the corruption? We have found the Lord angry enough with a whole people, for the sin of one man. Lord, hath one man sinned, and wilt thou be wroth with the whole Congregation? Num. 16. 22. No, Gods vengeance, when it is the hottest, makes difference of offenders: and knows to di∣stinguish betwixt the heads of a faction, and the traine. Though neither be faultlesse, yet the one is plagued, the other pardoned. Depart from the tents of these wicked men, lest you be consumed in their sins. So soon as the innocent are severed, the guilty perish. One Achan sins, all Israel suf∣fers. One David sins in pride, seventy thousand Josh 7. 11. of his subjects suffer in the plague. One Saul slew the Gibeonites, three years dearth lies upon the 2 Sam. 21. 1. Israelites for it. The blood of those Canaanites shed against Covenant, almost forty years before, by the then King, is now called for of the whole people. They had all sins enough, but God fix∣eth his eye of anger upon this. Every sin hath a tongue, but that of blood outcryes them all:
And if Justice do not revenge the murder of one, God will require it of the whole nation. When seven of Sauls sons were hanged up, God was in∣treated 2 Sam. 21 14 for the land. Then shall the clouds drop fatnesse, and the earth run forth into plenty: Then do the valleys stand thick with corn, land the Psa. 65. 12. little hills rejoyce on every side. Some drops of blood shed in Justice, procure large showers from heaven. A few carcases laid in their graves, are a rich compost to the earth. There can be no peace, where blood cryes unheard, unregar∣ded: but when it is expiated by the blood of the offenders, there will bee a cessation of Judge∣ments. Phinehas executed judgment, and the plgue Pal. 106 30. ceased. One contrary is ever cured by another: take away the cause, and the effect will cease. Prayer is very powerfull, but doing of Justice more availeable. The whole Congregation were at their prayers, and those prayers were steeped in tears; yet still the plague raged, and Gods anger continued. But when Phinehas had run those two adulterers through with his Javelin, in the Nam. 25. 8. act of their sin; the plague was stayed. So bles∣sed a thing is it for any nation, that Justice is im∣partially executed. Thus the universality of sin calls for the uni∣versality of repentance, or else it will provoke Gods anger to strike us with universall judge∣ments. If the whole people be guilty, the whole people must fall to deprecation. Such was the Nivites repentance, every man turning from Jon. 3. 8. his evill ways. We have sinned, even the whole
nation: and as if we had not sins enough of our own, we borrow of our neighbours. What nation under heaven do we trade withall, from whom the sinnes of that Nation are not brought hi∣ther? And those are merchandizes that might be well spared. Are we all in the transgressi∣on, and do we lay the burden of repentance upon some few? If we expostulate with God, Lord hath one man sinned, and wilt thou be wrath with the whole Congregation? May he not more Num. 16. 22. justly expostulate with us; Hath the whole Con∣gregation sinned, and is it enough for one man to repent? Is the whole garment fowle, and must only the skirts be washed? Is the whole building ruinous, and do we think it a sufficient reparation to patch up one corner of it? No, the plaister of our repentance must be fully as large as the orifice of our wickednesse; or we cannot be healed. But stil God wil be angry with us, yea though we were his own people: For, 4. God may be angry with his own people; which is the fourth proposition. Psa. 89. 33 I will visit their sins with a rod, and their iniquity with scourges; but my mercy I will not utterly take from them. Though he do not take his mercy from them, yet he may be angry with them. He is our father, and never did Father in sweeter terms entertaine the dearest trea∣sures of his blood, then God doth us, when he vouchsafes to call us His people: yet did you ne∣ver see a father angry with his child? In∣deed there is great difference between that wrath of God which is toward his own people, and that
which Col. 3. 6. comes upon the children of disobedience. They differ three ways. 1. In respect of continuance: his anger upon reprobates is eternall; not extinguished with their bloods, but pursuing them from earth to hell. To his people it is but temporary, it lasts but a moment: Psal. 30. 5. weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psal: 103. 9. He will not alwayes chide, nor will he keep his anger for ever. When he was very angry with his Idolatrous Israel, Exo. 32. 11. Moses does but put him in mind that they were his own peo∣ple, and he was pacified. Isa. 54. 8. For a moment in a little wrath, he hides his face from us. Mic. 7. 8. Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy; for though I fall, I shall rise again. But for the wicked, John 3. 36. his wrath abideth on them. 2. In respect of the measure: It is milder to∣wards his own people, then to others. For the unrighteous, he proportions his Judgements, not to their strengths, but to their deserts: For his own people, he proportions his corrections, not to their deserts, but to their strengths. For the former, he minds not what they can beare by their powers, but what they have deserved by their sinnes. For the other, he considers not what their sinnes deserve, but what their Spi∣rits can sustaine. His most bitter wrath to his own people, is always sweetned with his mercy. Pia 99. 8. Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions. He brings a scourge in one hand, and a pardon in the other: and while he draws blood of the flesh, he forgives the soul. 3. In regard of the end. Rom. 9. 22. The wicked are the
vessels of wrath: and as their sin makes them fit for Gods anger, so his anger makes them sit for destruction. But for his own people; 1 Cor. 11. 32 They are chastened of the Lord, that they might not be con∣demned with the world. Whether he inflict up∣on them punishments for sinne, or suffer them to fall into sin for punishments, yet all shall work to their good. Heb. 12. 11. his corrections are but medicines, bringing forth the quiet fruit of righteousnesse. He lets them fall into some hainous crime, but it is to waken their repentance. Small spots upon a gar∣ment are not minded; we seldome are so curi∣ous as to wash out them. But when a great spot comes, a fowle staine, we then scower and elense it, to get out that; and so wee get out all the little spots too. Sinnes of a lesser size never trouble us; we mind not the washing out of them with our sorrowfull tears: But when a great sin comes, and disquiets the conscience, then repentance, that old landresse is called for: and in that lardar we wash out both the great of∣fence, and all the rest. So God suffers us to fall into some grosse and grievous sinne, as a fa∣ther suffers his little child to burne his finger in the flame, that his whole body may not fall into the fire. All these differences are exprest by the Pro∣phet, Isaiah. 1. Forthe time▪ Isa. 28. 24 Doth the plough∣man plough all the day to sow? God doth not con∣tinue ploughing all day long furrows upon our backs, but when he hath broken up the fallow grounds of our hearts, he thensowes in the seed
of his comforts. 2. For the measure; Isa. 27 7. Hath he plagued Israel, as he hath plagued the enemies of Israel? He sinites his Israel in the branches, and in the bunches; cuts down some of her superflu∣ous boughes, and plucks off clusters of her rotten grapes: But the wicked he smites at the very root. 3. For the end; Isa. 27. 9. The fornace of his wrath shall but purge away our drosse, and make us pure metall, fit for the stampe of his owne I∣mage. Yet for all this, God hath been grievously angry with his own people: Yea, their sins an∣ger him most of all; because together with wick∣ednesse, there is unkindnesse. As dearly as he loves them, their sinnes may provoke him. Our interest in God is so far from excusing our ini∣quities, that it aggravates them. Of all others, the transgression of his own people shall not passe unpunished. The nearer we are to him, the nea∣rer do our offences touch him; as a man more takes to heart a discourtesie done by a friend, then a great injury by a stranger. Pagans may blas∣pheme, and bezzle, and defile the marriage-bed, and yet God let them alone: but he will not en∣dure these sinnes in his own people. The more hee loves us, the greater should our love be to him: now love and unkindnesse cannot stand together. If we revolt from our Maker, as Absolom thought Hushai had renounced David, may he not justly expostulate with us, Is this thy Kindnesse to thy friend? there is no such irksome disobedience, as where God looks for service. John 1. 11. He came unto
his own, and his own received him not: O, that could not chuse but trouble him. As Demades said to Philip King of Macedon, and at a time when he well deserved it; Cùm fortuna tibi Agamemnonis personam imposuerit, nonne pudet te Thirsitem agere? When fortune hath made thee an Agamemnon, art thou not ashamed to play Thirsites? When God hath honoured us for his own people, with the noble name of Christians is it not a shame for us to play the Pagans? u Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God. Yet that people may so farre an∣ger him, that he will take away not onely their temporall, but even their spirituall happinesse. Those seven Churches of Asia were Gods owne people: yet the Gospel was not fastned to their territories; as the old Romans pinnioned their goddesse Victoria, or their apish posterity doe the Catholick faith, to their own infallible Chaire. But as they had a time to breathe, so a time to expire: and so hath my fourth proposition. There is but one gradation more. 5. God may be angry with his people that pray∣eth. Wherein we have two main observations. First, The wonder, that God will be angry at our prayers. Secondly, the answer, which re∣solves the wonder; shewing why our very prayers may anger him. Either of these is back'd with three circumstances. 1. For the wonder, that God is angry with his people that prayeth.
1. All the other conclusions are easily granted: God may be angry, and angry very long, and angry with the whole people, and angry with his own people; all this because of their sins: But that he should be angry at their prayers, this is the wonder. He hath commanded us to pray, and will he be offended with us for doing his com∣mand? Angry against our prayer! He hath com∣mended to us Prayer, as the only means to as∣swage his anger: and yet is hee angry at our Prayer? Psa. 106. 30. Phinehas prayed, and his anger was pacified: Num. 16. 15. Aaron prayed, and the plague ceased: and will he now be angry with the people that prayeth? He is a God that heareth prayer: Psal. 65. 2. O thou that hearest prayer, to thee shall all all flesh come: and does he now reject prayer? He hath so stiled his own house; Oratorium, the house of prayer: and to them that pray unto him in his house, he hath promised peace; Hag. 2. 9. In this house will I give peace, saith the Lord of hostes. Peace and wrath are contraries: how should prayer procure peace, when God is angry at prayer? Prayer is so noble, that under it is comprehended the whole worship of God: Rom. 10. 13. Whosoever calleth on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: and yet wil God be angry at the prayer of his people? It is a great honour that God will vouchsafe to speake unto man: but a far greater honour, that man is allowed to speak unto God: the very An∣gels stand in admiration of it: and yet what comfort is there in that, when God is angry at the prayer of his people? What blessing is there,
which our prayers cannot infeoffe us in? Wee send up Prayer to God with the same confidence, that Adoniah sent Bathsheba to Solomon, 1 Kin. 2. 17. the King will deny thee nothing: and will God bee angry at prayer? It is the onely means we have to pacifie him, Prayer: and shall our Prayer an∣ger him? Alas, what hope is left us, when God is angry at Prayer? This hath often turned away his wrath, and does it now incense his wrath? If we should not pray, he would then be angry: and when we do pray, is he angry too? What, neither way pleased? What is the reason why there is so much empty cask in Gods cellar, but for want of prayer? Jam. 4. 2. Ye have not, be∣cause ye ask not: and shall not prayer obtain fa∣vour? Josh. 7. 8. Oh Lord, what shall I say (it was the com∣plaint of Joshua) when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies? So, what shal we say, what shall we do, when God turneth back our prayers? Why is it called the throne of Grace, before which wee present our prayers; if that throne send forth nothing but beams of wrath? We look for grace, and a favourable audience of our petitions; but alas, what shall become of us, when God is angry at our very prayers? 2. How wonderfull is the power of prayer? Exo. 32. 10. Let me alone, saith God to Moses: who would look for such a word from God to man, as let me alone? As yet Moses had said nothing: be∣fore he opens his mouth, God prevents his im∣portunity, as foreseeing the holy violence of
prayer▪ Moses stood trembling before the Maje∣sty of his Maker, as fearing his dire revenge: and, yet that Maker doth (after a sort) sollicite Moses for leave to revenge; let me alone. As it was afterwards said of Christ, concerning some pla∣ces, that he could do no miracles there, because of their unbelief: So one would think, that God could do no Judgements here, because of Moses his faith. Let me alone; why, what can resist God? Yes, Prayer can resist him. Such is his mercy, that he hath (as it were) obliged his power, to the faith of our Prayer. He enables us to resist him∣selfe: Seipsum vincit. The servent prayer of the faithfull, can bind the hands of the Almighty. What is there that God can do, which Prayer cannot do? O mighty, I had almost said, Al∣mighty Prayer! What a hand is that which can hold omnipotence? What wings are those that can overtake infinitenesse▪ Yet alas, we may now mourn over Prayer, as David did over Jonathan; 2 Sam. 1. 25. How are the mighty fallen! Prayer hath lost her force with God, vvhen God is an∣gry with prayer. Her wings are clipt, that she can∣not mount: Her bow is broken; she cannot shoot an arrow that reaches the marke. Lam. 1. 1. She is be∣come a widow, as it was lamented over Jerusa∣lem, desolate and solitary, that was a Princesse among the Provinces, and a Queen among the nations. She sits weeping in the dust, and hath almost forgot the use of speech. She mournes not so much for Mary's abstulerunt Dominum, for she knows vvhere to find him; as that our sins
Abstulerunt Domini favorem, and she knows not how to pacifie him: And how should she, when God is angry with his people that prayeth? Where is the strength of this Samson? What is be∣come of that power, which was wont to com∣mand heaven and earth? The visible heavens have been opened by prayer: Jam. 5. 18. so Elias brought down raine. The invisible heavens have been opened by prayer▪ so the penitent malefactor got from the Crosse into Paradise. Act. 7. 56. So ste∣phen saw the heavens opened, and the Sonne of man standing at the right hand of God, Omnia vincentem vincit. It was wont to be an especiall favourite of God; but now (alas) it is cast out of favour, for God is angry with prayer. Lam. 3. 44. Thou hast covered thy selfe with a thick cloud, that our prayer should not passe thorow. This is a wofull condition of our souls, when the Lord is angry at our prayers: when he will not hear them, not answer them, it is a cause of sadnesse in us; but much more, when he is angry with them. Eze. 8. 18. Therefore will I deale in fury: though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. This is fury indeed: Before, the ancients of Israel had said, The Lord se∣eth us not, he hath forsaken the earth: There they deny God eyes, and here he denyes them ears. A burning wrath; as the O∣riginall hath it; How long wilt thou smoak against the prayer of thy people? 3. And of thy people: this encreaseth the wonder. For God to stopp his ears against the
prayers of the Heathen, to reject the petitions of Idolaters, to despise a devotion done before painted blocks and Images, is no marvel. For they dishonour him in their prayers; and God will be angry with any thing that eclipseth his glory. But he does not use to slight those that serve him, and continue in his holy wor∣ship. It is strange that hee should bee angry at the prayer of his own people: Angry with them whom hee hath chosen; angry with them long, and angry with them at their very prayers. This must bee some extra∣ordinary wrath: and so you have all the circumstances that may advance the won∣der. Now for the Answer that takes off this admiration; and satisfies us with some rea∣sons, why God may bee angry with his peo∣ple that prayeth. God is never angry at his people without a cause: and it must be a great cause that makes him angry with them in their devotions: whereof wee have three considera∣tions. 1. There may be infirmities enough in our very Prayers, to make them unaccepta∣ble. As if they bee, 1. Exanimes, without life and soul: when the heart knowes not what the tongue utters. 2. Or Perfunctorie; for God will none of those prayers, that come out of fained lips. 3. Or Tentativae; for they that will petere tentando, tempt God in prayer, shall go without. 4. Or fluctuantes, of a wild and
wandring discourse, ranging up and down; which the Apostle calls, beating the aire: as huntsmen beat the bushes, or Saul sought his fa∣thers asses. Such prayers will not stumble upon the Kingdome of Heaven. 5. Or if they bee Praeproperae, run over in hast: as some use to choppe up their prayers, and thinke long till they have done. But they that pray in such hast, shall bee heard at leisure. 6. Or sine fiducia: the faithlesse man had as good hold his peace, as pray. Hee may babble, but prayes not: hee prayes infectually, and receives not. He may lift up his hands, but hee does not lift up his heart. Onely the prayer of the righteous a∣vaileth, and onely the beleever is righteous. But the formall devotion of a faithlesse man, is not worth that crust of bread which hee askes. 7. Or sine humilitate: so the Pharisees prayer was not properly Supplicatio, but superlatio. A pre∣sumptuous Prayer profanes the Name of God, in stead of Adoring it. All, or any of these de∣fects may marre the successe of our Prayers. 2. But such is the mercy of our God, that he will winke at many infirmities in our devotions: and does not reject the Prayer of an honest heart, because of some weaknesse in the petitioner. It must bee a greater cause then all this, that makes God angry at our prayers. In generall, it is sinne. Joh. 9. 31. We know that God heareth not sinners: but if a man doth his will, him he heareth. Ps. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. They bee our sins that block
up the passage of our prayers. It is not the vast distance between Heaven and earth, not the thick clouds, not the threefold regions, nor the seven∣fold Orbes, nor the firmament of starrs, but on∣ly our sinnes, that hinder the ascent of our prayers. When you make many prayers, I will not hear you; Why? Isa. 5. 15. Because your hands are full of blood. God will none of those petitions, that are pre∣sented to him with bloody hands. Our prayers are our bills of exchange; and they are allowed in Heaven, when they come from pious and hum∣ble hearts: But if wee bee broken in our religion, and bankrouts of grace, God will protest our bills, hee will not bee wonne with our prayers. Thus sinn is the generall cause. 3. In particular, it is the hypocrisie of sinne, or the sinne of hypocrisie, that makes God so an∣gry with our prayers. When wee honour him with the prostration of our bodies, and sollicite him with the petitions of our lips, and yet stil dis∣honour him in our sinfull lives, is not this hypo∣crisie? When we speak before him in the Tem∣ple as suppliants, and sinne against him abroad like rebells, is not this hypocrisie? Like the outlaw, that sues to the King for a pardon, and yet resolves to live in rebellion. We will not part with our beloved sinnes, and yet begge the removall of Judgements; will not this dis∣simulation make God angry with our very prayers? If wee shall, Judas-like, kisse his Throne with the Devotion of our lipps, and be∣tray
his Honour with the wicked works of our hands, should he not be angry at our prayers? Wee make as if we did lift up our hands unto him, but indeed we stretch out our hands against him: if this be prayer, it is such a one as deserves an∣ger. Fear can make the Divell himselfe fall to his prayers; Lu. 8. 28. I beseech thee, torment mee not. Another request he made, which Christ granted; but it was in wrath, not in favour. The pride of our hearts, the covetousnesse of our hands, the blasphemy of our mouthes, the uncleannesse of our lusts, the wickednesse of our lives; these make God angry with our prayers. If wee could bee throughly angry at our sinnes, God would cease to be angry at our prayers. But so long as wee run on in those sinful courses upon earth, let us look for no favourable audience from heaven. Doe good, and continue it: then pray for good, and have it. It hath been said, loquere ut te videam, speak that I may see thee: so saith God to man; Operare ut te audiam, worke that I may heare thee. If we dishonour Gods Name by our oaths and blasphemies, and upon every triviall occa∣sion tosse it in our profane mouthes; in vaine we pray, Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, Hallowed be thy Name. If we heare the Gospel preached, and receive no instruction by it, nor give any regard or obedience to it; in vaine wee pray, Adveniat regnum tuum, thy Kingdome come. If the current of our affections and actions runs crosse to the will of God; in vain we pray, Fiat voluntas tua, Thy will be done. If we extort the bread of the poor
out of their hands, or seek to live by violence or oppression; in vain we pray, Panem nostrum da no∣bis quotidianum, Give us this day our daily bread: For this is to attempt to have it whether God will or no: he does not give it, but we snatch it. Whiles we are indulgent to our darling sinnes, and will not part with the deare delight of our bloods, in vain we pray, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, For∣give us our trespasses. Whiles we seek to revenge our wrongs upon others, and bear malice in our hears; our Sicut nos dimittimus, As wee forgive them that trespasse against us, doth but begge for vengeance upon our own heads. All the while that we listen to the suggestions of Satan, and like the allurements of the world, and awaken our owne lusts to tempt our selves; it is but a mocke∣ry to pray, In tentationem ne nos inducas, lead us not into temptation. While we seek that which is evill, and study that which is evill, and runne with greedinesse into evill; in vaine we pray, Li∣ber a nos à malo, Deliver us from evill. We do but flatter God, and complement with him, when we conclude with Tuum est regnam, potentia, & gloria; Thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory; for it is our own glory we seeks after, not his. All this cannot keep him from being angry with our prayers. So long as his people rebelleth, he wil be angry with his people that prayeth. For some Use. If God be angry with them that pray, what will he be with them that do not pray? With them that break his laws, and never cry him mer∣cy,
with them that live in wickednesse, and ne∣ver ask him forgivenesse? The ungodly call not Psa. 14 4. upon the Lord: will he not be much more angry with them? God is not in all their thoughts: but Psal. 10. 4. they are in the thoughts of God. He thinks on them with indignation, and will remember them to their cost. Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: yes, hee will Psa. 1 37. 7. remember them in the day of their destru∣ction. If God be sometimes angry at our prayers, how will he brooke our curses? If he beat back our petitions, how will he take vengeance on our blas∣phemies? Out of the same mouth proceedeth bles∣sing Jam. 3. 10. and cursing: but God will not accept of a blessing, from a mouth that is so used to cursing. If he may be so angry with a people that prayeth, what will his wrath do to a people that swea∣reth? Think this, ye that (if it were possible) would swear God out of his Throne, and the Judge of all the world out of his Tribunall: your very prayers are abominable: your blasphemous breaths have put a stink into all your sacrifices. That tongue is fit for nothing but flames, which so flameth with oaths and execrations. Your prayers cannot be heard, by reason of your sins: but your blasphemies shall be heard and plagued, notwithstanding your prayers. If the In∣strument gives a harsh sound, there is trou∣ble in stead of inusick: a jarring organ grates the eares, rather then delights them. Our sinues have put all our Instruments out of
tune, and for them God is angry at our very prayers. There is no way to take off his anger, but by turning from our wickednesse. If we break off our sinnes, he will leave a blessing behind Joel 2. 14. him, even a meat-offering, and a drink-offering to the Lord: he will both give, and take our sa∣crifice. Let us do thus, and prove him, whether Mal. 3. 10. he will not open the windows of heaven. Our re∣pentance and righteousnesse shall open heaven, so that our prayers may goe up for a blessing, and a blessing shall come down upon our prayers. Prayer is vox fidei, as John Baptist was vox Chri∣sti: if we mourne, and do not pray, our faith hath lost her voice: and prayer without faith, is John without Christ, a voice without a word. Faith is the soul, and repentance is the life of Prayer; and a prayer without them, hath neither life nor soul. If we beleeve not, we are yet in our sinnes: if we repent not, our sinnes are yet in us: and so long as this state continueth, no wonder if God be angry with his People that prayeth. But first will I wash mine hands in innocency, and Psal. 26. 6. then will I compasse thine Altar. Then shall my Prayer be set before thee as incense; and the Ps. 141. 2. lifting up of my hands like the Evening sacri∣fice. When with the sword of severe and im∣partiall repentance, wee have cut the throate of our sins, and done execution upon our own lusts: then let us solicite heaven with our Prayers: then Pray, and speed: then come, and welcome: no Anger, but all mercy then. Then the Cour∣tiers
about the King in Heaven, make room for prayer. Then the Prince himselfe wil take prayer into his own hand, and with a gracious medi∣ation present it to his Father. Then mittimus preces & lacrymas ad Deum legatos. Then is that Court of Audience ready to receive and answer Cypr. our Ambassadours, which bee our Prayers and Tears. Then Saint John sees twelve gates in hea∣ven, all open, and all day open, to entertain such suitors. This is our refuge, and that a sure one. Although the Enemy begirts a City with never so straight a siege, and stop up all the passages; yet he cannot block up the passage to Heaven: So long as that is open, and God in league with us, there may bee reliefe and succour had from thence by prayer. Faith is a better engineer then was Dadalus; and yet he could make a shift to frame wings; with which hee made an es∣cape over those high walls, wherein he was im∣prisoned. Restat iter coelo, tentabimus ire. Let Pharaoh bee behind, the red sea before, the high rocks and mountaines on every side; yet Is∣rael can find a way for all that. When there is no other way to escape danger, a Christian can go by heaven, and avoid all by prayer. As it is the heaviest malediction, Let his prayer be turned into sin: so it is a happy blessing, when our sinne Psal. 109. 7. is turned into prayer; when sinne is so done away, that prayer may take place. Then shall Jacobs ladder be never empty of Angels; our prayers ascending to heaven, and Gods blessings descen∣ding
upon us. Then shall prayer disburden our hearts of all sorrowes, and God shall fill them with his sweet comforts. Then shalt we sing with chearfull voices; Blessed be the Lord, that hath not turned away our praier from him, nor his mercie Psal. 66. 20. from us. Amen. FINIS.
MAN'S COMFORT. PSALM 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. HEaven is a place of infinite glo∣ry and joy; yet is there little joy or glory in the way thi∣ther. The passage rather lies through much tribulati∣on: Act. 14. 22. so trouble some a galle∣ry leads to so happy a bed∣chamber. There is not a soul in the cluster of mankind exempted from sorrow; much lesse shall those grapes escape pressing, which God hath reserved for his own cup. All that will live god∣ly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. Not all that 2 Tim. 3. 12. live, but all that live godly: nor all that live god∣ly in respect of outward form, but th it live god∣ly in Christ. Paul, his Atturney, pleads their afflictions with an Oportet: and lest some should look for a dispensation, he backs it with an Om∣nis.
The Saints that have overcome the hill, be singing above: we that are climbing up, must be groaning all the way. The Anthems in-the up per Quire, the Church Triumphant, are all Hymns of joy: the militant part must bee content with sad tunes in this valley of tears. Not that the blessednesse of Immortality is no more perfect, but that it needs a foil of perplexity to set it off. Not that the joy of heaven is no more sweet, but that it needs the sowreness of the world to give it a tast. Not that the peace and plenty of Canaan, re∣quired the wants and molestations of this wilder∣nesse to commend it. But so it pleaseth the Al∣mighty King, who of his own free grace doth give the preferment, to interpose the conditions: that the sorrow and ingloriousnesse of this world, should be the throughfare to the glories and joyes of his Kingdome. For if it pleased him to conse∣crate the Prince and Captaine of our salvation through sufferings; what priveledg can the common souldiers and subjects expect? Deus Filium ha∣buit unum sine peccato, nullum sine flagell. Wee that hold our inheritance in Capite, have no other title to it then Christ had before us; by suf∣fering. When we consider David and his troubles, we say. Ecce dolores viri, behold the sorrowes of a man. But when we consider the Sonne of David, and his passion; we say, Ecce vir dolorum, Be∣hold the man of sorrowes. Indeed, if the one bal∣lance were full of sorrows, and the other quite em∣pty of comforts, there were an unequall poise.
They that do not finde some joy in their sorrows, some comfort in their dejections, in this world, are in a fearfull danger of missing both in the next. But as it is said in case of bodily sicknesse; If the patient and the disease joyne, then in vaine is the Physician: if the disease and the Physician con∣spire, then wo be to the patient: but if the pa∣tient and the Physician accord, then vanisheth the disease. So we may observe in spirituall di∣stempers: if the soul and sorrow desperately com∣bine, then the Spirit departs, the Physician is grieved: if God and sorrow joyne▪ in anger, in anguish; the former justly, the other sharply, then wo to the soul, for that cannot be comforted: but if the soul by faith, and God by grace, unite themselves, then away flies sorrow, for that is ex∣pelled. Here Davids soul joynes it self with the spirit of consolation; and sorrow loseth the day, the end is comfort. In the multitude of my thoughts within mee, thy comforts delight my soul. Here is a twofold Army, one marching a∣gainst another: Seditio, and Sedatio: an insurre∣ction, and a debellation; a tumult, and the ap∣peasing of it: a band of thoughts assaulting, and an Host of comforts repelling, resisting, prote∣cting. There is a multitude of those thoughts, and no lesse is the number of these comforts. Those troublous thoughts have got into the citadel of the heart, Apud me, within me: and these con∣solatory forces have entred as farr, even into the soul; They delight my soul. Those thoughts
fight under the colours of flesh and blood, but these comforts under the Banner of God; They are My thoughts, but Thy comforts: the cogitations of man, the consolations of Jesus Christ. 1. Look upon the adversary power; In the mul∣titude of my thoughts within me. 1. O that they were some externall grievances, a forraign warr, no domestick, intestine, civill broiles; not tur∣bulent thoughts. 2. Or if they be thoughts, re∣bellious, heart-breaking cogitations; yet that there were but some few of them, that they might be sooner suppressed; not so numerous, not a mul∣titude of thoughts. 3. Or if they must bee thoughts, and a multitude; yet that they had chosen some other place to rise in, not my Heart, the Fort, or Court, or Bedchamber of my spi∣rit; that they had not presumed unto so bold approaches, as to mutine Apud me, within my heart, nearer and closer to mee then mine owne bowels. But now, to bee Thoughts, of so tu∣multuous a nature: Multitudes, of so mighty a number: Within me, of so fearfull a danger; with∣out vent, composition, or quiet; here is a ful anxiety. 2. View the defensive forces; and in the midst of this conspiracy make room for preservation; Thy comforts delight my soul. 1. They are comforts: against litigions and unquiet thoughts, a work of peace; Comforts. 2. They are not scant & niggardly; but against amultitude of thoughts, many Comforts; and every one able to quell a whole rout of distra∣ctions. 3. They are thy comforts; not proceeding
men or Angels, but immediately from the Spirit of consolation: against My sorrows, Thy com∣forts. 4. They do not onely pitch then tents about me, or like a subsidiary guard, environ me: but they take up their residence in the heart of my heart, In my soul. These refresh more then the other can offend: against the thoughts in my heart, thy comforts delight my soul. Thus if we be not entred into Aceldama, a field of blood; yet we are got into Meribah, a field of strife; or the mountains of ether, a field of division: not unlike that of Rebecca's womb, where Cant. 2. 17. Jacob strove with Esau for the victory. We have seen both the Armies; now let us martiall them into their proper ranks, setting both the squadrons in their due stations and postures; and then ob∣serve the successe or event of the battell. And because the malignant Host is first entred into the ground of my text, consider with me, 1. The rebells or mutiners, Thoughts. 2. The number of them; no less then a multitude, many thoughts. 3. The Captain, whose colours they bear; a disquieted mind; My thoughts. 4. The field where the battel is fought; in the heart; Apud me, within me. In the other Army we find. 1. Quanta, how puissant they are; Comforts. 2. Quota, how many they are, indefinitely set down; A∣bundant comfort. 3. Cujus, whose they are▪ The Lords, he is their generall; Thy comforts. 4. Quid operantur, what they do: they delight the soul. In the nature of them; being Comforts,
there is tranquility: in the number of them, be∣ing many comforts, there is sufficiency: in the owner of them, being Thy comforts, there is omnipotency: in the effect of them, delighting the soul, there is security. There is no fear in them, for they come for peace; they are Com∣forts. There is no weaknesse in them, for they come in troopes, they are many comforts. There is no disorder in them, for the God of wisdome is their Captain, and leads their forces, they are Thy comforts. There is no trouble in them, for they evangelize joy, They delight the soul. 1. The Rebells are thoughts. Man is an a∣bridgment of the world, and is not exceeded by it, but in quantity, his pieces be not pauciora, sed minora. If all the veins of our bodies were ex∣tended to rivers, our sinews to mines, our muscles to mountaines, our bones to quarries of stone, our eyes to the bignesse of the Sunne and Moon, and all other parts to the proportion of such things as correspond to them in the world; man might stride over the sea, as the Hebrews fained of A∣dam; the aire would bee too little for him to move in, and the whole firmament but enough for this Starre; yea indeed, this little world would be the great one, and that great world ap∣pear but the little one. There is nothing in the world for which we may not find some answera∣ble part in man: but there is something in man for which we can find no answerable part in the world: I need not say Part; for the whole world is
not able to give any representation. Man hath a soul, made after the Image of God: of this the world can yeild no resemblance. The world produceth innumerable creatures; man yet in more abundance. Our creatures are our thoughts, creatures that are borne Gyants; that can reach from east to west, from earth to heaven. These can survey the whole earth, bestride the ocean, comprehend the vast air, and span the very firma∣ment. How capable, how active is the soul of man! It is even comprehensive of universality, and hath virtutem ad infinita: nature hath set no limits to the thoughts of the soul. It can passe by her nim∣ble wings from earth to heaven in a moment it can be all things, comprehend all things, know that which is, and conceive of that which never was, never shall be. The heart is but a little house, and hath but three chambers, yet there is room enough for a world of guests. God, the Creator of all, made this soul in a Cottage of clay, and this soul is a kind of Creator too: for though it dwell in a close prison, it can produce creatures, Thoughts: and any one of these creatures can move with the Heavens, move faster then the Heavens; over take the Sun, and overgoe the Sun; con∣template that which the Sun never saw, even the dreadfull abysse of hell, and a glimpse of the glory of Heaven. So various and innumerable are the thoughts of man, that hee had need of an astrolobe, to marke in what height and elevation they are; and so either to ad∣vance
them, or stoope them, as they de∣serve. There be three sorts of actions proceeding from the soul: some internal and immaeriall, as the pure acts of our wits and wills; some external and materiall, as the meer acts of our sense o∣thers mixt, between both, and bordering upon both the former; which Saint Augustine sayes, the Greeks call , the Latines Perturbationes. As the heart inspireth one and the same strength and life into all the parts of the body, for the better discharge of their diverse functions; though all the parts do not receive it in the same degree. The stomack by the vertue it receiveth, is made able to digest: the liver, to concoct the nutriment into blood: the spleen like a spunge, by sucking up the melancholy spirits, to purge the vital parts. So the soul breeds all these creatures, gives life to all these thoughts; yet according to their severall acts and offices, they have several names. If they be sensitive, we call them passions: if sen∣suall, lusts: if fantasticall, Imaginations: if reasonable, arguments: if reflective, consci∣ence: as they are evill, the suggestions of Satan: as good, the motions of the holy Ghost. As the world produceth vipers, and serpents, and venemous creatures, wormes and caterpillars, that would devour their parent: so the soul breeds no∣xious and mutinous thoughts, that are like an earth∣quake in her bowels; and whiles they maintain civil broiles and factions, one against another, she feels the smart of all.
Some thoughts be the darts of Satan; and these Non nocent, sinon placent: we cannot keep theeves from looking in at our widowes, we need not give them entertainment with open doors. As the Hermite said, he could not hinder the birds from flying over his head; but he could keep them from building their nests in his haire. Wash thy heart from iniquity, that thou maist bee saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge with∣in Jer. 4. 14. thee? They may be passengers, they must not be sojourners: God hath made a Statute a∣gainst such inmates: it is an unblest hospitality that gives them lodging: he is no friend to the King that harbours these Seminaries. Other thoughts are the motions of Gods spirit; and these must not only be guests, but familiar friends: salutation is not here enough, but glad entertain∣ment, welcome, and indulgence. Let no man like himself the better for some good thoughts: the praise and benefit of these motions is not in the receit, but in the retention. Easie occasions will fright away good thoughts from a carnall heart: like children, which if a bird do but flie in their way, cast their eye from their book. But Davids thoughts here were anxious, commotive thoughts; otherwise they stood not in such need of comforts. It is likely that they were either Ti∣moris, fearfull thoughts; or Doloris, sorrowfull thoughts: Thoughts of fear for what might bee, or thoughts of sorrow for what already was. The thoughts of fear are troublesome enough
as the ill affections of the spleen do mingle them∣selves with every infirmity of the body: no lesse doth fear infinuate it self into every passion of the mind. David might find this complication in his thoughts: I will please Saul with my harpe: but then fear replies, he will strike me through with his Javelin. He will give me his own daughter in marriage: but fear says again, How if this prove a fatall dowry, if this match be my snare! I will refuge my self with Achish at Gath: yet what trust is there in Infidels? I will lie hidden in Keilah, or Hachilah; but fear suggests, How if the Zi∣phites discover me? What shall I do? whi∣ther shall I go? where shall I rest? These were thoughts that stood in great need of com∣fort. The thoughts of sorrow are yet more distra∣ctive; and such were this royall Prophets: as our vulgar reads; In the multitude of the sorrowes that I had in my heart. What was the cause of those griefs: The slipping of his foot, his errors, his deviations, his sinnes. Other sorrowes may disquiet the soul: none but these have the promise to be comforted. As in martyrdome, it is not the sword or torture; not what we suffer, but why, that makes us martyrs. So in our sor∣rowes, it is not how deep they penetrate, or how sharply they cruciate, but wherefore, that ap∣proves their goodnesse. If our sins be the why of our sorrowes, we are blessed. Blessed are they that thus mourne, for they shall be comforted. Vaine Mat. 5. 4. are the sighes and groanes that proceed onely
from the thought of worldly losses. A medicine that cureth the eyes, we say, was made for the eyes, and for nothing else. We lose our wealth, and sorrow for it; will sorrow recover it?Chrys. wee are despised or abused, and grieve for it I: will grief right us? We bury our friends, and mourn for them; will mourning restore them to us? we are crossed by our unruly children, and weep for it: will weeping rectifie them? We are an∣guished in our bodies with paines and sickness, and are sorry for it: will sorrow heal us, nay wil it not rather hurt us? All our thoughts, and cares, and griefes, and tears can do us no good, no relief in these calamities: sorrow was not made for these things. But we sin, and offend the Lord; and we are sorrowfull for it; here is the disease for which sorrow is the proper remedy: penitent sorrow shall take away sin. Quamvis peccavit David, quod silent reges: tamen poeni∣tentiam egit,Chrys. Hom. 2. Ad pop. Antioch flevit, jejunavit, quod non solent reges: saith Saint Ambrose, who wrote him an apologie. While the ground of our lesson is our sinne, the choisest descant on it must bee our sorrow. Our thoughts and griefes may bee many; but if they bee not spent upon our sinnes, wee shall not bee comfor∣ted. 2. The number of them is a multitude: wee may say of sorrows, as it is said of shrewd turnes; they seldome come single. Like a volley of fol∣ding waves, one tumbling upon the neck of a∣nother; all threatning to overwhelme us: Undae
super advenit unda. It is too scant a name which Leah gave her son, calling him Gad, a troope com∣eth: Gen. 30. 11. and but enough, what the demoniacke an∣swered Christ: My name is Legion, for we are many. If they were a multitude, and not sor∣rowes; Marke 5. 9. the more the merryer: if they were sor∣rows, and not a multitude, then the fewer the better cheare. But to bee disquieting thoughts, and a multitude, makes up a terrible agony. Many are the troubles of the righteous: great or many, Psal. 34. 19. a great many, a great deal too many; but for the comfort of the deliverance. When Jobs af∣flictions began, they came in troops and hurries. so thick that hee could scarce take breath: one messenger pressing in with his-wofull relation, before the other could have ended his sad tale: While he was yet speaking. How did that fugi∣tive Prophet amplifie and aggravate his dangers? Job 1. 16. Thou hadst cast mee into the deepe, in the midst of the seas, and the flouds compassed me a∣bout: all thy waves and billowes passed over mee. Jonah 2. 3. It was no shallow river, but the sea: not neare the shore, but in the midst of the sea: nor was he floting on the waves, but plunged into the deep or bottom; the flouds compassing, the billows overwhelming, to keep him down. I need not travel for exem∣plifications. Let him be our instance, that spake what he felt, and felt what he spake; sorrowes enough to break any heart, but that which God had framed according to his own. His sonne Amnon ravi∣sheth his own sister, and is murdered by his own
brother: that murder is seconded with Treason, that Treason with an incestuous constupration: the insurrection of his own son hath driven him from his house, from his throne, from the Arke of God all this went near him: that son is slain by his servant, and that went nearer him. In what a miserable perplexity may wee thinke the heart of this good King all the while? Here was thought upon thought, thought against thought; how at once to spare the sonne of David, and to save the Father of Absolom: fear against hope, north against south, wind against tide, Arma armis contraria, flu∣ctibus undae; a multitude of thoughts, able to rend the heart in pieces, but for that recol∣lection of mercy, Thy comforts delight my soul. Not seldome fares it thus with us; Thought calls to thought, jealousie to fear, fear to sorrow, sorrow to despaire; and these furies leap upon the heart as a stage, beginning to act their tra∣gicall parts. Man hath more wheels moving in him then a clock: onely the difference is, that the wheeles of a clocke move all one way; whereas his faculties, like the epicycles, have a rapt motion: his sensitive appetite gives him one motion, his fantasie another, his reason a third, and his imperious, impetuons will crosseth them all, driving the chariot of his affections with the fury of Jehu: he desires, and thinks, and chuseth, argues, consents, and dislikes, and makes more businesse then time it self. There
are not so many houres in a year, as there may be thoughts in an hour. The Philosopher that Plura machina∣tur cor meum uno momento, quam in omnes homines perfice∣re possunt uno anno Hugo l. 3 de Anima. had shamed himselfe by weakly disputing with A∣drian the Emperour, thus excused himself to his friend; Would you have me contend with him, that commands thirty Legions? Alas, what can quiet that soul, which is distracted with such legi∣ons and multitudes of thoughts, and throngs of sor∣rowes? 3. The Captaine of this troublesome rout is himselfe; My thoughts. From what suggestion soever our thoughts come, wee call them our own: Whosoever begot the babe, the mother calls it her own child. Indeed, the praise and propriety of good motions we ascribe onely to God, without whom wee cannot so much as think a good thought: as the channell may ga∣ther filth of it selfe, but it cannot have a drop of pure water but from the fountain. Bad sugge∣stions, though they proceed from Satan, we call them our own, because they are bred in the womb of our natural corruption: stubble is blown by the winde into the fire, and being inflamed, it becomes fire. The Divel tempted David to sin; yet he calls it his sin; not Satans, but his own; I will be sorry for my sinne. Howe∣ver Epictetus could say, when evil happens to a man, one of the vulgar would blame others, a young Philosopher would blame himself; but one that had dived into the depth of nature, would blame neither the one, nor the other: Yet a Chri∣stian hath learned to blame himselfe; as know∣ing
that all his sorrowes proceed from his sins. My thoughts: thus easie is it with God to make a man become his own punisher. Under whose regiment are all these troubles? Under my selfe, My thoughts. As God threatens Tyre, that ancient and glorious City; that her owne feet shall carry her a farre off to sojourne: Our own Isa. 23. 7. feet shall carry us, our own creatures torment us: like diamonds, we are cut with our own dust. When David had numbred the peo∣ple, his own heart smote him: God finds the rod within us, wherewith to scourge us. As some vapor engendred in the cavernes of the earth, struggles for vent; and being barred of free passage, cau∣seth an earthquake in the foundations that bred it. Or as some fiery exhalation wrapp'd up in the bowels of a thick cloud, breakes through that wa∣try resistance, and delers it self to the world with a dreadful noise. So the griefs and perturbations begotten by our own lusts, become terrours within us, and rend our very hearts, till they get vent by confession and repentance: thus do we muster up forces against our own peace. We pray, Lord deli∣ver us from our enemies; and in that number we do wrap up our unthought of selves: for we are our own enemies. Turn thine hand upon mine enemies: for thou canst do it with the turning of an hand: Deliver me from the evil man: who is that? saith S. Psal. 81. 14. Augustine: he is not far to seek: libera me ab homine malo, that is, à meipso: deliver me from the evill man, that is, from my self: I am the aptestto be∣get
destruction upon mine owne soul: no enemy could hurt us, if we were our own friends. But we must not extend it so farre upon this holy King: they were thoughts indeed, and thoughts of sorrow, but of godly sorrow: and he calls them his own, to shew his neere acquaintance with them, My sorrowes. He was not a stranger to his own soul, his heart was not dead flesh. Satan had given him a fall, and he felt not that: sin had given him diverse falls, and he felt not them, neither: at last God undertakes him, wrastles with him, and he gives him a fall too: he felt that, yea and that made him feel all the rest. Now is he sensible of every pang and stitch: the least thorne makes him smart, and he cryes out of the multitude of his sorrowes. There be some that can drowne their griefes in wine and musick, as they did in Hinnom, the cry of the Infants with the noise of the In∣struments: as if they would forget that they are the owners of their own thoughts, because they trouble them. Many deale with their soules, as some old women do with looking glasses: they turne the wrong side toward them, that they might not see the furrowes of their own faces. They are loath to think of a reckoning, least they should despaire of making even the arrerages. Men have the courage to dare to sin, but they dare not look on their soules as they are polluted with sin. I have heard of a melan∣choly man, that would not beleeve he had a
head, till his Physician made him a hat of lead, and put it on: which with the weight infor∣ced him to cry, O his head. So men lost in sensuall pleasures, scarce remember that they have a soul within them, untill miseries, like talents of lead, or quarries of stone, with their heavy pressure squeese out a confes∣sion. Nothings be so neer as a man and his soul: Tot a domus duo sunt; the whole houshold is but two: yea, why should they be called two? we may say in a right sense, Mens cujusque is est quisque: every mans soul is himselfe. If there be any division, sin made it: a just pu∣nishment, at qui nollet cum Deo uniri, non posit in semetipso non dividi. All these quar∣rels and brawles may thanke sinne: that is the makebate betwixt God and us, betwixt us and our selves. But that man and his soul be grie∣uously fallen out, that will not speak one to ano∣ther: when he shall passe a whole day, and not aske his soul how she does? this were too much betwixt man and wife: when he shall he down in his bed, as the beast doth in his litter, with∣out bidding his soul good-night: when he shall have fowled and besmeared his soul with the nasty aspersions of lusts, and not sweep out the dust before he shut the door, not wash his soul with tears, before his eye-lids be closed down with slumber: yea, when he shall have wounded his soul with blasphemies and uncharitable injuries, and then throw it down in a deluge of drinke, as
it were weltring in the own gore, without cal∣ling for repentance, the Chirurgion to dresse it. What madnesse and selfe-hatred is this? When the soul may not have leave to think over her own thoughts; to reflect upon her self, to search her own bruises, to survey the multitude of her sorrowes, and feel in what need she stands of comforts? That, Plerisque notus, ignotus mori∣atur sibi? But the children of God have lear∣ned to commune with their own hearts, to exa∣mine every thought, and to weigh every desire in the balance of the Sanctuary. Whether they find themselves pensive or joyfull, they wil search the cause: As Rebecca said, when she felt the chil∣dren struggle in her wombe, Why am I thus? Whether fear or hope, joy or pain have inva∣ded Gen. 25. 22. my thoughts, let me aske my soul the reason, Why am I thus? The Fathers were excellent good at this: they had their confessions and Soliloquies, familiar conferences with their own hearts; that when a man reads them, hee would think they kept no other company but themselves. Conference with others may make us wise or learned, but conference with our selves is the way to make us holy. Tell thy conscience of all suggestions, as the chast wife (after some peremptory denyalls to her impu∣dent Tempter) professed to tell her husband of those sollicitations: such and such be my thoughts, thus and thus they haunt me, what shall I do with them? Indifferency is no lesse then selfe∣treachery, in matters of such consequence,
that come so neere mee, as to bee Apud me. 4. Within me, for this is the field where the skirmish is fought; within me. It is unhappy when souldiers march over the palaces of peace and seats of Justice, where the Senators of counsell use to sit. If there must be warre, yet let it be in forrain Countries: or if it will bee in our own land, yet let it proceed no further then the borders: but when it is gotten into the chiefe City, though it bee subdued, it will cost a dear victory. As Pyrrhus, when his friends congratulated his victory over the Ro∣mans, with a great losse of his own side; re∣plyed; yes, but if we have such another victo∣ry, we are undone. There is no penitent heart, that hath felt the bitternesse of these combates, remembring what sighes and sorrows, what groanes and tears it cost him to make his peace, but would be loth to be put to the charges of such another conquest. Durius ejicitur, quam non ad∣mittitur hostis: sinne may be kept out with ease, but will not bee driven out save with wofull ex∣pences. Within me: not before mee, as the host of the Philistims lay before Saul; not behind me, as the chariots of Egypt came thundring be∣hind Israel: nor above me, as Fabius Maximus on the mountaine above Hanibal; Imminet nubes, a cloud hangs over me: not round about me, as the Syrians compassed Dothan to take Elisha: but within me. Without were fightings, within 2 Cor. 7. 5.
were feares: and those fears within, were worse then those fightings without. There are exter∣nall calamities able enough to shake the most for∣tified soul: but Summus dolor ab intus. Saint Paul reckons up twelve of his inflicted sufferings, nine dangers, eight continued passions: yet as if all these were scarce worth putting into the cata∣logue, he addes; Besides the things that are with∣out, 2 Cor. 11. 28 he had an inward trouble: the care of the Churches, seeking the lost, rebuking the proud, comforting the dejected: here was the pain. Within me. There may be Bellum intesti∣num, a kind of unkind battell; where victi vi∣ctoresque invicem dolent: the soul bespeaking her affections, as Jocasta did her quarrelling sons, Bellageri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos. According to our Saviours prediction; A mans foes shall be they of his owne houshold. Intra me Matth. 10. 36. Aug. est, quod contra me est: that is within mee, which is against me. We say, he wants an e∣nemy that fights with himself: and because he fights with himselfe, he wants no enemy: Sibi pessimus hostis. With externall assaults we may grapple, threatned mischiefes we may prevent; from persecutours too potent for us, we may hide us: but who shall keep us from our selves? Nescis temeraria, nescis quem fugias, ideoque fugis: Whithersoever wee remove, we carry our sorrowes with us. Outward afflictions are a warre, turbulent affections a worse warre: both against us, but this later is within us. He needs
no other misery, that is troubled within himselfe. Aske not the anger of heaven, nor the trouble of earth, nor the dangers of the sea, nor the ma∣lice of hell, against him whom the anguish of his own thoughts have beaten down. He wil say to all other miserable complainers, you are hap∣py. Outward things may go crosse with us, and yet the peace of the soul remaine sound: but a wounded spirit who can beare? who can cure? As mans heart is the first that lives, and the last that die s: so it is the first that Satan assaults, and the last that he gives over. Yea, were there never a divel, the heart hath an ill spirit of its own to vex it. As some Boroughs of this Land plead a priviledge, that they can hang and draw within themselves: Mans heart is such a corpo∣ration; it can execute it self within it self, with∣out any forrain Judge or executioner. If wee look no further then among the multitude of our thoughts; might we not make a shift to think our selves to hell? If we had neither hands, nor eyes, nor feet, would not our hearts find the way thither! Within me. The proper seat and lodging of these troublesome inmates, the thoughts of sor∣row, is the heart: whithersoever they wander, there they center. Vagabonds taken roguing out of their own precincts, are sent with a pasport to the Town where they were borne▪ there they must be kept. Extravagant thoughts may rove up and down, but back again they must to the heart: the house that hatched them, must har∣bour
them, must answer for them. As all fa∣culties of sense have their severall seats: seeing is confined to the the eyes, hearing to the ears, fee∣ling to the flesh and sinews: so these perturba∣tions are limited to the heart. The locall seat of the sensitive apprehension is the braine; of the sensitive affection, the heart. In the for∣mer is softnesse and moisture, fit to receive intel∣ligible formes: in the other are fiery spirits, fit∣test for passionate and affectionate thoughts. My spirit is overwhelmed, and my heart within me is disolate: In such a distresse, let sense Psalm 143. 4. informe reason, reason speak to will, will to con∣science, conscience to faith, faith to Christ, and Christ to his Father; and they will both send the holy Ghost to comfort us. If there bee a fire in the heart of a City, all the suburbs will come in to quench it. This fire may burne within, but it will breake out. It is as easie to stifle thunder in the cloud, or fire in powder, as sorrow in the heart. It will have eruption, either by the voice in cryes, or by the eyes in tears, or by the speaking silence of the look in a deje∣cted heavinesse. The seat of sorrow is the soule; but it will overflow the boundaries. Why art thou cast downe, O my soule? None aske their eyes why they weep, or their voi∣ces Psalm 43. 5. why they lament, or their hands why they wring themselves: but Anima, quare tam tri∣stis? O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me?
We see now the full advancement of the misery; The thoughts of sorrow, an Army of those thoughts, the combination of that army, the terror of that combination: how miserably must the Country suffer where these rebels march? who can tell the taking of that heart, which feels this combustion within it selfe? These be our ene∣mies, where are our friends? The day is like to be fatally disastrous, if we have no defensive forces. Yes, the Lord shall fight for us, and Exo. 14. 4. we will hold our peace: as Moses comforted Israel when the choice was hard; whether to trust the fu∣ry of the sea before them, or of the Egyptians behind them; Fear not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord; Thy comforts delight my soul. Now are the white ensignes of mercy dis∣played against these bloody streamers: never to a handfull of men almost famished in a fort, did the tidings of fresh aid to raise the siege, arrive more welcome. Lord, if thou hadst been here, John 11. 21. my brother had not dyed. Though this multi∣tude of oppressours overlay my heart, yet Lord, if thou comest, my soul shall not pe∣rish. Let your patience sit out the successe of the battell; and though I wish you not such conflicts; yet if they do come, may you ne∣ver fail of such comforts. Thy comforts delight my soul. 1. Quanta, They are no lesse then comforts: not presumptions, nor promises, nor meer hopes, but solid and sensible comforts. God made comfort on purpose for sorrow: as mercy
would want a subject to exercise upon, but for misery. The blessed Angels are not said to bee comforted (as we use the word) because they ne∣ver knew what heavinesse meant: they are con∣served, they are confirmed, not (properly) com∣forted. There may be joy without any antece∣dent sorrow; as the Angelicall spirits ever were, and ever shall be filled with unspeakable joy. But comfort is the proper physick for trouble; this happy nature was not ordained but for sor∣row. There be some that ducunt in bonis dies suos, that have their wayes strawed with roses and violets; who move onely the paces of plea∣sure: these have no need of Comfort. What Physician ministers cordialls to the strong and healthfull constitution? It is the broad through∣fare of the world, which the Divell is so studi∣ous to smooth, that he leaves not a pebble in the way to offend them: as if he were that tutelar Angel, who hath a charge to look to them, that they dash not their foot against a stone. If they sigh, he sings to them: if they sleep, he sits Psal. 91. 12. by them; whispering to all troubles, (as the the Spouse to the daughters of Jerusalem) I charge you, O ye transgressions of his heart, wa∣ken Cant. 8. 4. him not till he please: Let there be no noise of fear, no alarme of repentance, no susurration of conscience to molest him: peace, peace, lie down in peace, with thy warme sinnes clea∣ving to thy bosome. The Prophet gives you their character; They lie upon beds of ivory, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and calves out of Amos 6. 4.
the stall; they chant to the sound of viols, and daunce to Instruments, and drinke wine in bowls; what should these men do with comforts? Joy, and nothing else but the voice of joy resounds in their habitations. It is poor afflicted Joseph, not they, that needs comfort. Consolation then is made for sorrow; and not for every sorrow neither. Some is produced by no other cause but temporall losses, paines or in∣juries: so Esau may mourn long enough without recovery of his Fathers blessing. Worldly sorrow bringeth death, not delight to the soul. Many weep, as Rachel did in Ramah, for her children, Matth. 2. 18. because they were not: but they neither are, nor ever will be comforted. There are tears that got sinfull Esau nothing, and there be tears that got sinfull Mary salvation. If the sorrow that swells our bosome with sighes, and is ready to burst our hearts, be spent upon our sins, it shall be sure of comforts. Are we full of griefe with∣in, and find no vent but by the groanes and tears of repentance? God may let us bleed for a while, till we be throughly humbled: but then, like the woman, the pangs of whose travell be o∣ver, the sonne of joy shall be borne in our souls, even that son which the blessed Virgin bore from her womb; Filius dilectionis, Filius delectationis, Jesus Christ. 2. Quota, there is a plurality of them; many Comforts. What should encounter with sorrow, but comfort? Comfort therefore it is for the na∣ture. What should oppose a multitude, but a
multitude? Many comforts therefore they are for their number. Are we troubled with the wants and miseries of this life? we have a comfort for that: The Lord is my portion: He is my shep∣herd, I shall lack nothing. Do we sinke under the burden of our transgressions? we have a comfort for that: Mary Magdalen heard it, to quiet all her stormes; Thy sinnes are forgiven thee. Are we haunted with temptations, hurri∣ed with persecutions? we have a comfort for this; I will be with thee in trouble, saith the Lord. Let your Christian experience supply here my defects of remonstance: I will summe up these comforts in a word: The Lord is gra∣cious, and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repenteth him of the e∣vill. Joel 2. 13. We read of certain Fair havens neere Candie: here be five fountains of comfort, like Acts 27 8. those faire havens; as welcome for harbour and rode of a sea-beaten conscience, as ever the bo∣some of mother was to the tender Infant. Drink at the first fountain, The Lord is gracious, free in his favours: if your thirst be not satisfied, go to the second; He is mercifull, he hath bowels of commiseration: if not yet, presse to the next; He is slow to anger, hard to conceive it, not willing to retaine it: wish we more? Hee is of great kindnesse, in the number and measure of his blessings: There is yet another well of comfort behind; Repenting him of the evill: full often doth he turne aside his blowes, and is easily intreated to have the rod pull'd out of his
hands. David, to encounter with the Gyant, took five smooth stones out of the brooke: here is the 1 Sam. 17. 40. brooke, and these the five smooth stones: let them not lie in the channel unused, but put them in your vessels, bear them in your hearts: whenso∣ever you are defied and assaulted by that mon∣strous Philistim, Satan; one of these comforts, like Davids stone, shall sink into his forehead, and con∣found him. How happily do these comforts meet with those sorrowes! we are troubled with the sense of our sins, and of Gods Judgment upon them: how should his Justice acquit us? yet there is com∣fort; the Lord is gracious, and cannot deny himself. But we are unworthy of this grace, because wee have turned it into wantonnesse: yet there is com∣fort: he is mercifull, and sheweth most pity where is most need. But we have multiplied offences, and continued in our sins to our gray hairs: yet there is comfort: He is slow to anger, evermore bles∣sed for his long sufferance. But our iniquities be not of an ordinary quality, they are hainous and intolerable: yet there is comfort, for he is of great kindnesse; our wickednesse cannot be so great as his kindnesse: of that there is no comprehen∣sion. But we are out of his favour, because he hath smitten us, our bodies with sore diseases, our souls with agonies, our families with pri∣vations: yet their is comfort, he will repent of the evil. In the hour of death, when the senses are past working, the understanding asleep, the bo∣dy in a cold and benummed sweat, these com∣forts
never leave us, Return unto thy rest, O my soul. Psalm 1. 16. 7. Our comforts vie number with our sorrowes, and win the game. The mercies of God pass'd over in a grosse summe, breed no admiration; but cast up the particulars, and then Arithmetick is too dull an art to number them. As many dusts as a mans hand can hold, is but his handfull of so many dusts: but tell them one by one, and they exceed all numeration. It was but a crowne which King Solomon wore: but weigh the gold, tell the precious stones, value the richnesse of it; what was it then? Jerusalem was but a city: but goe round about it, marke the towers, tell the bulwarks, observe the magnificent buildings: so consider the infinite variety of these comforts! Come, and I will tell you what God hath done for Psal. 66. 76. my soul: I never felt that sorrow, for which hee gave me not a soveraign comfort. Sennacherib in∣vaded 2 Chron. 32. 8. Israel with a mighty host; yet the undaunted courage of Hezekiah found more with him, then could be against him: and Sennacherib found it so too, to his cost, when he lost almost two hun∣dred thousand of his army in one night. The Prophets servant rising early in the morning, sees the City besieged with a fearfull host of foot, horse, chariots: his eyes could meet with no∣thing but woods of pikes, walls of harnesse, and lustre of metalls, and hee runs in with this affrighting newes to his Master, Alas, what shall wee doe? Quiet Elisha sits in his 2 Kings 6. 16. chamber as secure, as if all these had been the
guard of Israel, sent for his safe protection; Fear not. This was an hard precept: as well might he have bidden him not to see what he saw, as not to fear seeing so dreadfull a spectacle. But the taske is easie, if the next words find beleefe; They that be with us, are more then they that be with them. If the eyes of our faith be as open as those of our sense, to see Angels as well as Syrians, to perceive comforts as well as sorrowes, we cannot be appalled with the most unequall number of enemies. Many, O Lord, are thy won∣derfull works which thou hast done for us, they can∣not be reckoned. O God, what is man, that then Psalm 40. 5. art so mindfull of him? Yea, O man, what is God; that thou art so unmindfull of him? All the workes of God are excellent, and ought to bee had in remembrance: alas, that wee should e∣ver forget any of these workes, that are of mercy and comfort which hee hath done for our souls: For he alone hath done them: that is the next point. 3. Cujus, whose they are; Thy comforts. Troubles may be of our own begetting: but true comforts come onely from that infinite fountain, the God of consolation; for so he hath stiled him∣self. The eagle at her highest flight will not lose the sight of her young ones: if she perceive a∣ny danger approaching, down she comes amain to their defence. Christ is indeed ascended up on high; yet he hath a favourable eye to his ser∣vants below: no Saul can breath out threataings a∣gainst them, without a Quid me perfequeris?
Nec timeas hostem fortem, qui Ducem habes for∣tiorem: Let God arise, and let his enemies be scat∣tered: There is none that fighteth for us, but only thou O God. Cujusquam est rem publicam move∣re, Psalm 68. 1. Dei solius quietare. Our owne hearts can distract themselves, there is nothing to settle them, but what the God of peace puts in. Who can reconcile a man fallen out with himself? yea, fallen from himself? None but the God of com∣fort: who when the earth was void, without form, darknesse on the face of the deep; day and night, land & water undistinguished, could reduce all this mishapen chaos of the world to form and order: when father, mother, brethren, kinred, friends, negh∣bours, and a mans own heart forsakes him, then God takes him up. The structure of Jericho was not more pleasant, then the waters were unwhol∣some, and thereby the soile corrupt: Elisha cures them with a cruse-full of salt: Our hearts are ful of thoughts, but they be noxious: yet if God throw in∣to those fountains a handfull of saving grace, we shall bee whole. Our sorrowes too often would break our hearts, but (O God) for thy comforts: it is thou onely that canst make these weake vessels hold such scalding liquours, and not burst. There is combustion of these thoughts within us, til God part the fray, and pacifie the tumult: as when scholers are loud in brawls, the very sight of their master husheth them. When my heart, like the sea in a storm, is troubled; the winds raging, the waves roring; Thy comforts, like Christs com∣mand,
turns all into a calme. I thought on thee in the night season, and received comfort. In the night, the region of fear: in darknesse, the op∣portunity of despaire: in solitarinesse, the full advantage of sorrow: upon an unsleeping bed, the field of troublous thoughts: yet I did but think on thee, and before I came to meditate, to pray, to send up my soul unto thee, in that first thought I received comfort. O how short do all worldly things come of this sufficiency? If the heart bee wounded with sorrow, in vain is all the Chirurge∣ry of nature. Gold is no restorative, riches no cor∣dial, yea they may be a corrosive: wee say to wine, thy spirits are dull; to laughter, thou art mad: musick grates the ear, and physick loathes the palate: company is tedious, and solitude dangerous: alas, what hope can there be, till the God of comfort comes? Sauls evil spirit will not leave him, til he be dispossessed by Davids harpe: wee finde as much ease, when wee rest our hearts upon temporall things, as hee that laid him downe to rest upon the cold earth, with a pitcher under his head: and finding the pil∣low too hard, he rose and stopped it with fea∣thers, thinking that then it would be wondrous easie. So be all temporary things to the soul, even when they are filled with the choicest mirth, nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: not on∣ly vanity in their entertainment, but vexa∣tion in their farewell. Yet, O Lord, Thy com∣forts 4. Delight the soul; which is the last circumstance,
the effect of all. All Gods warre is for peace: Pacem habet voluntas, bellum necessitas. Wee should never have felt such a conflict, if God had not intended us such a conquest. Sin disquiets the heart; yet through his grace, this disquiet breeds repentance, repentance procureth forgiveness, for∣givenesse restoreth peace, and peace delights the soul. The sharpenesse of the trouble advanceth the sweetnesse of the joy: as Christs sufferings a∣bound, so his comforts superabound. Every peni∣tent tear that falls from the eye, springs up a flower of comfort. Look how full the vessells were of water, so full doth our Saviour ren∣der John 2. 7. them of wine. In hell are all sorrowes with∣out any comforts: in heaven are all comforts, without any sorrowes: on earth, good and bad, sweet and sowre, miseries and mercies, sorrowes and comforts are blended together. If here were nothing but sorrows, earth would be thought hell; if nothing but comforts, it would bee thought heaven. But that we may know it to be, as indeed it is, neither heaven nor hell, but between both, and the way to either; we have a vicissitude of troubles and delights. That as of old they painted King Solomon; because lear∣ned men were divided in their opinions of him; some casting him to hell, others advancing him to heaven: therefore a third moderate sort pain∣ted him halfe in heaven, and halfe in hell: so the Christian, in regard of his sorrowes, seems halfe confounded; and in respect of his comforts, halfe saved. But as indeed, Solomon after all his
errors found mercy; so the Christian after all his sorrowes shall find comfort. His beginning may seem troublesome, his proceeding not de∣lightsome, but his later end is peace. Marke the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end Psalm 47. 37. of that man is peace. His heart was troubled, his soul shall be delighted. As the grievances of the soul bee most dange∣rous in respect of their nature, so they are al∣so abundant in their number. Therefore let our care be to seek out that great Elixar, that most soveraign and universall Antidote and Cor∣diall. One soul complaines; I have obloquies, re∣proaches, calamniations cast upon me; which 1. render me contemptible to good societies. Mo∣rality would thus argue with the heart. Bee these imputations, thus charged upon me, true or false? If true, let the integrity of thy future conversation so convince thy associates, that they shall both suspect those reports, and rest as∣sured of thy constant goodnesse. But the Divine grace applies a more virtuall medicine to thy conscience, which shall revive, either thy patience, or thy repentance. The soul shall argue with it self: If these imputations be true, here is work for my repentance; I will weep in secret for my sins. If false, let them not trouble me: It is the slanderers sin, not mine: neither am I bound to father anothers bastard. But still upon this calumnie, the world condemns me: but thy faith and patience assures thee,
that thou shalt not be condemned with the world. Yea, there is yet a higher degree of honour belonging to thy patience. Have not the best men been traduced? Was not the best of men, God and man blasphemed? yea even upon the Crosse, he was jeered when he dyed, by some of them for whom he dyed. Thus do the com∣forts of God requite thee; that in all this thou art (in thy measure) conformable to the sufferings of Christ. So dost thou allay all these furious tempests with one breath of faithfull ejaculation; Thy comforts delight my soul. Another complains; I am fallen from an affluent estate, to deep indigence. I have kept 2. hospitality, to entertain friends: and made charity the Porch of my house, to relieve the needy ones. The vessell of my meanes is now drawn out to the bottom, there is not sufficient provision left for my own fa∣mily. Inquire of thy heart, whether this decay did not come by thy own riot, or through the vain∣glorious affectation of an abundant hospitality. If this, or that, or any other habituall sin, were the cause of it, begin with mortification there. First, mourne for thy sinnes: then faithfully depend upon thy Creators providence, and thou canst not faile of convenient suste∣nance. But it may be, that this is not the complainants case: he is not taken with a tabe or wasting of his substance; like a scarce sensible consumption of
his bodily vitalls. But his fall is with a preci∣pice; from a sublime Pinacle of honour, to a deep puddle of penury. Such was Jobs condition, so did he fall; from being rich and happy in the Adverb, to be poor and mi∣serable even to a Proverb. He had not only a∣bundance of good about him; but Omnia bene, all went well with him. Yet how suddenly did he fall from this abundant prosperity, to the depth of miserable poverty! Did he now follow the suggestions of that corrupt nature, which lay in his bosome, and whispered to him on his pil∣low; Curse God and die? No, but he apprehen∣ded the inspiration of grace; Blesse God, and live. So his last dayes were better then his first. That infinite mercy did so crown his patience with triumph, that his temporall estate was doubled. Yea, but what posterity had hee left to enjoy it after him? Yes, for even the number of his children was doubled too. For besides those seven Sons and three Daugh∣ters, which were now with his Father in Hea∣ven; he had also seven Sons and three Daugh∣ters with himselfe upon Earth. Piety and Pa∣tience cannot bee cast downe so low, but that the hand of mercy can raise it up againe. In the multitude of all my losses and crosses, O Lord thy Comforts have delighted my soul. But another, that hath heard all this sad Story, and seen the comfortable end sent 3 of the Lord, is not satisfied, because
himself is not redressed. Like a coward in wars that looks for the victory, before he gives one stroke in the battell. What merchant looks to be landed in the place of traffick, before he hath past his adventure upon the seas? Still saith such a repiner; I am in distresse, and want even ne∣cessaries. But still, thou, and we all, must suf∣fer much more, before it can be said of us, Here is the faith and patience of the Saints. Still O my soul, wait thou upon the Lord, thy most faithfull Creator: he will in his good pleasure, open his hand, and fill thee with plenteousnesse. Be thou penitent before him, patient under him, confident in him, and thou shalt have a bundant cause to bee thankfull to him: Thy end shall bee peace, and comfort in Jesus Christ. Yea, even now, in this dead low waters of fugitive fortunes, my soul confesseth, that I have the highest wealth. For Christs righte∣ousnesse is my riches, his merits is my inex∣haustible exchequer, his blood hath filld my veins with most lively vigour. My treasure is in hea∣ven, where no violence can take it from me. Stil and for ever, O God, thy comforts delight my soul. It is anothers complaint; I am shut up in a close prison, where I can neither converse with o∣thers 4. abroad, nor let in others to communi∣cate with me, in this my confined home. The sparrow on the house-top hath more freedome then I; For that, though wanting a mate, hath
an open aire to flie in, and may so invite company to solace her, I have no society, but my discon∣solate thoughts: no friend, to ask me so much, as how I do? Yet is thy soul at liberty: no barricadoed walls, no iron-gates or grates, no darke dun∣geons can imprison that. The Jail is a strong prison to thy body, and thy body is but (in a metaphoricall phrase) a prison to thy soul; Thy body may not walke abroad, thy soul can. Spite of all thy cruell creditors, and some unmercifull Jailors; she can break Prison: She hath wings that can mount her through clouds and moun∣tains, through orbs and constellations, and (like to Enoch) walke with God, in a heavenly con∣templation of his infinite goodnesse. My ears cannot hear those airy Choristers, singing their Creators praise in the groves: my soul, in specu∣lation, can hear the Anthems of Angels in heaven. I may not hear the Hosanna's of the Church mi∣litant in our materiall Temples below: I may conceive, that my soul hears the Halleluiahs of the Church triumphant above. I may not walk in the green pastures, and flowry medows on earth: my soul may move in the glo∣rious and melodious galleries of heaven. Thus O Lord, though in my strictest confinement here below, thou hast given me large liberty above. Still I will glorifie thee for all thy mercies, for thy comforts delight my soul. Anothers complaint is; I am vexed with a 5.
multitude of troubles. Not the law of the sword, but the sword of the law hath disquieted me. Let thy soul aske thy conscience this que∣stion: who did first breake the peace? If thou hast first overwhelmed that truth, which should bee apparent, thou art thine own enemy: For truth smothered in wet straw, will at length o∣vercome the danknesse of that suppression, and set on fire the smotherers. Thou hast forsa∣ken the truth, and art therefore forsaken of peace. There bee two chief preservers of the soul, under the Almighty Creator of it; Truth and Peace. How invaluable are they together; Parted, how miserable! truth is the precious stone: Peace, the gold, wherein it is both set and preserved. Truth is the glorious light of the Sun; Peace, a clear and serene heaven. Peace is a most beauti∣full body, whilst it containes Truth, that more lovely soul. Truth brings downe hea∣ven to us, Peace bears us up to heaven. Both are sisters, the daughters of one Father, God himself. Do thou first recover truth: by continuall labour seeke it, with prayers and teares begg it, with the expense of much sorrow buy it, and then peace will come in to the bar∣gaine: Gods comfort shall again delight thy soul. Another complaines; I am cast out of 6. doors: I have no harbour but the hedges; nor
lodging, but the fruitless ground. Poverty hath sent out her excommunication against me: all that have an estate, are forewarned to shun my compa∣ny. Consider, when had Jacob so sweet a nights rest, as when the pillow he laid his head upon was a hard stone? Then was that ladder set by him, by which his soul might climbe up to heaven in a vision, whereof before he had but the speculation. The Angels were dancing those measures, and singing those raptures about him, which did in a manner angelifie him. His body lay on the bare earth, his soul with those spirituall wings of faith and love, was mounted above the clouds, above the orbs, even conversant in the highest hea∣vens. When had Elias more excellent provision then when his breakfast was brought him in the morning, and his supper in the evening, by a raven? The messenger was homely, but the dyet was heavenly. It came from the table of that great King, whose hospitality feeds, not only men; but even the fouls of the air, the beasts upon earth, and the fishes in the sea. The Pro∣phets lodging was but a Field-bed, yet even then and there, the Lyons were a guard a∣bout him, the tutelar Angels did round him, and the Divine providence preserved him. If we be destitute of other lodging, and be driven to the common earth, yet we have a house
over our heads, not made with hands, but an e∣ternall mansion in the heavens. There is al∣so a canopy for us, a roof arched over with the two Poles, and set with innumerable gliste∣ring starrs. Yea; there is an omnipotent love that protects us; a materiall heaven encom∣passing us, and a spirituall heaven within us, the peace of a good conscience, assuring us, of our eternall salvation through Christ Jesus. This is a softer lodging then the cabbins of merchants, or the Hamachs of sea-farers; yea then the most curious beds that the harbengers can pro∣vide for Princes. O how sweetly doth the Christian rest, when he hears that voice from the Oracle of goodnesse; My grace is sufficient for thee, My comforts shall delight thy soul. But anothers complaint is; I am per∣plexed 7. with sicknesse: I am a marke against which paine shoots his arrows: I wast a∣way with languishments, as ice is dissolved by heat into water. Rest patient; this con∣sumption shall be consumed. Death, that u∣niversall executioner of mankind, shall be ex∣ecuted. Time shall cut off Death, and Eterni∣ty shall make an end of Time. Death shall have no grave left for his monument, or trophee of his victories: and the Angel hath sworn, that time shall be no more. Thy sicknesse may outlast thy Physician, but thy soul shall outlive thy sick∣nesse, and nothing shall outlive thy soul. But the pangs of my body are so violent, that they assault me with distraction. Fear not:
they may beleaguer thee with distrust, but ne∣ver overcome that faith, which thou puttest in this God of consolation. He is a most faith∣full Creator, and will servare depositum, keep that soul safe, with which the beleever hath instru∣sted him. The breaches of the body are the souls windows, and afford her a more clear prospect into heaven, inkindling her with an ar∣dent desire to be with God in glory. Jobs abun∣dant sores would have bred in him a continui∣ty of sorrowes; but for that antidote of faith, and saving cordiall of hope, that his eyes should see his Redeemer in blessednesse. The smiling Sunne flatters the traveller out of his cloake, whereas the robustious wind causeth him to wrap it the closer about him. God forbid that Christian Religion should bee but a cloake: yet the outward profession of it is somwhat loosned by wanton healths; and sickness wins it more inwardly to the heart. Experien∣ced merchants tell us, that in the hottest Coun∣treys, they find most comfort in the hottest drinks. A wonder to us that live in the cold cli∣mates: but that the Suns adventitions heat so sucks out the radicall moisture and spirits, that it leaves the heart feeble, and destitute of the naturall comforts. It is a maxime in Philoso∣phy, that one heat avocates another: the grea∣ter, the lesse. The heat of the Sun drawes forth the heat of the heart, and leaves it fainting. Poor Lazarus with his scraps and scabs, was yet in a better condition then the rich man with his
Princely Wardrobe, and his costly Viands. Con∣tinued health hath maintained wanton desires and delights upon earth: but sicknesse hath sent many souls up to Heaven. Yea Lord, even with sick∣nesse afflict my body, so that thy Heavenly Com∣forts do delight my soul. It is a generall complaint; Afflictions environ me. In my short pilgrimage, through the sharp 8. wildernesse of this world, on the one side the Thorns wound me, the Briers and Brambles scratch me on the other. This is not only the de∣served penalty of sinfull nature; Man is born to trouble as the sparks flie upwards, But even a kind of fatality inseparable to militant grace; All that will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. 2 Tim. 3. 12 That is a rare path upon earth, which hath never a rub: and a calm passage by water, that escapes all molestation. But more, Be there not some Afflictions, that conduce much to our preservation? We have found, that the falling into one grievous sin, the worst of all dangers, hath brought us to repentance, one of the best preservatives. I have heard some Seamen report by experience, that in a tempest, some raging billow hath swept a man from off the Decks into the maine Ocean: yet another wave on the o∣ther side, hath tossed him up into the ship again: so that he was only drenched; but not drowned. The violent pressure of one Affliction hath sunk a man to distrust in God: another with a more fu∣rious Storme hath left him destitute of all earthly succour: He now resolves, the world hath forsa∣ken
me, I will never look for relief from it. But my God hath not forsaken me, he never will for∣sake them that trust in him through Jesus Christ. To him I flie, upon him I rely: he will not suffer me to perish. Still, O Lord, in all my extremities Thy comforts delight my soul. Not offering to number mans grievances, which be innumerable; there is yet the last, and it may prove the best, complaint remaining. I am perplexed with the wofull consideration 9 of my sins; those bitter things which God writes against me, the irkesome recollection of my transgressions. I can argue with Philosophers, consult with Politicians, hear the ingenious fan∣cies of Poets, reason in domestick concernments, enjoy the company of morall and harmless friends with delight. I can pray with confidence to be heard, and satisfied; I do hope with some assurance of salvation; I sleep upon a peacefull pillow, Thus far I am in a calm and serene hemisphere, and quiet be all my thoughts. But after all this Sunshine, there ariseth a tem∣pest. When I do recollect, or be represented unto my conscience, my innumerable, incompa∣rable, intollerable sinnes; the remembrance of them is so frightfull, the burden of them is so un∣supportable, that I dare not even look up unto Heaven. Faith lies fainting, hope is in a swoon, fear stands by the bed side, despaire lies ga∣ping at the chamber door, my soul is in an ex∣tasie. I am weary of all company, but those that speak of mercy. I sit mourning all the day
long: Sorrow and solitude are my associates: I do shed some tears, and would weep tears of blood for my sins. I lament because my sorrows are not greater for offending my God. Well, yet hear the Physician of souls speaks to thee from Heaven. Weep on, bleed on, this bleeding shall not be unto death. Jesus Christ hath a Balsome, that shall not onely stanch thy bleeding, but fill the veins of thy soul with com∣fort. His blood is an Antidote for thine. One drop of that shall satisfie for more sins, then ever thou hast committed. Weep on for thy Transgressions: Those flouds of tears shall not drown thee. Yea rather, like the waters of that universall Deluge, in that sa∣ving Arke Christ Jesus, they shall bear up thy soul higher towards Heaven. They shall not drowne thee, yea they shall rather save thee from being drowned. This is that Secunda Tabula, af∣ter shipwrack; the main plank that shall preserve thee from perishing, emergent repentance. There be two most Valiant and Puissant soul∣diers, that are the Souls Champions, Faith and Repentance. They fight not only against lust and sin, those Gyants of the world: but even a∣gainst Principalities and Powers, those infernall spirits of darknesse. Faith hath her weapons and Forces, but Repentance hath many disadvan∣tages. 1. Other Souldiers fight standing, she kneel∣ing: They in a posture confronting their enemies, she in humiliation, though not tergiversation from
her opposites. They send forth their messengers of death in thundring ordnance: all her thunder is sighs and groans sent up to Heaven for mercies. They let flie their fiery Engines of destruction: she hath only her ejaculations: Her most piercing darts, be broken hearts. Their shafts are winged with fire, her arrows are feathered with water, her own soft tears. They swallow up the hope of vi∣ctory with insulation: she in an humble prostra∣tion expects pity. Yet the God of all power and mercy, whom she beleaguers in Heaven, yeilds her the conquest. He comes from his inpregna∣ble Throne by his most gracious favour, and in∣steed of confounding her as a Rebel, he useth her as a Friend, or Daughter. He takes her up from her knees, he wipes away all her tears, he folds her in his armes, he seals her a pardon of all sins, and assures her of an everlasting Kingdom in Hea∣ven. O victorious Repentance! yea rather, O triumphant Goodnesse! O God, Teipsum vincis, thou even overcomest thy self, that thy Comforts may delight our souls. It is reported of Alexander, that when he thought (and did but think so) he had conquered all this world, he fell a weeping, that there were no more worlds to conquer. But there was remaining ano∣ther world, a better then ever Alexander discove∣red. But this was not for an Alexander by force of Armes, but for a Mary Magdalen by force of tears, to overcome. It is true, that the Kingdome of Heaven suffers violence: but the way of Conquest is not through
the blood of bodies, but through a floud of tears, gushing out for our sins. This is such a stratagem of war, such a policy of Conquest, as the great Mo∣narchs of the world never understood: Yet even this through faith overcomes the world. Faith hath a plot, which shee hath taught her daughter Repentance, Concedendo superare, to o∣vercome by yeilding. It is a stratagem among Wrastlers, that if a man can get himself under his antagonist, he lifts him up, the sooner to cast him down; yea, to give him the greater fall. Repen∣tance stoops as low as she can: she lies, like Joshuah, upon the bare earth, yea wollowes in dust and ashes. She holds her self not worthy to be Gods foot-stool: let him trample upon her, and tread her under his feet, she still holds him by the feet, washeth them with her tears, and wipeth them with the hairs of her head, and kisseth them, though she be spurned by them. Doth this humble prostration provoke fury? No, it rather invites mercy. Parcere prostratis scit nobi∣lis ira Leonis: The Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, will spare such Lambs of humiliation; and in the pastures of consolation; he will both feed and preserve them. That thunder which dissolves the stubborn mettall, yet spares the yeilding purse: When power and policy have spent their spirits, submission is found the only way of Conquest. The feafull thunder of vengeance is resisted by the soft wool of repentance. 2. Yet hath this blessed grace another disad∣vantage. Faith, the chief of all the Forces, may
be somtimes benighted, through the conglomeration of the clouds condensed by our sins. Hope may be e∣clipsed, by the interposition of the earth, our worldly imaginations, betwixt us and that great luminary of heaven, the Sun of righteousnesse; The century of watch∣ful conscience, may be overcome with security. Sin is a subtile enemy, and his father, the Divel wil shew him the opportunity. Now is the time of invasion: seise on them, and cut all their throats. What shal repentance now do, when faith, the great Lady general droops; and Hope, her Lieutenant general is fainting? when the whole century is overcome with slumber? Yes, there is a watchman in the tower of the soul, that doth seldom sleep; holy Fear. He wakens conscience, conscience cals up faith, faith rouzeth hope, hope cryes aloud to repentance, repentance troops all the spiritual forces, the martial musick gives the alarm, the souldi∣ers are in battel-array, the enemies flie, the mind is at peace, because Gods comforts have delighted the soul. 3. One disadvantage more makes dangerous work for repentance. The troops of faith are routed, one wing of hope is cut off. Yet this con∣quering Queen of the Viragines, or maiden-graces, alwayes bears up the Rear, and never appeares till the day be almost lost. When those great Com∣manders, Innocency and Righteousnesse are foiled, and beaten, and have their Queen the soul, in danger to bee taken and slain by sin and Sa∣tan, her old adversaries; Then this Virgo, Virago, that all this while lay in expectation of the e∣vent; this martiall Maid, victorious Repentance comes in with her Reserve, sets upon the conque∣rors
with her fresh forces, rescues the Queen, our soul, puts the great generall Satan to flight, and does impar∣tial execution upon all his souldiers, which be our sins. Thus one grace begets another, by a supernatural generation, til they increase in number and measure, by the Divine inspiration. Faith calls up repentance, re∣pentance brings in pardon and forgivenesse, pardon leads in comfort, and thus, O my God, Thy comforts delight my soul. 4. When God, by the preaching of his law, hath bro∣ken up the fallow ground of our hearts, and by the ap∣plying of his Gospel hath sown the seed of eternal life in those furrows, he lookes that we should bestow our labour in the watering of this plantation. The ground is his, for he made it: the seed is his, for he gives it: the harvest is his, and he owns it. Yet such is the bounty of his goodness, that he gives his farmers the fruits of it. The rent of that great Landlords glory being truly payed, the product is ours, even the comfort and salva∣tion of our poor souls. All our pains is, but to hook up the weeds, that would hinder the growth of the corn, and dew the furrows with our tears, that it may spring up with chearfulness. But when the reaping-time comes, the whole crop is ours: and we come home singing with joy and thankfulness; Thy comforts have delighted our souls. When those glorious reapers, the Angels shal bear up our souls to heaven, like sheaves into the barn, we shal sing harvest-home, & glorifie our infinite good God, and our sweetSaviour JesusChrist. To conclude, crosses are but the pursuivants to fetch in repentance: and afflictions, but Gods letters, missive formortification. When we are fallen into some
hainous transgressions, we may better say then in our other trouble, this will cost hot water: For so it will in∣deed: it wil cost the hot waters of our tears from our eyes, or it will cost the warm blood of our hearts. Our godly sorrow for our sins, is like the Pool of Bethesda: when that Angel from heaven, gracious repentance hath troubled the waters, the lazarous soul does but step into them, and is cured. For all our spiri∣tual diseases, this is the remedy, upon which we may safely write, Probatum est. We have made our selves sick by sinning: God is the Physician, and he prescribes: Affliction is the Apo∣thecary, and he prepares: the Medicine is Repentance, and that infallibly cures. It is a broken heart that makes us whole. God loves a true heart, and a clean heart, and an honest heart, and an humble heart: yea and he loves a broken heart too. The broken and con∣trite heart, O God thou wilt not despise. It is true, that we Psa. 54. 17 are bound to love him with our whole heart: but if it be broken with penitential sorrow for sin, he wil heal the fracture, redintegrate the heart, and reaccept it wholly to himself. A contrite heart, broken in peices with sor∣row, and pickled up in brinish tears, is a sacrifice that God will not reject. Whosoever hath such a heart, let him make much of it: It is a dish for the king of kings. Sin, Repentance and Pardon, are like to the three vernall months of the yeer, March, April, and May. Sin comes in like March blustering, stormy, and full of bold violence. Repen∣tance succeeds like April, showring, weeping, and full of tears. Pardon follows like May, springing, singing, ful of joys, and flowers. If our hands have been ful of
March, with the tempests of unrighteousnesse: our eyes must be ful of April, with the sorrow of repentance: & then our hearts shal be ful of May, in the true joy of forgivenesse. His soul; as there be no comforts like those of God; so there is nothing to which comforts are so welcom, as to the soul. The pleasure which the body takes, is but the body, yea scarce the very shadow of pleasure: the soul of pleasure is the pleasure of the soul. There bee many things pleasing to the body, wherein the sancti∣fied soul takes no delight, especially in the day of trouble. In calamity, good nourishments are confor∣table, good words are comfortable, good friends are comfortable, the Physician is comfortable, the Di∣vine comfortable, a good spouse specially comforta∣ble: but in respect of these comforts, which passe all understanding, we may say of the rest, as Job did to his visitant friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. But blessed are the souls upon whom this Sun of com∣fort shineth: and happy are those showers of fears and sorrows, that shall be dryed up with such beams of comforts: and blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. To whom, with the Son, and Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 1. 3. be all praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
