a662a 11906649 50707
ADVICE to the Patrons of the TEST I Cannot but admire the Heat and Zeal of many Men, (per∣haps some of the Honourable House of Commmons,) who, to Support the Church of England, unhappily take such measures, which in all probability must destroy That which they so Vehemently endeavour to maintain. 'Tis true, Vox Populi had once a great Influence; but now, since we have a Prince so Religious, whom none but Atheists can dislike; and so Just, whom none but Traytors can fear; Give me leave to say, That no People in the World are so Unjust to their Sovereign, or so Unkind to themselves, as those pretended Patriots, who so obstinately promote the continuing of the Penal Laws for Religion, especially the TEST, I mean that of Shaftsbury, whose very Name alone one would think were suf∣ficient to Damn it. For sure I am, no honest Church of England-man can have the Confidence to Vindicate that Man, or his Principles, who meerly out of Malice to His present Majesty (whom God long preserve) and not out of any kindness to the Church of England, was the only Contriver of that Machine, which in It contains, or at least aims at almost as much Blasphemy as the Alchoran, and ought to be as much Exploded by any Man that pretends to the Name of a Christian. I have often taken notice of the Common Scandal the English Clergy, without any colour of Truth, throw upon Catholicks, & That they are the most Severe and Sanguinary People imaginable in the Propagation of Religion; And then for instance, my Lear∣ned Parson is pleased to urge the Inquisition of Spain, and the Nick-nam'd Persecution of France, all of his own knowledge, tho' he never was o'th' other side the Water, unless at Surrey Assizes to Prosecute some Litigious Action against his Parishioners. Such Men would do well to consider the Rigour of the Penal Laws of this Kingdom against Catholicks, and then I am sure they'l be of another mind; For I defie any Impartial Man to in∣stance a greater Persecution of Christians, than that of the Prote∣stants against Catholicks. If we enquire into the Statutes made since Henry the VIII. about Religion. 'Tis true, under Dioclesian, and many other Roman Emperours, Christians have been put to Death, and to the most Exquisit Torments imaginable; But in these Statutes, Death in comparison is the least Punishment; For thereby a Catholick, (tho' an English-man, and of a plentiful For∣tune,) is made incapable of Enjoying his Estate, and his own Na∣tive Right and Property, the Son of Inheriting his Father; and in
fine, his Wife and Children turn'd out of Dores to beg their Bread: Yet all this while the Protestants are the only Peaceable, and Charitable Men in the World. Indeed I could wish they were so, for then those Laws would soon be Abolish'd: But on the con∣trary, I find they would Prosecute all other Men with the greatest rigour. Tho' they cry out of Popery and Persecution, when they feel the least Restraint upon themselves; a very great Injustice, and such as all good Men ought to blush at. Of the same stamp are all the other Calumnies, and Malicious Stories imposed upon the Church of Rome, by B. S. T. S. and many other Celebrated Raby's of the Protestant Communion, who, instead of Argument, endeavour to represent Catholicks as the greatest Blockheads in the World, if all were true they say; But since they themselves know 'tis all false, I am satisfy'd that Cha∣racter belongs to themselves; For by such Romances, instead of Preaching the Gospel, they (besides aspsing the King,) Ridicule Christianity it self, and endeavour, (as much as in them lies,) to introduce Atheism. Pardon this short Digression, and be pleased to consider one thing further, That the Government of England is absolutely Monarchical, and that the Prerogative of the Crown can't be Diminish'd, even si le Roy le veut. Now this being gran∣ted, (which I'm sure no Gentleman of the Long Robe will deny,) I would gladly know whether Magna Charta, (that great Diana of the unthinking Croud,) Charta Foreste, the Statutes of Metron, Marlebridge, Gloucester, Acton-Burnell, Westminster the 2d, Win∣chester, Quia Emptores Terrarum, &c. (to omit many others,) are not, or at least were Authentick Laws; if so, then the Kings of Eng∣land had Originally the Enacting Power in themselves alone. Those Statutes being (if I mistake not,) created, and made by the Kings Supream Fiat and Authority only, without the formal phrase, By and with the Consent of, &c. Though now those words are look'd upon as Essential. This sure is a great Prerogative of the Crown, and at any time may be re-assum'd if 'tis the Princes pleasure so to do, for Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. And therefore, if Subjects will Sawcily Vindicate their pretended Rights and Properties, I see no Rea∣son why His Majesty may not Legally Assert his own Power and Prerogative. These, (as well as many other Reasons now in Print,) one would think were sufficient to perswade any Rational Man to a Complyance with His Majesty, for Abolishing the TEST, and other Penal Laws concerning Religion. But if nothing will do, and Men will still persist in their Obsti∣nacy, I shall leave them to reap the benefit of their own folly, and ever Pray that God Almighty wou'd Enable His Majesty to Trample upon His Enemies, and bless Him with a Long and Prosperous Reign, Amen. FINIS.
