B856 12095708 53972
THE AUTHORITY OF Church-Guides Asserted in a SERMON Preach'd before our Late GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN King CHARLES II. At Whitehall, Octob. 17. 1675. By Miles Barne, D. D. Fellow of St. Peters Col∣ledge in Cambridge, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Late MAJESTY. Published by His Majesty's Special Command The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for Richard Green Bookseller in Cambridge. 1685.
The Preface to the Reader. Reader, THIS Sermon being the last which I had the Honor to preach before our late Gra∣cious Sovereign of blessed and immortal Memory; and having been so well approv'd of by Him, that I receiv'd his Commands twice for the printing of it, and his Defence of it after it was publish∣ed, I now again present to publick View, yet not with∣out some apprehension of danger; for if, notwithstanding the Royal Command and Defence of that Sagacious Prince, I could not at that time escape the severe strokes of some Potent Men, who from the very moment it was first preach'd, by secret Arts endeavour'd my ruine, and became my Enemies for no other reason, but because I told them the truth: I have little reason to expect bet∣ter usage now, being to my unspeakable grief destitute of that Royal Patronage. The Design of it is to vindicate that Church-Autho∣rity, which our Lord, before he went into his far Country, in a most solemn manner conferr'd upon his Apostles, and which was to descend upon their Successors, and to be continued in the Governors and Guides of the Church unto the end of the World; to lessen, if not render use∣less this Sacred Authority, especially that part of it, which consists in expounding the Scriptures, in teaching and guiding the Flock; some modern Divine (for rea∣sons
best known to themselves) have advanc'd the Per∣spicuity of Scripture to that degree, that not only the less difficult part thereof, but even the  them∣selves are become easie and intelligible to every Mecha∣nick Reader. And it may seem strange, that this pretend∣ed Clearness of Scripture, unknown to those Illustrious Fathers, who writ in the first and succeeding Ages of Chri∣stianity, who with indefatigable Labour, painful Watch∣ings, and incessant Recourse to the Spirit of Truth, en∣deavoured to explain the deep Mysteries thereof, should never be discovered until these last Centuries, and then made use of to usher in, and support those pestilent Schisms which happened in the Western Churches, and is indeed set as a fatal Bar to frustrate all the Methods of Re-uni∣on: and yet stranger, that these Discoverers should be so wilfully blind, as not to discern, that nothing is more clearly reveal'd, or more expresly set down in Holy Writ, than the Authority here contended for, if the in∣fallible and concurrent Testimony of the Evangelists may be thought of any moment in the case. God forbid the Bread of Life should be denied to the Children of the Gospel Covenant; but whether the great Master of the Houshold has not appointed Spiritual Fa∣thers to be the Stewards and Dispensers of this Heaven∣ly Food, or left the Children to be their own Carvers, ought to have been more maturely consider'd; for this Bread of Life, which is the Word of God, is by St. Paul com∣par'd to a two-edged Sword, and if that be put into the
hands of unskilful Managers, it may prove both fatal to themselves, and destructive to others. I shall not here trouble you with a review of those Complaints, occasioned by the dire Heresies, which soon followed upon the first Translation of the Bible into the English Tongue; since the Divine Writings cannot be translated into too many Languages, and since after the Translation, the Supreme Authority might have hindred the mischiefs which insued, by restraining the promiscuous reading of them, and indulging that Priviledge to those only who should be licens'd thereunto by the Governours of the Church. But certainly those men had no very good Design, nor a due Honour for the Divine Oracles, who first expos'd their mysterious meaning to the Judgment of every vul∣gar Capacity; and yet I would willingly entertain so much Charity for them, as to believe the first Inventors did not foresee the dangerous Consequences of their own Prin∣ciple; for from hence it naturally follows, in the First place, That there is no necessity of Church-Guides for di∣recting Christians in necessary Faith. Secondly, From hence follows a contempt of their Function, at least as to this part of it, (for who will regard that Authority which is made useless;) Thirdly, An Innundation of all those wild Opinions, which either Malice or Ignorance can betray men into. Fourthly, The multiplying of Sects and Heresies, without any due Means left for the suppressing them, since every sincere Endeavourer may equally plead
the Truth of Scripture in justification of his Opinion. This one Principle has turned our Jerusalem, which was once a City at Ʋnity within it self, into a Babel, not of Languages, (but what is worse) a Confusion of the grossest Errors which ever infested the Church since the Foundation of Christianity; and since Latitudinism in Principles, is evermore accompanied with Libertinism in Practice, Schism in the Church begets Sedition in the Monarchy, and an Erastian in the one, proves a Republi∣can in the other. To this one Principle may be chiefly ascrib'd all the Fatal mischiefs of the late unnatural Wars, and the dreadful Confusions intended by the last Fanatick Conspiracy, which we so narrowly escap'd, that we can scarce yet think our selves secure from the danger of it: for since the Translation of the Bible into our Language, and the promiscuous Reading of it, what Schismatick ever wanted a Text, of his own interpreting, to counte∣nance his Schism? or Rebel, to authorize his Rebellion? The Peace and Ʋnity of the Catholick Church, ought to be dearer to every good Christian, than the greatest temporal Blessings, or even Life it self: How far this has been obstructed by the envenom'd Writings and Era¦stian Principles of some modern Controvertists, I wish we had not too just cause to lament; and that in their Transports of indiscreet Zeal, and even inhuman Passions, they had not wounded the Catholick through the sides of the Roman Church; for not contented t throw off an Ʋniversal Supremacy, unduly challenged by
St. Peter's Successors, as the Prerogative of the first Apostolical See, they have denied that Primacy of Order, that Exordium Unitatis which is both consistent with St. Cyprian's, Hoc erant uti{que} & caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti & honoris & potestatis, &c. allow'd by the most genuine Sons of the Church of England, and which is necessary for the supporting the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and without which that Ʋnity of the Church, which the Holy Father so earnestly contends for, cannot so well be preserv'd; not contented with this Degradation of his Holiness, they have proceeded further, and made him the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, notwithstanding all the Phaenomena of the Apocalyptical false Prophet, do so exactly agree to Mahomet; as the ingenious Oxford-Paraphrast has fully and learnedly made out in his Anno∣tations on the 2 Thess. Chap. 2. not contented to justifie our Separation from the Church of Rome, upon the account of Innovations, Corruptions, and imposing them as necessary Conditions of Communion, and so becoming guilty of causal Schism, they have represented all the Members of that Church, both Pastors and People, both in Doctrin and Practice, guilty of Heathenish, and worse than the most sottish Heathenish Idolatry; so foul a Charge, and so injurious to that Charity which the Church of Eng∣land hath always been renown'd for, that I hope the Au∣thors of it may have Grace to retract, and make satisfa∣ction for that Scandal which is thereby given even to our
common Christianity. And I have always wondred, how it ever could enter into the heart of any man to believe, and publickly maintain, that so great a number of Christian Professors, eminent for Learning, and Austerity of Life, could be guilty of so damnable an Apostasie: concerning the mischiefs of this Charge, take the Judgment of the Learn∣ed Thorndike, in the last words of the first Chapter of his just Weights and Measures: And as they who ju∣stifie the Reformation by charging the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters; so, on the other side, they who over-charge the Reformation to be Hereticks, make themselves thereby Schismaticks before God. We hope no ingenuous Person, though an Adversary, will think the worse of the true Sons of the Church of Eng∣land, for the uncharitable Opinions of some particular Men, descended perhaps from dissenting Parents, educated in dissenting Times, and who never yet sufficiently conquer∣ed the Prejudices of their Education; if they had, they would not maintain such Erastian Positions as these, (viz.) That Christ never appointed any particular Form of Church-Government, but left it arbitrary, and dependent on the Civil State. That Christ Jesus is not to be preach'd, if the Magistrate and the Law of the Country forbid it. That the King has a Power to execute all Pastoral Offices, & devolve it on others, with many others of the like dan∣gerous consequence, which that valiant Champion of Church-Power, Mr. Lowth, has charg'd upon them, and
learnedly made good the Charge; whereas concerning the last of these Positions, neither his present M. nor any of his Predecessors, by virtue of their Ecclesiastical Suprema∣cy, ever thought themselves indow'd with any other Power, but that of Nursing Fathers; neither do's the true sence of the Oath invest the Civil Magistrate with any other power in Spiritual Matters, than what is purely external and coercive, if Bishop Bramhal, and others, may be thought of equal Authority with the Authors there tax'd; let them consider in this very juncture of time the conse∣quence of their own Positions, and then lay their hands upon their mouths, and be for ever after silent: or if they please to look backward, let them consider what mischiefs the Fathers of the Church had brought upon themselves, had they been of this Opinion, when Julian and Constan∣tius reign'd; had they spent as much time in defending the Church of England, as they have in opposing the Church of Rome, they would have prov'd themselves as good Sub∣jects to the Father of their Country, and as dutiful Sons to their Mother the Church; had they given a true account of ancient Church-Government, instead of imbroyling us with Irenicum's and Weapon-salves, they had purchas'd as much Renown to themselves, and more Benefit to Christ's Catholick Church; then might we hope to see the Mischiefs of Separation display'd, without a Preface of such Concessions as manifestly tend to the destruction of Ʋniformity: and if it be a sign of a luke-warm and un∣generous temper to desert a Friend in affliction, that cruel juncture of time in which those Concessions were made,
does no ways extenuate the Presumption, for it deserves no milder a Name; for any private Doctor, let his Fame he never so great, to assume to himself a more than Papal Power, to dictate ex Cathedra, prescribe to the Church, and unfix what has been establisht by her venerable Au∣thority, generally receiv'd and approv'd by all her true Subjects; then might we not despair to behold and ad∣mire the Beauty of the Church of England in all her heights of Decency and Order; her Doctrins believ'd; her Liturgies daily frequented; her Sacraments fre∣quently celebrated; her Rubricks duly observ'd; her ne∣glected Discipline restored; her Censures dreaded; her Governours religiously obey'd: then might we not despair to see our Controversies in Religion manag'd with all due deference to the Authority of ancient Fathers and Coun∣cils, general Tradition, and the consent of the Catholick Church, and consequently with a design to maintain uni∣versal Truths, rather than our own private Opinions; to confute mens Errors, rather than expose their Persons; and a return of that Christian Spirit which enobled the Writings of Cassander, Grotius, Forbes, and many other Illustrious Conciliators, the decay whereof hath widen'd our Breaches, and obstructed that Ʋnion which ought to be the earnest desire, & endeavor of every good Christian. If the Church of England do's not flourish as much in our days, as ever it did since the first Reformation, the fault must be in our selves, since His Majesty, in his gra∣cious Declaration, has past his Royal Word for the pre∣servation of the Government both of Church and State, as
it is now by Law established, and we cannot in Honor, or Duty require more, since his Word has always been as Sa∣cred and inviolable to him, as his Person and Preroga∣tive ought to be to us; wherefore instead of somenting needless Fears and Jalousies concerning our Religion, which even in a Coffee-House is dangerous, but from the Pulpit do's naturally rise into Disorders and Tumults; the people are to be taught the Duties of Submission, Hu∣mility, and Obedience to their Governors, both Civil and Spiritual, that as Religion is not to be propagated by Force, so neither is it lawful to take up Arms against law∣ful Authority in defence of it; they are to be instructed in the Duties of Passive Obedience, and non-resistance, from the Doctrines of the Scripture, the Principles of the Church of England, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians, when under the severest Persecutions. In the same Declaration He is pleas'd further to add, That He knows the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it have shew'd themselves good and loyal Subjects; therefore he will always take care to defend and support it: so that out of his abundant Goodness and Clemency, he has confirm∣ed his Word by the surest Tyes of Interest and Princely Gratitude. It pleased the Almighty (in whose hands are the Fate of the greatest of Potentates) to call to Heaven his dearest Brother, and to leave him the deepest Mourner in the Nation, in that very period of time, when they might have promis'd themselves a secure enjoyment of earthly Bles∣sings;
for had not that glorious Monarch, like Moses, by an invincible Patience and Magnanimity withstood the mur∣murings and ingratitudes of a rebellious People, freed us from the Slavery and Tyranny of our Egyptian Task∣masters, brought us out of a Wilderness of Confusion, and placed us within the prospect of a Canaan of Peace and Order; and yet to his lawful Successor, the mighty Jo∣shua, Providence decreed the full possession of those Bles∣sings, which he, the lamented Moses, only liv'd to have a sight of. And what may we not promise to our selves under his most auspicious Reign, and in nothing more auspicious, than in the peaceable devolution of the Crown upon his Head; after so many bold and wicked Attempts to cut off his Succession, this seems no less miraculous than his Pre∣decessor's Restauration; may his Subjects learn from hence, That Kings are of Divine Right, and dread the Vengeance of that God by whom they reign; may they never forget the miseries they have escap'd, nor grow weary of the benefits they are sure to enjoy under his wise and steady Conduct; may his Reign be long and prosperous; and to compleat his Happiness, may all his People give him the same dutiful Obedience now he is King, which he so reli∣giously paid to his Sovereign, when he was the highest of Subjects; and to say no more, may he live to accomplish those glorious things for this Nation, for which he seems to be design'd, by that special Providence which has at∣tended him through the whole course of his life, and has now plac'd him on the Imperial Throne.
2 Pet. Chap. 3. ver. 16.— In which are some things hard to be Ʋn∣derstood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, Wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own De∣struction. THE clearness of Scripture, in all points ne∣cessary to Salvation, to all such as sincerely endeavour to believe, and find out the True Sense thereof: as it is a Principle which suits very well with the nature and design of a Rule; with the Justice and Goodness of God in propounding it as such; and hath been urged with some success against those, who plead a necessity of having One Supreme infallible Judge, to decide and determine all Controversies, which shall happen to arise concerning that Faith which was once deliver'd to the Saints: Whose Decisions and Determinations, say they, ought to be Receiv'd, by all the Sons of the Church [for as much as the Church is the same in all Ages] with equal Assent and Veneration with those of the Apostles: And this to be the only sure way, to keep the Ʋnity of the Faith in the Bond of Peace. Whereby on the other hand 'tis said, New Articles of Faith may be daily imposed; the Doctrines of men pass
for the Commandments of God, and humane Inventions receive the stamp of Divine Authority; whereby men seem precluded the genuine methods of coming to the Knowledge of the Truth, and those Precepts of search∣ing the Scriptures, seeking the Kingdom of Heaven, trying the Spirits, are rendred Ineffectual; whereby men are so far from being able to give an account of their Faith, that their Ʋnderstandings are enslav'd by a Principle of blind Obedience; so far from being led into the ways of Religion, by the cords of men, that they seem rather to be driven like Beasts, and acted like Puppets, as 'tis phras'd by a late Author. As this Doctrine of the Clearness of Scripture, hath prov'd successful to the beating down the pretences to an absolute Infallibility, and uncontroulable Soveraignty over the Consciences of men: so on the other hand hath it mightily embolden'd the Patrons of Liberty, not only to despise their Ecclesiastical Superiors, to throw off all obedience to Christ's Ministers; [Whom He, notwith∣standing, a little before his Return to his Fathers Court, for the further negotiating, and advancing the affairs of His Church, Anointed and Ordain'd to perform the Apostolical Offices, of Preaching the Gospel; Remitting Sins; Inflicting Censures; Ministerially conferring the Ho∣ly Ghost; Deciding Controversies, and Administring the Sa∣craments in his stead, here on earth till his second com∣ing] but likewise to invade their Function, usurp their Sacred Calling; especially that part of it which consists in Preaching and Expounding the Word. For, say they, since 'tis confess'd, the Scriptures are sufficiently clear to all unprejudiced minds, such as are free from the clogs of Passion and Interest; Why should these pretended Ministers of Christ take so much upon them? Are not all the Congregation Holy, and Learned, as well as they? Are they the only Temples of the Holy
Ghost? And doth the Spirit of Prophecy reside solely in their Breasts? During the Dispensation of Moses, 'tis confess'd, there was a necessity of an Aaron; all along under the Legal oeconomy, the Priests Lips did preserve Knowledge; and likewise during the Reign of the Prophets, there was an appropriate Ministry. But the case is quite different under the Gospel, God having made clearer discoveries of himself, and poured out more liberally of his Spirit upon all Flesh. The sense of the Law that was Doubtful, Typical and Mysterious; the Prophecies were industriously couch'd under dark Parables, and deliver'd in obscure sayings. But then the light, the glorious light of the Gospel, as 'twas universal, 'twas likewise so clear, that any one that runs may read. Why then should we not assert that Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free? and since we have a Command, to work out our own Salvation, Why should we pin our Faith upon other mens sleeves? Thus these men, under the goodly Pretences of Chri∣stian Liberty, become enslav'd to spiritual pride and con∣ceitedness; plead the Prerogative of the Gospel, in pre∣judice of Christ's own Ambassadors; urge, for their own private Conceptions, clearness of Scripture, to their own Confusion, and pry so long into the Doctrines of Theology, till at length they light on those hidden My∣steries, which they being Ʋnlearned and Ʋnstable, Wrest unto their own Destruction. The way thus prepar'd, my Text yet leads me into these following Considera∣tions. 1. That the clearness of Scripture doth no ways lessen the Authority, or take away the Necessity of Spiritual Guides. 2. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet private men, abandoning their Lawful Guides, and following their own Corrupt Fancies, may deprave and distort them to their own Destruction.
3. That for preventing Mistakes from rising, and suppres∣sing Errors when risen, 'tis the duty of Private men to sub∣mit their Judgments in matters of Religion, to the Determi∣nations of those whom God hath constituted to be their Spiri∣tual Guides and Governours; unless it manifestly appear, that such Determinations are contrary to Gods Word. I. I begin with the First, That the Clearness of Scri∣pture, &c. For, if the Scriptures be so Clear, and Self-evident, as is pretended, then may men with greater security rely on the Directions of their Guides; and they have the less Reason to suspect their Conduct in those things, wherein they themselves being Judges, they cannot be mistaken, if they sincerely attend them; the clearness of the Law is so far from lessening the Autho∣rity, that it rather conciliates reverence to the Judge. The Profession of Physick doth not therefore become useless, because the Aphorisms of Hippocrates contain the necessary Rules for Health; and may be understood by those who are capacitated, and will take the pains to do it. The Scriptures they do clearly contain the Doctrines of Salvation: And one way, whereby Christ prov'd himself the true Messias, was by answering that Chara∣cter the Prophets had given of Him, that the Poor should have the Gospel Preached unto them, i. e. Men as of small Capacities, and less Estates, so of humble and teachable Dispositions; men who are Poor in Spirit, as well as in Fortune: And the perfection of the Christian Law consists in this, that therein God hath prescribed a reasonable service. The Rules of Life, which are there∣in laid down, are not so much the product of absolute Power and Soveraignty; as the Result of infinite Mer∣cy and Goodness. And these His Attributes led Him to consult the wants, and commiserate the Necessities of the meanest of Mankind: And therefore, as when
He took upon Him to deliver Man, He did not abhor the Virgins Womb; and that He might become a Sacri∣fice for Sin, was content to be disarray'd of His own Eternal Glory, to take upon Him the Form of a Servant, and to humble Himself to the Death, the shameful Death of the Cross: so likewise when He took upon Him the Office of a Teacher, by a wonderful Condescent, He ac∣commodated His Doctrines to the Reason and humane Affections of His Auditors. His Laws obtain'd as much by their suitableness to our Natures, as the Authority of the Speaker. When He preach'd His Divine Sermon to the Multitude, He did not amuse them with Mysti∣cal Theology, or torture their Understandings with pro∣found Subtilties; but as He was the Brightness of his Fa∣thers Glory, and the express Image of His Person; so He declar'd the Law of God in a most Plain and Perspicuous manner. Mahomet indeed, that grand Impostor, was well Ad∣vis'd to pen his Alcoran in swelling Words, and mysti∣cal Phrases; and as in some things to Restrain, so in others to Indulge the sensual Appetite: For by this Stra∣tagem, that sottish People with whom he had to do, were content to part with their natural Right, to gain an Unlawful Freedom, and to Admire what they were never like to Understand. But our new and perfect Law-giver Christ Jesus, ha∣ving no other design but the Salvation of Souls, and be∣ing every way. Adorn'd for so noble a Purpose; though He made the Gate Narrow, and the Path Strait; yet He hath promised it shall be Open'd to all that Knock; and none, unless Wilfully, need mistake the Way which leads to Eternal Life. But then, because He knew, there was no Rule so plain, but it might be Mistaken; no Precept so clear, but it might be Perverted; no Doctrine so pure, but it might
be Corrupted: Because He foresaw there would arise false Prophets, and false Teachers, whose business it would be to Seduce the Ignorant, and Debauch the Credulous: Because He foresaw a perpetual Succession of Gnosticks, who, in all Ages, would set up the Dagon of their own lascivious Fancies, in opposition to the Ark of His Co∣venant; and be so audacious, as even to confront Di∣vine Revelations with carnal Reasoning; therefore to obviate, and prevent, the mischiefs of such grievous Wolves; before He took His Journey into his far Coun∣try, out of a tender care of that Flock, which He had purchas'd with his Blood, He appointed Overseers, and Pastors of his Flock; committed to them, and them only, the care of Feeding his Flock; amplified their Commission with the like Authority, which he had receiv'd from his Father; promis'd to be with them unto the End of the World; and to assist them with that Spirit, which should guide them into all Truth. If then the Scriptures be so clear, as to be understood even by the Multitude, then much more by the Disciples in general: If by the Disciples in general, much more by the College of the Apostles, who were His special Fa∣vourites, and of his Cabinet-counsel: If the Nations, to whom these Ministers in Chief, and Plenipotentiaries for Christ, made known the Will of God, were through∣ly instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven; then much more both they, and their Successors, upon whom they, in obedience to their Masters Command, conferr'd the same Pastoral power which they had receiv'd from Him. The Clearness then of Scripture cannot reasonably be urg'd, in Prejudice of Christ's Ministers; for whatsoever is from hence alledg'd, in favour of the People, the ad∣vantage will be still greater on their side. Thus hath God promis'd the Assistance of his Spirit to all private
men, who sincerely endeavour to find out the Truth; then much less will He be wanting to the Governours of his Church, to whom He hath committed the care of the Souls of those private men, and given power even to confer the Holy Ghost. Are the Scriptures clear to them, much more to those, whom the Son of God hath signaliz'd, and set apart for the Lights of the World? Two Things are usually brought to hinder this Proce∣dure: Either that those Promises of Assistance were made only to the Apostles; or else that they depend on the condi∣tioned Righteousness of Men. Where, by the way, it may be Observ'd, that by the First of these, the Claim of the People is utterly cut off; and by the Second, they have as small Advantage. But they who argue this, might do well to consider, that this Objection may strike at the very Foundation of the Faith. For, if those promises of Assistance, which Christ made to his Church be Hypothetical; if they de∣pend on the Performance of Men, then may the Foun∣dation totter, the Gates of Hell prevail, Christianity decay, and the Gospel it self be lost out of the World, before the End thereof, notwithstanding all Christ's fair promises to the contrary. If they had been confin'd only to the Apostles, the Christian Religion had not long surviv'd its Author; every Martyrdom of an Apostle had pull'd down a Pillar of the Church, and by consequence, the whole Fabrick must have fallen to the ground in the ve∣ry first Century of our Lord. Happy indeed had it been for Christendom, that the Imperiousness of some Modern Bishops of Rome had not brought an Odium, though unjustly, upon Episcopacy in general, that their too much Lording it over the Flock, had not given Advantage to the Enemies of Church-Authority, and their challenging to themselves at least an indirect Power in Temporals, had not alarm'd
the Kings of the Earth, to stand up, and take Counsel how they might destroy so dangerous an Ʋsurpation of the pretended Vicegerent of the Lords Anointed. Happy had it been, if for the Support of their Secu∣lar Greatness, they had not wrested the Scriptures to countenance such Doctrines, as have no clear and solid Foundation therein; and that under pretence of making the Church all Glorious within, her Governours all Tri∣umphant without, they had not defac'd Her Innocent Beauty, and made Her Militant in the worst of Sences. However, they can no way be excused, who think they can never be secure from Papal Supremacy, but by demolishing the Evangelical Hierarchy, and introducing a Presbyterian Parity into the Catholick Church; and to avoid the Necessity of having an Infallible Judge, lea∣ving every private prepossessed Fancy to the Perspicuity of Scripture, whereby men are often bewildred in a Laby∣rinth of Errors, seduc'd into those by-paths which lead to the Pit of Destruction: For, notwithstanding that Beam of Divine Light, which shines so bright in the Scriptures, it seems some men have Eyes either so weak, as to be dazled at the sight of it, or else so blind with Pride or Malice, as not to perceive it: For St. Peter tells us, there are in the Scriptures some things hard to be understood, which unlearned and unstable men wrest unto their own Destruction: And therefore the Unlear∣ned should do well to consult their Teachers; the Un∣stable, those that are found in the Faith; which brings me to my second general Consideration. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet Private men, aban∣doning their Guides, and following their own corrupt Fan∣cies, may deprave and distort them to their own destruction. Who those Wresters were, or what those  are, wherewith St. Peter chargeth the Epistles of his be∣loved Brother Paul, I shall not strictly inquire; the
Apostle having pass'd them over in a profound silence, it will be difficult at this distance of time exactly to de∣fine; yet 'tis not improbable, that either the Gnostick, or Cerinthian Hereticks, were here chiefly aim'd at, who upon a mistake of some Predictions, became the Founders of a Temporal Dominion of Christ after His Resurre∣ction; wherein His Followers in their New Jerusalem, should wallow in sensual Lusts and Pleasures, spend the space of a Thousand Years, as in a Nuptial Festivity, and enjoy the all that is in the World; the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, in as ample and exquisite a manner, as the most Epicurean Soul could effect or covet: A Fancy, in its first Origi∣nal, meerly Jewish; afterwards entertain'd by some Judaizing Christians; and finally, rather rectified than abandoned by some of the Fathers in the Primitive times. And if those sublime Wits, who had all the Learning which either Jerusalem, Athens, or Rome, could boast, were nevertheless mistaken in their Expositions of some abstruse Texts of Scripture [whilst they deli∣ver'd their Opinions but as private Doctors] what won∣der, if the unlearned and unstable wrest them to their own Destruction? That they have, de facto, done this, is manifest, since 'twill be hard to instance in any one Century, which is not either chargeable with new Heresies, or the reviv∣ing and improving of old. And the most extravagant Opinions, which ever yet saw the light, have still shrouded themselves under the Patronage of Holy Writ. What shall we say then, shall we condemn the Scri∣ptures of Sin? Shall we say, That the Scriptures are of themselves either productive of Error, or not a suffi∣cient Store-house of Truth? God forbid. The Scriptures are Holy, Just, and Good, but private men wrest them to their own Destruction. And this they do, First, By
their Ignorance; Secondly, By their Instability. I. First, By their Ignorance: where it will be pre∣sently objected, that Ignorance is so far from being a cause of Error, or Impiety, that, in a sober sence, 'tis truly the Mother of Devotion. The Wisdom of this World is given in by Tertullian, as the prime Cause of Heresie; None were greater Tormentors of the Scri∣ptures than the Philosophers; for which Reason they are branded by the same Author with the Title of Arch-Hereticks: Particularly the Valentinian Heresie, concer∣ning the portentous production of the Gods, comes from the Platonists; Marcion's Ʋnconcern'd, and Lazy God, was first set up by the Stoicks; the Mortality of the Soul was the Doctrine of the Epicureans; the Impossibility of the Resurrection of the Flesh, of the whole stream of Phi∣losophers. The Apostle tells us, Not many Mighty, not many Wise, not many Noble, were chosen: cautions his Pro∣selytes against Philosophy and vain Deceit, and concludes the Wisdom of this World, Foolishness with God. Where∣fore, by , Unlearned, in this place, we are not to understand Ideots, and those who never knew Letters; but we must understand those who will not be instruct∣ed by the Masters of Divine Wisdom, the Nolentes discere, those who refuse to hear the Church of the Living God, which alone is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth. And so their Learning, like Julian's, only qualifies them to de∣ride the Doctrines of a Crucified God, and by their Wis∣dom they become the more formidable Enemies of Christ's Kingdom. Thus, if Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, fall from his Allegiance, whole Legions of the Heavenly Host are involv'd in the Rebellion. That Heresie spreads like the Contagion of a Leprosie, which hath an Arrius for its Founder, and a Constantius for its Promoter: And the
Mahumetan▪ Religion owes as well its monstrous Birth, as its fatal Increase to the Malice and Cunning of an Apostate Jew, and a Renegado Christian. And to give but one instance more, but of a far more Modern Date, and therefore of more dangerous consequence; That unhappy man Socinus, a person otherwise of singular Wit and Learning; but being in this sense unlearned, i. e. having entertain'd so slender a Notion of the Church, as to date a general Defection from the very Deaths of the Apostles; upon this Perswasion, thought it not Rob∣bery to make himself equal to the most Oecumenical Coun∣cils, to contradict the most receiv'd Doctrines of the Church; and from this contempt of his Mother, to proceed to that daring pitch of impiety, as to deny even the Lord that bought him: so dangerous is it for pri∣vate men to rely solely upon the perspicuity of Scri∣pture, or to measure the  of the Incarnation of the Godhead, his Consubstantiality with the Father, by the scantling of Humane Reason. Cedat curiositas fidei, gloria saluti, was the Advice of as great a Wit as any Age hath bred. Our Curiosity must give place to our Faith; the thirst of Temporal Glory, to the benefits of Eternal Salvation. 'Tis true, by our Reason, we are first dispos'd to be Christians; for no Creature, beneath the Rational, is capable of Divine Revelation; but when once we have given up our Names to Christ, 'tis by our Faith we are saved: but if we assent to no Doctrines, but such as our Reason fully comprehends, this is no longer Faith, but Science; and so we may continue Infidels, whilst we go under the Notion of Christians. And since we live in such a knowing Age, wherein all captivating the Ʋnderstanding, though it be to the Obedience of Faith, is made the subject of Grievance and Complaint: And that we have to deal with men of such
a sceptical Genius, as that they do not only inquire into the Grounds and Reasons of our Faith, but moreover deny our very Creed; with whom a Treatise of Humane Reason is of more Force, than the Revelation of St. John the Divine. To the Consideration of these Men I offer Two Things, which I judge most proper. I. First, The Answer which Origen made to Celsus; when 'twas objected by that Calumniator against the Christians, that their Religion was built on a very sandy Foundation, which durst not undergo the Test of Rea∣son, but commanded its Converts not to Examine, but Believe, and their Faith should Save them. In part he owns the Objection, but wisely retorts it upon his Ad∣versary, by telling him, that the Philosophers were the greatest Dictators in the World: Witness the Ipse dixit of Pythagoras, that their Systems contain'd some such se∣cret Dogmata, which their Disciples swallowed solely upon the Credit of their Masters. And if the Masters of the Wisdom of this World [which is either Foolish∣ness, or at best, but Science, falsly so called] required so great submission from their Scholars, how much greater is to be given to those Doctrines which are contain'd in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, who were Taught of God, and spake as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost? II. Secondly, I urge the Authority of my Lord Bacon, whose, if any, methinks should be admitted by these Vir∣tuosi in Religion; The Divine Prerogative, saith he, ex∣tends it self to the whole Man; and requires not only Obedience from our Wills, but Submission from our Un∣derstandings. And therefore, as we are bound to obey the Divine Law, though our Wills reluct never so much against it; so are we obliged to believe whatsoever God hath reveal'd, though never so improbable to our Un∣derstandings: For if we believe no more than what we
can demonstrate to be true, we do not believe the Truth deliver'd for the Authors sake, but the Author for the Truths sake; and so we pay no more Respect to the Oracles of God, than we do to the Writings of Men, though never so much suspected by us. The Faith which justified Abraham, was conversant in a matter in∣credible to Reason: And therefore the higher the My∣steries of Religion are above our Reason, the greater is the exercise and triumph of our Faith, and the Honour done unto God in Believing. To conclude this Point, Great is the use of Reason in Religion, both as to the manner of interpreting the Scriptures, and the deducing true Consequences, and wholesom Conclusions from thence; and if it be wholly suppress'd, our Religion will degenerate into Superstition; we shall be so far from paying God a Reasonable Service, that we shall offer Him the Sacrifice of Fools. But then it must be kept to a due temper: for, if it be not managed by prudent Guides, 'tis apt to grow wild and extravagant, to hurry us on to a Belief of the Foulest Impostures, to a Practice of the Grossest Impieties, which either the pre∣valency of the World, the domineering Enmity of the Flesh, or the implacable Malice of Satan, can propound to be believed or practis'd. II. The second Reason of private Mens falling into Error, is their Instability in not adhering to their Guides; but forsaking them to go astray in the intricate paths of Error and Deceit. Heresie being nothing else but an Excision from, and Disobedience to the Church in points of Faith. And therefore the Apostle pronounceth an Heretick Self-condemned; one who hath want only cho∣sen to himself those Opinions, for an obstinate Defence whereof, after full and plain means of Conviction, he justly falls under the Censures of the Church, is Excom∣municated the Assembly of the Saints; and so without
Repentance and Reconciliation continues in a very dange∣rous estate, if that of Heathens and Publicans be acknow∣ledg'd such. Not in vain then are those frequent Cautions against Falling away, those repeated Admonitions to Perseve∣rance, those earnest Exhortations to hold fast the Pro∣fession, and contend for the Faith which was once deli∣ver'd; those so much inculcated Commands of obeying those who are set Over us in the Lord, Heb. 13.7. Re∣member them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow. Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls. For in vain may those men commit themselves to the immediate Assi∣stance of God, who neglect to hear his Guides; and violate His Commandments, in hopes to procure His help and favour: For, from that very moment of time, they cease to be Members of the Holy Catholick Church, they are become Out-lawries in a Gospel-sense, they have lost the Protection of the Heavenly King, and they lay under the Deprivation of the Benefits belonging to the Subjects of that Jerusalem which is above. And what wonder, if being in this forlorn condition the Tempter take his advantage, lead them into the Wilderness, and there present to their disturb'd Fancies false Schemes of Religion, suggest unworthy apprehen∣sions of God; and whatsoever is by him thus suggested, is by them mistaken for new Light and holy Inspira∣tions. And because this Spirit of Delusion dares put forth, among Christians, no Doctrines but such as pretend to be founded on the Scriptures: to this purpose they are wrested and tortur'd, their Scope is mistaken, their Sense abused, their Periods miserably mangled, their whole Design perverted to countenance every Wild Opinion,
which either a capricious Fancy can imagine, or a malicious Wit invent. And from hence it comes to pass, that we have as many several sorts of Christians as there are different Humors or Interests of men; and the Gospel with St. Paul, though in a quite contrary sense, is be∣come all things unto all men. And having made thus bold with the Scriptures, it cannot be expected that they should deal more modest∣ly with any Authority inferiour to that; the most an∣cient Traditions must now give place to new Discoveries. The Consent of the Catholick Apostolick Church be born down by the Dictates of a private, I might say, fami∣liar Spirit. Whereas there is all the reason in the World to believe that the Apostles best knew the mind of their Master, that they faithfully and fully communicated their knowledge to their Successors, and so by certain steps and degrees we may arrive at this fundamental Truth: That as the Church is the most faithful Keeper, so the most authentick Expositor of Scripture. Which fairly ushers in my third and last Consideration. That for the preventing Mistakes from rising, and suppressing Errors when risen, 'Tis the duty of Private Men to submit their Judg∣ments, in matters of Religion, to the Determinations of those whom God hath Constituted to be their Spiritual Guides and Governours; unless it manifestly appear, That such Determi∣nations are contrary to Gods Word. And this I shall assert very briefly both from the Qualifications of the Persons who are appointed to Rule in the Church, and the Rea∣son of the thing. I. And that which first entitles the Governours of the Church to a Superiority over their Subjects, is that special Ordination and Commission, which they have receiv'd from Christ, to instruct the World in all necessary Truths, and that Charge which he hath laid upon others to obey them. If any one listeth to see their Commission, he
may find it recorded in any of the four Evangelists. I shall exhibit it, as 'tis exemplified Matt. 28.18, 19, 20. And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Go ye therefore, and Teach all Nations, Teaching them to observe all things what∣soever I have Commanded you: And lo, I am with You al∣ways unto the end of the World. In which words there are these Three Things considerable: 1. That Christ com∣mission'd His Disciples immediately after He had pro∣claim'd Himself Omnipotent. 2. That this Commission implies it to be Christ's Will, that all Nations of the World should obey them. 3. That He promised to be with Them and their Successors, unto the end of the World. And there cannot be a fuller instance, of the Perversness of some Men, who, to evacuate and over∣throw the Authority of the present Church, will needs confine  to some period of time, short of the final dissolution of all things, when time shall be swallow'd up of Eternity; if not contrary to the Gram∣matical sense of the Word, yet at least to the design of the Promise, and the nature of the Thing. Which of the Ambassadours of earthly Potentates ever received so ample a Commission? the Person commissio∣ning was Omnipotent. The Commission was universal in respect of Persons, Time and Place; 'twas directed to all the Nations, and to continue throughout all the Ages of the World, and for the Execution of it they were em∣powr'd from above; wheresoever they came, they consti∣tuted a Spiritual Government, and they had full Power to Enact such Laws as they thought tended to the Ad∣vancement of their Masters Kingdom; and they did with Authority, and not by way of Counsel only, as some would have, determine such Controversies as arose, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Ʋs. All along their Spiritual progress, if any City refus'd
to receive Them, or their Doctrine, they shook off the dust off their Feet against it, as a direful Presage of some ensuing Judgment, as the next words manifestly declare; Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, than for that City. Wretched City! how has thy Disobedience ascertain'd, and aggrandiz'd thy Ruine. The lewd Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha shall find more Favour in the day of Judgment, than thy Citizens. Most true it is, their Power was purely Spiritual: Christ, the Prince of Peace, did not commission Generals to destroy, but sent forth Apostles to convert the Nations, by declaring His Laws, and denouncing His Judgments. But then they had no coercive Power of the Sword, which God hath given to Magistrates, to inflict the Judgments which they de∣nounc'd. But as they, because living under Heathen Powers, left the Event of their Spiritual Censures solely to the Divine Vengeance, [which they who escap'd in this World, were sure to meet with in the next]; so is it still, unless Kings are graciously pleased to shew them∣selves Nursing Fathers to the Church, to enforce Spiritual Censures by Corporal Penalties, and adjudge those Un∣worthy the Protection of the Laws of the Realm, who are justly depriv'd of the Benefits of the Church. By all which it appears, that the Church is something else, than a Christian Commonwealth, since there was a Church before the Commonwealth became Christian; and nei∣ther the Leviathan, nor any of his Disciples, hath yet been able to shew, how, or when the Church forfeited Her antecedent Right: And that though the Gover∣nours thereof may challenge to themselves a Power di∣stinct, yet no ways opposite to the Civil; The Shield of Faith doth not clash with the Sword of Justice. And maugre the designs of those, who have Evil will at Sion, this is not to erect Imperium in imperio, much less
to set the Mitre above the Crown: Since whatsoever Pow∣er, is here challenged as of Divine Right, is purely Spiri∣tual, exercis'd to Spiritual ends and purposes; so far from interfering with the Civil, from Absolving men from that Obedience, which is indispensably due thereunto; that wheresoever it takes place, it abates nothing of that na∣tural Right which the Magistrate had in the Affairs of Religion: Yet herein it will appear, that the Wisdom of the despised King of the Jews, did far surmount all the Policies of the World; in that he hath so interwoven the Concerns of His Church with the Interest of the State, that at the same time any man shall dare to be∣come an Enemy to his Kingdom, he must cease to be a Friend to Caesars. II. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear from those promises of Assistance, which Christ hath made to them, but not to others without them; much less to others against them: And those are Illumination, Direction and Power. Illumination, in things Obscure; Direction, in things Difficult; Power, to encounter, and overcome all Opposition. And this may be one Reason, why Christ did not Arm his Disciples with a Temporal Sword; for certain∣ly He, who had all Power given Him in Heaven, and on Earth, might have done it, if He had pleas'd, be∣cause He furnish'd them with such Extraordinary Virtues, as did abundantly supply the defect of that. Thus they who could raise the Dead from the Grave, needed no other Argument to gain the Living. They who could convince the Consciences, captivate the Understand∣ings, beat down the Imaginations, and conquer the Affections of their Adversaries, needed no Sword, nor Spear, nor any of the Bloody Engines of War, to make themselves Masters of the Field. Now the same Spirit, though not in the same Measure,
doth still reside in the Governors of the Church: though they do not equalize the Apostles in working of Mira∣cles, diversities of Languages, extent of Jurisdiction; though they have not, as they had, the whole World for their Diocess; yet are they still Bishops of Souls; Pa∣stors, and Doctors for the Consummation of the Saints, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Either then let Private men submit to their Spiritual Go∣vernours; exercising their Commission according to God's Word; or else let them warrant their Dissent with greater, at least equal Attestations of the Divine Fa∣vour; and then there will be no great fear of any danger arising from Dissenting Brethren. III. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear from their Study and Learning in Divine Matters, and from the far less Knowledge and ordinary Capacity in others. The Apostles, they had their Knowledge of Divine things, either from a constant and familiar con∣verse with their Master, or else from that plentiful Ef∣fusion of the Holy Ghost, which He vouchsafed them immediately upon His Restauration to His Heavenly Kingdom. That which was thus wonderfully bestowed upon them, their Successors are forc'd to acquire, by hard Study, great Industry, frequent and fervent Address to the Fountain of Wisdom. For, not only the Knowledge of Languages, a Calmness of Mind, neither ruffled with the storms of Passion, nor distracted with the Cares of the World; but likewise a piercing Judgment, to distinguish between the Literal and Figurative sense, to weigh the scope and coherence of things, to compare one place with another, to illustrate obscure Texts, by those which are more plain, to consult, and find out the sense of An∣tiquity, is required to a right understanding of the Scri∣ptures:
For they do not only contain things of them∣selves hard to be understood; but moreover, those very things are rendred more difficult, by the Malice of Satan, and the Cunning of his Agents. The Enemy hath sown such a prodigious quantity of Tares, that 'tis very hard sometimes to find out the Wheat: What wonder then, if such a spawn of Monstrous Opinions flow from the Scriptures falling either into prophane hands, or being interpreted by a private, self-conceited, and unruly Spi∣rit? If St. Paul, who was caught up into the third Hea∣vens, and was even oppress'd with Revelations; never∣theless cryes out, as well for the Difficulty, as the Dignity of his Function, Who is sufficient for these things? Then certainly it can be no Disparagement to the Laity, how∣ever quick-sighted they may be in other Affairs, to sup∣pose them not such competent Judges here, as those of the Clergy are. And indeed, we hear of very few, though never such Despisers of the dull Clergy in their life-time, but are very willing to admit of their advice and assistance when they come to Dye. IV. Fourthly and lastly, The necessity of this Sub∣mission appears, as 'tis the only means to restore Peace and Unity to the Church; Happiness and Tranquillity to the State, how ineffectual the several Projects of Com∣prehension, Toleration, unwarrantable Compliance have pro∣ved to effect the Work of Coalition: I mean to Compose those Differences, and Unite those Divisions which so fu∣riously Rage among us; we either are, or 'tis to be fear∣ed, by sad Experience, may be Taught. These Projects can only lay claim to an imaginary Happiness, and however plausible they may seem in the Notion, yet may they prove dangerous in the Practice, at least, not attain the ends for which they were de∣sign'd. For, in truth, as well may we expect To gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles, as that a Tole∣ration
of Disagreements, should produce the blessed Fruits of Peace and Concord. These are Contraries, and destroy each other. Now, what other Expedient have we left but the Re∣storing, and Asserting the Discipline of the Church.: That so they, who will neither Hold the Faith, nor keep a good Conscience, by being deliver'd up to Satan, may learn, at least, not to blaspheme. Many and grievous are the Guilts, which are charg'd upon the Church of Rome; yet such is the Exactness of Her Discipline, and the Obedience of Her Sons and Daughters, consequent upon it, as hath hi∣therto preserv'd Her from Ruine. Now, if our Fears of the Increase of Popery, be as real, as they are pretend∣ed, methinks it should be no ill Policy to learn Wisdom from our Adversaries; for that which preserves a Corru∣pted Church from Falling, in all likelihood will make a Pure One to Flourish. However, we are little the better for being deliver'd from the Slaveries of an Implicit Faith, and Foreign Su∣perstition, if we run into Licentiousness, Infidelity, and Irreligion at Home. For, who is so blind as not to see that Irreverence and Disrespect for the Lord's Clergy, hath been accompanied with a manifest Decay of Piety, and a notorious Contempt of the most Essential Parts of Religion? That want of Submission, to the Just and Pi∣ously Determinations of the Church, no less Justly and Pi∣ously ratified and established by the King and State, hath given Birth to such monstrous Variety of Opinions, as hath scarce left any Fundamental of the Faith unque∣stion'd, if not denied; Atheism creeping in by insensible degrees, from indulging too great a Latitude in Matters of Religion. And now in the Close of All, Let every Man seriously consider with himself the Hainousness and Danger of Schism; and the blessed Effects of Obedience.
The Danger of Schism, in that it breaks, the precious Ʋnity of the Church, alienates the Affections of the Mem∣bers thereof. Who, as they have but one Faith, so they should have but one Soul. And so instead of Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Forbearance, Meekness, Temperance, those lovely Fruits of the Spirit, which adorn private Men, and secure the publick Peace, there arise Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Evil Surmising, Sedi∣tion, Heresies, Murders; those ugly Works of the Flesh, which dissolve the Bonds of Society, and exclude Men from the Kingdom of God. How that the Schismatick is arrested with Fears and Jealousies from without, when he considers his Sin of Disobedience against those whom the Lord hath set over him, and the Dreadfulness of the Churches Censures, when justly incurr'd for his Disobe∣dience. How that he is tormented with sad and un∣comfortable Reflections from within; being Ʋnstable in all his Ways, ever learning, but never coming to the Know∣ledge of the Truth; but being abandon'd to the Delusions of a Private Spirit, he is miserably toss'd to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, till at length he makes an Eter∣nal Shipwrack of the Faith. On the contrary, the blessed Effects of Obedience; how the Humble Christian, by an happy Resignation of his Judgment, there where our Lord seems to demand it, enjoys a perpetual Peace, and Freedom from Dis∣pute, together with all his Fellow-Members of the same Mystical Body. As for those great Mysteries of Godliness, which concern his Salvation, though they are above his Reason, yet not above his Faith; and he had rather rely on the Churches Decisions of them, when he finds no place of Scripture plainly contrary to such Decisions, than either give way to his own Curiosity, or heed to the Disputers of this World, left he should thereby wrest them to his own Destruction. And this he thinks he may do
with less trouble to himself, and greater assurance of the Truth, and so he continues sound in the Faith, without being skill'd in those unhappy Controversies, in which the Disputers of this World have involv'd it. And this Harmony of Faith and Doctrine is always ac∣companied with an entire League, and Union of Cha∣rity, [that common Badge by which Christians were once distinguish'd from the rest of the World] and a Blessed Ʋniformity of God's Publick Worship and Ser∣vice, whereby the Members of the Church Militant, in some sort, resemble the Saints of the Church Triumphant. In a Word, in this Obedience, the Humble Christian goes on securely, and chearfully, in the Ways of God's Commandments; And instead of troubling his Head with the  of Religion, practiseth those plain, but most important Duties of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety; which will render his Life happy here, and crown him with Eternal Felicity hereafter. FINIS.
