C4529 12221915 56425
THE LIFE & DEATH OF Julius Caesar, The first Founder of the ROMAN EMPIRE AS ALSO The LIFE and DEATH OF Augustus Caesar In whose Raign our Blessed LORD, and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIT was borne. By Sa. Clarke sometime Pastor in St. Bennet Finck London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Guilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. 1665.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF Julius Caesar The first Founder of the ROMAN EMPIRE. JUlius Caesar by the Fathers side was of a ve∣ryCaesars Paren∣tage. Noble and ancient Family, and by the Mothers side he descended from the Kings of Rome, who were extracted from the Trojan Aeneas. When he was a young man, Sylla having gotten the Lordship of Rome, would have had him put away his Wife Corne∣lia, who was the Daughter of Cinna, the Dictator, but he could not prevaile with him, either by promises or threats to do it, whereupon he took away her joynter from him. Sylla being very busie in puting to Death many of hisHis dan∣ger by Sylla. enemies, yet passed by Caesar whom he contemned for his
youth. And Caesar was not contented to retire himself in safety inthose stormy times, but came and made suite to the People for the Priesthood which was then void, when he had scant any haire on his face: but by Syllas means he suffered a repulse, who was so irritated here∣by, that he determined to have killed him; and when some of Syllas Friends told him, that it was to no pur∣pose to put so young a man to Death, he answered, That they did not consider that there were many Marius's in that one Boy. Caesar being informed of his danger, secretly fled from Rome, and hid himself a long time amongst the Sabines,His flight▪ wandering from one place to another, yet at length he fell into the hands of a party of Syllas Souldiers who soughtfor him, but he bribed their Captain with two Talents, and so escaped. Then went he unto the Sea side, and taking Ship, he passed into Bythinia unto King Nicomedes. And after a while, he took Sea again,He is taken by Pirates. and fell into the hands of some Pirates, who at that time kept all the Sea-coast, with a great Fleet. They asking him twenty Talents for his Ransom, Caesar laughed them to scorne, as not knowing what a man they had taken, and of himself promised them fifty Ta∣lents, and sent some of his men to get him this money, so that he was almost left alone amongst these Theeves, which were the cruellest Butchers in the world, having onely one of his Friends and two Slaves with him. Thus he continued thirty eight dayes amongst them, not as a Prisoner, but rather waited upon as a Prince by them: For he boldly exercised himself amongst themHis bold∣nesse. in their sports: He would make Orations and call them to gether to hear them, and if they seemed not to understand or regard them, he would call them Blockheads and Beasts, and laughing, would threa∣ten to hang them, and they took all in good part, thinking that it proceeded from his Boyish simpli∣city.
When his Ransome was come, he paid it them and so was dismssied; and presently arming and man∣ningHe is de¦livered. some Ships out of the Haven of Miletum, he fol∣lowed these Theeves, and finding them yet at Anchor, he took most of them, and got a great Booty, and carryed there persons to the City of Pergamus, and there imprisoned them, whilst himself went to Jumus, the Governour of Asia, to whom the execution of these Pirates did belong. But he desiring to get the money, because there was good store of it, said, that he would consider of these Prisoners at better leasure. Caesar here∣upon returned back to Pergamus, and there hung up allHe cruci∣fies the Pirates. these Theeves openly upon the Crosse, as he often had threatened that he would doe, when they thought that he was but in jest. When Sylla's power began to decay, Caesars Friends wrote to him to returne to Rome: But he first went to Rhodes to study there for a time, under the Tuition of Apollonius, an honest man and excellent Rethori∣cian,His studies. whose Schollar also Cicero had been. Caesar had an excellent gift to speak well naturally, which was much holpen by his Studies, so that he was very elo∣quent, and might have been second to none, but that he applied himself rather to follow the Wars, and to mannage great matters than to pleading of cau∣ses. When he was returned again to Rome, he immediate∣lyHis return to Rome. wan the good willof the People by his Eloquence, and courteous speaking to every man, being more cere∣monious in his deportment than could be expected from one of his years. Besides, he ever kept a good Table, andHe grows popular. fared well, and was very liberall, which much encreased his estimation with the people. And his enemies, pre∣suming that when he could not hold out that charge andAnd is feared. expence, the favour of the People would quickly decay, they suffered him to go on, till by degrees he was grown very great, and powerfull. So that though some of them foresaw that his power would at last turne to the
destruction of the Commonwealth of Rome, yet now they knew not how to provent it. Indeed Cicero was the first man, who mistrusting his dealings, found out his subtilty and malice, which he cuningly cloaked un∣der a shew of curtesie, and familiarity: Yet (said he) When I consider how finely he combeth his fair bush of haire, and how smooth it lyeth, and that I see him scratch his Head with one finger, my mind gives me then, that such a man should not be so wicked as to designe the ruine of the common∣wealth. The first time that he made proofe of the good will of the People was, when he stood in competition with Pompey to be chosen a Collonel of a thousand Foot Souldiers, and carryed it against him; but a more manifest proof of it was at the Deathof his Aunt Julia, the Wifeof Mari∣us the elder. For then he solemnly made an Oration in her commendations in the Market place, and at her Buriall, did boldly shew forth the Images of Marius, which was the first time that they were seen after Syllas Victory over him, at which time Marius and all his partakershad been proclaimed Traytors and enemies to the Commonwealth. And whereas some cryed out upon Caesar for doing it, the Poeple on the other side applaudded and thanked him him for it. And whereas there was an ancient custome that the Romans used to make Funerall Orations in com∣mendation of old Ladys, but not of young Women, Caesar was the first that praised his own Wife in an Oration at her funerall, which much engaged the Peo∣ple to him, seeing him of so kind, and loving a na∣ture. Shortly after he was made Treasure under AntistiusHis pre∣ferment. Vetus, the Praetor, for which he ever after honoured him, so that when he himselfe came to be Praetor, he made his Son Treasurer under him, and when he came out of that Office, he married his third Wife, whom was Pompeia, and married his Daughter Cornelia which he had by his first Wife, to Pompey the Great. He fur∣ther ingratiated, himself with the People by disbursing a
great summe of his own money in mending the Appian way, when he was made Overseer thereof: as also for that, when he was chosen an Aedile, he shewed the Peo∣ple the pastime of three hundred and twenty couple of Sword Players, and exceeded all others in the sumptuousnesse of his Feasts and sports which he made for the delight of the People, which made them daily to give him new Offices by way of requi∣tall. Not long after the High Priest Metellus dyed, and Isauricus and Catulus, two of the chiefest men, and of the greatest authority in Rome, contended for the place: Cae∣sar also presented himself to the People and sued for it, and Catulus fearing the event, sent a great summe of money to Caesar, to procure him to leave off his suite: Caesar sent him word, that he would disburse a greater summe than that to maintaine the suit against him: and when the Day of Election came, his Mother bringing him to the Doore, Caesar weeping kissed her and said,His ambi∣tion. He is made High Priest. Mother, This day thou shalt see thy Son chief Bishop of Rome, or bannished from Rome; and accordingly he carred it by the suffrages of the People, insomuch as the Senate and Noble men were all affraid of him, judging that from henceforth he would make the People do what he pleased. Afterwards Caesar going into the Senate to cleere him∣self of some accusations that were brought against him, the Senate keeping him somewhat longer than ordina∣ry, the People come to the door and called for him, bidding them let him out. Whereupon Cato fearing an insurraction of the Poor and needy persons, who put all their hopes in Caesar, moved, that a frank distribution of Corne for a moneth should be made amongst them, which indeed put the Commonwealth to the charge of fifty five hundred Myriades, but it quenched the present danger, and did happly scatter the best part of Caesars strength, and that at such time when he was made Praetor, and had thereby opportunity of doing
much mischief. Yet all the time of that Office, he ne∣ver attempted to make any alteration in the Common∣wealth.His Mo∣deration. About this time Clodius was suspected of too much familiarity whith Pompeia wherefore Caesar put her away.He puts away his wife. The Government of Spain being falne unto Caesar as he was Praetor, his Creditors came with great importunity cal∣ling for their debts: But he being unable to satisfy them, went to Crassus, the richest man in Rome; who stood in need of Caesars boldness and courage to withstand Pom∣peys greatness, who became his surety to his greediest Creditors, for eight hundred and thirty Talents, where∣upon he was suffered to depart to his Province. As he passed over the Alps he came to a little poor Village, where his friends that did accompany him, as∣ked him merrily if there were any contending for Offices in that Town, and whether there were any strife a∣mongst the Noble-men for honour? Caesar answered, I cannot tell: but for my part, I had rather be the chiefest manHis ambi∣tion. here, than the second person in Rome. Another time in Spain reading the History of Alexander he was sorrowfull a good while after, and at last burst out into weeping. His Friends marvelling at it, asked him what was the cause of his sorrow? He answered, Do you not think that I have good cause to be sorry, when Alexander (being no older than myself) had conquered so many Nations and Coun∣tries, whereas hitherto I have done nothing worthy of my self. When he first came into Spain he followed his business close, and in a short time had joined ten new EnsignsHis victo∣ries in Spain. of Foot Souldiers, unto the other twenty which he had before. Then marching against the Gallicians, and Lu∣sitanians, he conquered all before him as far as to the At∣lantick Ocean, subduing those People which before knew not the Romans for their Lords; and then did as wisely take order for the establishing of Peace. For he reconciled the Cities together, made them Friends: But especially he pacified all suits of Law betwixt
Debtors and Creditors which arose by usury: Ordain∣ingHis Pru∣dence. that the Creditors should take yearly two parts of the revenew of their Debtors, till such time as they had paid themselves, and that the Debtors should have the other third part to live upon. By this he won great esti∣mation to himself, and returned from his Government very wealthy, his Souldiers also were full of rich spoiles. The Romans had a custome, that such as desired the ho∣nour of Triumph, should stay without the City, whereas they that sued for the Consulship must of necessity be there in Person. Caesar coming home just at that time when Consuls were to be chosen, he sent to request the Senate that he might be permitted to sue for the Consul∣ship by his friends: Against this Cato at first did vehe∣mently invey, alleadging that it was contrary to an ex∣press Law. But when he perceived that many of the Senators (being Caesar's friends) favoured his request, he cunningly sought all he could to prevent them: whereupon Caesar resolved rather to give over his suit, for the Triumph, than to lose the Consulship: So he came into the City, and outwitted all but Cato. His device was this, Pompey and Crassus were the two greatestHis subtil∣ty. Persons in Rome, and at jarr between themselves: Caesar affecting to make himself greater than either of them, sought to make them friends, and thereby to get the power of them both: For indeed, they both affected his Friendship, that by his help they might supplant one an∣other. And in the end, by his endeavours, a peace was concluded betwixt them: yet being still jealous one of another, and fearing to lose Caesar, they both sought to gratifie him, and by this means he made himself equall to either of them: and that power which they two had formerly usurped, was now divided between three, and in the end Caesar hereby got the sole command. This League being made betwixt them, Caesar de∣manded the Consulship, being brought into the Assem∣bly for the Election betwixt these two Noble Persons
and was there chosen Consul▪ together with Calphurni∣usHe is chosen Consul. Bibulus, without the contradiction of any: And when he was entered into his Office, he began to put forth Laws meeter for a sedicious Tribune than for a Consul, because by them he preferred the division of Lands, and distrubuting Corne to every Citizen Gratis, and all to please the People; And when the Senators op∣posed it, he took the advantage, Protesting that the Senate by their austerity drave him against his will to cleave to the People, and thereupon he asked Crassus and Pompey in the open Assembly, if they gave their con∣sents to his Laws? They answered, yea. Then he prayed them to stand by him against those that threatned to oppose him with the Sword: Crassus said he would, and Pompey did the like, adding, that he would come with his Sword and Target both against such; which gave great offence to the Senate, but the common People much rejoyced. Caesar to oblige Pompey more to him, gave him his Daughter Julia in marriage, who was made sure beforeHe mar∣ries his Daughter to Pompey to Servilius Caepio, promising him in her stead Pompeys Daughter, who also was made sure unto Faustus, the Son of Sylla. And shortly after Caesar himself married Calphur∣nia, the Daughter of Piso, whom he caused to succeed him in the Consulship. Cato then cryed out, and called the Gods to witnesse, that it was a shamefull thing that they should make such havock in the Commonwealth by such horrible Bawdy matches, hereby dividing a∣mongst themselves the Government of Provinces, and great Armies. And Bibulus perceiving that he did but contend in vaine, Caesar being too potent for him, and that his Life was in danger for opposing these Laws, he kept his House all the rest of his Consul∣ship. Pompey having married Julia, he filled the Market∣place with Souldiers, and by open force authorised the Lawes which Caesar had made in favour of the People: He procured also that Caesar had both the Gauls, and
all Illyria, with four Legions, granted him for five years: and when Cato stood up to speak against it, CaesarHe is sent into Gaul. bad his Officers to lay hold on him, and carry him to Prison, thinking that he would have appealed to the Tribunes, but Cato said no more, but went his way. And Caesar seeing that not only the Nobility, but the Commons also were offended at it, out of respect to Cato's virtues, he secretly prayed one of the Tribunes that he would take Cato from his Officers, which was done accordingly. Many of the Senators refused to be present in the Senate under him, but left the City, because they could not endure his doings; whereupon one Consi∣dius, an old man told him, that the Senators durst not meet because of his Souldiers. Why then (said Caesar) dost not thou also keep home out of the same fear? Be∣cause (said he) My age takes away my fear from me, for hav∣ing so short a time to live, I care not to prolong it fur∣ther. Caesar preferred Clodius, a base fellow, to be Tribune, who sought the Office for no other end but to destroyHe bet∣tays Cice∣ro. Cicero, who had discovered his Villanies, and Caesar would not go to his Province till he had set them two together by the ears, and driven Cicero out of Italy. Yet did he deserve the name of as brave a Generall as a∣ny that went before him, if we consider the hard Coun∣tries where he made Wars: His gaining of so many Countries which he adjoyned to the Empire of Rome: The multitude and power of the enemies whom he o∣vercame: The rudenesse and Valour of the men with whom he had to doe, whose manners yet he mollified, and civilized: His courtesy, and clemency to those whom he overcame: His great bounty and liberallity to those that served under him: As also if we consider the number of Battels that he fought, and the multitude of enemies that were slaine by him. For in lesse then ten years, he took by assault above eight hunderedHis Va¦lour and great suc∣cesses. Townes: He conquered three hundred Nations: and having at several times above thirty hundred thousand
Souldiers against him, he slew a Million of them, and took as many more Prisoners. He was so intirely beloved of his Souldiers, that to doe him service, andHis Soul∣diers Va∣lour. to advance his honour, they were invincible: As ap∣peares by the example of Acilius, who in a Sea-fight before the City of Marseiles, boarding one of the ene∣mies Ships, had his right hand cut off, and yet he ran upon his enemies, thrusting them in their faces with his Target on his left hand, and so prevailed that he took their Ship. One Cassius Scava also in a fight before the City of Dyrrachium, having an eye put out with an Arrow, his shoulder striken through with a Dart, and his thigh with another, having received thirty Arrows upon his Shield, called to his enemies as if he would yeild to them: but when two of them came running to him, he cut off one of their armes by the shoulder, and wounded the other in the face, and made them give back till he was fetched off by some of his fellowes. In Brittan also when some of his Captaines were driven into a bog full of mire and dirt, the enemies fiercely assaulting them there, Caesar viewing the Battel, he saw a private Soul∣dier thrust in amongst the Captaines, where he fought so valiantly that at length he forced the Barbarous Peo∣ple to fly, and thereby saved the Captaines, who other∣wise had perished there: And then this Souldier being the hindmost of all the Captaines, marched through the bog, sometimes swiming, and sometimes on foot, till he gat to the farther side, onely he lost his Target. Caesar wondring at his valour, ran and imbraced him: But the poor Souldier, hanging down his head, with teares in his eyes, fell at Caesars feet, begging pardon for leaving his Target behind him. In Africk also, Scipio having taken one of Caesars Ships, slew all that were in it, save Petronius, a Treasurer, to whome he profered life: But Petronius answered him, that Caesars Souldiers used to give others their lives, and not to have their lives given them, and thereupon slew himself with his own Sword.
Now Caesar bred this courage in them by reward∣ing them bountifully, and honouring them. He also gave them a good example by adventuring himself up∣on manifest dangers, and putting his Body to extreame paines when there was occasion, which filled them with admiration. As for his costitution he was lean, white, and soft skin'd, and often troubled with the Head-ach, and sometimes with the falling sicknesse, yet yeilded he not to his sicknesse, but rather took paines as a Medi∣cineHis Tem∣perance. to cure it, travelling continually, living soberly and commonly lying abroad in the Fields. Most nights he slept in his Coach, and in the dayes travelled up and down to see Cities, Castles, and strong holds. He had alwayes a Secretary with him in his Coach, who writ as they went by the way, and a Souldier behind him that carryed his Sword. He made such speed when he had gotten his Office at Rome, that in eight dayes he came to the River of Rhone. He was an excellent Rider from his youth: for holding his hands behind him, he wouldHis activi∣ty. run his Horse upon the spurre. In his Wars in Gaul, or France, he used to exercise himself in inditing Letters by the way, wherein he was so nimble that he imployed two Secretaries, or more at one time. He made very little account of his Diet, Supping one night in Millane with his Friend Valerius Leo, there was served at Table some Sperage with per∣fumed oile instead of Sallet oile, he eat it, and found no fault, blaming his Friends who were offended at the mistake, saying, that if they liked it not they should have let it alone, and that it was not good manners hereby to shame their Friend. At another time in his journey he was forced by soul weather to shelter himself in a poor Cottage that had but one Cabbin, and that so narrow that one could scant lye in it, whereupon he said to his Friends, the greatest roomes, are fittest for the greatest men, and Beds for sick persons, and so caused Oppius that was sick to lie there, and himself with the rest of his Friends, lay without doors.
The first War that Caesar made in Gaul, was againstHe over∣comes the Swissers. the Helvetians, or Swissers, and the Tygurines, who ha∣ving set fire of their own Cities and Houses, came to in∣vade that part of Gaul which was subject to the Romans. These were a very War-like and Valiant People, and in all they were three hundred thousand souls, whereof there were one hundred and ninety thousand fighting men: yet were they overthrown by Labienus, Caesar's Lieutenant at the River Arax. And when the Helveti∣ans afterwards came suddenly to set upon Caesar, he made hast to get into some place of strength, and there ordered his Battel against them, and when one brought him his charging Horse, he said, when I have overcome mine enemies, then I will get upon him, to pursue them, and so marching against them on foot, he fiercely charged them: The Battel continued long before he could make them fly: yet had he more ado to take their Camp, and to break the strength that they had made with their Carts. For not onely those that were fled into it, made head a∣gain, but their Wives and Children also fought stoutly for their lives, till they were all slain, and the Battel was scarce ended by midnght. Presently after, above one hundred thousand of those that had escaped from this Battel, were forced by Caesar to return into their own Country again, and to the Townes which they had burnt; and this he did lest the Germans should come over the Rhine, and settle them∣selves in that Country being void. The next War that Caesar made was in defence of theAnd the Germans. Gauls against the Germans, though himself had before admitted Ariovistus their King to be received as a conse∣derate of the Romans: Notwithstanding which, they were grown very unquiet Neighbours, watching but an opportunity to possess themselves of the rest of Gaul. Caesar perceiving that some of his Captains much feared them, especially the young Gentlemen of Noble Fame∣lies, who went along with him as to some Pastimes, he commanded all that were afraid to return home, and
not endanger themselves against their wills. But for himself he said, he would set upon those Barbarous Peo∣ple, though he had left him but the tenth Legion onely. Upon this the tenth Legion sent their Officers to thank him for the good opinion he had of them: and all the other Legions blamed their Captaines for their back∣wardness, and followed him cheerfully till they came within two hundred Furlongs of the enemies Camp. Ariovistus his courage was well cooled when he sawAnd the Gauls. Caesar so near, whereas they thought that the Romans were afraid of them: His Army also was in a great a∣maze. But that which discouraged them most, was the Prophesies of some foolish women, who observing the terrible noise which the water in the River made, advised the Germans by no means to fight, and they being possessed with a supestitious fear, sought to avoid the fight: Yet Caesar skirmished with them every day and sometimes followed them to their Forts, and little Hills where they lay, whereby he so provoked them that at last they came down with great fury to fight. In this Battell he overcame them, and pursued them very eagerly, making a great slaugh∣ter of them even to the River of Rhine, filling all the fields with dead Bodies, and spoiles. Ariovistus himself flying speedily got over the River, and escaped with some few of his men: At this Battell there were slain a∣bout eighty thousand Germans. After this Battel Caesar left his Army to winter a∣mongst the Sequanes, and himself thinking of the affairsHis poli¦cy. of Rome, returned over the Alps to a place about the Ri∣ver Po: whilest he lay there he laboured to make Friends at Rome: and when many came to visit him there, he granted all their suits, and sent them back, some with liberal rewards, and others with large pro∣mises, whereby he engaged them to him. During all the time of Caesar's great conquests in Gaul, Pompey did not consider how Caesar conquered the Gauls with the Roman weapons, and wan the Romans with
the Riches of the Gauls. At this time Caesar being in∣formed that the Belgae who were the most warlike Na∣tionHe over∣comes the Belgae. of all the Gauls, were all up in Armes and had rai∣sed a very great Power, he presently made towards them with all possible, speed; and found them over∣running and plundering the neighbour Countries and confederates of the Romans, wherefore he gave them Battel, and overthrew their chiefest Army, and slew so many of them that the Lakes and Rivers were died with their bloud, and filled with their dead Bodies, that the Romans passed over on foot upon them: After this overthrow, such of them as dwelt neere the Sea yeilded themselves: and from thence he conducted his Army against the Nervians, the stoutest Souldiers of all the Belgae. These dwelling in a Woody Country, had conveyed their Wives, Children and Goods into a ve∣ry great Forrest, remote from their enemies, and being above eighty thousand fighting men, they, watching their opportunity, set upon Caesar when his Army was out of order, and little expecting them. At the first charge they brake the Roman Horsemen, and encom∣passing the seventh and twelfth Legions, they slew all the Captains, and had not Caesar himself with his Shield on his Arme, run amongst them, making a lane as he went, and the tenth Legion, seeing him in that danger, followed him with all speed, there had not a Roman escaped alive that day. But looking upon Cae∣sar's valour, his men fought desperately, even beyond their abilities, and yet could they not make the Nervi fly but they fought it out bravely till most of them wereA Battel. slaine in the Field, five hundred onely of them ascape∣ing. Yet was it a bloudy Battel to the Romans, for that of four hundred Gentlemen, and Counsellers of Rome, there were but three saved. The Senate of Rome made great, signes of joy for these Victories, by sacrifizing to the Gods, Playes, &c. and as Caesars fame was encreased hereby, so he wan upon the Peoples love: And alwayes, when his affaires would
permit, he used to Winter by the River Po, to give direction about his affaires at Rome. And truly not only such as sued for Offices at Rome, obtained them by Cae∣sars money, and therefore imployed all their power to promote his interest, but the chiefest also of the No∣bility, went to Luke unto him, insomuch as at one timeHis Poli¦cy. there have been seen before his Gates, one hundred and twenty Sergeants carrying Rods and Axes before the Magistrates that have waited upon him, and two hun∣dred Senators besides. Here they held a Councell, wherein it was agreed, that Pompey and Crassus should again be chosen Consuls for the year following: and that Caesar should have more money delivered him to pay his Army, and that his Government should be pro∣rogued for five years longer. Then Caesar returning into Gaul to his Army, found there a great War begun: For two Potent Nations of the Germans, having passed over the River of Rhine to conquer new lands, Caesar fought with them, which himself thus discribeth: These Barbarous People (saith he) after they had sent Ambassadours to me to desire peace, contrary to the Law of Armes, came and set up∣on me as I travelled by the way, insomuch as eight hundred of their men overthrew five thousand of my Horsemen, who nothing at all expected their comming, And going on to describe their farther proceedings. he saith, that they again sent Ambassadours to him to mock him, whom he kept Prisoners, and then setting upon the enemies, who were about four hundred thou∣sand Persons, he slew most of them, saving a few thatHe over∣comes the Germans. flying gat back over the River of Rhine and so escaped. Caesar, taking this occasion, and being ambitious to have the honour of being the first Roman that ever pas∣sed this River with an Army, he built a Bridg over it, though the River were very broad, and ran with a violent streame, and especially there where he built the Bridge: and the Barbarians casting great Trees into the River, they were carried down with such violence
that by their great blowes they did sore shake the Posts of the Bridge, to prevent which, and to abate the su∣ry of the streame, Caesar caused a Pile to be made a good way above the Bridge, which was forcibly rammed in∣to the bottom of the River, so that in ten dayes space he had finished his Bridge of goodly Carpenters work: A very rare invention as could be possibly de∣vised. Then passing his Army over this Bridge, he found none that durst fight with him: For the Suevians who wereHe passes over the Rhine. the most Warlike People of the Germans, had retired themselves and goods into great Valleys, Bogs, Woods, and Forrests. Caesar therefore having burnt up the ene∣mies Country, and confirmed the League with the con∣sederates of the Romans, he returned back into Gaul. A∣bout this time also he made a journey into England, be∣ing the first that sailed the Westerne Ocean with an Army, and that passed through the Atlantick Sea toAnd went into Eng∣land. make War in this great and famous Island, and was the first that enlarged the Roman Empire beyond the habi∣table Earth. For he twice passed the Seas out of France into England, where he fought many Battels with the Brittans, in which he did more hurt to the enemies, than enrich his own men: therefore this War had not such successe as he expected, which made him one∣ly to take pledges of the King and to impose a year∣ly Tribute upon him, and so returned back into Gaul. He was no sooner landed there, but he met with Let∣ters which advertised from Rome of the death of hisJulias death. Daughter, the Wife of Pompey, for which they both of them were very sorrowfull: and by this meanes the league betwixt Pompey and Caesar was broken, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth. Caesars Army be∣ing very great, he sent it into severall Garrisons for their Winter Quarters, and returned into Italy, as he used to do. During which time all Gaul rebelled again, and had raised great Armies, who were led by one Ambi∣orix.
These did first set upon the Garrisons of Caetta, and Titurius, whom they slew together with all their men. Then they went with sixty thousand men, and besieged the Garrison which Quintus Cicero had in charge, and had almost taken it by storme, Ciceroes Soul∣diers being all wounded, yet they shewed such valour that they did more than men in their own defence. This newes comming to Caesar, who was far off, he returned with all possible speed, and levying seven thousand Souldiers, he hasted to relieve Cicero that was in great distresse. The Gauls that besieged him, hear∣ing of Caesars comming, arose, and went to meet him, making little account of his small number: Caesar to en∣trap them, still drew back, making as though he fled from them, but still lodging in plaees of safety, and com∣manded his men that they should not stirre out to skirmish with them, but rather to raise the ramparts of his Camp, and to fortifie the Gates, as men affraid, that their enemies might the lesse esteeme them: But at length, he took the opportunity when the enemies came in a disordered manner to assault his Camp, andHe beates the French. then sallying out, he routed, and slew a great number of them. This Act suppressed all the rebellions of the Gauls in those parts: Himself also went in the midst of Win∣ter in those places where they did Rebel▪ for now he had a new supply out of Italy of three whole Legions to fill up the rooms of those that were slaine, of which Pompey lent him two, and the other Legion was raised about the River Po. Shortly after there brake out the greatest and most dangerous War that ever he had in Gaul, which had been long designed by the chiefest and most Warlike People in all that Country, who had a very great Army, leavying multitudes of men, and much Treasure to fortifie their strong holds: The Country where thy were was very hard to come into, especially then in the Winter when the Rivers were high, and the Woods and Forrests covered with Snow,
the meddowes drowned with floods, and the Snow so deep that no wayes could be discerned, all which might have discouraged Caesar from setting upon them: the ra∣ther, because many Nations joyned in this conspiracy, of whom the chief were the Vernians, and the Carnutes, who had chosed Vercing entorix for their Captain. He divided his Army into divers places, under divers Captaines, and drawn into his assistance all the Nations as far as to the Adriatiek Sea: So that if he had tarried a little longer till Caesar had been ingaged in his Wars with Pompey, he had put all Italy into great fear and danger. But Caesar, who knew his advantages, and how to take the best opportunities, as soon as he heard of this Rebellion, he hasted towards them, intending to letThe French re∣bell. them know, that they had to do with an Army that was invincible, and which they could not pos∣sibly withstand, seeing they had marched with such speed in so hard a Winter. This made them wonder when they saw him burning and destroying their Coun∣try, when they thought him far off. Such Towns and strong Forts as yeilded to him, he received to mercy. But the Hedui, who used to be stiled the Brethren of the Romans, taking Armes against him, much discouraged his men: wherefore Caesar went through the Coun∣try of the Lingones to enter into Burgundy, who were con∣federates with the Romans. Thither the enemies fol∣lowed him, endeavouring to compasse him in on every side. Caesar tarried their comming, and then fighting with them a long time, he at last overcame them. OfCaesar over∣comes them. those which fled, most of them together with their King got into the City of Alexia, which Caesar presently besieged, though it seemed inexpugnable, both in re∣gard of the hight of the Walls, and the many hands to defend them. During this siege Caesar fell into a very great danger: For three hundred thousand of the best Souldiers amongst the Gauls came against him, besides those within the City, who were seventy thousand fighting men, so that finding himself to be shut in be∣tween
two such mighty Armies, he was faign to for∣tifie himself with two Walls: One against those with∣in Alexia, and the other against those without. And truly the Battell which he wan at this place, gat him more honour than any other that ever he fought be∣fore. For in this extream danger he shewed more Va∣lour and Wisdom, and courage than in any other. And this was wondefull, that they within the City ne∣heard of their Friends that came to assist them, till Caesar had overcome them: Yea, Caesars own men that guard∣ed the Wall against the City, knew nothing of the Bat∣tell till they heard the cries and lamentations of those in the City, when they saw the Romans bring into their Camp such a number of Shields glistering with Gold and Silver, such store of bloudy Corslets, and Armour, such a deal of Plate, and movables, and such a number of Tents, and Pavilions of the Gauls which the Romans had gotten of their spoiles. Thus the greatest part of this huge Army were slain: and as for those within the City, when they had done and received much hurt, they at last, yeilded, and Vercing entorix, went out of the City rich∣ly Armed, and his Horse furnished with brave, and glittering Caparisons, and rode about, Caesar who sat in his Chair of State. Then allighting, he took off the Ca∣parisons, and stript himself of his Armour, and pro∣strated himself on the Ground, and then went and sat down at Caesars feet, speaking never a word. Caesar after a while committed him to Prison to be led in his Tri∣umph at Rome. Now Caesar had long since projected the distruction ofNon vult Caesarve priorem, Pompei∣usve pare∣ni. Pompey, as Pompey had done the like for him. Nothing kept Caesar from being the Greatest Person but Pompey the Great, and nothing kept Pompey from being supreame but Caesar. Hitherto Pompey had set light by Caesar, thinking that he could crush him when he pleased: But Caesar went more cunningly to work: for to attaine his end, he procured to be sent into Gaul, where he exer∣cised and hardened his Army, and by his valiant deeds
purchased fame and honour: so that now he lacked no∣thing but an occasion to put his design in practise, which Pompey partly gave him, and the iniquity of the times much surthered it. For such as sued for honours and Offices, bought the voices of the People shamefully, who therefore came to the Market-place, not to give their voices, but with Bowes, and Slings, and Swords: and the Assembly seldom brake up, but the Pulpit for Ora∣tions was besprinkled with the bloud of the slaine, so that many Wise men believed, that there was noDisorders at Rome. other cure of these evils but by putting the supreame au∣thority into one mans hand; and many wished that Pom∣pey were the man: But he seemed to decline it, though cunningly under hand he laboured to be chosen Di∣ctator. Cato smelling his drift, perswaded the Senate rather to make him sole Consul, thereby to satisfy his ambiti∣on:Pompey sole Con∣sul. This was done accordingly, and the time also for the Gevernment of his Provinces was prorogued: they allowed him also a thousand Talents yearly out of the publick Treasury wherewith to pay his Souldiers. Here∣upon Caesar took occasion to send his men to Rome, to sue in his name for the Consulship, and for the prolonging of his Government. This was too indiscreetly opposed by Mar∣cellus and Lentulu, and many things were spoken in his disgrace. They took away also the freedom from the Collonies which Caesar had lately granted them. And when Marcellus was Consul, he caused one of those Senators to be whipt, saying, that he gave him those marks, that he might be known to be no Citizen of Rome; and bad him go and tell Caesar of it. Shortly after Caesar opened his Treasures which he had got in Gaul, and gave it freely among the Ma∣gistrates of Rome. He set Curio the Tribune, cleer out of debt: He gave to the Consul Paul fifteen hundred Talents, wherewith he built a stately Theater. Pompey now beginning to fear, laboured to have a successour
sent to Caesar, and withall sent for his two Legions, which Caesar returned to him, bountifully rewarding eve∣ry Souldier: and they which brought these Legions back, disgraced Caesar all they could, and told Pompey that if Caesar's Souldiers did but once see him, they would all forsake Caesar and cleave to him. This made PompeyPompey de∣luded. more secure, that he neglected to prepare for War. One of Caesar's Captaines coming to Rome, and moving the Senate to have his government prorogued, they de∣laying their answer, he laid his hand upon his Sword, and said, Sith you will not grant it him, this shall give it him. Caesar seemed to be very reasonable in what he re∣quested, For he said, that whilest they required him to lay down Armes for fear of a Tyranny, and yet permitted Pom∣pey to keep his, they went about to establish a Tyranny. Curio in the name of Caesar moved before all the People, that both should be commanded to lay down Armes, which motion was entertained with great joy and clap∣ing of hands by the People, who threw nose-gayes, and flowers upon him for it. Then Anthony one of the Tri∣bunes,Factions in Rome. brought a letter from Caesar, and read it before the People in spite of the Consuls, wherein hae desired that they would grant him Gaul on this side the Alps, and Illyria with two Legions onely, and then he would desire no more: But Scipio the Father in Law of Pompey, moved in the Senate, that if Caesar did not dismiss his Ar∣my by a day appointed, that then he should be proclaim∣ed an enemy to Rome, Marccilus also added, that they must use force of Armes and not Arguments against a Thief; whereupon the Senate rose without determining any thing, and every one put on his mourning ap∣parrell as in the time of a common calamity. Cirero being newly come from his Government in Cilicia, took much pains to reconcile them together, and perswaded Pompey all he could, who told him that he would yield to whatsoever he desired, so he would let him alone with his Army: But Lentulus the Consul shamefully drave Curio and Anthony out of the Senate, who were in such
danger that they were faigne to fly out of Rome to Caesar, disguised in a Carriers coat. This gave Caesar great ad∣vantage, and much incensed his men, when they saw and heard how his Friends were abused. Caesar at this time had about him but five thousandCaesar goes against Pompey. Foot, and three thousand Horse, having left the rest of his Army on the other side of the Alps, to be brought after him by his Lieutenants: Judging it better suddenly to steal upon them at Rome, then to assail them with his whole Army, which would require time, & give his ene∣mies opportunity to strengthen themselves against him. He therefore commanded his Captains to go before, and to take in the City of Ariminum (a great City on this side the Alps) with as little bloodshed as might be. Then committing the rest of those Souldiers which he had with him, to Hortensius, he spent a whole day in seeing the sword players exercise before him. At night he went unto his lodging, where having bathed himself a little, he came into the Hall, and made merry with those whom he had bidden to supper. Then rising from the Table, he prayed his Guests to be merry, and he would come again to them presently: howbeit he had secretly before directed his most trusty Friends to follow him: not all together, but some one way, & some another. Himself in the mean time took a Coach that he had hired, and pretending at first to go another way, he suddenly turned towards Ariminum. But when he came to the River of Rubicorn, which divides the hither Gaul from Italy, he suddenly made a stop (for if he once passed that, there could be no hope of peace) considering with himself of what importance this passage was, and what miseries would ensue upon it. Some say that he spake thus to his Friends: Doubtlesse if I forbear to pass over this River, it will be the beginning of my ruine; if I passe it, the ruine will be generall: Then turn∣ing towards the River, he said, It is yet in our power to turn back, but if we passe the River we must make our way with our Weapons. Some say, that Coesar standing thus
doubtfull, he was encouraged by the apparition of a man of a very great stature, piping upon a reed, where∣upon many of the Souldiers and some Trumpetters went neer to hear him, and that he catching one of their Trumpets, leaped into the River, sounding to the Bat∣tel with a mighty blast, and so passed on to the farther side of the River: Whereupon Caesar, with a furious resolution, cryed out, Let us go (whether the Gods,) and the injurious dealing of our enemies, do call us. The Dice are cast. I have set up my Rest, Come what will of it: AfterHe passes Rubicon. which he set spurs to his Horse, and passed the River his Army following him. Caesar having passed the River and drawn his Army together, he made an Oration to them, shedding some tears, and tearing his Garment down the Breast, lay∣ing before them the equity of his cause, and craying their assistance. To whom, having with a generall ap∣plause and consent made answer; that they were ready to obey his will, he presently marched on and came the next day to Ariminum, upon which he seized. The like he did to all the Towns and Castles as he passed on, till he came to Corfinium which was held by Domitius, who in a factious tumult had been nominated for his suc∣cessour in the Government of Gaul. This being taken, he pardoned the Souldiers, and Inhabitants, and used Do∣mitius kindly, giving him leave to depart (who went straight to Pompey) by which clemency he purchased to himself much honour. These thirty Cohorts he kept with him. Caesars resolution being known at Rome, it troubled Pompey, amazed the Senate, and terrified the common People. Pompey now found himself deceived, who be∣fore could not believe that Caesar would thrust himself into so great danger, or that he could be able to raise sufficient forces to resist him: but the success proved o∣therwise. For though Pompey had authority from the Consuls and Senate to leavy Souldiers, to call home his Legions, and to send Captains for the defence of those
Cities in Italy by which Caesar should passe, yet all this was not sufficient to resist his fury, and the power that he brought with him. The fame of Caesars comming increasing daily, Pompey, with the whole SenatePompey flies and the Se∣nate. left Rome, going to Capua, and from thence to Brundu∣sium, a Sea Town seated at the mouth of the Gulph of Vinic, where he ordered the Consuls to passe to Dyrra∣chium, (now Durazzo) a Sea Town of Macedonia, there to unite all their forces, being out of hope to resist Caesar in Italy, who had already taken Corfinium, where, having drawn Domitius's thirty Cohorts to serve him, he marched on, and hearing that Pompey and the Con∣suls were at Brundusium, he hasted towards them with his Legions with all possible speed. But Pompey, thoughCaesar pursues him. he had fortified the Town sufficiently for his defence, yet when Caesar began to invest the Town, he imbarked himself and his men in the night time, and so passed o∣ver to Dyrrachium, to the Consuls. Thus Caesar injoy∣ed Italy without opposition, yet was he doubtfull what to resolve on: He would gladly have followed Pompey but wanted Shipping, and it being Winter, he knew that Ships could not be procured so soon as was requi∣site: and considering with all, that it was not safe to leave an enemy behind him, which might cause an alteration in France, or Italy; he resolved first to go into Spain, which held for Pompey, and where he had his best Legions under the command of Petreius and Afranius, saying to his Friends, Let us go against an Army which wants a Captain, and afterwards we will go against a Captain that wants an Army. For Pompeys Souldiers in Spain were very valiant, and had been long exercised in Armes, but their Commanders were neither Politick, nor expert in War. But on the contrary, Pompey was a most Wise and Valiant Captain, but his Souldiers were newly levied, and of small experience.He is Lord of all Italy. And went to Rome. Caesar returning from Brundusium, in sixty dayes space became Lord of all Italy, and when he came to Rome, the People were in great fear, remembring the Miseries they
had suffered under Sylla: But Caesar using his accustom∣ed clemency, hurt no man, high nor low: He cal∣led the Senators together which remained there, com∣forting them with milde and good words; and laying the whole fault upon Pompey, he fought to justifie his own cause, declaring how much he desired Peace, with all, requsting that Abassadours might be sent to Pompey to procure the same: And causing himself presently to be chosen Consul, he opened the Treasury, though Me∣tellus, one of the Tribunes of the people, oppo∣sed him, and the Treasure which he took from thence, which was very great, he distributed amongst his Souldiers. Then was he desirous to go into Spain, first taking order for the Civill Government: and making choise of the Legions which should go with him, he left the rest in Brundusium, and Otranto, and other strong places upon the Sea Coast, to keep Pompey from landing if he should attempt to return into Italy. He also made Hor∣tensius, and Dolabella his Captaines to provide Shipping to be brought into the Port of Brundusium, there to be in a readinesse against his return from Spain: Quintus Valerius he sent with a Legion into Sardinia against Marcus Cotta which held the same for Pompey. To Si∣cily he sent Curius, and Marcus Cate, with direction that having taken the same, he should passe over into Africk. Lepidus he sent to Rome, as Prefect thereof, and Mark Anthony he made Governour of all Italy: And resolving to leave Licinius Crassus in France, with his acustomed celerity he went on his journey, finding no resistance, neither in Italy nor France, till he came toHe went into Spain Marcelleis, which held for Pompey. This City he be∣sieged, and to avoid losse of time, left Decius Brutus, and Caius Trebonius with sufficient Forces, who endured much in the siege: himself hasted into Spain, where, being expected, Afranius and Petreius attended him with four Roman Legions, and the aid of their Friends, between whom, and Caesar the War continued for
some while, chiefly about the City of Lerida. At first Caesar was in great danger and much distressed chiefly for wans of Victuals, as also for that the Winter was come on, which troubled him with the swelling of Rivers, before and after which, there passed manyAnd con∣quered Pompeys men. great skirmishes between the two Armies. And Caesar, watching his opportunities, at last brought his adver∣saries to such distresse that they perished with hunger, and were forced to come to a composition, which was, that the Legions should have liberty to go whither they pleased: and so part of them took pay of Caesar, the rest departed, and Petreius, and Afcanius went to Pompey. This War being ended, and the Spring come, Caesar, that he might leave no enemy behind him, marched into the Province of Betica (now Andaluzia) with part of his forces, commanding the rest to marchAnd other places. whither he had appointed, and there to stay for him, because Marcus Varro held that Province for Pompey a∣gainst Caesar with one good Legion: But he, not da∣ring to oppose Caesar, delivered up the Legion to him, together with that Country, and all was pacified there. From thence Caesar went to Cordova, where he called a Parliament of all the States of that Province, in which he highly commended them, and those of Sivil for taking his part, and so marching forward, he came to the Isle of Cadez, where having gotten Ships in readinesse, he left Quintus Cassius with four Legians in that Province, and so embarking, he went to Taragona, commanding his Legions to march by Land thither, where having settled his affairs, he advanced with his Army towards Narbona, and from thence to Marcelleis, which nowHe takes Marcelleis. yeilded to him, having endured many calamities du∣ring the Seige: Caesar respecting the antiquity and same of this City, would not destroy it, nor the Inhabitants, but leaving a strong Garrison in it, he ordered his Le∣gions to march for Italy; and himself, with a sufficient guard, and some of his Friends took passage by Sea to Rome.
Though all things succeeded thus well with Caesar, yet some of his Captaines had ill sucesse. For Caius An∣tonius,His Cap∣taines had ill successe. whom he left with Dolabella for to command his Navy, was overthrown and taken Prisoner in the Gulph of Venice by Octavius, Lieutenant to Pompey. In which overthrow this was very remarkable: Anthony was faign to put his men into long Boates for want of Ships, which were taken by a Strategem as in a toil, by the Pompeians, with Ropes under the Water. One of them which had in it a Thousand valiant young men, being thus ensnared, was assaulted by the enemies whole Army, against which they defended themselves bravely from morning till night, and in the end being oppressed with the multitude, by the perswasion of Valteius, their Collonel, they all slew one another, ra∣ther than they would fall into the enemies hand. Do∣labella was likewise overthrowne neere to the Island of Coreyra (now Corfu:) and Curius, who went with his two Legions into Africk, though at first he had good successe, yet afterwards he was overthrown, and most of his men slaine by Jaba, King of Mauritania, Pompeys Friend. Caesar being come to Rome and made Dictator, new Consuls were chosen, whereof he being one layed aside his Dictatorship, and provided Praetors for the Provin∣ces as himself pleased. He sent Mracus Lepidus into Spain: Aulus Albinus into Sicily: Sextus Peduceius into Sardinia; and Decius Brutus into France; and taking such further order as he thought good, he departed from Rome in December towards Brundusium, whither he commanded all his Forces to march, there to take passage for Macedonia, where he knew that Pompey staid with his Army: who all that whole year that Caesar spentPompey prepares for War. in his journey to Spain, busied himself to provide a Na∣vy wherein to return into Italy, and in gathering Trea∣sure, and levying Souldiers, having made an exceed∣ing great provision of all things. For there came un∣to him, Ships, money, and men from sundry King∣domes
and Provinces both of Asia, and Greece: as from Syria, Pontus, Bithynia, Cilicia, Phoeniciae, Caeppado∣cia, Pomphilia, Armenia Minor, Aegypt, Greece, Thes∣saly, Boeotia, Achaia, Epirus, Athens, Lacedemonia, the Isles of Creet, and Rhodes, and from many other Countries. There came also to his aid King Deiotarus, and Aribarzanes, of all which, together with those which he brought with him from Italy, he compounded a very great Army by Land, and a very great Fleet of Ships and Gallyes by Sea. It being now the depth of Winter, Pompey presu∣ming it improbable, if not impossible for Caesar to passe the Seas to him; having also intelligence that Caesar was in Rome, he disposed of his Army to their Winter Quar∣ters in Macedonia and Thessaly; and himself retired far∣ther from the Sea, commanding his Sea-Captaines (of whom Marcus Bibulus was chiefe) to guard the Sea coast. But Caesar knowing that in the speedy execution con∣sisted his greatest hopes of Victory, and that occasion once lost could hardly be recovered, he departed from Rome, and came to Brundusium, though all his Legions were not as yet come to him. There he embarked seven of his best Legions in such ships as were ready, sending a Command to the rest which were comming, to hasten to Brundusium, whither he would send for them with all possible speed. And so departing, he crossed the Seas with a prosperous gale of Wind, and theCaesar goes against him. Now Brindez. third day after arrived upon the coast of Macedonia, be∣fore Pompey had any intelligence of his embarking. There he safely landing his men in dispite of Pom∣peys Captaines, and commanded his Ships and Galleys presently to returne to Brundusium to fetch, the rest of his Army. Presently after his first landing, he seized upon the Cities of Appallonia, and Erico, driving from thence Lucius Torquatus, and Lucius Straberius, who held them for Pompey. Pompey hearing of Caesars arrivall, sent for his Troops which were neerest hand with all speed possible, with
whom he marched towards Dirrachium, where his Vi∣ctuals, ammunition, and other provisions for the War lay, lest Caesar should go and surprise them, which indeed he attempted but in vaine, the situation of the place make∣ing it inexpugnable. Pompey being come, their Camps were lodged withinSksrmish∣es be∣twixt them. a few furlongs each of other, where he passed many ad∣venturous skirmishes, and also some Treaties of Peace, offered by Caesar, but rejected by Pompey, so confident he was of his own power. In the interim Caesar dayly ex∣pected the comming of the other Legions, who staying longer than he expected, he resolved in person, with three Confident servants, secretly to embarke himself in a Brigandine, and to passe that streight of the Sea and to fetch them, hoping to performe the same with∣out the knowledge of any. And accordingly, passing down the River to the Sea, he found it so troublesome and tempestious that the Master of his Brigandine (not knowing whom he carried) durst not adventure forth, but would have returned. Then Caesar discovering his face, said, Perge audactèr: Caesarem enim fers, & fortu∣namCaesars rashness. Caesaris: Beare up bravely, and boldly against the Winds and Waves: for thou carriest Caesar, and all his Fortunes. The Master herewith encouraged, strove all that possibly he could to proceed in his voyage: but the force of the Tempest was so great, and the Wind so contrary, that do what possibly they could, they were driven back again. When Caesars Army heard of these passages, they much wondred, grieved and were troubled at it: Com∣mending him more for his Valour, than for his Wife∣dome: But within few days after M. Anthony arrived with four of those Legions which were left behind in Ita∣ly, presently returning the Ships back for the rest. An∣thony after some adventures, joyned with Caesars Army neer to Dirrachium where we lately left him. Frequent skirmishes still continued between the two Armies, and many were slain on both sides, and one day the skirmish
was so hot, supplies being sent from both sides, that it almost came to a just Battel, wherein Caesars men wereCaesar is beaten. so beaten, that they fled before the enemies, and could not be made to stand by any intreaties, or menaces, till they were come into their Camp, which they had strong∣ly fortified: yet many durst not trust to that, but fled out of it: But Pompey either because he imagined their flight to be faigned to draw him into an Ambush, or be∣cause he thought there needed no more to be done, and that Caesar could no more resist him, he neglected to pro∣secute his Victory, causing a retrate to be sounded with∣out assaulting Caesars Camp, which, probably, he might have taken, and made an end of the War that day. Whereupon Caesar said to his Friends: Truly this day had ended the War, if our enemies had had a Captain that had known how to overcome. At this time Caesar lost a great number of his men, a∣mongst whom were four hundred Roman Knights, ten Tribunes (or Collonels) and thirty two Centurions (or Captaines) and his enemies took for from him thirty two Ensignes. Upon this Victory Pompey sent newes thereof to diverse parts of the World, holding himself for an absolute Conquerour. Caesar much blamed some of his Captaines and Ensigne bearers for their cowardize, and his Army were so grieved and ashamed, that they much importuned him to lead them forth again to Bat∣tell: But he thought it not fit so soon to lead them forth against a Victorious Army. He therefore sent his fick and wounded men to the City of Apolonia, andCaesars policy. departed by night with as great silence as could be from the place where he was▪ and marched towards Thessa∣ly, intending there to refresh and encourage his Army, and to draw his enemies farther from the Sea coast, where their chiefe strength lay, and where their Camp was well fortified, and victualled, or at least he intended to attempt the overthrow of Scipio, who (as he heard) was comming to joyne with Pompey. Pompey finding Caesar was departed, followed him for
some few dayes; and then taking Councel what to do, he resolved to leave a sufficient Navy to guard the Seas,Pompeys good re∣solution. and with the rest to returne into Italy, and to seize upon it, together with France and Spain, and afterwards to go against Caesar: But the Romane Lords that were with him, and the importunity of his unskilfull Captains and Soul∣diers, forced him to alter his determination, and present∣ly to pursue Caesar, who made an Alt in the fields of Pharsalia, which are in Thessaly, making his retreat with so much prudence, and in so good order, that upon all occasions that were offered he ever had the better; till at length seeing his men full of resolution and courage, he resolved no longer to defer the Fight. Concerning which Battell: the ordering, and event of it: the flight of PompeyPompey beaten and slain. into Egypt, and how basely, and barbarously he was mur∣thered there, see it before in the Life of Pompey the Great. Julius Caesar having obtained this great and glorious victory, used therein his accustomed Clemency, notCaesars clemency. suffering any Roman either to be slain or hurt after the Bat∣tell was ended, but pardoned all those that were either taken in the Fight, or found in the Camp, amongst whom was Marcus Tullius Cicero. After which, beingHe pur∣sues Pom∣pey. informed which way Pompey was fled, he pursued him with the lightest, and swiftest of his Army, and in the way subduing all the Cities, he at last came to the Sea side, where he gathered together all the Ships and Gal∣lies that possibly he could, together with those whom Cassius had brought, he therein shipped as many of his men as they could contain, and passed into the lesser A∣sia, where, being advertised that Pompey had been in Cyprus, he presumed that he was gone into Egypt; where∣fore he steered the same course, taking with him two Legions of old Souldiers onely. When he arrived atHe comes into Egypt. Alexandria, he understood that Pompey presuming upon the many benefits, and good entertainment which the Father of this King Ptolomy had received in his House, had sent to this Ptolomy to harbour and assist him: which accordingly the King promised, & Pompey comming upon
his safe conduct, in a small Boat, was by the false Kings commandement basely murthered, thinking thereby to win the favour of Caesar. He understood likewise that Cornelia the Wife of Pompey, and his Son Sextus Pompey∣us were fled from thence in the same ship wherein they came. Caesar being landed, and received into the City, they brought him for a present the Head of the Great Pompey; but he turned away and would not see it, and when they brought him Pompeys Ring with his Seal of Armes, he wept, considering the end and successe of the great ad∣ventures and properties of Pompey, who with such ho∣nourVanity of vanities. and fame had Triumphed three times, and been so many times Consul in Rome: and had obtained so many Victories abroad. When Caesar was landed in Aegypt, he found the Country imbroyled in Civill Wars: there being great discord between young King Ptolomy, and his Sister Cleo∣patra, about the division and Inheritance of that King∣dome, wherein Julius Caesar (as being a Roman Consul) took upon him to be an Arbitrator. For which cause, or because their guilty consciences accused them for the treacherous murther of Pompey, Fotinus the Enuuch, who had contrived the said murther, and Achillas, who had been the actor of it, fearing that Caesar inclined to favour Cleopatra, sent for the Kings Army that lay neere the City, consisting of twenty thousand good Souldiers, purposing to do by Caesar as they had done by Pompey, so that within a few dayes, there began be∣tween Caesar and his small Army, both in the City, and in the Harbour where the Ships and Galleys lay, the most cruel, and dangerous encounters that ever Caesar met with: For he was often forced to fight in his own Person, both within the City (whereof the ene∣miesHis Wars in Egypt. held the Greater part) and also in the Harbour with his ships, and was sometimes in so great perill and dan∣ger, that he was forced to leap out of the Boat into the Water, and by swimming to get to one of the Gallies,
at which time he held his Commentaries in one hand a∣bove Water, and carry his Robe in his teeth, and toHis dan∣ger. swimme with the other hand. But when his other Forces were come to him from Asia, and other parts, he at the end of nine moneths (for so long these Wars lasted) be∣came Victorious, as in all other his enterprises he had been, and the young King Ptolomy was slaine in fight.His Victo∣ry. In this Warre Caesar did such exploits, and behaved himself so gallantly, that for the same onely he well deserved the fame and name of a brave Cap∣tain. The Pride of the Aegyptians being thus tamed, Cae∣sar put to death the murtherers of Pompey, and established the faire Cleopatra, the Queen and Governesse of Aegypt, whom, during his stay there, he intertained for his Friend, and had a Son by her called Caesarion. And when he had quitted and settled all things in Aegypt, he departed thence into Asia, and travelled through Sy∣riaHe passes into Asia. (now Soria) being informed, that during his trou∣bles in Aegypt, King Pharnaces, the Son of that mighty King Methridates, thought it a fit time, whilst the Ro∣mans were embroiled in Civil Wars, to recover what his Father had lost: For which end having overthrown Domitius, whom Caesar had sent to govern those parts, and having taken by force of Armes the Provinces of Bi∣thynia, and Cappadocia, expelling thence King Ariobar∣zanes (a Friend and Subject of Rome) and beginning to do the like in Armenia the lesse, which King Deiotarus had subjected to the Romans: Caesar (I say) being in∣formed hereof, went with his Army sooner than Phar∣naces imagined, though he expected him, and had intel∣ligence of his approach, so that in few dayes they came to a Battell, in which the King was soon overthrown,Over∣comes Pharnaces. and put to flight, with great slaughter of his People, yet himself escaped. Caesar was very joyfull for this Victory, because his of earnest desire to returne to Rome; where he knew that many scandals were raised, and many insolencies were
committed for want of his presence: He knew also that Pompeys eldest Son had seized upon a great part of Spain, and had raised great forces of those which Marcus Varro had left there, and of his Fathers Troops. He also under∣stood, that in Africa many principal Romans, who had escaped from the Battell of Pharsalia, were gethered together, where of M. Cato (surnamed Uticensis) was the chief, and Scipio, Pompeys Father in Law, and that these went thither with the greatest part of the Ships and Gal∣leys which belonged to Pompey, and with the greatest power that they were able to leavy; and that joyning with Juba King of Mauritania, they had subdued all that Country, and had a great Army in a readinesse to op∣pose him, having chosen Scipio for their Generall, be∣cause that Cato would not take that office upon him, and for that the Name of Scipio had been so fortunate in A∣frica. Caesar having intelligence of all these things, within the space of a few dayes, with great celerity and dili∣gence recovered all that Pharnaces had usurped, and chasing him out of Portus he regained all those Coun∣tries: and so leaving Celius Minucius for General, with two Legions to gaurd that Province, pacifying the controversies and contentions in the rest, and reward∣ing the Kings, and Tetrarchs which continued firme in their Leagues and amity with the Romans, without any longer aboad, he departed out of Asia, and in a short space arrived in Italy, and so passed to Rome, within little more than a year after he went thence, whichHe comes to Rome. was a very short time for the performance of so great matters, and so long a journey. Presently after his comming to Rome, he caused himself to be chosen Consul the third time, and reform∣ing (so much as the time and his leasure would permit) all disorders in Rome, being troubled and not able to endure that his enemies should possesse Africk, with great expedition he prepared all things necessary, and from Rome took his way towards Africk, commanding
his Army to follow him. First he went into Italy, from from whence taking Ship, he passed over into Africk,He passes into A∣frick. and though neither his Navy, nor his Army arrived with him, trusting to the valour of those that he had with him, and his own good Fortune, he landed with small Forces, neere to the City of Adrumentum, and from thence marched to an other City called Leptis, into which he was received, and after some conflicts that passed, his Legions being come to him, and certaine other Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot, he began the War which continued four moneths. He first began with Petreius and Lubienus; and then with Sci∣pio and King Juba, who brought to those Wars eight thousand men, the one half whereof were Horse. In this War were many encounters and Battels, in which Caesar was in great danger: but at last (his good Fortune, still attending him) he overcame them in a great Battell, wherein there were slaine of the ene∣mies ten thousand, and Caesar remained Master of theHe over∣comes Scipio. Field, and in a short time after, subjected all the Country to him. Scipio, and all the chiese Captaines, with him died sundry Deaths, and Juba escaping by flight from the Battell, finding no place of securi∣ty, Asranius and he resolved to dye fighting one a∣gainst the other, in which combate, King Juba being the stronger man, slew Afranius, and then command∣ed one of his slaves to kill him, and so he died de∣sperately. Marcus Cato, who was in the City of Utica, hearingCato kills himself. that Caesar was marching thitherward, though he knew that he would not put him to death, but rather had a desire to pardon him and to do him honour; yet, re∣solving neither to receive life nor honour from his ene∣my, he slew himself: In whose death there passed many remarkable accidents recorded by Historians. Ftorus saith thus of it. Cato (saith he) hearing of the death of his Partners, he dallyed not at all, but joyfully hastened
his end: For after he had embraced his Son, and his Friends and bad them good night, and then rested a while upon his bed, having first perused Plato's Book of the immortality of the Soul: then about the re∣lieving of the first watch he got up, drew his sword, and therewith thrust himself through: after which the Phisicians applied plaisters to his wounds which he in∣dured whilst they were in the roome, but then he pulled them away, and the bloud following abundantly, he left his dying hand even in the wound. Scipio, who had been Generall in this War, escaped also from the Battell by flight, entered into some Gallies, which be∣ing met with by Caesar's Navy, that he might not fall into his enemies hand, after he had given himself some wounds, he threw himself into the Sea, and so was drowned. Caesar having obtained so great and absolute a Victory, spent some few dayes in settling and ordering the Pro∣vinces of Africa, making the Kingdome of Juba a Province, and then marched to Utica, where he im∣barked June the third, and came to the Isle of Sardinia, and after some short stay there, he arrived at Rome theHe re∣turns to Rome. twenty fifth day of July. At his comming thither there were granted unto him four Triumphs: First for his conquests and Victories in France, in which wereHis Tri∣umphs. carried the Protractures of the Rivers of Rodanus, and the Rhine wraught in Gold. The second Triumph was for the Conquest of Aegypt, and of King Ptolomy, where were set the River of Nilus, and the Pharus burning. The third was for the Conquest of Pontus, and of King Pharnaces, wherein, in regard of his speedy Victory, was placed a writing with these words, Veni, Vidi, Vici: I came, I saw, I overcame. The fourth Triumph was for the Province of Africa, wherein King Jubas Son was led Captive: and in this Triumph were given Jewels, and Armes to Octavius, Caesars Nephew, who succeeded him in the Empire. As for the Battell wherein he Conquered Pompey, he would
not Triumph, because it was against a Citizen of Rome. These Triumphes being ended, he gave great re∣wards to his Souldiers, and intertained the People with Feasts, and bountifull gifts, and then caused himself to be chosen the fourth time, Consul. And so, to the end that there should be left no place wherein he would not be obeyed, he resolved to go for Spain, hearing that Gneius Pompeius, the Son of Pompey, was retired with the rest of the Army which had escaped out of A∣frick, to go to his Brother Sextus Pompeius, who was in possession of a great part of Spain, as we heard before, to∣gether with the famous Cities of Sivil, and Cordova, and many others of those parts: many Spaniards also com∣ming to their aid. Caesar in this journey carryed with him his most vali∣ant, and most experienced Souldiers, and made so goodHe goes nto Spain. speed, that in few dayes space he arrived in Spain, in which journey his Nephew Octavius followed him. En∣tering into Spain he came to the Province of Betica (now Andaluzia) where were Sextus Pompeius, with his Brother Gneius, and such Legions and Souldiers as they had gotten together; and there began betwixt Cae∣sar and them a most cruel and bloudy Warre, the end whereof was, that neere to the City of Munda, Caesar, and Gneius Pompeius (for Sextus was thenA cruel Battell. at Cordova) joyned Battell, which was one of the most obstinate, and most cruel fights that ever was in the world. For Caesar being a most excellent Captain, and the Souldiers which he brought with him most brave and valiant men, and fleshed with so many Victories, held it out with great resolution; and on the other side, the bravery and courage of young Pompey and his men was such, and they fought in such manner, as Caesars Squadrons began to give ground, and were ready to for∣sake the Field, and at the very point to have been whol∣ly overthrown: and the matter came to this issue, that Caesar was about to have slain himself because he would
not see himself overcome. Yet taking a Target from one of his Souldiers, he rushed into the midst of his ene∣mies, saying with a loud voice, If ye be not ashamed, leave me and deliver me into the hands of these Boyes; For this shall be the last day of my Life and of your Honour: with which words, and his example, his Souldiers took heart in such manner, that recovering the ground which they had lost, the Battell became equall, which lasted almost a whole day without any signe of Victory to either party, sometimes seeming to incline to the one, sometimes to the other side; untill at the length Caesar and his men did so great exploits, as that the evening being come, his enemies began to faint, and fly, and the VictoryHis Victo∣ry. was apparently Caesars. There died of the enemies a∣bove thirty thousand in this Battell, and Caesar lost a∣bove a thousand men of account besides common Soul∣diers. Caesar esteemed so much of this Victory, and so glori∣ed in the danger which he had ascaped, that ever after he used to say, That in all other Battels he had fought for honour and Victory, and onely that day he fought for his life. Young Pompey, after he had performed all the offices of a Prudent Generall and Valiant, Souldier, was for∣ced to fly, and wandering through many places, was at last taken and slaine by some of Caesars Friends, who carried his head to Caesar. His other Brother Sextus Pompeius, fled from Cordova, and afterwards forsook Spain: Caesar recovered Sivil, and Cordova, and all the rest of the Country▪ after which, ordering his affaires in Spain after his pleasure, he returned to Rome, andHe returns o Rome. Triumphed for these Victories, which was his fifth and last Triumph. Caesar now came to be the most mighty, the most re∣doubted, and the most highly esteemed man in the World, having conquered and subdued the greatestHis pow∣er. part thereof, in as little time, as it might seeme that a∣nother man might be able▪ to travel through those Coun∣tries by reasonable journeys. He then made himself
perpetuall Dictator, and so without opposition, he fi∣nished the making of himself the Soveraigne Lord, and Monarch of the Empire of Rome, within lesse than five years after he first attempted the same. And this was the Originall and beginning of the Roman Empe∣rours. For Julius Caesar would not be called King (that Name being odious to the Romans above all things, ever since Kings were first driven from Rome) but contented himself to be called Perpetuall Dictator, and Empe∣rour, which Title was usually given to the Roman Gene∣rals upon their obtaining any signall Victory. But after Julius Caesar, all his successors took that title, glo∣rying to be called Emperour, which hath evere since been held for the highest Title, and Dignity in the World. Caesar having now attained to that absolute power which he had so ambitiously saught after, he shewed in all his Deportment much clemency, and Magnani∣mity,His cle∣mency, and Mag∣naminity. honouring and rewarding his Friends, and easily forgiving, and very cheerfully pardoning all those that had been his Adversaries: Thus he pardoned Brutus, Cassius, Cicero, Marcellus, and many others: Yea, some of them he admitted to his company, and private familiarity, and to Offices and Dignities; and amongst the many virtues wherewith he was endued, his clemency and liberality were most glorious. But all this prevailed not with the Romans to quench their desires after the recoverie of their lost liber∣ty, neither to asswage the hatred and malice con∣ceived against him by his adversaries, as afterwards ap∣peared. And notwithstanding many were discontented, yet some for love, others for fear, and out of dissimulation,Discon∣ten's arise. both Senate and People, yea all in generall gave him Names, preheminences and Titles of Honour, such as never had been given to any other man before him, neither ought to have been accepted by him; and many were the more offended, because they knew that he
affected and desired them. They gave him the name of Emperour, Father, Restorer, and Preserver of his Coun∣try. They made him perpetuall Dictator, and Con∣sul for ten years: and perpetuall Censor of their man∣ners. His Statue was erected and set up amongst the Kings of Rome: and a Chair, and Throne of Ivory was set up for him in the Temple, and in the Senate House, and an high Throne in the Theater, and in the place whereBase flat∣tery. the Senators did use to sit. His Pictures and Statues were set up in the Temples, and in all publick places. Some Titles they gave him, and he accepted of, which were pecular to the Gods. The moneth formerly cal∣lad Quintile, they called Julius after his name. They also built, and consecreated Temples to him, as they did to Jupiter and the other Gods, and gave him cer∣taine Honours which they held proper for their Gods, and did him many other honours exceeding all mea∣sure. Julius Caesar enjoying such honour and power, so that he had no equall, no second in the World with whom he might contend, it seemed that he would contend with himself, and attempt something wherein he might excell himself: For he was not contented with all the Victories which he had obtained, neither to have fought fifty severall Battels, in all which he was Victorious, save in that one at Dirrachium against Pompey: neither to have slaine in the Wars and Battels which he fought a Million, ninety, and odd thousands of men, besides those which were slaine in the Civil Wars. But being of aHis great projects. most haughty mind, he sought to do greater matters, if greater could be. For first he resolved to passe into the East, there to conquer and subdue the fierce Nations of the Parthians, and to revenge the death of Marcus Crassus; and from thence to passe through Hyrcania, and other Countries till he should come to the Caspian Sea, and so through all the parts of Scythia, Asiatica; and passing the River Tanais, to returne through Scythia into Europe, and in
his retreat to come into Germany, and other Countries bordering thereupon, conquering and subjecting all to the Roman Empire. For which end, he presently caused to be levied in severall places ten thausand Horsemen, and sixteen Legious of chosen Footmen, and appointing the time wherein he intended to begin his journey, he commanded them to repaire to their Rendevouz. He sought also not onely to subdue all Nations, but to cor∣rect and reforme even nature it self: For he purposed to have made an Island of Peloponesus (now called Morea) by cutting the neck of land between the Egaean, and the Jonian Seas. He purposed also to have altered the courses of the River Tiber, and Anian, and to have made there new channels, capable of bearing great Ships. He ordered the digging down and levelling many high Hils and Mountaines, in Italy, and to dry up, and dreine great Lakes and Marishes therein. He corrected the computation of the year, reforming it according to the course of the Sun, and brought it into that order wherein it now is. He did the like about the course of the Moon, and her conjunctions and oppositions to the Sun: and this was attributed to him for Tyranny by those that hated him. Many others things Caesar did, which were very re∣markable, in reforming the Laws, customes, and Offices. He reedified the ruined City of Carthage, in Africk, and sent thither Colonies, and Roman Citizens to Inhabit it: the like he did by Corinth. But all these works with his high conceits and undertakings, were prevented, by his unexpected, and immature Death, which within a few Dayes after ensued. A few men, and those unarmed bereft him of his Life, whom no former forces could resist. For five moneths only he lived as Soveraign Lord in Peace; when those in whom he reposed greatest trust conspired his Death. Some say that Caesars was counselled to have a Guard about him alwayes; to which he answered, that he would have none: for that he had rather die once,
then live continually in feare. They which conspired his death, were stirred up thereto, either out of hatred to his Person, or desire of Liberty, accounting him for a Tyrant: or out of suspition that he would have made himself a King, a thing in the highest degree hatefull to the Romans: and lastly because he begun to contemne o∣thers: For he used to say, that the Commonwealth wasHis Pride. but a voice and name without a Body, or Substance, and that Sylla was a Fool for resigning his perpetuall Dictatorship. All the whole Senate comming one Day to the Temple of Venus where he was, he sat still, and rose not up as formerly he used to do. His Friends also and Favourites began to report, that in the Books of the Sybils (which in Rome were had in great Veneration) it was written, that the Parthians could never be over∣come but by a man that should have the Title of a King, and therefore he laboured that Caesar should take upon him that Title before his Parthian War; and though he seemed to be displeased at it, yet they suspected the con∣trary, and their suspition was encreased, for that, whereas the Tribunes of the People had caused a man to be imprisoned who had set a Crown upon the Head of one of Caesars Statues, he was so encensed against the Tri∣bunes that did it, that he deposed them from their Office: And not long after, when Mark Anthony (who was his great fovourite▪ and that year his fellow Consul) being at some publick Games, came to Caesar, and put a CrownHis dissi∣mulation. upon his Head, though he threw it down, yet they all imagined that Mark Anthony would not have pre∣sumed to have done it without his good liking, and that he did it but to prove the People how they would like it; these and such like passages gave them occasion to desire and designe his Death. They were also further encouraged hereunto, for that in sundry publick places, certain writings were set up which did intice and animate them to conspire against him: as upon the Statue of Brutus, who in ancient times did chase the Kings out of Rome, were written these words,
Would to God thou wert now living, Brutus. And upon the Image of Marcus Brutus, who then was Praetor, and descended from the former Brutus, were these words: Thou sleepest long Brutus. Truly thou art not Brutus. And again: Thou art dead Brutus: Would to God thou wert living, Thou art unworthy of the succession from the Brute. Surely thou art not descended from the good Bru¦tus: and such like other writings were set upon these Statues. So as for these, and such like reasons, there were se∣venty of the most eminent men in Rome that conspired toA conspi∣racy a∣gainst him▪ murther Caesar: of which the principle were Decius, Marcus Brutus, Caius Cassius, Gaius Casca, Attilius Cim∣ber, Servius Galba, Quintus Ligarius, Marcus Spurius, &c. who, after diverse consultations, concluded to kill him upon the Ides of March, which was the fifteenth day of that moneth, in the Temple where the Senators were to sit that day: Yet Brutus was held to be Caesars Son, and had received great honours, and many fa∣voursHis death foretold. from him. This conspiracy was kept so secret notwithstanding the great number of them, that there was not any one found that discovered the same. But there were so many signes, and Prodigies, and to him∣self there happened so many forewarnings, that (with∣out knowing any cause) all men were of opinion that Caesars Death was neere at hand. Spurina also, who was his Southsayer, forewarned him to look to himself till the Ides of March were past: for that his Life was in great danger. And Caesars own Wife in∣treated him upon her knees, that he would not that day go to the Senate: For shee had dreamed that he lay dead in her lap. These and such like warnings pre∣vailed so far with him, that he was about to send to Mark Anthony to make his excuse, and to put off the Se∣nate to another day. But what God hath determined must come to passe; and therefore Brutus being present, advised him by no meanes to discover any such fear, and so he resolved to go.
Caesar made small account of Death, and said, That as for himself he had won power and fame, and glory enough, and that at no time he could die with greater honour. And some discoursing the night before he was slaine, what Death was best: Even that (qouth he) which is sudden, and least prepensed. The fifteenth of March being come, he went from his House in a Litter towards the Senate, and as he passed along the street, there was a Petition delivered to him, wherein was set down in writing all that was concluded in this conspiracy, and he which gave it, prayed him to read it presently, which he began to doe: but there came so many to speake to him that he could make no farther progresse, and this Paper was found in his hand when he was dead. As he passed on, he met with Spurina, the Southsayer, and pleasantly jesting, he said to him, Dost thou not know Spurina, that the Ides of March are come? Yea (answered Spurina) and I know that they are not yet past. When he came to the Temple where the Senators met, he alighted from his Litter and went in, and having first done Sacrifice (according to the custome) which all that saw persaged to be fatall, and infortunate, he sat him down in his Chair, and Brutus Albinus enter∣taining Mark Anthony at the door with discourse, one of the Conspirators, whose name was Celer, came to Caesar, under a pretence to intreat him to release a Bro∣ther of his from Banishment, and presently all the rest of the conspirators drew neere to his Chair; which when Caesar saw, thinking that they had all come for the same purpose, he said unto them, what force is this? and at that instant, one of them whose name was Casca, beginning, they all drew their poyniards, and Swords which they had privately under their Gowns▪ and began to wound him. The first blow he re∣ceived Casca gave him in the throat: At which Caesar said aloude, What dost thou Traitor Casca? and wrest∣ing the Poyniard out of his hand, he arose and stabbed
Casca through the Arme, and being about to strike him again, he was prevented by the many wounds which the others gave him, wilest with great force and courage he leaped from one side to the other to defend himself: But when he saw Marcus Brutus with his drawn Sword in his hand, wherewith he had already wounded him in the Thigh, he was much amazed, and said in the Greek Tongue, Why how now Son Brutus? And thou also? And having so said, seeing so many wea∣ponsHe is slaine. bent against him, and that no body came to his rescue, he remembred to keep the honour of his per∣son, with his right hand he covered his Head with part of his Robe, and with his left hand, girt himself and setled his cloathes about him, and being so covered he fell down to the ground, having received three and twenty wounds; and it happened that his fall was at the foot of the seat on which Pompeys Statue stood. So inHis cha∣racter. this manner died one of the most Mighty, Worthy, Va¦lient, Wise, and most successfull Princes, and Captaines that ever was in the World. For, his excellencies, abi∣lities, invincible mind, incomparable courage, the Battels which he fought, and Victories which he obtain∣ed: The Provinces, Kings and Nations which he subdu∣ed; His Counsels, Policies, and Stratagems, and bold attempts: his Magnanimity, clemency, and bounty both to the conquered and Conquerors: the great de∣signes which he had proposed to himself a little before he was slaine, being all well weighed and considered, it will plainly appear, that in none of those things afore∣said, nor in any other that may be said of him, there hath been any Heathen King, or Captain that ever ex∣celled him. And setting apart his ambition, and de∣sire of rule, he was onely noted, and blamed for being too much given to women. Caesar was thus slaine in the fifty sixth year of his age, a little more than four years after the Death of Pompey, in the seven hundred and tenth year after the building of Rome, and about fourty and two years be∣fore
the Incarnation of our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Caesar left behind him neither Son nor Daughter legi∣timate at the time of his Death: For though he had been four severall times married, yet he had but one only Daughter, named Julia, that was married to Pompey, and dyed before him. Wherefore by his last Will, he adopted for his Son, and made his Heire in theHis will. Dodrant, that is, in nine parts of twelve of his goods, his Nephew Octavius Caesar, after wards called Octavianus Augustus, who was the Son of Acia, his neece, and of Octavius Praetor of Macedonia, which Octavius at this time, was, by the commandment of his Uncle, in the City of Apollonia, in the Province of Epirus, where he applied himself to his studies, staying for him there, thence to go with him to the Parthian War, being now about seventeen years of age. Caesar being thus slaine, the newes of it ran presently all over the City, and the tumult therein was so great, that no man knew what to doe or say. All Offices ceased, the Temples were all shut up, and every man was ama∣zed. Caesars Friends were affraid of those that slew him, and they as much feared his Friends, Brutas, Cassi∣us, and the other Conspirators, and others that joyned with them, seeing the great tumult, durst not go to their Houses, nor prosecute their other designs, for fear of Mark Anthony and Lepidus, whereof the one was Consul, and the other Generall of the Horsemen, but presently from thence they went to seize upon the Capitol, crying by the way as they went, Liberty, Liberty, and imploring the favour, and assistance of the People. The rest of that day, and all the next night, Mark Anthony, and Le∣pidus (who took Caesars part) were in Armes, and there passed sundry massages, and treaties between them and the Conspirators: At last it was agreed that the Senate should sit, whither Brutus, and Cassius came, M. Antho∣nies Sons (by the perswasion of Cicero, a great lover of Liberty) remaining as Hostages for them.
In the Senate they Treated of Peace and concord, andPeace conclud∣ed. that all that was past should be buried in perpetuall obli∣vion; whereunto, Anthony who was Consul, and the whole Senate agreed: and the Provinces being divi∣ded, there was algreat liklihood of Peace. For the Se∣nate approved, and commended the murther, and the People dissembled their thoughts: For on the one side the authority of Brutus, and Cassius, and the name of Liberty, seemed to give them some content: and on the other side, the hainousnesse of the fact, and the love they bare to Caesar, did move, and excite them to hate the murtherers, and so all was quiet for the present. But Mark Anthony (who affected the Tyranny) took every oportunity to incense the People against them: and Caesars Testament being opened, wherein (besides the adopting of his Nehpew Octavius, and making him his Heire) besides other bequests, he bequeathed to the People of Rome, certaine Gardens, and Lands neere to the River of Tiber, and to every Citizen of Rome a certaine summe of money to be devided amongst them, which being known, much encreased their love to Caesar, and made his death more grievous to them. Caesars Funerall being agreed upon, his Body was burnt with great solemnity in the Field of Mars, and Mark Anthony made the Funerall Oration in his Praise, and took the Robe wherein Caesar was slaine, being all bloudy, and shewed it to the People, using such speeches as provoaked them both to wrath, aud commiseration, so as before the Funerall solemnity was fully finished, they all departed in great fury, taking Brands in theirA tumult. hands from the fire wherein Caesar was burned, and went to burnethe Houses of Brutus, and Cassius, and if they could have found them, and the rest of the Con∣spirators, they would certainly have slaine them; and in their fury they unadvisedly slew Elius Cinna, by mi∣staking him for Cornelius Cinna, who was one of the Conspirators. This tumult put Brutus, and Cassius, and their confe∣derates,
into such feate, that they all fled from Rome in∣to severall parts: and though the Senate (having ap∣peased the tumult) inflicted punishment upon some of the seditions, and had already committed some of them to Prison, yet Brutus, and Cassius durst not return to Rome, but after a while went into Greece, to Govern those Pro∣vinces which Caesar in his Life time had allotted unto them, which were, Macedonia to Brutus, and Syria to Cassius. And truly this was very remarkable, that within the space of three years all the Conspirators dyed, and not one of them of a naturall death. Caesar in his fifth and last Consulship made an Edict, that thanks should be ruturned to Hyrcanus, the High-PriestHe fa∣voured the Jewes. and Prince of the Jewes, and to the Nation of the Jewes, for their affection to himself and the People of Rome. And decreed also, that the said Hyrcanus, should have the City of Jerusalem, and repair the Walls of it which Pompey had beaten down, and should Govern it as he pleased himself. He also granted to the Jewes, that every second year there should an abatement be made out of their rents, and that they should be free from Impositions, and Tributes. His Name of Caesar was so honourable, that all his suc∣cessors to this present day, have assumed it into their Title, and esteem it an honour to be called Caesars. FINIS.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF OCTAVIANUS AUGUSTUS In whose Raign our LORD CHRIST was born. _ Caesar, who was afterwardsHis Paren∣tage. called Octavianus Augustus, was by the Fathers side descended of the Antient Family of the Octavij, which was of great account in Rome even from the time of Tar∣quin their King: By the Mothers side he was descended from the Re∣gall Line: His Mother was Accia the Daughter of Accius Balbus, and Julia, the Sister of Julius Caesar, which Accia was married to the Father of Octavius. He was born in the year of the Consul∣ship of Cicero, and Caius Antonius. He was but four
years old when his Father dyed: and at twelve years old he made an Oration at the Funerall of his Grand∣mother Julia. When his Uncle Julius Caesar, was Warring in Spain against the Sons of Pompey, Octavius (though he was butHis first imploy∣ment. young) followed him thither through many and great dangers: and when that War was ended, Julius Caesar intending to take him with him to the Parthian War, sent him before to the City of Apollonia, where he plyed his Book very diligently; and on a time having a minde to see Theogenes, a learned. Astronomer, he calculated his Nativity, and promised him great matters, which made Octavius conceive great hopes of himself, and in memory thereof he caused certain Medals to be coin∣ed, and would often boast of what Theogenes had told him. Octavius in the sixth moneth after he went to Apollonia, having intelligence from his Mother of the Death of hisHe comes into Italy. Uncle Julius Caesar, he hasted out of Epirus to Brundusi∣um, where he was received by the Army that went to meet him as the adopted Son of Caesar, and without any further delay he assumed the name of Caesar, and took up∣on him to be his Heire, and that so much the rather, be∣cause he had brought with him good store of money, and great forces that were sent him by his Uncle: and so at Brundusium, adopting himself into the Julian Family, he called himself Caius Julius Caesar Octa∣vius. To this very Name, as though he had been his true Son, there came great store of partly of his Friends, partly of freed▪men, slaves▪ and Souldiers, by whom be∣ingMany re∣sort to him. more strengthened and imboldned by the multitude of them that flocked to him, and by the authority of the Caesarian name, which with the common People was in great reputation, he took his journey towards Rome with a great traine, which daily increased like a Floud. On the fourteenth Kalends of May he entered into
Naples, where he gave Cicero a visit. From thence as he was going to Rome there met him a vast com∣panyHe comes to Rome. of his Friends, and as he entered the City, the Globe of the Sun seemed to compasse his Head round like unto a Bow, as it were, putting a Crown upon his Head, who afterward was to be so great a man: and at night, calling together his Friends, he commanded them to be ready the next morning, with good store of followers, to meet him in the Market-place, which was done accordingly; and he going to Caius, the City Praetor, and Brother to An∣thony, he told him that he did accept of the Adopti∣on. For it was the Roman custome in Adoptions to in∣terpose the authority of the Praetor: which acceptance being Regisired by the Scribes, from thence he presently went to Mark Anthony the Consul, who behaved him∣selfM. Antho∣ny's pride. proudly towards him, and scarcely admitting him into Pompeys Gardens, gave him time to speak with him. Octavitanus had a great mind to revenge the Death of Julius Caesar; but by his Mother, and Philip his Father in Law he was advised to conceal his Purpose for a time, both because the Senate had approved his Death, and because Mark Anthony, who was principally to assist him therein, did not shew himself very friendly to him. Octavianus understanding that Mark Anthony had in his custody all the Treasure that was left by Julius Caesar, he desired him to command it to be delivered to him, therewith to pay his debts, and to distrubte it as Caesar had appointed in his Will: But Anthony with greater Pride than Octavianus could well bear, not only refused what he demanded, but reproved him for desiring it; whereupon discords presently arose betwixt them: and Octavianus strengthened himself with the Counsel of Cicero, a great enemy to Anthony, and one whose au∣thority at that time, by reason of his Wisdom and Elo∣quence, was very great. Anthony being Overseer of those things which Caesar had
commanded to be done, what by corrupting the Notes,And fal∣shood. and changing them at his pleasure, did what himself listed, as if it had been the appointment of Caesan; by this meanes, gratifying Cities and Governours, and heaping vast summes of money to himself, selling not onely Fields and Tributes, but freedomes and immunities even of the City of Rome, and that not onely to particular Persons, but to whole Provinces, and of these things there were Tables hung up all over the Ca∣pitol. Octavianus being nineteen years old, at his own charges gathered an Army, and sought the favour of the People,Caesar raises▪an Army. and prepared forces against Anthony for his own and the Commonwealths safety. He also stirred up the old Soul∣diers, who by Julius Caesar had been planted in Colonies: so that Anthony being afraid of him, by the mediation of Friends▪ had a conference with him in the Capitol, and they were for the present reconciled: but within a few dayes, through the whisperings of some, their en∣mity brake our again, and Anthony, not thinking himself strong enough, and knowing that the Legi∣ons of Macedonia were the best Souldiers, and six in number, with whom also were many Archers, light harnessed men, and Horsemen, these he sought to draw to himself, who, because of their neernesse, might presently be brought into Italy: and thereupon he caused a rumour to be spread, that the Getae wasted Macedonia by their inrodes; and upon that occasion he demanded an Army of the Senate, saying, that the Macedonian Army was raised by Caesar against the Getae, before he intended the Parthian War, whereupon he was chosen Generall of those Forces, and he abtain∣ed a Law for the change of Provinces, whereby his Bro∣ther Cains Anthony challenged Macedonia, which before by lot fell to Marcus Brutus.Anthony leaves Rome. On the seventh of the Ides of October Anthony went to Brundusium, there to meet foure of the Macedonian Le∣gions, whom he thought to draw to himself by money.
Thither also Octavianus sent his Friends with money to hire these Souldiers for himself, and himself posted in∣to Campania, to engage those Souldiers which were in Colonies to take his part; and first he drew to him the old Souldiers of Galatia, then those of Casilinum on both sides of Capua, giving to each man five hundred pence, by which meanes he gat together about ten thou∣sand men, who marched with him under one Ensigne as a guard. In the mean while the four Legions of Macedonia, accusing Anthony for his delayes in revenging Caesurs Death, without any acclamations conducted him to the Tribunal, as it were, to hear an account of this matter, and there continued silent. Anthony taking this ill, up∣braded them with their Ingratitude, and complained that they had not brought to him some disturbers of the Peace, who were sent from that malapert young man (for so he called Octavian) and to ingratiate himself with them, he promised an hundred pence to each of them, which niggardly promise was intertained with laughter,His Par∣simony. which he took so ill, that being returned to his Quar∣ters, in the presence of his most converous, and most cru∣el Wife Fulvia, he put to death some Centurions out of the Martian Legion. When those of Caesars party, that were sent to corrupt the Souldiers, saw that they were more exasperated byCaesars Policy. this deed, they scattered Libels about the Army, where∣in they disgraced Anthony, and extolled the liberality of Caesar. And when some sided with Octavian, and o∣thers with Anthony, the Army, as if it had been set to sale at an outery, addicted themselves to him that would give most. And because that Decius Brutus, who com∣manded Gallia Cisalpirea (now Lombardy) opposed An∣thony, he went to besiege him in the City of Mutina (now Modena) which being known in Rome, Cicero his authority and credit in the Senate was such, that MarkAnthony declared an enemy. Anthony was declared an enemy to the State, and the new Consuls, Hircius and Pansa were sem against him,
and with them was Octavian sent with Ensignes of a Consul, and Title of a Pro-praetor, having been first ad∣mitted into the Senate though so young, which was done by the procurement of Cicero, though he afterwards re¦quited him ill for it. Octavian with the Consuls, drew neer to Mark An∣thony, Cicero remaining to command in chief in all matters at Rome: and between the two Armies there passed many skirmishes and encounters, and at last they came to a Battell, wherein the Consuls and Caesar had the Victory, but Hircius was slaine in the Battell, andCaesar o∣vercomes him. Pansa was so wounded, that he died within a few dayes after, and both the Armies of the slaine Consuls obeyed Caesar. By this meanes D. Brutus was freed from his siege, and Anthony was forced to forsake Italy by a dis∣honourable flight, leaving his baggage behind him. In this service Octavian made marvelous proof of him∣self, being but twenty years old, performing the Office, not onely of a good Captaine, but also of a stout Souldier: For seeing the Standart▪ bearer sore wounded and ready to fall, Octavian took from him the Eagle, and bare it a great while till he had lodged it in safety. Mark Anthony after the Battell, gathering the remain∣dersHe fliesin∣to France. of his Army, passed the Alps and went into France, solliciting the Friendship of Lepidus, who was there with an Army ever since the Death of Julius Caesar, whom after some treaties he made his Friend: and Octavian after the Victory obtained, presently sent to the Senate to require a Triumph for his Victory, as also the Counsulship for the remainder of the year in the roome of the dead Consuls, with their succession in their charge, and command of the Army. But the answer of the Senate was not according to his desire: For the Friends and Kinsmen of those that had murthered Caesar began to fear him, and to suspect his power, wherefore they prevailed to delay that which he required, and in the end they resolved to assign the Army to Decius Bru∣tus,
and temporizing with Octavian, they granted him a Triumph, but denied him the Consulship, whereat he was much discontented, and therefore secret∣ly treated of friendship with Mark Anthony, and having drawn to himself the affections of the Army, he there∣withCaesar makes himself Consul. marched towards Rome, and approaching near to the City, in dispite of the Senate, he caused himself to be chosen Consul being not fully twenty years old. Then did he cause accusations to be exhibited against Brutus, and Cassius, and the rest of the Conspirators; and in their absence, having none that durst defend their cause, they were condemned. After this was done he left the City, and with his Army marched toward Anthony, and Lepidus, who were already entred into Italy. Decius Brutus hearing of the Treaties and League that was made between Octavian, Lepidus and Mark Antho∣ny, not daring to stay in that Country, departed with his Army, which soon forsook him, some going to Caesar, others to Mark Anthony, whereupon he fled, but being at last taken, he was brought to Mark Anthony, who caused his Head to be cut off. The Armies of these Captaines drawing neere toge∣ther, to whom Assinius Pollio, and Plancus, with their Legions were joyned, these three Octavian Caesar, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus, meeting, after three dayes debate, they concluded their accursed Peace; and these firebrands of sedition entered into a Triumvirate, withA Trium∣virate e∣rected. severall intents and designes. Lepidus was covetous, and sought riches by troubling the State. Anthony was by nature an enemy to Peace, and to the Common∣wealth, desiring an opportunity to be revenged of those who had declared him an enemy to the State. And Octavian sought revenge upon Brutus, and Cassius, and those who had slaine his adopted Father. And to bring these things to passe, Octavian put away his Wife who was Daughter to Servilius, and contracted him∣self to Claudia, Daughter in Law to Anthony by
his Wife Fulvia, who was now a child, and from whom he was afterward divorced by reason of the dis∣cord that arose between Anthony and him. In this League which they made, besides dividing the Provinces amongst themselves, they agreed to Pro∣scribe and kill each of them his enemies, and the oneMany pro∣scribed. delivered them into the others hands, having more re∣spect to be revenged upon an enemy then to save a Friend; and so there was made the most cruel and in∣humane Proscription, and Butchery that ever was be∣fore heard of, giving and exchanging Friends, and Kinsmen for enemies. For Mark Anthony gave up his Fathers Brother: and Lepidus his own Brother, LuciusIngrati∣tude. Paulus: and Octavian; M. T. Cicero, whom he cal∣led Father, and who had intreated and honoured him as a Son. And besides these, they Proscribed and condemned to die three hundred other Principall men of Rome, amongst whom were about one hundred and four∣ty Senators, besides two thousand Romans of the order of Knighthood. This agreement being made, they all three went to Rome, where they took upon them the Government of the Commonwealth by the name of Triumvirat, the time being limited to five years, though they never meant to leave the same. And presently after, those who were condemned and Proscribed, were by their com∣mandement put to death, being sought out in all parts and places; their Houses were ransacked, and their goods confiscated. Cicero understanding that his name was in the Cata∣logueCicero flies. amongst the Proscripts, onely because he had been a lover of Roman Liberty, he fled to the Sea, where he embarked himself, but so hard was his hap, that by contrary winds he was driven back to the shore, whereupon, returning to some possessions of his neere Capua, not far from the Sea, as he lay sleeping there, he was awakened by some Crowes which with their bils pluckt his cloaths from his back. His
servants being moved with this ill presage, put him into his Litter, and again carried him towards the Sea: but being overtaken by the murtherers, he put his neckAnd is slaine. out of his Litter, and they cut off his Head, and his right hand, wherewith he had written his Orations a gainst Mark Anthony called Philippicks: And thus was he slaine by one whom he had defended, and delivered from death. Anthony joyfully received his hand, and caused it to be nailed up in the place where he was wont to plead, to which all the People repaired to be∣hold so wofull and miserable a spectacle, of whom there was not any one but was heartily sorry for the Death of so great a Personage, and so fervent a lover of his Country. Salvius Otho, a Tribune of the People, invited his Friends to his last Supper, and as they wereHorid cruelty. sitting, in came a Centurion, and in the presence of them all, strake off his Head. Minutius the Praetor was slaine, sitting in his seat of Judgment. L. Villius Annalis, who had been Consul, flying from the murtherers, hid him∣self in the Suburbs in a little House of one of his clients,Sons un∣naturall. but his own Son betrayed him to the murtherers, who slew him there; but shortly after this Parricide being drunken, quarrelling with the same Souldiers, was slaine by them. C. Toranius also being betrayed by his own Son, was slaine, who in a few dayes having consumed his Patrimony, was condemned for Theft, and banished into a place where he died misera∣bly. Quintus Cicero was hid by his Son, whom they couldSons duti∣full and good. never make to confesse by any torments where his Fa∣ther was; but the old man, not being able any longer to endure that they should torment so vertuous a Son, came and presented himself to the Murtherers: where∣upon the Son entreated them to kill him first, but they killed them both together. The Egnaces; the Father and Son, embracing one the other were both run through at once and slaine. C. Hosidius Geta, was put into a grave by his Son as dead, who sustained and kept
him till the danger was over. Aruntius, after he had comfored his Son, delivered up himself to the mur∣therers, but his Son for griefe famished himself. Some other Children carefully hid, and preserved their Pa∣rents. Tanusia was such an importunate suitor to Caesar for her Husband T. Junius that she preserved his life: HeWives good. was in the intrim hidden by Philopoemen, his bond∣men enfranchised, whom Caesar afterwards Knighted for his fidelity to his Master. Q. Ligurius haivng been concealed by his Wife, was discovered by a slave, and killed, whereupon his Wife pined her self to death. Lu∣cretius Vespilio, having passed many dangers whilst he sought to hide himself here and there, at last came to his Wife Shuria, who hid him between the Sealing and the top of the House till she had begged his Life of the Triumvirs. Apuleius was saved by his Wife, who fled away with him. Antius his Wife wrapped him up in Coverlets, and caused him to be carried to the Sea side as a pack of stuff, where he embarked and sailed into Sicily. Coponius was saved by his Wife, who lent her Body to Anthony for one night, to save him whom she preferred before her honour. But the Wife of Septimius, having shamefully given her Body to one of Anthonies Familiars, caused herWives bad. Husband to be put into the number of the Poscripts, that she might the more freely continue her Adulteries, and her Husband was slaine by her meanes. Q. Vettius Salussus was hidden in a very secret place, but ac∣quainting his Wife with it, she betrayed him to the murtherers. Fulvius was discovered by one of his slaves and his Concubine, though he had made her free, and given her goods wherewithall to maintaine her self. P. Naso was betraid by his slave enfranchised, withServants bad. whom he had been too familiar, but he revenged him∣self upon his slave, whom he killed, and then held forth his neck to the cut throats. L. Lucceius had put into
the hands of two of his Freedmen as much as would have relieved him in his Banishment, but they ran away with all, whereupon he delivered himself to the murtherers. Haterius, who had hid himself in a very secret place, was sold and betrayed by his slave, and killed. Cassius Varus who was betrayed by a slave made free, had his Head struck off. Caius Plotius was hiden by his slaves, but being given to Perfumes, the sent thereof discovered him; yet when the Soul∣diers could not find him, they cruelly tormented hisServants good. Servants to make them confesse where he was, which yet they would not do: But the Master pitting his faith∣full servants, came out of his secret place, and deliver∣ed himself to the murtherers. Appius Claudius changed his Gown with his slave, who in that habit presented himself to the murtherers, and was slain by them instead of his Master. Another slave of Menius did the like: for he went into his Masters Litter, and offered his neck to the murtherers, who cut off his Head, and so his Master escaped into Sicily. The slave of Urbinus Panopio, hearing that the murtherers were comming to his Masters House, took off his Gown and his Ring, and gave him his own apparrel, and put him out at a back doore: then he went up and lay upon his Masters Bed, where he boldly attended them that killed him for Panopio. The slave of Antius Restio, though his Master had soundly beaten him a few dayes before for some knavish tricks, yet to save his Master, meeting an old man by the way, he struck off his Head, and shewing that, with his whippings to the murtherers, he made them believe that thus he had revenged him∣self of his Master, with whom he shortly after fled into Sicily. The slaves of Martius Censorinus kept their Ma∣ster secretly, till he had oportunity to escape into Sicily to Sextus Pompeius. Q. Oppius, an honourable old man, being very neereA good Son. taking, was rescued by his Son, who conveying him out of Rome, carried him upon his shoulders, and sent
him into Sicily, where all the poor distressed Romans were courteously intertained by S. Pompeius, who sent forth Ships, and Galleys to lie upon the coast of Italy, ready to receive all them that fled to him; doubly re∣warding those that saved any that was Proscribed: He gave also honourable Offices to all that had been Con∣suls, and comforting the rest with singular courtesie. Many others fled into Macedonia to Brutus and Cassius: others into Africk to Cornificius. Statius Samnis, an honourable Senator being about eighty years old, that those Theeves might have no part of his Goods, he gave them for a prey to whomsoever would take them; then setting his House on fire he burnt himself in it. A∣ponius having been long concealed by his slave, grew weary of that confinement, came out into the Market∣place, and yeilded his neck to the murtherers. Cesti∣us being in the like condition, caused his slaves, to make a great fire, threw himself into it and died: Sulpitus Rufus, who had been Consul, was mur∣thred because he would not sell an Isle of his to Fulvia: also Ampius Balbus was slaine, because heA Jeza∣bel. would not give her a pleasant place of his. M. Anthony put into the number of Proscripts a Se∣nator called Nonius Struma, onely to get from him anBase co∣veteous∣nesse. Emerod esteemed worth fifty Thousand Crowns: but Nonius found a meanes to escape with his Emerod, to the great grief of Anthony. Some valiantly defended themselves, as Atteius Capito, who killed many Souldi∣ersValour. who came rudely running upon him, but being at last oppressed with multitudes, he was slaine. Ve∣tulinus, assisted by his Son, valiantly repulsed the murtherers, but at last was slaine. Sicilias Coranas hoping to escape, put himself amongst the Mourners that followed a dead Corpse, but being discovered was slaine. The Triumviri caused the goods of the Proscripts to be sold by the Drum, at such prizes as the Souldiers pleased, yet most part of them was spoiled and given
away. They promised also to Widdowes their Joyn∣tures, and to Sons the tenth part of their Fathers Patrimony, and to Daughters the twentieth part, but few or none had any benefit by this promise; yea, on the contrary, they sacked many of them that demandedOppressi∣on. these rights. They exacted great summes of money in Rome, and all over Italy; and to encourage the Souldiers, they gave them unmeasurable gifts, and granted them daily new pillage. The Legions they Wintered in the richest Cities upon free Quarter. To be short, men by fear and custome were so inured to slavery, that they became more slaves than the Tyrants would have had them. These three men having done what they would in Rome, and knowing that Brutus and Cassius had a very great Army in Greece, who called themselves the De∣liverers of their Country, saying that they would go and and set Rome at liberty from oppression: Cassius having overthrown and slaine Dolabella in Syria: and being informed, that by the assistance of their Friends, they had gotten together eighteen Legions, hereupon Mark Anthony, and Octavian resolved to go against them with the greatest Army that they could pos∣sibly make of old Souldiers, and that Lepidus should stay to guard Rome: and accordingly they depar∣ted,They go against Brutus and Cassius. and arrived in Greece, and marching on, they drew neer to the place where Brutus and Cassius were encamped, which was in Macedonia in the Philippick Fields. Before they came to joyn Battell there were sundryProdigeis. Prodigies: for fowles of prey hovered about the Camp of Brutus as if it had been their own already: and as they marched out to Battell, a Blackmoore met them, which they accounted an ill Omen. Brutus being alone in his Tent at night, a man sad and gastly appeared to him, and being asked what he was, he answered, IA Specta∣rum. am they evill Genius, and so vanished: But on the con∣trary. Birds, and Beasts promised good successe to Cae∣sar.
These Armies lying so neere together had fre∣quent skirmishes, and at last came to a Battell, where the Victory was strangely divided: For Brutus on theBrutus beats Cae∣sar. M. Anthony beats Cas∣sius. one side of the Field, did beat Octavian, and put his Battalion to rout, pursuing them into the Camp, where many of them were slaine; and while Brutus was fol∣lowing his Victory, his partner Cassius was over∣thrown by Mark Anthony, though he did all that was possible to encourage his men, and by reason of the clouds of dust, knew nothing of Brutus his Victory, whereupon retiring to an high ground, he there pitched his Tent: and so standing and look∣ing about, he saw Brutus his Troops comming to his aid, and to relieve him; but he imagining that they came flying before their enemies, commanded a slave of his whom he had made free to kill him, who did it accor∣dingly. Octavians men that escaped by flight, retired to Mark Anthonies Camp, and had not Brutus his men busied themselves in ransacking Octavians Camp, they had that day, obtained an intire Victory: for they might in due time have rescued, and relieved Cassius, and both of them being joyned together might easily have o∣verthrown Mark Anthony: but God had otherwise de∣termined. The Victory being thus devided, the Ge∣nerals of either party gathered their forces together, and of Brutus side, were slaine eight thousand men, and of the enemies side a far greater number. Brutus did his best to encourage and comfort his Souldiers, and the Gentle∣men which followed Cassius: and the next day, though both Armies were put in Battell array, yet they fought not; but a few dayes after, Brutus, by his Souldiers, was forced to come to an other Battell, who was of him∣self willing rather to delay and prolong the War, know∣ing that his enemies wanted Victuals, and many other necessaries, and because he reposed no great trust in the forces of Cassius: for he found that they were fear∣full,Brutus beaten. and hard to be commanded because of their late o∣verthrow.
When they came to the second encounter, Brutus did all the Offices of an able Generall, and of a Valiant Knight, yet in the end his men were broken, and overthown by the enemy. Burtus having gathered his scattered Troops together, found himself unable to make any further resistance, and being advised by some of his Friends to fly, he told them, That so be would, yet not with his feet but with his hands, and there∣upon, taking a Sword from a servant of his called Stratus, he slew himself. Thus Octavian, and Mark An∣thonyKills him∣self. remained Victors, and Masters of the Field, and all things succeeded according to Caesars desire, for whom, God in his secret Counsell, had reserved the Monarchy of the whole World, which for the present was devided between three. These Wars being ended, and the Legions of Brutus, and Cassius, reduced to the obedience of the Conquerors, Octavian, and Mark Anthony agreed, and resolved, that Anthony should remaine to Govern Greece, and Asia, that Lepidus should go into Africk, and that Octavian should returne to Rome: and accordingly Mark An∣thony went into Asia, where he gave himself up to sen∣sualityAnthony With Cle∣opatra. and delights with the fair, but wanton Cleopatra, Queen of Aegypt, and Octavian, though with some hindrances, by reason of his health, at last came to Rome. Not long after there arose new Wars and troubles for though Octavian was at peace with Lepidus who was now in Africk, Octavian having under his commandTroubles in Rome. Spain, France, part of Germany, Italy, and Illyricum, yet Lucius Antonius, who at this time was Consul, be∣ing provoked thereto by his Sister in Law Fulvia, Wife to Mark Anthony, began to oppose himself against Le∣pidus and Octavian, seeking to overthrow the Triumvi∣rat, which contention brake out about the division of Fields which Caesar had made to the Souldiers which had served him in his Wars. Some say that Fulvia made this stirre, that she might procure the return of Mark An∣thony
to her, of whom she was jealous, hearing of his fa∣miliarity with Cleopatra. The discord in Rome grew to that height that they came to Armes; and Lucius Anto∣nius went from the City, and levied an Army against Octavian, who also marched towards him with his Forces. But Lucius not daring to joine Battell, shut himself up in Perugia, where Caesar immediately besieg∣ed him, and divorced himself from Claudia, the Daugh∣ter of Fulvia, and was married to his third Wife, Scri∣bonia by whom he had one only Daughter. Octavian being about twenty three years old, so strictly besieged Perugia that Lucius and his men were brought to suchCaesars Victory. straits for want of Victuals, that he was forced to yeild up himself to Octavian, who pardoned him, and used him kindly, and thus this War was ended without bloudshed. And so Octavian returned to Rome, of which he was now sole Lord: and from hence some reckon the beginning of his Empire which was about four years after the Death of Julius Caesar, and about thirty eight years before the Incarnation of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Caesar being now in quiet, Fulvia by letters, and false informations sought to stirre-up her Husband Mark An∣thony against Octavian, with which resolution she left Italy, and went towards him; and at the same time Mark Anthony departed from Alexandria in Aegypt, and came to the Isle of Rhodes, where he was informed of all that had happened to his Brother Lucius. From thence he went into Greece, and at Athens he found his Wife Fulvia sick, yet vehemently inveying against Octavian:Authony comes into Italy. wherefore leaving her there, he went with two hun∣dred Gallies into Italy, and landed at Brundusium, where the Wars began between him and the Forces of Octavi∣an, who was yet at Rome. But newes comming of Fulvias death, some Friends interposed to reconcile them, and at last it was agreed, that Arbitrators should be chosen to compose their differences. Octavian chose Mecaenas, and for Mark Anthony was Asinius Pol∣lia,
and these brought it to this issue, that Mark An∣thony should have all the East from Italy, beginning from the Jonian Sea, which is the entry into the Veneti∣an Gulph, unto the River of Euphrates, wherein were in∣cluded all the Provinces of Graecia and Asia, with all thePeace made be∣wixt them. Islands within these limits. To Octavian was allotted from the said Jonian Sea to the Westerne or Spanish Sea, wherein were contained Spain, France, Italy, Germany, and Britan. To Lepidus was confirmed Africa, where he then was, with all the Provinces thereof. And for the strengthening of this League, Mark Anthony, now a Widdower, was to marry with Octavia, the Sister of Octavian by the Fathers side, formerly married to Mareus Marcellus, by whom she had one Son called also Marcellus, whom Octavian adopted. And this marriage was dispensed with by the Senate, because in Rome, Widdows were not permitted to marry till they had lived ten moneths in Widdowhood, which she had not done. This being concluded, Octavian, and Mark AnthonyAnthony marries Octavia. went to Rome, where the wedding was solemnized, and they were seemingly good Friends; but their Peace was disquieted by the Neighbourhood of Sextus Pom∣peius, who commanded the Seas from Sicily where he lived, and with his Ships, and Pirates, he disquited Caesars Friends, who thereupon resolved to ruine him: But at the request of the Senate, and of Mark Anthony, he harkned to Peace, and by the mediation of Friends,They are reconciled with Sex∣tus Pom∣pey. it was agreed that all matters past should be forgotten, & that they should live like good Nighbours and Friends, and that Sextus Pompey should enjoy Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica which he had in possession, and that he should cleere the Seas from Pirates that Marchants and passengers might passe safely, and that he should furnish Rome yearly with a certaine quantity of Corne. This being concluded, they agreed upon a meeting of all three upon the Sea side in the straight of Messina, in a Fortresse built for that purpose which reached into
the Water, whither Sextus Pompey might come with his Galleys and be in safety: which accordingly was per∣formed with great joy and solemnity; and Sextus Pompey feasted them in his Galleys, and they likewise him by Land. From hence Sextus Pompey returned into Sicily, and Octavian and Mark Anthony to Rome, where for a while they remained in great familiarity: and then Mark Anthony preparing for his journey into the East, sent Ventidius before him with a great Army against the Parthians, wherein he had so good successe, that he o∣vercame and defeated Pacorus, the Parthian KingsThe Par∣thian bea▪ten. Son, and slew twenty thousand of his men, and thereby sufficiently revenged the Death of Marcus Crassus, for which he afterwards Triumphed at Rome. Mark Anthony departed from Rome with his new Wife, and wintered with her in Athens▪ Octavian in the mean time in Rome growing mighty, and in high esteem, was yet very pensive, being troubled at the Nighbour∣hood of Sextus Pompey in Sicily, attending an occasion to War against him: for which purpose he prepared a great Fleet, pretending that▪ Sextus with his Ships,Caesar en∣vies Sextus Pompey. and Gallyes hindred the comming of Corne into Italy. These Sicilian Wars continued for some years: in the beginning whereof Octavian had ill successe, yet more from stormes and tempests than from the force of his enemies▪ and if Sextus Pompey had been as Prudent and able to offend his enemy as he was to defend himself: and as he was Valiant, if he had been as Wise and Po∣litick, he might have greatly distressed Octavian in all matters concerning Italy: yet the matter was so hand∣led, that at Octavians request Mark Anthony came twice out of the East into Italy to assist him in these Wars. The first time he came to Brundusium, where, not find∣ing Octavian according to appointment, he returned without seeing him, upon some jealousies which grew betwixt them. But Octavian having lost most of his Fleet
in a storme, he sent his intire Friend Mecenas to Mark An∣thony, at whose intreaty he returned into Italy with three hundred Ships and Galleys, giving it out that he came to Caesars aid. And though there were some dif∣ferences between them, yet Octavia so laboured between her Husband and Brother, that she reconciled them, and so they met in the mouth of the River neer Taren∣tum, where Mark Anthony gave to Octavian one hundred and twenty of his Galleys for his Wars, and Octavian gave to him some of the Italian Souldiers, and they re∣newed their Triumvirat for other five years. Which done, Mark Anthony returned to the East to prosecute his Wars against the Parthians, his Wife Octavia and her Children remaining in Rome. Anthony being gone, Octavian resolving to prosecuteWars against him. the Wars against Sextus Pompey with all his Forces, armed two Navies, whereof Agrippa was the Admirall of the one, and himself of the other: He sent also to Lepidus intreaing his aid, who accordingly came and brought with him a Thousand Ships, little and great, and eighty Galleys, wherein he transported five thou∣sand Horse, and twelve Legions of Foot Souldiers. Sextus Pompey hearing what great preparations were made against him, did strongly fortifie all the Sea-coasts of Sicily, and on the frontiers of Africk; neere to Lilibaeum, he placed Plinius, a good Captain with good companies of Souldiers, and his whole Fleet by Sea he drew into the Port of Messina, purposing to mannage his Wars by Sea, having neither experience, nor power to do it by Land, and so he attended the comming of his ene∣mies. Lepidus loosing with his whole Fleet from Africk, was encountered with a tempest, wherein with the losse of a great part of his Navy, he, with the rest landed at Lilybaeum, and took in certaine places there about, but having small judgement, and experience in the Wars, he made a greater noise then did hurt to Pompey. Octavius also being at Sea in a tempest, lost thirty of his
Galleys, besides small Ships, and with much difficul∣ty returned to Italy: and Taurus, who command∣ed the Galleys which Anthony left, landed at Ta∣rentum, though with great losse and danger. Octavian was so grieved at these losses, that he had thoughts of giving over the War for that yeer: but changing his mind, he repaired his Fleets, and ordered Agrippa, with one of them to passe into Sicily, and there to make War both by Sea and Land: and himself following with the o∣ther Fleet did the like. About this time Octavian divorced himself from Scribonia, though he had a Daughter by her called Livia, and then he married Livia Drusilla, Wife to TiberiusCaesar marries Livia. Nero, by whom she had a Son called also Tiberius; here∣upon Tiberius was forced to leave her to please Octavian, though at this time she was with child of a Son. This Livia he loved deerly, and continned with her till his Death. Agrippa assaulted, and took in some places in Sicily, which Pompey hearing of, departed from Messina with one hundred and seventy five Galleys, to relive them, and Agrippa being advertised of his comming, prepa∣red to meet him, his Galleys being almost equall in number, and so they joyned Battell, which for a time seemed to be equall, but at last Agrippa prevailed, and Pompey rerreated in time, his Galleys and Foists with∣drawingPompey beaten. themselves into some Rivers neer at hand, whi∣ther Agrippa with his bigger Vessels could not follow them. In this fight Pompey lost thirty of his Galleys. Agrippa the next day went to a City called Tindaria, thinking to surprise it by reason of intelligence which he had with the Citizens: and Pompey in the night gave secret order to his whole Fleet to retire to Mes∣sina. Octavian in the mean time imbarked a great part of his Army, which he landed in Sicily, and set them on shore under the command of Cornificius, little thinking that Pompey had been so neer, who if he had taken this
opportunity, might have defeated Octavian. But loo∣sing it, Octavian imbarking again, intended to deter∣mine the quarrell by a Battell at Sea, leaving Cornifici∣us with his men fortified on the Land. Then did Pom∣pey saile out of Messina with his whole Fleet, and nei∣ther Parties refusing it, they came to a Battell, in which Octavian was overcome, and all his great Fleet scatteredCaesar beaten. and lost, and himself driven to fly into Italy in a Brigan∣dine, where through many dangers, he at last came to the Army, whereof Mesalla was Generall, and being nothing discouraged with this losse, he presently took order for all that was needfull. To Rome he sent his in∣tire Friend Mecenas, to take order that this newes should breed no alteration there, and then presently sent to Agrippa, the Admirall of his other Fleet, that he should with all speed succour Cornificius and his Ar∣my in Sicily, and to Lepidus he sent to desire him to make his present repaire to the Isle of Lippari, which is between Sicily, and Calabria. His diligence and good order about these affairs was such, that in a short time, by the help of Lepidus, and Agrippa, in dispite of Pompey, he landed all his Forces in Sicily, and joyning with Lepidus, he encamped neer to Messina, where began a most cruel War both by Sea, and Land, wherein the power and sufficiency of Pompey did wonderfully appear, in that he was able to grapple with so potent adversaries. Yet seeing himself oppressed, he sent a challenge to Octavian, that to avoid the further effusion of bloud, he would try it out with him in a Navall fight, so many Ships and Galleys against so many. Ostavian delayed him at the first, but after∣wards they agreed that with three hundred Ships and Galleys on either side, they would meet in such a place, and there fight it out, and accordingly they prepared for the Battell. Octavian leaving Lepidus with his Land Army, em∣barked himself in his Fleet, and Pompey did the like, and so they joyned Battell, which was one of the cruelest
that ever was, considering the Commanders and the strength on either side, where Pompey, after he had per∣formed all the Offices of a good and Valiant Captain, and after the slaughter of multitudes on both sides, was overcome by Octavian, and all his Fleet was burnt andPompey beaten. sunk, or taken, saving sixteen sayl which escaped by flight, and he in one of them, and these entered into the Haven of Messina. And though the City was suf∣ficiently fortified, and Pompey knew that Plinius, hisAnd flies. Generall was comming to his rescue, yet in a dark night he imbarked, and with those sixteen Ships which had escaped, he fled into the East to Mark Anthony, hoping to find relief from him: but after much toile, and manyAnd is slaine. accidents which happened to him, he was slain by one Titius at the commond of Mark Anthony, and in him failed the House and memory of his Father Pompey the Great. In this War Octavian escaped many dangers. For having transported part of his Army into Sicily, andCaesars dangers. sailing back to fetch the rest, he was suddenly supprised by Demochares, and Apolaphanes, two of Pompeys Cap∣taines, from whom he escaped with much difficulty with one only Ship. Then travelling by Land to Rhegiuns, he saw some of Pompeys Galleys neer to the shore, and supposing them to be his own, he went down to the Sea side, where he had like to have been taken by them; and then seeking to escape by unknown passages, he met with a slave of Aemilius Paulus, who remem∣bring that he had proscribed his Master Paulus, Father to this Aemilius, he attempted to kill him. Octavian having obtained this great Victory aforesaid, though with very great losse, he went to Land with the remainder of his Ships and Army, comanding Agrip∣pa to joyn with Lepidus, and to go to Messina, whither Pliny, Pompeys Generall had retired himself. But not thinking good to stand upon his defence, now that his Master was fled, he yeilded himself to Lepidus with all his
Legions: This made Lepidus so proud, that affecting to have Sicily to himself, he contended with Octavian a∣boutHe falls out with Lepidus. it: and entering into the City of Messina, he placed a Garison in it, to hold it for his own use: The like he did in many other places of the Island: and when Octavian came, he desired to speak with him, great∣ly complaining of his proceedings. But in Rule, and Dominion equallity is intollerable, whilst either of them coveted this Isle for himself they fell at variance, and Octavian made his Navy to draw neere to the shore: So that both Armies began to stand upon their guard, the one against the other, and many messages passed between them, yet could they not a∣gree. But Octavian was far better beloved and esteemd by the men of War, for his many vertues, and Nobi∣lity, and for his Name-sake [Julius Caesar,] then the o∣ther, and the Souldiers began to lay all the fault upon Lepidus. Octavian understanding this, laboured secretly to cor∣ruptCaesars Policy. Lepidus his Souldiers, to draw them to himself: and one day, with a great Troop of Horse, he rode neere to Lepidus his Camp, and parlying with his Souldiers, justified himself and laid all the fault upon Lepidus, in∣somuch that many of them began to come over to his side. Lepidus, being informed hereof, caused an AlarmeLepidus overcome. to be given, and commanded his men to sally out a∣gainst Octavian, but when they came forth, most of them joyned with him: so that Lepidus seeing himself in danger of beig forsaken of his whole Army, yeild∣ed himself unto Caesar, and putting off his Generals Robe, he went to his Tent, and submitted to him. Octa∣vian received him as if he had never offended, very courteously, and honourably, but restored him neither to his State nor power, and sent him with a good com∣pany to Rome, without any Office but the High Priest∣hood, which he had held ever since the Death of Julius Caesar: and so this difference was ended without bloudshed.
Octavian now retaining Sicily to himself, and having devested Lepidus of the Triumvirat, he appro∣priated to himself the Province of Africk, and re∣mained Generall of the three Armies, to wit, of Le∣pidus, of Pompey, and of his own; wherein were fourty five Legions of Footmen, and twenty five thou∣sand Horse, all well armed, besides many other Numi∣dians. He had also upon the Sea, six hundred Galleys and many Ships, and Brigandines. And now waited only for an opportunity to fall out with Mark Antho∣ny that he might make himself Lord of all. Yet for the present he paid his Souldiers as well as he could, and gave Coronets, Honours, and Armes to those who had deserved well in these Wars. He then dispered his Ar∣mies, sending them to their own homes, loaden with many faire promises. He also left, and sent Praetors and Governours into Sicily and Africk, and so hastedCaesar re∣tern to Rome. towards Rome, where he was received with Ovation (which was little lesse than a Triumph) with incre∣dible joy and honour: and was so exceedingly be∣loved, that in many places they erected Temples and Altars to him, as to their Gods: and he reformed such things as by reason of the Wars were grown out of order. At this time Mark Anthony, who was in the East, though he had no great successe in his Parthian War, yet was he still of great power, very Rich, and well obeyed in the Provinces of Greece, Asia, and Aegypt, and inAnthony besotted with Cleo∣patra. the rest of his Governments. But he was so besotted with the love, and company of Cleopatra, the Queen of Aegypt, that he thought of nothing but how to satisfie her humour, in the meane time neglecting, and forget∣ting his Wife Octavia, the Sister of Octavian, who in beauty and Wisdom was nothing inferior to Cleo∣patra, and in virtue and goodnesse did far excell her. The Monarchy of the World being thus devided be∣tween these two, the one in the East, the other in the West,
yet, as though each of them had not enough, they studi∣ed each of them to supplant, and destroy the other. Chiefly Octavian, who seeing that Anthony neglectedCaesar seeks a quarrill with him. his Sister, and did not send for her, he continually ad∣vised, and urged her to go to her Husband, that he might have a fair occasion to fall out with him if she were not well intertained: But she, not well understand∣ing his designe, that she might prevent all controver∣sies between her Brother and her Husband, departed from Rome, carrying with her many Jewels, and Pre∣sents which she had gotten together therewith to pre∣sent Mark Anthony. But he, having fixed his▪ heart upon Cleopatra, wrote to her by the way that she should go into Greece, and stay at Athens, till he re∣turned from the Parthian War, yet did he never go a∣gainst them, Cleopatra hindering him. Notwithstanding Octavia sent all those things which she had brought, to her Husband, and all this not prevailing to procure her acceptence, she went full of griefe, to Rome. Then did Octavian begin openly to complain of Mark Anthony, and to declared himself his enemy, and Mark Anthony entered into a League with the King of the Medes, the better to strengthen himself, causing Cleo∣patra (besides the Title of Aegypt) to be called Queen of Syria, Lybia, and Cyprus, and joyntly with her, a Son of hers called Caesarion, of whom Julius Caesar left her with child when he was in Aegypt: and to two Sons which himself had by her, called Ptolomy, and Alexan∣der, he gave the Title of Kings: to Alexander, of Ar∣menia, and Parthia: and to Ptolomy, of Cilicia, and Phoenicia,; hereupon the enmity between Octavian and him greatly encreased: yet was the War deferred be∣cause of other Wars which Octavian had in Illyricum, and Dalmatia. The People of these Countries, seeingCaesars new troubles. the Romans engaged in Civil Wars, rebelled, together with those of Austria, Hungary, and Bavaria, who joy∣ned with them. This War Octavian undertook in his own person, which was very cruel and dangerous:
wherein he was twice wounded, and gave great proof both of his Wisdome and Valour: yet in the end, he not only subdued and tamed Illyricum, but both the Pan∣nonia's, and all the neighbouring Nations which had joy∣ned with them. Then did Octavian return Victorious to Rome, and though a Triumph was granted him, yet would he not Triumph as then, so great was his desire to make War against Mark Anthony, who was no better affected to∣wards him. For he levied Souldiers, procured Friends, and Armies against him, and promised Cleopatra to bring her Tryumphing into Rome. Yea, she requested of him, the Rule and Empire of Rome, and he promis∣ed it her. Matters standing upon these tearmes, Mark Anthony sent his Wife Octavia a Bill of Divorce, according to the custome of those times, commanding her to go out of his House wherein she dwelt in Rome. This, and otherQurrals betwixt them. indignities Octavian imparted to the Senate, complaining against Anthony, and in his Orations to the People, he accused him for that (the second five years of his Triumvirat and League being expired) yet came he not to Rome, neither respecting the authority of the Se∣nate, nor of the People, but held his place, and kept possession of the East and of Greece: and by such suggestions he incensed the People against him. Mark Anthony, on the other side, by Letters and Messengers, complained that Octavian had often broken the Peace, and had cast Sextus Pompey out of Si∣cily, retaining that, and other places which he held, to himself: and that therein he had no respect of him, nor had given him any part thereof: and that he detained the Galleys which he had lent him for that War. As also that he had deprived Lepidus of his Government, and kept all those Provinces, and all the Legions which were his, without imparting any share thereof to him: and that he had divided all the Lands in Italy to his own Souldiers, not assigning any part thereof to
his. Thus the one accused the other, either pretend∣ing that they were forced to undertake the War; where∣as the truth is, it was their Ambition, and insatiable de∣sire to Rule that pricked them forward to it. Hereupon they called diverse Nations to their aid, so as the whole World in a manner, either of one side or other, was in Armes. Those in the West for Octavian, and those inPreparati∣on for War. the East for Anthony: at least, the beast and choisest men of them all. Anthony was first in the Field, and came with a great Army to the famous City of Ephesus in Jonia, a Province of Asia the lesse, whither he had sent for his Navy to transport him into Europe. And he had in readinesse eight hundred Galleys and Ships of burthen: two hundred whereof Cleopatra gave him, together with all the Ammunition, and Victuals necessary for the Fleet: He also took her along with him, contrary to the advise of all those which were of his Councel. Then sailed he to the Isle of Samos, to which he had appoint∣ed all the Kings, Tetrachs, and People which served him in this War, to come by a day perfixed. The Kings that met him there, were Tarcondemus, King of the upper Cilicia: Archalaus, of Cappadocia: Philodel∣phus, of Paphlagonia; Methridates, of Comagena, and o∣thers: Besides those which sent their Forces, as Herod, King of Judaea: Amyntas, of Lyeaonia: and the Kings of Arabia: Of the Medes: and Palemon, King of Pontus with some others. So that he had one hundred thou∣sand well trained Footmen, and twenty two thousand Horse, besides his Navy by Sea, which consisted of five hundred Gallyes, besides Ships of burden which carried his amunition, and Victuals. If Anthony, thus furnished, had presently passed in∣to Italy, he had put Octavian into great hazard: ForAnthonys impru∣dence. then he had not sufficient Forces to have withstood him, nor other necessary Provision for the Wars. But Mark Anthony, delaying the time at Athens, let slip the oper∣tunity, and gave Octavian leasure to provide all things
necessary from Italy, France, Spain, and all other his Provinces, from whence he levied eighty thousand choise Souldiers, and above twenty thousand good Horse: and seeing that Anthony stayed so long, he sent him word, that seeing he had Ships, and other fit provision, he shouldCaesars message. come for Italy, where he staid in the Field to give him Battell, promising to afford him good Ports and Havens, where he might safely land without interruption. To this Anthony answered, that it would be more honour∣ableAntonys answer. if he would determine this quarrel in Person against him, body to body, which he would willingly accept, though he was now old and crazed, and the other young and lusty: and if he liked not of this challenge, he would stay for him with his Army in the Fields of Pharsalia, in the same place where Julius Caesar fought with Cneius Pompey. These Messages passing between them without effect, Anthony drew his Army by Land, and his Navy by Sea towards Italy, and Octavian, imbarked his Legions at Brun∣dusium,They meet. and crossed the Sea to a place called Torma, in the Province of Epire (now called Romania) and after some notable exploits performed, the two Armies drew neer together, as also did the Navies. Octavians Na∣vy consisted of two hundred and fifty Galleys, but better armed, and swifter then were Mark Anthonies, though his were more in number. And Mark Anthony, be∣ing perswaded by Cleopatra (who in this also was the cause of his ruine, thereby to have the better meanes to fly if the Battell should be lost) would needs try his Fortune in a Sea fight, though his Army by Land had a great advantage over the o∣ther. Anthony chose twenty two thousand out of his ArmyThey pre∣pare to fight. and put them aboard his Fleet, and Octavian, who refused not the Sea-fight, made his provision also, and so ship∣ping himself in his Galleys, he committed the charge of his Land Army to Taurus, and Anthony left his Land Forces with Canidius: and in the sight of both the Armies,
these two brave Captaines, which the best Navies in the World, took the Seas, where they fought for no lesse then the Empire of the World. Yet was the Fight de∣ferred for three dayes in dispite of both parties, the Seas rising so high that they could not Govern their Vessels. The fourth Day they came to an encounter at a Cape called Accius, in Epire, not far from the place where their Land Armies stood. The Battell was one of the most cruelest that ever was heard of, and lasted ten hours before Octavian obtainedA Battell. the Victory, though Mark Anthony staid not so long in the fight. For Cleopatra in the greatest fury of the Bat∣tell, fled away in her Galley, whom seventy of her o∣ther Galleys followed: and unfortunate Mark Anthony, who all his life time hitherto had been a valiant and brave Captain, seeing Cleopatra fly, on whom he had fixed hisAntony flies. eyes and heart, shifting out of his own Galley into a ligh∣ter, followed her, without regard of his Armies either by Sea, or Land, and overtaking her, went abord her Galley, wherein he sailed three dayes with out either seeing or speaking with her, being confounded with shame for shewing so much weaknesse, and at last they arrived in the Port of Alexandria in Aegypt. His Navy which he left fighting, though now Head∣lesse and without a Captain, yet continued to make gal∣lantHis mens fidelity. resistance till five thousand of them were slaine: and at last they were overcome, rather for want of a Commander then through any force of an enemy, though Octavians light and swift Galleys were a great help to him: and so he remained Conquerour, and granted life, and pardon to the Conquered, getting in∣to his hands three hundred of their Galleys. In An∣thonies Army by Land there wanted neither courage nor constancy to their Generall, though he had so unwor∣thily deserted them: and therefore they continued se∣ven dayes in their Camp, ready to give Battell, without accepting any composition from the enemy, and they would have staid longer, had not Canidius their Cap∣taine
abused his trust, flying secretly from the Camp to seek Anthony, whereupon, the Army being destitute of a Generall, yeilded to the enemy; who admitted themHis Army yeilds to Caesar. into his own Army, being nineteen Legions of Foot, and twelve thousand Horse. The Senators, Knights, and Noble men, that had served Anthony, many of them he fined in great summs of Money, many he put to death, and some he pardoned. Then did Caesar sail to Athens, and being pacified with the Greeks, he distributed the Corne that was left in the War, to the Cities that were afflicted with Famine, and that were despoiled of their Money, Servants, and Horses, And Anthony being arrived in Aegypt, chose out one good Ship of good burden, and fraught with store of Treasure, and rich Plate of Gold and Silver, and gave it to his Friends, intreating them to divide it amongst them and to shift for themselves, and he wrote to Theo∣philus, the Governour of Corinth, that he would pro∣vide them an hiding place till they might make their Peace with Caesar. And Caesar, of the spoiles of the enemy dedicated ten Ships' to Apollo Actius. Anthony being come into Africk went into a desartAnthony lives pri∣vately. place, wandering up and down, only accompanied with two Friends; and after a while he sent to the Generall of the Army which he had formerly raised for the de∣fence of Aegypt, but he slew his messengers, and said that he would not obey Anthony, whereupon he had thought to have killed himself, but being hindred by his Friends, he went to Alexandria, and after a while he built him an House in the Sea by the Isle of Pharos, and there lived from the Company of all men, saying, That he would live the life of Timon the Man-hater, because he was abused by his Friends, and had experience of their in∣gratitude, and he called this house Timonion. Yet at length he left this place, and went to the Pallace, where he spent his time in Feasting and jollity. And Cleopa∣tra got together diverse sorts of deadly poisons of poi∣sonsome Creatures, whereof she made triall upon many
condemned persons, and amongst all, she liked the biting of the Aspe best: for it brought a sleepinesse without any contraction of the members, or groaning, onely causing a gentle sweating of the face, and a lan∣guishing stupidity of the senses. At Rome many things were decreed in honour of CaesarCaesar highly honoured. for this Victory at Sea: First a Triumph was granted him for Cleopatra: and a Triumphal Arch was erected at Brundusium, and another at Rome. The base of the Juli∣an Temple was adorned with the Beakes of the Shipshe had taken: There were Playes decreed to be kept every fifth year in honour of him: Processions were always to be made on his Birth day, and on the day wherein the newes of his Victory was first brought. That the vestall Virgins, the Senate, with their Wives and Chil∣dren should go and meet him at his returne: that all the Ornaments of Anthony should be demolished and cast down: that his birth day should be accounted unlucky: and that none of his Famely should ever have the forename of Marcus. About this time Anthony and Cleopatra sent Ambassa∣dours to Caesar into Asia. Cleopatra demanded the King∣dom of Aegypt for her Children, and without Anthonies knowledge, sent him a Scepter, Crown, and Chaire, all of Gold, as it were, delivering her Kingdom over to him: and Anthony demanded that he might live a private life at Athens if he might not continue in Aegypt. Caesar accepted of Cleopatra's gifts, accounting them as good Omens: but he would afford no answer to Anthony; and privately he promised impunity and her Kingdom to Cleopatra if she would kill Anthony. They sent also a second Ambassage to Caesar, and Cleopatra promised him a huge masse of money; and Anthony minded him of the former friendship and alliance that was between them, and what acts they had done together: he deli∣vered also to him Terullius, a Senator, and one of Cae∣sars murtherers, whom he put to death▪ he proffered also to kill himself to obtaine security for Cleopatra,
yet Caesar would give him no answer. Anthony and Cleopatra hereupon prepare for War, and Caesar at last marched against them, and sent CorneliusAnthony prepars for War. Gallus before with four Legions, who suddenly seized up Paraetonium, the prime City of Aegypt, toward Ly∣bia. Anthony being informed hereof, marched towards Paraetonium, hoping to draw Gallus his Souldiers to owne him, but when on the contrary he had received great losse both by Sea and Land, he returned to Alexandria. Presently after Caesar took Pelusium, by the Treachery of Cleopatra, who caused Selucus the Governour to deliver it up to him, hoping to draw his love to her, yet did she disown it to Anthony. Cleopatra had storehouses, and Monuments, admira∣ble both for sumptuousnesse and higth, which she had built by the Temple of Isis, and thither she had brought the most precious things of all her Royall Treasure, as Gold, Silver, Emeralds, Pearles, Ebony, Ivory, and Cinnamon, as also store of Lamps, and Flax; whereupon Caesar fearing that she would set fire of them, whereby he should loose such Treasures, he, to pre∣ven despaire, gave her hopes of favour, whilst he marched to wards the City, and she privately forbad the Citizens of Alexandria to sally out against him; where∣as openly she seemed to encourage them to oppose him. Caesar being come before the City, Anthony fallied out,Casar pursuss him into Aegypt. and fought valiantly with him, and routed his Horse, and drave them to the very Camp, of which at his re∣turne, he boasted to Cleopatra, and she to reward him gave him an Headpeice, & Armour, all of Gold. The next Day Anthony dispersed tickets amongst Caesars Souldiers, promising them fifteen hundred Drachmaes a piece if thy would come over to him: These Caesar read to his Souldiers, rendering Anthony more hatefull to them thereby, and they being exceeding angry that their fide∣lity was tempted, fought so valiantly at the next encoun∣ter, that Anthony was driven back out of the Field. Af∣ter
this Anthony challenged Caesar to a single Duel, who answered, That Anthony had many wayes to die. He therefore considering that he could not die any way more honourably than in Battell, resolved to set upon Caesar both by Sea and Land. Many Prodigies fore-ran the bondage of Aegypt. InProdigies. some places it rained bloud. Armies appeared in the Aier. A huge Draggon was seen amongst the Aegyp∣tians which hissed horribly. A Comet appeared, and the Images of the Dead. The Statues seemed to mourne: and Apis lowing heavily, shed some teares. On the Kalends of August, Anthony early in the morn∣ingCleopatras treachery. went down to the Haven to order his Fleet. But Cleopatra caused them to revolt from him, and to joyn with Caesars Fleet: Whilst Anthony beheld this, he was also forsaken by all his Horsemen, who revolted to Cae∣sar, and his Foot were heaten back into the City: where∣upon he cryed out that he was betrayed by Cleopatra. She fearing his anger, fled to her Monument with one Eunuch, and two Maids, and sent Anthony word that she was dead: This he believing, desired his faithfull ser∣vant Erotes, according to his former promise, to kill him: Erotes drew out his Sword as if he would do it, but Anthonies back being towards him, he slew him∣self, who falling at his feet, Anthony said, Noble Erotes, thou hast taught me what to do, but couldst not endure to do it thy selfe; So taking the Sword, he thrust it into his Belly: yet after a while, the bloud stop∣ping,Anthony kills him∣self. he desired those about him to dispatch him, but they all fled, which caused a great tumult. Cleopatra from the top of the Monument perceiving it (for the Gate was so made that being shut it could not be again opened) she sent her Secretary to bring him in∣to the Monument to her: Anthony was carried to the foot of the Monument, and being tyed in a Pulley, was with great paines drawn up by Cleopatra and her two Maids. It was a sad sight to see him thus drawn up, be∣smeared
with bloud, and ready to give up the Ghost. When he came to the top, he stretched forth his hands to Cleopatra, who receiving him in▪ laid him on a bed, tareing her head tire, breast and face with her own hands, so that she was all gore bloud: He laboured to comfort her, and advised her to look to her affaires, and to save her life if she could do it without dis∣honour, and that amongst all Caesars Friends she should most trust Proculeius, and so gave up the Ghost. In the mean time Dercetaeus, one of Anthonies Guard, stole his bloudy Sword, and ran away with it to Caesar, telling him what had happened: Caesar then going into the inmost roome of his Tent, much bewailed Anthony,Casar be∣wailes his Death. his Kinsman and Colleague, and who had been his companion in many Battels, and in the Government of the Empire. Then sending for Proculeius, he com∣manded him by all meanes, if it were possible, to save Cleopatra alive, fearing to loose her Treasures, and that she might adorne his Triumph. Procuieius, and one Epaphroditus coming to the Monument, laboured to per∣swade Cleopotra to come forth: and at last, by a wile, Proculeius seized upon her, yet granted her some dayes to embalme Anthonies Body, after which they brought her into the Pallace, diminishing nothing either of her wonted traine, or honour, that so she might do no mis∣chief to her self. Caesar having Conquered Alexandria; ascended into a Tribunal, and calling the Citizens before him, who for fear fel upon their knees, he told them that he free∣lyCaesar par∣dons the Egytians. pardoned them for their great God Serapis his sake. He also pardoned the rest of the Aegyptians, being un∣willing to put so many men to death, which formerly had done so good service for the Romans. Of those that favoured Anthony, some he put to death, and others he par∣doned either of his own good will, or at the intercession of Friends. And whereas Anthony had with him many Children of Kings, some as Hostages, others upon
false accusations, some of them Caesar sent home, others he joyned together in marriage, and some he kept by him. Comming to view the Tomb of Alexander the Great (which as Strabo reporteth was of Glasse) Caesar put a Crown upon it, and strewed flowers over it, and wor∣shipped it: and being asked whether he would see the Bodies of the Ptolomies? he answered, That he would see a King, not the dead. Neither would he go to see their God Apis, saying, that he used to worship Gods, not Oxen. Many great Kings, and Captains desired to bury the Body of Anthony, but Caesar would not take it from Cleopatra, who buried it splendidly and Magnificent∣ly, and Caesar suffered her to take what Treasures she would for his Funerals. Cleopatra, through her much sor∣row, fell into a Fever, and her Breast was troubled with inflammations, and ulcers, through the blowes which she had given herself, yet by the care of Caesar, and the skill of her Phisician she was recovered: after which she delivered to Caesar an Inventory of all her Treasures: and when Seleucus, one of her Treasures, accused her for concealing some things, she leaped up, and taking him by the haire, she buffetted him soundly; at which Caesar smiling, reproved her, to whom she answered, Is it not a great matter, O Caesar, seeing thou pleasest to comeCleopatras Passion. and visit me in this condition that I am in, that I should be accused by my own Servant? If I have reserved some Jewels, not for my self poor wretch, but that I might Present Octavia, and thy Lyria▪ that by their intercessions I might find the more favour with thee, I hope its no fault. Caesar was glad at this, hoping that now she had a mind to live, but she deceiv∣ed him. Shortly after she wrote a Letter, and sealing it up, she sent it by Epaphroditus to Caesar, wherein she desired to be buried with Anthony▪ then adorning herself in herShe kills herself. best apparel, she set an Aspe to her left Arme, by the biting of which, she presently died as in a slumber. As soon as Caesar had read her Letter, he sent some in all
hast to her to see what was done, who when they came, found Cleopatra dead upon a bed of Gold, in all her roy∣all robes, and her two waiting maides dead at her feet. Casar being informed hereof, admired, and pitied her, and grieved that he was deprived of the chiefe honour of his Triumph; and buried her in the same Sepulcher with Anthony, finishing the Tomb which she had be∣gun: and her waiting Women by his command were buried honourably: she lived thirty nine years and raigned twenty two. Caesar having setled his affairs in Aegypt, passed through Syria into Asia, and from thence into Greece, and so to Rome where he Triumphed three dayes, firstCaesars Triumphs for his Dalmatian, secondly for his Acian, and thirdly for his Aegyptian Victory, which was the most sumptu∣ous, and set forth with the greatest preparations, where∣in was carried in a bed the Image of Cleopatra, and an Aspe biting her Arme. After which Caesar inriched the Temple of his Father Julius with the Aegyptian spoiles: He also consecrated many things to Jupiter Capitolinus, Juno, and Minerva: He brought into the Cell of Jupiter Capi∣tolinus sixteen thousand pound weight of Gold, beside Pearls, and precious stones vallued at fifty Millions of Sesterces, and Rome was so enriched with the Riches of Alexandria that the prizes of every thing were doubled, and Interest fell from ten to four per Cent. Thus Caesar, in the space of about sixteen years, erected the Monarchy, which his Uncle Julius Caesar had begun, and though the meanes whereby he obtained it, are not justifiable, yet afterwards he Governed it justly, and wisely, and was one of the best Princes in the World: Gentle, Just, Mercifull, Liberall, Valiant, and endued with many other Virtues; happy and suc∣cesfullCaesare commen∣dations. in his affaires, and much beloved of all: and the People, and Senate of Rome gave him a new Name, which before that time was never heard of, calling him Caesar Augustus, a Name which they held for ho∣ly, venerable, and of Great Majesty, and which apper∣tained
to the Gods and their Temples, concerning which Ovid thus writes, Sed tamen humanis celebrantur honoribus omnes, Hic socium summo cum Jove nomen habet, &c. Fastorum. All common Persons have their common Fame, But he with Jove enjoyes an equall Name, Of old most sacred things, Augusta were: Temples that Name, and hollowed things do bear: Yea Auguri depends upon this word, And whatsoever more Jove doth afford: Let it enlarge his rule and life, let all Our coast be guarded by a fenced wall. The Senate also by Oath approved all his acts, freed him from all tye of Laws, and that he should have asFlattery. absolute power as the Laws, and that he might do all things, or not do them, according to his pleasure. And now because the Books of the Sybils, through age were worn out, Augustus gave charge to the Priests, with their own hands to write them out, and that no other should read them. Caesar Augustus (for so now we must call him) seeing himself in quiet and without War, caused the Tem∣ple of Janus to be shut, whereas they Religiously ob∣served,Janus Temple shut up. that during the time of War it should stand open: It had never before been shut since the foundati∣on of Rome but twice: Once in the time of Numa Pom∣pilius the second King thereof: and the other after the second Punick War, whe Titus Manlius was Conful▪ Augustus shut this Temple three times, whereof this was the first: And now living in Peace and prosperity, he omitted no part of his care in the Government of the Roman Commonwealth, and the Provinces there: Sending thither Praetors, Pro-consuls, and other Gover∣nors which were excellent men, & fit for those dignities:
and himself gave direction, and was very diligent in all things touching Justice, Customes, Religion, and publick buildings, so as in all things his Rign was happy, peaceable, and quiet dureing all his life. Yet in this so happy a time, some People and Nations still affecting Liberty, laboured to shake off the RomanNew troubles. yoak, and thereby molested, and disquieted the Empire, as the Spaniards, the Inhabitants of Illyricum, and the Pannonians. In Spain the Cantabrians, the Astu∣rians, and part of Gallicia, passing their bounds, began a War against the Empire. Augustus being informed hereof, judging it to be a doubtfull War, and of impor∣tance, commanded the Temple of Janus to be opened, and determined to go against them in person, and to send other Captaines to follow his other Wars. And accordingly Augustus went into Spain, and with three Armies made War against the People aforementioned, which proved very doubtfull, and desperate, and last∣ed five years: and though he suppressed the Cantabrians, and Asturians, and drave them to their Rocks and Moun¦tains, yet before he could wholly subdue them, he was faign to bring a great Navy upon the coast of France to in∣vade the Sea coasts of Cantabria, and Galizia, by which meanes he drave them to such extremities by Land, that they were at last forced to submit to his obedi∣ence. Augustus his great favourite Agrippa served him faith∣fully in this War, whom therefore he married to his Daughter Julia, who was the Widdow of his Nephew Marcellus, the Son of his Sister Octavia. And thus he brought all Spain into subjection to him above two∣hundredSpain sub∣dued. years after the Romans began to make their first Wars there. So as no Province cost Rome more Treasure, more bloud, nor more time than Spain This long and doubtfull War being so happily finish∣ed, Augustus was so pleased with it that he gave
commandment that the Temple of Janus should again be shut, and came to Rome in great Triumph. But this Temple continued not long shut, for some Nations of the Germans rebelled, so that it was again opened. These were the Inhabitants of Noricum, (now Bavaria) and the Pannonia's (now Austria and Hungary) and the two Missia's (now Bulgary, and Servia)▪ as also Illyricum (now Sclavonia) and the Province of Dacia (now Transylvania, and Walachia) and some others, though at severall times. Against these Augustus sent his Generals, and Ar∣mies, amongst which were his Sons in Law, the Sons of Livia, Tiberius Nero, who succeeded him in the Empire, and his Brother Drusus Nero, of whom Livia was with child when Octavian married her: and these two Brothers (though the War lasted somewhat long) vanquished those Nations, and obtained great Victories in Germany, and the confines thereof: especially Tiberi∣us, who in three years space subdued the Pannonia's, Il∣lyricum, and Dalmatia; for which Victories he after∣wards entered into Rome in an Ovation Triumph with great Pomp and honour. Marcus Crassus also over∣came and put to flight the Missians, a People who had never seen the Romans before. And when they were ready to give Battell, they said, Tell us who you are that seek to molest, and disquiet us? We are (said they) Romans, the Lords of Nations, whereupon they replyed, It shall be so if you overcome us; which fell out accordingly. But Augustus obtained not these Victories withoutAugustus his crosses. some crosses. For in these Wars dyed his Son in Law Drusus, who was highly esteemed for his Noble acts, and grear Victories, for the losse of whom both Au∣gustus and Livia were much afflicted: But yet his griefe was greater for the mishap which befell Quintilius Varro, who was Generall of three Legions in Germany, and being carelesse, was surprized by the Almans, and himself, his Legions, and all his Auxiliaries were slaine, and
two Standards with the Emperiall Eagles taken, for which he was so immoderately grieved, that he knocked his Head against the Wall, and cryed out unadvisedly, Quintilius Varro, Give me my Legions again: For certaine moneths also he suffered the haire of his Head and Beard to grow carlesly. And the very day of this unhappy ac∣cident, he did every year observe mournfully with sor∣row and lamentation. Of his Son in Law Drusus there remained two Sons, Germanicus and Claudius, which he had by Antonia, Au∣gustus his Neece, and Daughter of his Sister Octavia and Mark Anthony; of which Claudius was Emperour: And Germanicus married Agrippina, the Daughter of Julia, Augustus his Daughter, by whom he had Caius Caligula, who also was afterwards Emperour. Au∣gustus, after many notable Victories, compelled his enemies at length to sue for Peace, whereupon again he commanded the Temple of Janus to be shut up, and from thenceforth all things succeeded prosperonsly with him. The Subjects of the Empire were now very obedient to him, and all other sent their Ambassadours seeking hisMany Ambassa∣dours come to him. favour, and Friendship. The Indians in the remotest parts of the East; and the Scythians that inhabited the North: and the Parthians an untamed People, sent their Ambassadours to him, giving security to keep the Peace, and restoring to him the Standards and Eagles which were taken when Marcus Crassus was slaine. There came also Kings who were Friends and Subjects to the Roman Empire to do him Homage, laying aside their Ensignes, and Royall Robes: and many of them built Cities to his Name, and for his honour, calling them Caesaria. So did Herod the Great in Palestine: King Juba in Mauritania, and others. The World being thus at Peace and quietnesse, forty and two years being expired since that Augustus, af∣ter the Death of Julius Caesar, came to Rome, in the time of this generall Peace, was the Prince of Peace, our bles∣sed
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ borne in Bethlem, ofOur Sa∣viour Christ borne. the Virgin Mary, Herod being King of Judaea, placed there by the Romans, of whose blessed Life and bitter Death, as also of the order of his Ministery, and Mira∣cles see his Life published by me Anno Christi 1664. At which time their came forth a command from Caesar Augustus that all the Roman World should be tax∣ed, which taxing was first made when Cyrenius was Go∣vernour of Syria. Luck. 2. 1. Out of which a little Book was made by Augustus, in which all the publick Riches were contained: as also how many Citizens, and Allies in Armes: what Navies: How many King∣domes and Provinces: what Tribute, and Customs there were: what necessary charges, and Pensions went out. Shortly after Augustus was called Lord by the People, but he did not only refuse that Title, but forbad it by a publick Edict. Augustus enjoying so great prosperity, was yet no∣thingHis Pru∣dence and Justice. altered in his qualities and behaviour, as often it happens in other Princes; but rather became more mild, just, and affable, more courteous, liberall, and temperate. He established very good Laws, and or∣ders for the reformation of abuses and evill customes. He erected both within and without Rome many stately, and sumptuous Edifices, which made him to boast con∣cerning Rome, Latericiam inveni, Marmoream reliqui: I found it built with Brick, and left it built with Mar∣ble. He bestowed great gifts and favours upon all sorts of People. He delighted the People with Feasts, and Playes of sundry kinds, going himself in person to honour them: He sent Colonies into sundry parts and Provinces: He made excellent good Orders for the Governours, and Government of the whole Empire: The like he did also for the Wars, and Martial Disci∣pline. He shewed himself loving and sociable to his Friends and Familiars, whom he honoured and loved much. Some conspiracies against him which were disco∣vered, he punished without rigour, being more prone to
pardon than to punish. Of murmurings, and defama∣tory Libels he never desired to know the Authours; but answered them with gravity, giving satisfaction, and purging himself from those things which were charged upon him. He was much addicted to, and affected with learning, and himself was very learned and elo∣quent, and compiled some notable Books. He much honoured and rewarded wise and learned men: yet he escaped not the tainture of some vices, growing through humaine frailty, and his great liberty: especially he was much given to Women, though in his diet, apparel,His vices. and ornaments he was very sparing and modest. He gave himself also excessively to play at Dice, and other Games then in use. Thus, though in many things he was very happy, yet, besides his troubles and dangers, he was very unhappy in his Children and Successours: For by hisHis cros∣ses. four Wives to whom he was married, he had only one Daughter called Julia, by his third Wife Scribonia, and she proved exceeding Wanton, and unchast, yea she left nothing undone in luxury, and lust, which was possible for a woman to do or suffer, accounting every thing lawfull that pleased her. Yea, she came to that heigth of laciviousnesse, that she kept her feasting even in the Courts of Justice, abusing those very places with lascivi∣ous acts in which her Father had made Laws against A∣dulterers. Hereupon her Father was so enraged that he could not contain his anger within his own House, but published these things, yea, and communicated them to the Lords of the Senate. He kept himself also a long time from company for very shame: He had thoughts of putting his Daughter to death; but at last he banished her into Pandataria, an Island of Campania, her Mother Scribonia, of her own accord, accompanying her in ba∣nishment, Julia being at this time thirty eight years old. For want of Sons to succed him, Augustus first adopt∣ed his Nephew Marcellus the Son of his Sister Octavia, to whom he first married his Daughter Julia: and Mar∣cellus
dying without issue, he then married her to his Favourite Agrippa: who also left her a Widdow, but yet he had by her three Sons, and two Daughters: Two of these Sons having been adopted by Augustus, died before him: whereupon he adopted the third, who bore his Fathers Name, Agrippa, the which adoption he afterwads revoaked for some displeasure conceived a∣gainst him: and lastly he adopted his Son in Law Tibe∣rius Nero, and made him his Heire, whom also he married to his Daughter Julia, the Widdow of Agrip∣pa: yet this he did more through the importunity of his mother, than for any good liking that he had of him, being sorry that such an one should succeed him. Not long after, the first Letter of his Name that was upon the Inscription of his Statue that was set up in the Capitol, fell down, being struck with a flash of lighten∣ing; whereupon the Southsayers foretold that he shouldA prodi∣gy. live only one hundred dayes after, which was denoted by the letter C. and that he should be Cannonized for a God, because Aesar, which remained of his Name, in the Hetruscan. Tongue signified a God. Hereupon he wrot a Catalogue of his doings, which he appointed to be engraven in Tables of Brasse, and to be set over his Tomb. Things being thus done, Caesar Augustus being now se∣venty six years old, and odd dayes, having raigned above fifty six, and being the best beloved, and the best obeyed Prince in the World, Death overtook him, which was occasioned by a flux which held him for some dayes: and so Augustus died at Nolla in Campania, in the same House and Chamber wherein his Father Octavius died,His Death. being the nineteenth day of August, upon which day he was first made Consul: and in the fifteenth year after the birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ. He was generally lamented, and there was a univer∣sall sorrow, and heavinesse over the whole Empire for him. For he did wisely and uprightly Govern that Mo∣narchy
which he had gotten by force, and fraud. He wasHis Cha∣racter. of a mean stature, of a very good shape, and proportion of Body, of an exceeding fair face mixed with modesty, and gravity: His eyes were very clear and bright: He was very advised in his speeches, and loved to speak quick, and briefly. His last Will and Testament was written a year and four moneths before he died, and left in the custody of the Vestall Virgins. In his life time he was very desirous to reforme abuses in Rome, and in the first place he corrected some disor∣ders in the Senate, whom he reduced to the number of six hundred. He reformed what was amiss in their playes and Games, in the Knights, and in their manner of suing for publick Offices. He set fines upon their Heads that would not marry, and bestowed much up∣on those that had Wives and Children. He gave unto Hor∣tensiusHe was a friend to marriag. twenty five thousand Crowns to procure him to marry, that he might raise up issue to that Noble Fa∣mily of the Hortenses. He ordained that maids should be at least twelve years old before they married: and suffer∣ed them to kill Adulterers that were taken in the fact, and condemned the Sodomites without pardon. He gave order that none should be put in nomination for Offices but such as were vertuous and of good repute. He tied not himself to any certain hours for his meales, but used to eat when he was hungry, and that which he fed upon was neither dainty nor delicate, and he drankHis tem∣perance. little Wine: Instead of a Looking-glasse, he used to read or write whilst his Barber was trimming him. He ne∣ver spake to the Senate or people, or to his Souldiers but what he had first written and premeditated, though he had words at command. He delighted to read good Authours, but gathered no∣thing more then sentences teaching good manners, andHis Pru∣dence. having written them out word for word, he gave Cop∣pies thereof to his familiar Friends, and sent them about to the Governours of Provinces and to the Magistrates of Rome. He was too much adicted to Divinations,
and was marvellously afraid of Thunder and Lightning: Our Saviour Christ being borne, all the Devils Oracles ceased, and the Oracle of Delphes was faigne to confesse it, and ever after remained dumb: whereupon AugustusThe De∣vils Ora∣cles dumb being astonished, caused a great Altar to be set up in the Capitol, with an Inscription, signifying that it was the Altar of the God first born. To prevent the great abuse of Usury which undid many Families, he put into the Ex∣chequer twenty five hundred thousand Crowns, and suffered private men to take of it for three years withoutHis Cha∣rity. Interest, putting in good security for the paying back of the principall: and condemned such usurers as had taken more than the Law allowed to pay four times as much to those who had been oppressed by them. FINIS.
