C6948 99826987 31399
Babel's Builders Unmasking Themselves, As appears by the following PAPER from Barbadoes, (promoted by George For his Party, and subscri∣bed by Eighty two of them.) With a LETTER of G. F's, G. W's, &c. in Answer thereunto; and OBSERVATIONS thereupon. Also, a FALSE PROPHECY of that Lying Prophet, SOLOMON ECCLES. Published for undeceiving the Simple, and in Abhorrence and Dete∣station of the Principle and Practice contained in the said Paper; they being of an evil tendency, and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, or of any sincere-hearted Protestants, or true Christians this day. By T. C. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that pro∣phesy unto you;—they speak a Vision of their own hearts, and not out of the Mouth of the Lord. Jer. 23. 16. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine Iniquity—but seen for thee false Prophecies. Lam. 2. 14. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.
THE PREFACE. THE Intent of the Publication of this ensuing Paper and Letter, &c. is not to reflect or reproach in general the People called Quakers, or in contempt of their Prin∣ciple: for God hath a People among them, many of whom have long been reviled and falsly accused and slandered, because they have conscientiously refused to conform to Prescriptions without Conviction, and are therefore termed Separates, Stubborn, Cains, Judases, Apostats, and what not, that may make them odious to honest People? But this is to manifest the Apostacy and Innova∣sions of a few of them that are of the Foxonian Sect, which love Prehemi∣nence, and term themselves the Body and Elders, and the Church, and presume to give Laws and Orders to others to conform to, or else be account∣ed Infidels, Rebels, &c. when it is evident the cause of their Rage against them (they call Separates, &c.) is, because they will not rebel against the Light in their own Hearts: So it's those that pretend themselves the Church, Elders, &c. that would cause the People to rebel, therefore may be said, they are like Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Also G. F. &c. have manifested themselves to be Lo here's (which Christ commanded should not be gone after) as appears by their Letter herein, produced and pretend∣ed as a disowning that Paper or Judgment, but doth chiefly endeavour to stifle it from going abroad, because it manifests their Confusion. And that G. F.'s &c. Universal Spirit they so often mention, is not that which Peter had, Acts 10. 24. which accepts all that fear God, and work Righteousness, but they hedg up the way to Acceptance with God, and leave no Entrance, but by their Forms of Men and Womens Meetings; contrary to Christ, who said, I am the Way, &c. Also they ascribe that to their Orders and Meetings, which the Scripture ascribes to Christ. And G. F. &c. are so fond of Proselytes to their Orders and Meetings, that notwithstanding this Paper and Judgment is so repugnant to their pre∣tended
Foundation-Principle, yet they give not a word of sharp Reproof to it in all their Letter; as the Apostle to the Galatians, Who hath bewitch∣ed you? but they, instead thereof, give high Commendations: Therefore with sorrow it may be said, as formerly of literal Jerusalem, so now of Je∣rusalem from above, Her Adversaries are the Chief, her Enemies pre∣vail; and Blindness is in part hapned to Israel. This hath the Lord suffered to come to pass, that no Flesh should glory in his sight. Therefore be humbled and fear before Him, for their presuming that they are God's Peo∣ple, and that they have his Wisdom and Power with them, therefore they conclude what they do act as the Body or Church, is of God, and must stand as his Will and Counsel, and for want of his Power (which alone makes his People willing) they fly to their pretended Church-Power and Autho∣rity, and, Saul-like, desire to have Honour before the People; but what Power theirs is, on which they ground their Authority to proceed against the Dissenters from their prescribed Forms of Meetings, &c. hear Isaac Pennington's Judgment, That Power therefore in the Church which spares the Hypocrites (who can easily comply with an outward Con∣formity in Worship without feeling an inward Life and Virtue) but lights heavy on that which is tender and shy in matters of Worship, that is not the true Church-Power, at best but a Counterfeit of the True. The Lord God preserve and deliver us from those of the Spirit of Gehazi, who falsly use the Master's Name, when he never sent them. Even so, Amen, saith T. Crisp.
At a Quarterly Meeting at Ralph Fretwell's House in Barbadoes the 23d day of the tenth Month, 1680. THE sum of the Testimony this day born amounts to this: That there is this day a Choice to be made, viz. Whether Friends will cleave and abide unto the Universal Spirit of the living God, and each give up their whole Concerns; with which Spirit the Faithful have Unity? Or, Whether they will give up unto the Judgment unto their own Particular, or Particulars only, with which the Judgment General of the Meeting have not Urity? After very many Testimonies given, to the further opening of the Question, the Judgment underneath was written, being voluntarily subscribed unto by each Particular of this Meeting, or by their Order their Names were hereunto put. I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and Temporal, unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men and Womens Meetings: as believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my self, or any particulars with which the Men and Women̄s Meetings have not Unity. Subscribed by Men 39. Women 43. Total 82. The Party that sent the above-said, writes thus, viz. This Paper hath been promoted in sundry other Meetings since, and subscribed: some few have re∣fused: in abhorrence whereof other Perswasions have Posted it. Here follows the Letter of G. F. &c. to the Quarterly Meeting at Barbadoes touching the said Paper; whereby it may be seen how, and wherein they own or disown it. NOw dear Friends, if this Order or Judgment should come into the hands of any Apostates or Opposers, they would make ill work with it, and say that we set up an Arbitrary Power over Mens Consciences and Properties, and an implicit Faith and Submission, without inward Conviction What more true?; And that we divided the measure of God in a Particular, from the Uni∣versal Spirit of God in other Particulars in Men and Womens Meet∣ings. And as for subscribing unto such an Order or Judgment, they would say, it was like the Scots Covenant But G. F. G. W. &c. do not say so.; and as tho the measure of the Faith and Spirit of God in themselves, was not agreeable to the Universal Spirit and Faith in the Men and Womens Meetings; and that if they should go from the measure of Faith and Spirit of God in
their own particulaers, and to give up both their Spiritual and Temporal Concerns to the Universal Spirit in Men and Womens Meetings. This would be the way to bring them all from the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars. For how can the Men and Women in the Universal Spirit receive that which is not given up from the Universal Spirit: therefore all must be left to the Universal Spirit in their own mea∣sures thereof; and as for the Stubborn and Wilfull, that are against Men and Wo∣mens Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. And all are to give up to the Universal Spirit of God in their own Particulars, in which Spirit they have Unity and Fellowship without outward Subscription, and to be led by the same Spirit to see their Names written in Heaven in this Gospel-day of Light and Life, and this is and was the Saints Testimony in the New-Covenant of Light and Life, and their Hea∣venly Subcription, which is above all outward Subcriptions both among the Jews and Professors, for one ties them below, and the other ties them above. And for any to say they desire to give up their whole concerns both Spiritual and Temporal unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in Men and Womens Meetings, as believing it to be more according to the universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my self, or any particulars. Now this would make the belief which is in the Light, and the measure of the Spirit in their own particulars, not one with the Universal Spirit in the said Meetings. And as for those that the Men and Womens meetings in the universal Spirit of God have not Unity with, they are erred from their own measures of the Spirit of God; but the Universal Spirit of God has Unity with the least measure now, as it was in the Apo∣stles days, who kept every one to their own measure; which was both the great Rule and Line of the New Creature in the Believers and Saints then, and so with that the U∣niversal Spirit in the Apostles and Elders then had, and now have Unity. And there∣fore, dear Friends, we know your care and tenderness of Truth, and that you aim at the best things Contrary to S. Crisp, who said, The Paper was not only ill worded, but he believed 'twas ill meant, and have had much to do with some loose Spirits there: and therefore our desires are, that you would stop this Paper from going any further, lest some should get Copies of it, and spread amongst bad Spirits; and keep in the general tender Spirit of God, that in love you may answer the measure of the Spirit of God in them that are convinced by it, and in them that err from it. And the Man of God must not strive, but be gentle towards all. And so con∣cluding with the Apostle's tender Advice, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you, Bre∣thren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions amongst you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And Phil. 2. 2, 3. Ful∣fill you my joy; that you be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain-glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves. And 1 Pet. 3. 8. Finally, be all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as Brethren: Be pitiful, be▪ courteous.
Now as for your Subscription to an outward tie, be above such things; forasmuch as You are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ,What higher Testimony can be given to the Saints and Servants of the most high God, than G. F. G. W. & A. P. give the Authors and Subscribers of this wicked and ungodly Paper? written not with Ink, but, with the Spirit of the living God; which Spirit hath given you Life, and will bring you to the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusa∣lem, and to the General Assembly and Church of the first-born, which are written in Heaven, &c. London the 20th of the 4th Month, 1681. Your dear Friends and Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you have Peace, Life, and Salvation. GEORGE FOX. ALEX. PARKER. GEO. WHITEHEAD. Now by this Letter of G. F. &c. they either condemn the aforesaid Paper, or not: if they condemn it, then these three particular Persons condemn the Judgment of the Universal Spirit of God (as they call it) in the Men and Wo∣mens Meetings: if they do not condemn it, then they fall in with them in con∣tradiction to their first Principles. But it is observed, that they rather dislike the wording it, than the matter of it, and would have it believed that those Measures in Particular Persons which Men and Womens Meetings have not Unity with, They are erred from their own Measures of the Spirit of God, and are stubborn, wilful, and the like. Thus do they condemn the conscientious Refusers, and greatly magnify the Authors of the said Paper, and do fully assert their Authority. As for their advising against such Subscriptions, it may be observ'd that their Reasons are, Lest Apostats or Opposers (as they call them) should make ill work with it, and say such and such things as do clearly follow from it. Not that these three Men are against the Substance or Doctrine couched in the sub∣scribed Paper; but they are afraid to give the World (that which some have long seen) such a clear instance of their Apostacy from their former Principles; and their Ambition in having all the Quakers subject to them: for these Men and Womens Meetings must do nothing which does not agree with the Judg∣ment of G. F. and his Elders. Let all sober Men judg of the turnings and twinings that are to be discovered in these two Papers, that from Barbadoes, and that from London; and how inconsistent they are with themselves, and their first Principles. A for the aforesaid Paper from Barbadoes, wherein is exprest the Judgment of the Quarterly Meeting, I take it to be neither according to Scripture, nor the Principles of Truth!
And first, for Scripture; By it you make void the New Covenant, or Law written in the Heart. Of which it is said, Heb. 8. 11. They shall not need to teach every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; but all shall know me from the least to the greatest. And John 2. The Anointing which you have received of Him, abi∣deth in you, you need not any Man to teach you, but as That teacheth, &c. But your Judgment contradicts these, (viz. Give up your whole Concern, Spiritual and Temporal, if required, unto the Spirit of God (as you say) in Men and Womens Meetings, believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in your selves, &c. But the Scripture saith, None know the things of God but the Spirit of God. And how shall any one know what the Meet∣ing requires is according to the Spirit of God, if not by a measure of it in them∣selves? It is also said, If our Heart condemn us, God is greater: but if that con∣demn us not, then have we confidence towards God. For if it please God to reveal any thing to any Particular, and the General deny or disown it, then that Particular must deny that Revelation, and give up to the General. Accord∣ing to this Doctrine I cannot see how the Church should ever be restored out of the Apostacy, unless God first reveal Himself to the General; which seems to be contrary to His way of Manifestation to this very day: For what must John have done with his Revelations and Message to the Asian Churches, Sar∣dis and Laodicea, who had a name to live, and were dead? and said, they were rich, and encreased in Goods, and wanted nothing. They thought well of themselves, and had but few Names left, (not the Generality) yet were mistaken, and Apostatized, and reproved by a Particular. Now, according to your Judg∣ment, John, and the few Names, ought to have given up to the General, and not to his Particular Revelation. Also all the Reformations since the Apostacy, have been begun by Particulars, and opposed and persecuted by the General; therefore it is not, as you say, most agreeing to the Wisdom of God, to cleave to the Judgment of the General, but to the Particular Manifestation; although the Judgment General have not unity therewith. For if a Particular may reprove the General, surely he ought to cleave to his Particular measure for his own Belief and Practice, although the General have not unity therewith: for what is not of Faith, is Sin, much more what is contrary thereto. For if any Meeting require any one to do or believe contrary to their own measure: whoever o∣beys them, becomes therein a Servant to these Persons or Meetings; for it is said, His Servants ye are, whom ye obey. Hereby you call such Men, or Meetings, your Master, or Father, which is contrary to Christs Command. O Friends, strain not at Gnats, and swallow such Camels! which the 82 seem to me to have done. Secondly; That it is against the Principles of Truth, is plain enough, and needs no proof: For by that we are taught to be guided by the manifestation of God's Spirit in our hearts, to speak and act, as thereby instructed, and that the Judgment of Truth through a part of Christ's Members, cannot become
a Bond on others further than their Understandings are illuminated thereby. These two Positions the Judgment aforesaid seems to contradict. Also read E. B. & I. P's Works, or any ancient Friends, they all direct to the Light in our own Hearts or Consciences, as the only and sufficient Guide and Leader▪ But you not only contradict Scripture, and Friends Testimonies, but have given such an unlimited power to Meetings, and not contented to give that to Men which never before was given, since Protestantism, but to Women also, in which the Scripture is silent; or what it says is rather against their having any power or rule, but to be subject. Nay, this unlimited Power was one of the heavy weights in the Pope's Yoke, that made it so uneasy to England in times of Po∣pery; neither can I find that ever in England the Pope, or any Church, gained this Point by all their Stratagems, Wars, &c. as you have granted, (viz. Spi∣rituals and Temporals.) The Christian State is said to be a Glorious Liberty, but your Judgment makes them Slaves and Vassals, and will cause any Un∣derstanding Men to avoid submitting to such a Church that hath so unlimited a Power; 'tis much safer submitting to a Church which makes the Scripture their Rule; for there one may know what they may or can require of one, but yours (after one hath given up Spirituals, &c.) may still require more without mea∣sure, if you pretend or stamp such Requirings with the name of the Universal Spirit of God, as Experience teacheth hath been too frequent. What is become of all our Protesting Fore-Fathers, according to your judgment? for you seem to have acquitted Rome of all their Blood, and yet they had not only the Judg∣ment of the generality of the Church, but of the Magistracy and Law of the Na∣tion against them, which was of greater Authority than your Womens Meetings, for which there is no Precept, Precedent, nor Law, but against. I am ashamed that after all this Light and Knowledg pretended, any should make such a long stride towards Rome, which now is very unseasonable; for if but one more such, I know not but you may both too soon meet and imbrace each other. But if any say we mistake you, you do not give up to the Meeting, but to the Spirit of God, &c. But W. Pen's Address, &c. and other Testimonies, I think answer that, viz. A Man may falsly believe, as the true Church believes: and if I believe only, be∣cause she believes, and not because I am convinced in my own Understanding and Con∣science, my Faith is false, tho hers be true. p. 146. Also E. Burrough saith, Every one is to mind the Teachings of the Spirit of Christ in himself, for to that he is to stand or fall. p. 852. Now that which further aggravates and makes this Judgment the worse, is, that it should come from such persons as G. F. &c. writes, the 82 Subscribers to be, viz▪ manifestly declared the Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of the living God, which Spirit hath given you Life, and will bring you to the City of the living God, &c. High-grown Christians, or G. F. &c. highly mistaken! Thus what you have done seems to be to the dishonour of Truth, and con∣trary to what you once professed: for the sufficiency of light in your own hearts was that Gospel you received, and they preached at first, for all to cleave to,
and abide by, & give up to. But now to give up to the Requirings of others, al∣tho contrary to That; what more like another Gospel? Therefore I beseech you mind the Exhortation, If We, or an Angel from Heaven bring any other Go∣spel, than that you have received, let him be accursed. And avoid all such Questions as these are, and the Propounders thereof, for they are but foolish Questions, yea, worse, and will gender to strife; therefore let no Men (nor Women especially) rule over you, neither receive their Traditions for Doctrines, fur∣ther than manifested by the Truth in your own Hearts, and in the Scriptures. Are ye so foolish as to believe that the Requirings of Men and Womens Meet∣ings, without Scripture-evidence, or manifestation by the Light in your own Hearts, can give you acceptance with God? when as Christ said to them that said they had prophesied, and cast out Devils, and done many mighty works in his Name, Depart, I know you not, &c. And think you such unwarrantable requirings, and implicit giving up, can stand you in stead? Nay, this perswa∣sion cometh not of God, but, as was prophesied in Scripture, Some shall arise from among your selves, speaking perverse things. Remember from whence ye are fallen, and return to the measure of Truth in your own selves, and arise and depart from such Judgments, for fear it be fulfilled on you, as was said against some of old, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God; they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkned: Therefore I pray be not so soon moved and tossed up and down by these windy, Arbitrary and im∣plicit Judgments of Men, who have Mens Persons and Orders in admiration, because of advantage; for such serve not Christ but themselves: but mind the Truth in your own Hearts, and according, as the Apostle said, let every one be fully perswaded in his own mind. You must answer for your selves to God, when it shall be said, Who required these things at your hands? Will any Men or Wo∣men, or outward written Orders, have greater force than Moses and the Prophets? Nay; but as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; this Spirit, Christ said he would send, should be in them. Think me not your Enemy, because I deal plainly with you: For it is in Love to Truth (and abhorrence of Arbitrary and Unlimited Power, and implicit, blind and unacceptable Obedience) that I write to you, desiring the Lord may open your Understandings to know his Will, and what is acceptable; and I recommend you to the Spirit of Grace in your own Hearts, which is able through Faith in Christ, to preserve you blameless and harmless in this crooked Generation; to God alone be Glory and Dominion for ever. Friends, mind the good Sermon of Christ on the Mount; also the sound Exhortations in the Epistles of Paul and Peter, &c. which, as in Faith read and considered, may be helpful and useful to the Man of God in words and works. Forasmuch as the foregoing Letter of G. F. &c. to Barbadoes was produced, as a proof of their denial of the said Paper, I have read it, and observe this
therefrom, That they are more afraid of its Publication, than ashamed of the Matter; and do more object the subscribing the Paper, than owning the Prin∣ciple: as appears by their words, If it should come into the hands of Opposers, &c. they would say we set up Arbitrary Power, and Implicit Faith, &c. which are the plain tendency thereof. But it is needful to know what they mean by the Universal Spirit, being that is so often mentioned. I take it to be the Opinion or Judgment of the Ruling Party (or Foxonians) among the Quakers; because they exclude those who op∣pose their Orders, as being Apostats, and gone out from the Universal Spirit. Al∣so I take this Spirit of theirs not to be the Universal Spirit of God, but a pri∣vate selfish Spirit of their own: Because they say, As for the Stubborn and Wil∣full that are against Men and Womens Meetings, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. Now those they term Stubborn, &c. are not against Men and Womens Meetings, but differ about the Form and Power thereof; they are only against Women having Meetings apart from the Men, when they have no business re∣quires it: not against them in Cities, great Towns and Places where they live near together, and occasions require; but only in Counties where they live remote from each other, and have no business. Also about the Form of Marriages, &c. For these Persons, who they say are against Meetings, do, and are willing to use them on necessary occasions. This is the state of the Diffe∣rence, and the Case of those Persons G. F. &c. terms Apostats, bad Spirits, &c. G. F. &c. say, the Universal Spirit cannot receive that. I shall shew by Testimonies of other Friends, that notwithstanding Differences, yet Christians ought to re∣ceive each other, and walk in Love as Brethren. E. Burrough says, Every one was to walk in that measure of Truth they had at∣tained to; and notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, whether in Cases sub∣stantial or ceremonial, yet they were still to be in love and unity. p. 809. and every one to mind the teachings of the Spirit in himself. Hereby you may see that E. B. could receive in love, and walk in unity with such as differed in Cases substan∣tial: which is as high a Difference as any about Womens Meetings. Also W. Pen says (Address to Protestants, p. 70.) I cannot see how such Men can excuse themselves from great presumption, &c. who deny those Persons to be Mem∣bers of Christ's Church, that in Conscience refuse to subscribe any other draught than their Lord hath given them. Then how can G. F. &c. excuse themselves, who say, Those that be against Womens Meetings the Universal Spirit cannot receive? unless G. F. &c. prove that such Dissenters have had their Form of Womens Meetings from their Lord. G. F. &c. must admit them Members of Christ's Church, or prove they refuse that which the Lord hath given them; or else G. F. &c. are inexcusable, and condemnable by their own owned Testimonies. Also 2 Pet. 1. 5. Give all diligence thereunto: add to Faith, Vertue, Knowledg, Tem∣perance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, Love: for if these things be in you, and abound, ye shall not be unfruitful, nor barren, &c.—Wherefore give all diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure: for if you do these things, ye shall never fail; for an entrance shall be ministred unto you into the everlasting Kingdom. Now I appeal to any sober Christian, Whether all these qualifications may not be in one, and yet conscienciously dissent from a Form of Womens Meetings, as used and ordered by G. F. If it can be, as I am sure it may be, that one may be so qualified and assisted by God's Spirit, as to attain these Vertues expressed by the Apostle Peter, and not comply with G. F's Womens Meetings; then a sure entrance is made into the everlasting Kingdom, and they are received by the Universal Spirit of God: therefore G. F's, &c. Spirit, is not that of God, nor of E. B. or I. P. nor the Spirit of Christ and his Apostles, for they said, Judg not; and that the Tree was known by its Fruit. But G. F. &c. will judge and condemn for evil, and gone from the Spirit, although no evil Fruit ap∣pears. Also, where evil Fruit does appear, as in this their Judgment, yet he can say to them, because they own his Form, and Womens Meetings, We know your care, and that you aim at the best things. So that to give up to his Orders, tho con∣trary to their own measures, is by him termed the best things, and they are mani∣festly declared the Epistle of Christ, writ with the Spirit of the living God, &c. whereby he seems to place more Virtue and Power in conforming to his Orders of Wo∣mens Meetings, than in all Faith and fruits of the Spirit, expressed in the Scrip∣ture. And where-ever G. F. mentions the Universal Spirit, I take him he means the Spirit that set up these Meetings, and persecutes all such who cannot for Conscience sake conform to his Womens Meetings. Now Christ said, Whatever ye would another should do to you, that do unto them: Love thy Neighbour as thy self, &c. This is the Universal Spirit, to desire no more Liberty nor Cha∣rity from another, than one would be content to allow them; and impose no more on another, than one would have them impose on ones self. G. F. &c. once cried for Liberty of Conscience; none must perform any Worship, but taught and led thereinto by the Light in their own Hearts: but having ga∣thered a People to themselves, now (say they) Submit to your Elders: and if not conform to his Orders for Conscience sake, then, Wilful, stubborn, out of the Universal Spirit and Truth, and all that is Good, &c. Also it appears that the Subscribers of the Paper, and G. F. &c. do differ▪ for G. F. &c. say, This would make the belief which is in the Light, and the mea∣sure of the Spirit in their own Particulars, not one with the Universal Spirit, &c. In∣deed so it does: for there be many that believe in the Light, and measure of the Spirit, and its sufficiency, not one with G. F's &c. imposing Spirit, which he calls Universal, but against it; altho the true Universal Spirit of Christ, and in all His, hath now, as formerly, unity with the least measure in any Member, tho for Conscience sake they may be of a differing apprehension in some things; and therefore saith the Apostle, he became all to all, weak, or strong; and said, bear one anothers Burdens, and bear one with another; and therefore he conde∣scended to baptize, and circumcise, to win over, and endeavoured the encrease
of their Faith and Understandings; not blind Conformity before Convince∣ment, but said, If any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal, &c. As their Faith increased, so should their Obedience. The Spirit, the Apostle was in, could re∣ceive those that differed in Judgment and Practice in some things, and did not say they were erred from their measures; and if against Womens Meetings, that the Universal Spirit could not receive them, but were careful not to offend the weak; would deny themselves that which was lawful, for the benefit of the weak: therefore not of G. F's, &c. pretended Universal Spirit. Now G. F. &c. Letter is so jumbled together, seemingly disowning, and yet owning the Paper too: but take them either ways; if they disown, then that manifests a difference; if they own it, then they plainly manifest themselves to be what the Dissenting Party have objected against them many years, (only G. F. &c. have imperiously and wrongfully born them down) viz. that they do in their Actings contradict their Principles and Doctrine; that is, they (as the Pharisees) say, and do not: for it is evident by the whole scope of their Letter, that they only are dissatisfied with the wording of it, and afraid of its publication, knowing they cannot justify it, and that it is that they have been charged for practising these many years, and for this cause many have and do dissent from them, whom they term,—gone from the Power of God, and Opposers of the Order of the Gospel: Setters up of Standards against Truth: and many other names & marks of Sons of Perdition; when they have nothing else against them, only not submitting to G. F.'s Orders without conviction: for G. F, &c. do not at all contradict the Principle, only the Subscribing to it; nor deny but their Meetings have such Power, or ought to be given up to, only would insinuate that it is done from the Universal Spirit of God: and all who do not so believe and act, the Universal Spirit cannot receive, &c. But all that fear God, beware of such Men, who be thus given to change, and believe and act so contrary to what they say and pretend; and notwithstanding the good words of the Apostles in the latter end of G. F's Letter, which be found; and had they kept them∣selves to their primitive Testimony and sound Doctrine, as in Scripture, there had not been this Separation: but having followed the devices of their own Heads, with fair words and speeches beguile the many simple ones; but now their folly is made manifest, and that they have only a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; from such turn away. And it is better to be by such accounted Separates, than for their favour to deprive your selves of the benefit of your own measures of Light and Life, according to which all shall be at last judged. WHat is here afore-wrote, is not as a full Answer or Detection of the Depths of Satan, and Mystery of Iniquity that is couched under, or lies hidden in this Judgment asserted in the Paper from Barbadoes, and the seeming Answer of dislike thereto, given by G. F. &c. but only as a Mite
from one, and according to present ability, to manifest his detestation of all such Principles and Practices. The aforesaid Judgment being publickly read in Gracechurch-street-Meeting, with a Protestation against it, that it would be printed unless disowned by them, and as a stop to the printing of the same, and in vindication of G. F, &c. this Letter or Answer was produced, which in∣deed is more subtilly worded, but denies not, nor disowns the Principles therein, neither refuses nor denies to receive what is in that Judgment given up to them; but I doubt not but that there will be some of greater ability, who shall contribute much more to the uncovering Her who hath long sat as a Queen, and deceived many, yet says, I shall not see Widowhood nor Sorrow; because her Children are many and mighty, through the Power they have received from that Beast on which she rides, and will suffer none to buy nor sell in their Mar∣ket, but who receive her Mark in their Forehead or Hand. For notwithstand∣ing their Judgment is such bare-faced Popery, and so contrary to their pre∣tended Principles, yet observe how G. F. &c. treat the Authors, viz. We know your care and tenderness for Truth, and that you aim at the best things, and are ma∣nifestly declared the Epistle of Christ, written with the Spirit of the living God, which will bring you to the City of the living God, &c. And not one Reproof in all, only Caution for fear of its Publication, &c. But when we consider the Names and Terms which are given to others that profess the same Faith, and agree in all things, except as aforesaid, viz. Something about Womens Meetings, and some Forms of Marriages, &c. they for this consciencious forbearing to pra∣ctise such things as they have no faith in, are termed Apostats, departed from the Truth, such as the Universal Spirit cannot receive, &c. By all which we may see how they would hedg up the way to God, and leave no door to come in by, but G. F's. Forms; nay, not only so, but tie up or limit God, that if he reveales any thing to any particular, he must give up all to the general, and if they have not unity with it, must cleave to the general against that particular measure of knowledg or manifestation in himself; but I think hereby is plainly manifested, that there be such Innovators as W. Rogers hath mentioned in his Book, viz. The Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, which Title C. Taylor says is notorious Blasphemy. But hereby it not only appears that the Title is proper, and no Blasphemy: but also that there was just cause for W. R's▪ writing that Book; for the cause that those, they call Apostates, separate from them, is not out of any dislike or denial of the Principles of Truth (altho they say all that oppose them be gone from Truth) but in opposition to their usurping Authority over Peoples Consciences in Religious Matters, and requiring Con∣formity to their Orders, before, or without conviction. This is the chief cause of all their hard Speeches, and false Accusations against J. S. J. W. and those they term Apostats and Separates, and say, In the Name of the Lord they resolve to give Battel where-ever they meet that Spirit. But others are resolved in the Spirit of the Lamb not to bow to their Image, having seen that they should, as they
have done, manifested themselves to be what they are, even empty Clouds. The Lord open the Understandings of all the Simple-hearted among them, (as I be∣lieve there be many) and preserve all blameless and in love, that they may have no just cause to speak evil of you: but separate from such who have a Form of Godliness, and high swelling Words of Church-Power and Gospel-Order (which they have made to themselves, and are bowing to, even the work of their own hands, as appears by the fore-going and following lying Prophecy of Sol. Eccles) and have your minds girt up towards the Lord, and your Conversation as becomes the Gospel, in Meekness and Fear, not terrified by their high swel∣ling Words; and seeing the evil effects of forsaking the Teaching of the Lord by his Spirit, to give up to Men and Womens Meetings, and Orders, beware lest you be carried away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness; but endeavour to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom alone be Obedience and Glory for ever: which is the desire of my Heart, as for my self, so for all that desire to follow the Lord, and that we may be kept from Idols. AMICUS VERITATI. Here follows the false Prophecy of S. E. taken out of his Letter which he (accompanied with two eminent Friends and Espousers of G. F. and his Party) delivered to J. S. who is still alive, notwithstanding his pre∣dicting the contrary several years ago. O JOHN STORY, what hast thou done against the Lord, & thy own Soul! Thou hast divided the Heritage of God; and the Good Ordinances which Christ Jesus hath set up in his Church hast thou contemned, especially Womens Preachings, and Womens Meetings; therefore will the Lord throw Contempt upon thee; and if thou dost not repent speedily, miserable will be thy end. O how hast thou lost thy Place and Dignity which thou had amongst the Saints in Light! and now to be numbred amongst the Rebellious! If ever thou find mercy with the Lord, go home to the North with speed, and break up the Divided Meetings, which thou and John Wilkinson have been instru∣mental to divide from the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee; and thou art bound with two Bonds: for the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art surely bound in Heaven; and this is the Testimony of Jesus to thee, neither shalt thou be able to get from under these Bonds, till thou art reconcil'd to the Brethren. Hast, O haste to the Work above said, lest the Wrath of the Lord over-take thee before it be done, and be reconciled to GEORGE FOX, who is God's Friend, and the Servant of the living God, and Great Apostle of Jesus Christ.—haste away to the North, for thy time is short, and go quickly thou and thy Brother, if possible you may bring again to the Body of Jesus Christ, those
ye have scattered, lest their Blood be required at your hands—Arise quickly, and be going, for this is the Word of the Lord to thee, viz. That this Year shalt thou (John Story) die, because thou hast Taught Rebellion against the living God. 1st day of the 1st month, 1677. SOLOMON ECCLES. READER, OBserve what this S. E. delivers in the Name of the LORD, viz. 1. Their Womens Preachings and Womens Meetings are the good Ordi∣nances which Christ hath set up in his Church. 2. That being reconcil'd, (i. e. submitting) to G. F. &c. is the only way to find Mercy with the Lord. 3. G. F. &c. (who call themselves the Body of Friends) these he terms the Body of Jesus Christ. 4. That great Lye he delivered as the Word of the Lord, This Year shalt thou (John Story) Die, 1677, who was then very ill, and not like to live, but is now alive and well, altho above three years since. This is here inserted, that all who read or hear it, may fear, and beware of taking the Name of the Lord in vain, as these so frequently do, and of having Mens Persons in Admiration; as this S. E. and others have done by G. F. as appears by the Titles they have given him, viz. One greater than Moses: A Prophet indeed, &c. It was said of Christ, that he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not: So it may be said of this true Pro∣phet, whom John said he was not; but thou shalt feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Milstone upon thee, and altho the World knows him not, yet he is known. Again, they stile G. F. The Father of many Nations, whose Life hath reached through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off; whose being and habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou rules and governs in Righteousness, and thy King∣dom is established in Peace, and the encrease thereof is without end. These, and many more have been given him, which he hath received. Now these things are covered, excused, or justified: but if any conscien∣tiously dissent from their Ceremonies, they shall be persecuted with rigour and false Accusations. O was ever greater Partiality, and respect of Persons ma∣nifested from any pretending to Christianity! And if Trees may be known by their Fruits, these are evil ones: Therefore, dear Friends, come out from a∣mongst them, be ye separate, and touch none of these unclean things: for such Principles and Practices are the Brats of Babylon; and happy shall those be who dash them against the Stones; but, Wo to them that give suck, nourish, or countenance them. THE END.
