D2110 12126132 54610
A True RELATION Of the Progress of the Parlaments Forces in SCOTLAND: Together with the KING'S Wholly abandoning Scotland, and, in de∣spair, with what Forces were left them, march∣ing into England: with part of our Forces in his Van: and my LORD GENERAL following in his Reer. By an Express Messenger to the Council of State. blazon or coat of arms London, Printed by William Du-Gard, by the appointment of the Council of State, Anno Dom. 1651.
A Letter to the Honorable Council of State relating the Progress of the Parlaments Forces in Scotland, together with the King's marching into England, &c. Truly Honorable! HAving taken in Brunteland, and the enemie still continuing with∣in their Trenches at Sterling, it was unanimously concluded a ne∣cessarie and a quick work to en∣deavor the reduction of St John∣stone, which, as I hinted in my last, is a place of great importance lying in the Center of that part of Scotland, which is on the other side Forth. The enemie had put in a Regiment of foot into the Town, not above two hours ere our Van came up, who were boated from the other side of the water into the Town, which made them very high and peremptorie: but our men having broken down the sluces and let out the water out of their graff, their courage fail'd, and the Lord's Daie morning last the Town was surrendred to us upon Brunteland Articles: My Lord went in and view'd it: and wee finde the place everie way an∣swering
our thoughts of it: and that night the whole Armie marcht back towards Brunteland, eleven miles: On Munday last wee came to Brunteland, and that night shipt over our whole foot to Leith, and som of our Hors: and the residue were transporting with all expedition. Lievtenant General Munk is left in Scotland, Commander in chief, and march't from us directly to Sterling the same day wee came to Brunte∣land: and wee are confident hee was the next day possessed of Sterling Town, and doubt not of the hearing a speedie account of the Castle. Wee have left with him of Foot and Hors a field-force of 7 or 8000. Col. Overton is made Governour of St Johnstouns: hee hath with him Colonel Daniel's Regiment of Foot, Col. Aldridges Regiment of Hors, and 500 Dragoons. Tuesdaie in the After∣noon, Major General Lambert, with about 3000 Hors and Dragoons, marcht towards the Enemie, who will with all expedition, get into the Reer of them: and my Lord hath now sent mee with Orders to Maj. Gen. Harrison to get into the Van of them, to stop them what hee can, and do what further hee think's fit in the Counties as he marche's: I am to keep with him till the Armie com up. Both Maj. Generals will march night and daie till they get to them: Yesterday morn∣ing, my Lord General, with the Foot, and Residue of the Hors, march't from Leith: hee will eas himself so of his Train as may expedite his Marches: hee bring's out of Scotland 8 Regiments of Hors, besides Dra∣goons; and 8 or 9 (if Col. West com with him) Re∣giments of Foot. Truly, the Lord hath don wonder∣fully for his poor servants, with you, and here, beyond what wee could have thought; and now the whole
hopes of the Enemie is cooped up in this partie that march't by Carlile yesterdaie. Thursday the Enemie remov'd from Sterling: Friday wee had intelligence thereof, but however wee resolved to go on with our work: after that their marches were in such traverses, that wee knew not well what to conjecture: how∣ever wee resolved after them, assoon as the business of St Johnstouns was over. After their march, they first resolved Middleton should return to keep the North: then that Robert Montgomery (who was on the other side Forth) should go: and this a little put us to thoughts what they will do: but, in conclusion, Robert Mountgomery and all were ordered to follow them. They are not above 11000 men at most; they have very little pro∣vision with them; through all the countrey in Scot∣land wee finde their run-awaies: in a word, nothing was left them but a desperate cure, or a desperate ru∣ine, wth my heart is fill'd in the confident exspectation of. I suppose rational men will put a wide difference between their condition now, & it 2 or 3 moneths ago, when their Armie was in it's strength, Fife, and all the side of that side the water theirs. They have not left in Scotland the face of anie Autoritie or force, or Town garrison'd. The Lord keep his servants hum∣ble, but believing himself, and let everie one bestirr himself, and plaie the man (or rather the Christian) in this hour. I must beg pardon for not writing to anie others, beeing wearie, and the messenger taking hors. My humble and heartie remembrance to Mr Roe. I am, Sir! Your Honor's most cordial and humble Servant, G. Downing. Newcastle, Aug. 7. 1651.
Postscript. The generalitie of the Scots were against the present attempt for England; but the KING told them, hee would march with such as would follow him: hee look's very despondingly, but must adventure all.
A Letter from the Council of State to the Lord Major of London. My Lord! THis letter coming to the Council by a Messenger Express, shewing the progress that our forces have made in Scotland; so, as the Scottish Ar∣mie, which would never bee brought to fight in their own Countrie, have now left the same for lost; and are marched into England. By it you will also see in what posture our forces are in order to them; you will find St Iohn∣stones surrendred to us, and Sterling town before this time in our possession: by all which wee hope that whole work is near a good and happie end; which wee thought good to give your Lordship notice of; and desire you it may bee pub∣lished in the Congregation where your Lordship is, that the people might bee thereby stirred up to give God thanks for the great progress made in Scotland, and for the hopeful Condition our affairs are in for a speedie and good issue. White-Hall August the 10. 1651.  Signed &c.
