D2432 08119093 40888
OBSERVATIONS On the Mineral WATERS OF FRANCE, Made in the ROYAL ACADEMY Of the SCIENCES, By the Sieur DU CLOS, Physician in Or∣dinary to His Most Christian Majesty. Now made English. VERITAS IN PUTEO. LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne, and John Kersey at the Rose in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1684.
THis Treatise being the Product of that Ingenious Assem∣bly, the French Royal Aca∣demy of the Sciences; and Curious both in Sub∣ject and Method, has been thought not unworthy to speak the English Tongue. It may be hop'd, that Our Nation, which is so good Natur'd, as to imi∣tate, sometimes even the Follies of those our Neigh∣bours, may hence be ex∣cited
by a Generous Emula∣tion, to a like, if not greater Performance in this kind. Some may object, what is Here done, arrives not to the Exactness of Cer∣tain Knowledge; which tho granted, hinders not, but such a numerous Col∣lection of faithful Experi∣ments may find a favoura∣ble acceptance. The Subject Matter lies Dark and Deep, in the very Bowels of our Mo∣ther Earth; and the Great Chain of Causes and Ef∣fects is perfectly known, on∣ly to that All-Wise Being, whereon it depends.
OBSERVATIONS On the Mineral WATERS OF FRANCE, Made in the Royal ACADEMY Of the SCIENCES. THe Use of Mineral Waters having deservedly obtain'd a great Esteem and Reputa∣tion for the Cure of many Chronical and Rebellious Diseases; some Physicians have applied them∣selves
to search out, by Experiment, their Nature and Principles; thereby to judge how far they are proper for certain Diseases, and the particular Constitution of the Diseased: While others have been contented to refer themselves to common Opinions foun∣ded on the Observations of some Ef∣fects. This Matter being subordinate to Physical Speculation, the Royal Aca∣demy of the Sciences have determined to employ themselves in the Enquiry of the Qualities of those in this Kingdom, which are most considerable. And till favourable occasion may offer to make Observations at their Springs, they have caused these Waters to be brought from several Provinces, with much care, to examine them in the usual Assemblies of the Naturalists of this Academy. The Resolution to proceed herein has not been taken without much con∣sideration; the Reasons from the ad∣vantage of these Waters for the resto∣ring Health in many Diseases, being counterbalanced by those of the Dif∣ficulty in knowing the Causes of their
Proprieties, which depend particularly upon the Mixtures of certain Substances which meet together in their Passages in the Earth, or in the Cavities and Inter∣stices of Rocks, which are various and many, as Vapours, Juices, Salts, Earths, &c. The greatest part of these substances, wherewith Mineral VVaters are im∣pregnate cannot be discern'd; and the different Mixture which is made of several together, may constitute so great a Number of Kinds of Mineral Waters, wholsom or unwholsom, that it is im∣possible to give any knowledge or de∣termination of them all. The Waters of the same Springs may, at divers times, receive considerable Alterations, either by new Mixtures, or by the Ces∣sation of those which have been for∣merly made. It is not probable that these Waters, called Mineral, should be produced alone by Mineral Vapours condens'd, or that there is in the Earth Mines suf∣ficiently abounding to furnish continual∣ly Vapours capable, being condens'd, to maintain a perpetual Course of these
Waters in Springs which dry not. But it may be that some Mineral Vapours or Exhalations do mix with common VVaters, which traverse the Earths where they meet and are condens'd, and that these VVaters are impregnated with their Qualities, and of some other Volatile Salts not Concrete, elevated in these dry Exhalations or humid Va∣pours. The distinguishing the Quali∣ties of these Exhalations and Vapours is not easy; the Diversity of their Prin∣ciples is very great; the Rencounter of their Mixtures is casual; the Condi∣tions of the Places thro which they pass, and wherein they are retained, are not evident; and the Alterations which they produce in the Waters wherein they insinuate themselves, are not al∣ways very manifest. There is no less difficulty to know and distinguish the Juices which are mixt with Mineral Waters, and parti∣cularly those which receive nothing of Concretion, and which communicate to these Waters no sensible Quality; for these liquid Juices, and wholly Volatile, pass in distillation with the substance of
the Water, and are no otherwise mani∣fest than by Effects which simple Wa∣ter cannot produce. The Juices, which are call'd Con∣crete, because they are Condensable and Resoluble, leave Sediments which render them visible and palpable after the Distillation or Evaporation of the Water wherewith they are mixt. But it is difficult to discern their Kinds and Proprieties, if they have no resemblance to those which are already known, or if they are many conjoin'd. The Salts and Earths are the most sensible and most common substances which mix with the Waters of Springs and Wells. There is almost no sort of Earth which participates not of some Salt dissoluble in the Waters which pass thro it; and the Current of these Waters carries away always some fine Earth. This is found the most mani∣fest in these Waters: But the knowledg of these Salts and Earths mixt in these Waters, is not always so distinct as to de∣termine their Species, and make a cer∣tain judgment of their Properties.
There are few Concrete Salts known to us: There may be many which have no resemblance with Common Salt, Nitre, Alum or Vitriol, which are the four most common Genders of Concrete Mine∣ral Salts. Those whose disposition to∣wards Concretion is not yet compleat∣ed, and which are yet in Embryo or their first Seminal Being, are less distin∣guishable in that State: And those which are more formed, and either al∣ready Concrete, or capable of Con∣cretion, by some called Enix, that is to say, born and come forth out of their Matrixes, have not substances Simple and Homogeneous in each kind. The Salt which goeth under the Name of Common Salt, contains two different Parts mixt together; whereof one is Condens'd and Chrystalliz'd, thro Cold in a Humid, after Evapo∣ration of one part of the Water, where∣in this Salt hath been dissolv'd; the other is not Chrystalliz'd or Condens'd, but by a total Evaporation of the re∣maining Water. The former Part is most Sulphurous, and by its Sulphureity
mixeth with the Sulphurous Salt of Tar∣tar Calcin'd and Dissolv'd by the Moi∣sture of the Air, or in common Water, without trouble and without Coagula∣tion: But the other Part containeth an Acidity which Coagulates in an instant the dissolv'd Salt of Tartar, and all other fixt Salts, Sulphurous and Ni∣trous. Vitriol, which shooteth forth by the Humid Air on Sulphurous Marchasites, hath likewise a Succulent part, Conden∣sable only by a total Evaporation of its Aqueous Humidity, of a taste very Acrimonious, of a consistence Unctuous and easily dissoluble by a humid Air, which Part is much different from that which first is Condensed and Chry∣stallized thro Cold in Water wherein this Vitriol hath been dissolved. These Chrystals are Pure Acid-Austere Vitriol, whence there is precipitated much Mi∣neral Earth by the mixture of Sulphu∣rous and Nitrous Salts, with which the other Part can mix without trouble, ha∣ving not, as the first, this Acidity whereon the Sulphurous Salts may act. The contrary whereof happens to Com∣mon
Salt, whereof the first Part is the most Sulphurous, and the second most Acid. The true Nitres are likewise com∣pos'd of two different Saline Parts; the one more Sulphurous, which is Chry∣stalliz'd thro Cold in a Humid; the other, which remains dissolv'd after this Chrystallization, and which is not condens'd but by a Heat strong enough to drive away all the Dissolvent Humid, is less Sulphurous, and hath a certain Acidity which the other hath not. The first Beings or Embryo's of Mi∣neral Salts are nothing else but Vapours, or Juices Unconcrete, wholly Vapou∣rable, whereof some may be Con∣dens'd, and in part fixt by the force of Fire; or be disengag'd from their Ma∣trixes, and rendred capable of Concre∣tion by the means of the Air; which is observ'd in certain Nitrous, Aluminous and Vitriolic Salts. The Sulphurous Salt which is found in the Calx of cer∣tain hard stones burnt in the Fire, and which is a kind of true Nitre, had its Seminary in these stones Crude; and in this state of its first Being is much dif∣ferent
from what it acquires by the Fire, which from being Cold and Coa∣gulative rendreth it Caustic and Reso∣lutive. The Cold and Coagulative Quality of this stony Salt in its first Be∣ing is manifest enough in the Water of the Springs of some Rocks, which are very Clear and Cold, and which produce Gouts and Cold Scirrhous Tumours in those who ordinarily drink of them. This Seminary of stony Salt is rendred Nitrous, Sulphurous, Caustic and Re∣solutive by the Fire, which is able to exalt it, but not to produce it in the Calcination of these Stones, no more than in burnt Oyster-shells, whereof is also made a Calx, which hath no less of a Sulphurous Salt. This Embryonate Salt in the Chalk-stones is a stony Juice, which mixeth it self with Waters which pass between the Beds and Interstices of these Stones in the Rocks, but is not easily discern'd in the Waters im∣pregnated therewith. The Seminary of Alum and Vitriol is also necessarily in the substances whence these sorts of Salts are drawn▪ by the means of Water, after their Cal∣cination
in the Fire, and Maceration in the open Air. The Fire and the Air which are able to exalt them, cannot produce them. The Seminary of Alum in the Aluminous Stones, and that of Vitriol in Sulphurous Marchasites, are not in this state manifest to our senses; and oftentimes they are not known in Mineral Waters but by some Effects, and that without certainty, because these Effects may be Equivocal. All these Diversities of Mineral Salts, Embryonate, Enix, Chrystalline, Suc∣culent, Sulphurous, not Sulphurous, of the first and of the second Concreti∣on; those also of their Genders, Species, Mixtures, Proportions, Alterations, &c. render the Judgment of the Proprieties of Waters partaking of them very dif∣ficult and uncertain. The fine Earths which also are mixt in Mineral Waters may be of several Kinds difficult to be distinguished: they being of divers Colours; White, Grey, Yellowish, Ruddy, Brown, &c. and also of different Qualities. Some are dissoluble in distill'd Vinaigre, others indissoluble; some may be mel∣ted,
others not, by Fire; wherein also they receive diverse Colours: Some resemble Marle, others Clay, others Chalk, others Bole, some Sand, others Talk, and others Calx; some are pro∣duc'd by the Concretion of certain Juices Saline or Sulphurous, others not; some simply Mineral, others Metallic. The most part of these Species being difficultly distinguish'd when single, are much more when mixt. The simple Infusions of certain Mine∣ral-Sulphurous Earths may remarkably alter the Waters of Wells and Springs, notwithstanding there may remain no Sediment from these Earths after Distil∣lation, as happens in Liquors rendred Emetic by the simple infusion of Anti∣mony. The Hot Mineral Waters may con∣tract some alteration by Sulphurous and Bituminous substances meeting in their Course; for these substances participate of certain subtil Salts, which these Waters may dissolve and carry with them. Some Mineral Waters, Cold or Te∣pid, have a Taste somewhat Aigre,
or Vinous, which is not observ'd in any of those which are remarkably Hot; but this Taste is so easily lost by the least Heat, and even by the Air, that it is difficult to know what produ∣ceth it. This is found not only in Wa∣ters esteem'd Aluminous and Vitriolic, but also in those which are manifestly Nitrous, and which abound in a Sul∣phurous Salt opposite to Acids. The Causes of the Heat of certain Mineral Waters are little known. There is reason to doubt whether there be Subterraneous Fires capable of hea∣ting them, or whether they receive this Heat from the Exhalations of certain Mineral Juices Fermentable, or where∣in there is caused an Effervescence by the mixture of other Juices. All these Difficulties have hindered, these four years, the advantage which the Public might have receiv'd from the Communication of what the Natura∣lists of the Academy have been able to observe on Waters which have been sent them from several Provinces; and which they have examined according to the opportunities which they have had.
The Method which has been taken in this Enquiry was to observe, 1. From what Place they came. 2. In what Time and Disposition of the Air they were taken from their Springs. 3. How long they had been put up in Bottles to be sent away. 4. Whether they were preserv'd in Bottles that were clean and well stopt. 5. Whether they had made any Se∣diment in the Bottles, and of what sort. 6. Whether they were clear or mud∣dy. 7. Whether they had any manifest Scent or Taste. 8. Whether their Weight differ'd remarkably from that of simple and Common Waters. 9. Whether they took any Tincture or Colour by certain Powders, as of Galls, of Oak-leaves, Pomegranate-Bark, of Myrobalans, &c. 10. Whether having been expos'd to the Air, or a little warm'd, they would no more receive the Tincture or Colour.
11. Whether being put to Distilla∣tion by an Alembic in Balneo Mariae, there rose and distill'd first of all some Liquor more subtil than the rest; and whether there were found any difference between the several parts of the same distill'd Water taken apart. 12. Whether in Evaporating or Di∣stilling these Waters by a gentle Heat, there were form'd any Films on the surface of the Water; or whether there were made some Earthy Concretions swimming in the Water in Flakes, or adhering to the sides of the Vessels, or settling to the bottom; and of what sort. 13. Whether after Distillation, or Evaporation, almost total, of these Waters, there was made, in the re∣maining Liquor set in a cold place, any Concretion Saline, Fibrous, Gra∣nous, Leafy, or otherwise figur'd. 14. Whether the Water being total∣ly Evaporated, or Distill'd off to a dri∣ness, left a Sediment, how much, and of what sort. 15. Whether the Earthy Sediments contain'd any Portion of Salt, or not.
16. To what sort of Salts common∣ly known, the Salts of these Waters might be referr'd. 17. Whether they caus'd Mercury sublimate dissolv'd in common Water to precipitate in a Red,Naca∣rate. deep Crimson, or Yellow colour; and whether also they caus'd the Sulphurous Earth of common Vitriol to precipitate, as do the true Nitre of the Ancients, the Na∣tron of Egypt, and fossil Borax, and al∣so the Alcalisate or fixt Sulphurous Salts of Plants. 18. Whether they changed into Green the Colour of Syrup of Violets, and whether they restored the Blue colour of Tournesole made Red by some Alumi∣nous, Vitriolic or other Acid; as the true Nitres do. 19. Whether they made Tournesole to become Red, as do Alum and Vi∣triol. 20. Whether they caus'd the Liquor of the fixt Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, to thicken and coagulate quickly; as doth the Succulent and second Part of Com∣mon Salt, which is not Condensed but by a Total Evaporation of the Water
wherein the Salt hath been dissolved. 21. VVhether they made any change in the VVater of the Dissolutions of Mercury Sublimate and Vitriol, or on the colours of Tournesole and Syrup of Violets, or on the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, any more than Salt-Petre doth, and the first Part of Com∣mon Salt which thro Cold Chrystal∣lizes in a Humid. 22. VVhether the Earthy Sediments of these VVaters, after the Separation of their Salts, were wholly, or in part, Dissoluble in Vinaigre distill'd, and with a certain Effervescence, as do some sort of Chalks, and also the White Earth of the Coagulum of Nitrous and Alkali-Salts, produc'd by the Mixture of the second part of Common Salt. 23. Whether these Earthy Sediments, freed from their Salts, being put in the Fire, and strongly burnt in Crucibles, were fixt; whether they chang'd Co∣lour, were Vitrified or Calcined; or by the means of Reductive Salts there might be drawn forth somewhat Me∣tallic, or not. 24. Whether, if their Salts being
purified, after having been melted by the Fire in Crucibles of good Vitrified Earth, they took any Colours extra∣ordinary. These Methods of examining Mine∣ral Waters brought to the Academy, seem'd very reasonable to give some knowledge of the Properties of them; and even much greater than those who have hitherto writ on that Subject have ever had; who for the most part have grounded their judgment only upon their Effects, which may be referr'd to diverse Causes. According to this Enquiry made upon a great number of Waters from different Springs, as well Hot as Cold, they have observ'd particularly Salts and Earths of divers Qualities, and different Quantities. The Salts which have been Condensed after Distillation, or slow Evaporation, of the Waters which have ben brought to the Academy, may be reduced to two Kinds; the one, to the Nitre of the Ancients, which is a Sulphurous-Mine∣ral Salt, like to the Alkali of Plants; the other to Common Salt considered in one or other of its different parts, or
according to the mixture of both toge∣ther. There hath not appeared in any of these Waters either Alum or true Viitriol. The Waters, as well Hot as Tepid▪ wherein a Nitrous Salt was found, at those of Bourbon l' Archambault, Ner Esvahon, Mont d' Or, Chaudesaigue Vichy, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyr and Sail lez Chasteau Morand. Cold Waters, wherein the true N∣tre hath been observed, are those o Pougues, S. Mion, Pont-Gibault, S. Fl∣ret, Petit Jaude, Jaude au Champ de Pauvres, Beaurepaire, Josse, Vic Carladois, S. Alban, Andabre, Cama∣rets, and Prugniez. The Hot Waters, whose Salt hath resemblance with Common Salt, consi∣dered in Conjunction of its two dif∣ferent Parts, are those of Bourbon Lan∣cy, la Bourboule, Barbazan, Encaus∣se, Balleruc, Bagniéres, and Baré∣ges. The Cold Waters, which also have the like Common Salt, are those of Cap∣vert, and some others which have but a little, as those of Besse, Pons en Sain∣tonge,
la Rocheposay, Vaujour, Cha∣steau-Gontier, Premeau, and Pro∣vins. Likewise the Waters, Cold in their Springs, whose Salt may be referred to that Part of Common Salt, which is Chrystallized thro Cold in a Hu∣mid, are those of la Trauliere, S. Pierre de Clermont, and some few others. But those, whose Salt seems to be like that part of Common Salt, which is condens'd only by a total Evaporati∣on of the Water wherein the Salt hath been dissolved, are in greater number, and more considerable, as those of S. Reyne, Chastelguyon, Availles, Digne, &c. All these Observations of the Diver∣sity of Salts which have been found in these Waters, are General. The two Genders of Salts, Nitrous and Common, whereunto those of these Waters are re∣ferr'd, do each comprehend several Species, whose Specific Differences are not easily comprehended; and the mix∣tures of these several Species together are still in a greater number, and less known.
The Differences observed between the Nitrous Salts of these Waters, by melting them by Fire in small Cruci∣bles, have been these. Some have become Blew, as doth the Salt of Tartar; such were those of Martres de Veyre, Josse, and Sail lez Chasteau Morand. Others took a Green Colour, as doth Salt-Petre Alcaliz'd by Coal; so did those of the Waters of Neris and Esva∣hon. Others became Yellow, as that of the Water of Vichy. Others became Ruddy, as those of the Waters of Chaudesaigues, Mont d' Or, and S. Floret. Others became Tawny, as those of the Waters of Bourbon l' Archambaut, Andabre, and Prugniez. Others became Red, as those of the Waters of Pougues, Jaude, Beaurepaire, and S. Alban. Others became only Greyish, as those of the Waters of Vic le Comte and S. Mion. Others changed not their Colour, as that of the VVaters of Vic en Carladois.
As to the Differences observed be∣tween the Salts which may be referred to the Gender of Common Salt, beside those of the two different Saline sub∣stances before mentioned, whereof the one is Chrystalliz'd thro Cold in a Humid, and which troubleth not the VVater of the Dissolution of Salt of Tartar; and the other, which is not condens'd but by a total Evaporation of the VVater wherein this Salt is dis∣solved, and which in an instant coa∣gulates the Dissolution of the Salt of Tartar, and of true Nitre; there have been remarked few other Particular differences. Those of the VVaters of divers Springs of Bagniéres being melted by Fire in the Crucibles, exhal'd forth Vapours which rendred the Flame of the Coals Blew; and afterwards these Salts being cool'd became of a clear Lacque-Colour. That of the VVater of Balleruc was difficult to melt, and became Greyish: That of the VVater of Availles crac∣kled in the Fire, as doth Sal-Ma∣rine.
That of the VVater of S. Reyne had a certain subtil Acrimony, as that of Sal Armoniac. Others had nothing Par∣ticular which was manifest. There was not had much regard to the Observations of the Forms and Fi∣gures of each of these Salts, as well Ni∣trous as Common, in their Condensa∣tion; because these did vary in the same Salts, according to the manner and degree of the Evaporation of the VVater wherein they were dissolv'd in order to be purified. The Quantity of Salt, as well Ni∣trous as Common, wherewith each of these Mineral VVaters are Impregnated, cannot always be precisely determined; it being not always equal in the VVaters of the same Springs, according to the Constitutions of the Air, wet or dry, and other Accidents. 'Tis sufficient to remark only the Differences of much, little, or middle Quantity. The waters which have been ob∣serv'd to have a remarkable and great Quantity of a Salt like to true Nitre, are those of Bourbon l' Archambaut, Vi∣chy, Mont d' Or, Vic le Comte, Martres
de Veyre, S. Mion, S. Floret, and An∣dabre. Those which have but a Mediocrity, are those of Chaudesaigues, Pougues, Pont-Gibault, S. Alban, Jaude, Beau∣repaire, Josse, Vic en Carladois, and Prugniez. And those which have little are those of Neris, Esvahon, and Sail. The Salt which was found to have a resemblance with Common Salt, was abundant in the VVaters of Balleruc, la Bourboule, Chastelguyon, and Avail∣les. There was a moderate Quantity in those of Bourbon Lancy, Bagniéres, En∣causse, and Digne. But there was very little in those of Baréges, Capvert, Barbazan, la Trau∣liére, Besse, Pons en Saintonge, la Ro∣cheposay, Vaujour, Chasteau-Gontier, S. Reyne, Premeau, Provins, For∣ges, S. Paul de Rouen, Belesme, Hebe∣crevon, Reuilly, la Taille, Menetou, Bourberouge, Vaux, Montigny, Mont∣bosq, and Pont-normand. There was no manifest Salt found in
those of S. Pardoux, Bardon, Chano∣nat, Mans, &c. There hath not been found in any of these VVaters, either Alum or Vitriol discernible in their Sediments. These substances which are reckoned in the rank of Mineral Salts, are Concrete Juices, condens'd by Evaporation of the superabundant Humidity dissolving them. They participate of much Ear∣thiness very fixt, and their Acid Spirits are not separated but by great Heat, which raiseth them with an Augmen∣tation of a Corrosive Acidity. The Taste somewhat Aigre or Vi∣nous must needs proceed from other mixtures than those of Alum or Vitriol, since it is so easily lost in the open Air, when these VVaters are exposed thereto for a few days, and more speedily when they are a little warmed. In the Di∣stillation of these VVaters in Balneo Mariae, this Acidity is neither found in what is distill'd, nor in what remains in the Alembic, where no other Salts are to be found but Nitrous or Common. Only the VVater of Vahls in Dau∣phiné, from a certain Spring called la Do∣minique,
left after Distillation, a cer∣tain Salt having some resemblance to White Vitriol. It was of a Taste a lit∣tle Vitriolic, sweetish, and somewhat Styptic. This Salt, being dissolv'd in Common Water, made the Tincture of Tournesole to become Red, almost as Vitriol doth; and being mixt with the Salt of Tartar, dissolv'd also in Com∣mon Water, became Black as Ink, and precipitated a Black Earth: It being otherwise with White Vitriol, which doth not so much blacken with the Salt of Tartar. It were proper to enquire whether this Water of la Do∣minique be Emetic, as that wherein Vi∣triol is dissolved; and whether it pro∣duceth Effects like to those Waters wherein there is a True, Compleat Vitriol. The Brownish-Red, or Purple Co∣lour, which Acid Mineral Waters take by the Infusion of certain substances, which with Vitriol make Ink, is no cer∣tain sign that Vitriol is the Cause of the Acidity of these Waters; in the most part whereof there is no Vitriol, but a Sulphurous Nitre capable to absorb
Vitriolic and Aluminous Acidities. There were found in certain Sulphu∣rous Earths Vaporous Juices not Co∣agulable, which are Acid, and do seem to be Vitriolic Seminaries, which may in time gain, by degrees, Con∣cretions approaching to those of Vi∣triols. These Vaporous Juices meeting with the Waters of certain Springs, may give them a Vaporous Aci∣dity; but which is easily lost, as those of the Waters of Pougues, S. Mion, Vic le Comte, Vic en Carladois, Martres de Veyre, S. Parise, la Trauliére, Besse, and several others. Tho when these Juices have any beginning of Concre∣tion, there remains some part in the Sediments, after the Distillation of the Water, as in that of la Dominique, which nevertheless lost its Acidity by Heat. As for the Earths which have been found in different Quantity in the Mine∣ral Waters examin'd by the Academy, the particular Distinction of their Species hath been more difficult than that of the Species of their Salts.
There was found much Earth in the Waters of Petit Bain, Bain de la Reyne, and the Spring of la Forgue at Bagniéres, also in those of Barbazan, Encausse, Prugniez, and Chastelguyon. Moderately in those of the Grand Bain, Bain de S. Roch de Bagniéres, Cap∣vert, Andabre, Bourbon l'Archambault, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, S. Flo∣ret, Pierre de Clermont, Jaude, Josse, Digne, Pougues, and Passi. Little in those of the Spring of Salut de Bagniéres, and in those of Baréges, Chaudesaigues, Mont d' Or, Vic en Car∣ladois, S. Mion, Besse, Vernet, Chano∣nat, Pont-Gibault, la Bourboule, S. Al∣ban, Sail, la Trauliére, Vichy, Bourbon Lancy, Neris, Esvahon, Pons en Sain∣tonge, Montendre, la Fonsrouilleuse, la Rocheposay, Vaujour, Chasteau-Gontier, Premeau, S. Reyne, Provins, Mans, and in all those of Normandy. There was no manifest Earth found in the Waters of Balleruc and Availles, the Sediments whereof were wholly Saline. The most part of these Earths were White and Subtil, as those of the Wa∣ters of Bagniéres, Capvert, Barbazan,
Encausse, Andabre, Prugniez, Vic en Carladois, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, Besse, Vernet, Chastelguyon, S. Pierre de Clermont, Jaude, Pont-Gi∣bault, la Bourboule, Josse, S. Alban, Sail, Neris, Esvahon, S. Parise, the two Bourbons, and Pougues. Others were Grey, as those of the Waters of Baréges, Mont d' Or, Chau∣desaigues, S. Floret, Chanonat, Vichy, Bardon, S. Pardoux, la Trauliére, Pons, la Rocheposay, Chasteau-Gontier, S. Paul de Rouen, Belesme, Premeau, and S. Reyne. Others Ruddy, as those of the Waters of Vaujour, Mans, Provins, Forges, and almost all the other Waters of Nor∣mandy. In Evaporation of all these Waters their Earths were in different Forms; some in that of Films swimming a top, as those of the Waters of Capvert, Bar∣bazan, Encausse, Vic en Carladois, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, Vernet, S. Alban, Vichy, Pougues, S. Parise, and Pons. Others in Flakes, as those of the Waters of Baréges, Andabre, Prugniez,
S. Floret, Chanonat, S. Pierre, la Bour∣boule, and Josse. Others in Mucilages, as those of the Waters of Chaudesaigues, Vic en Carla∣dois, Montendre, Vaujour, Mans, and Premeau. Others in Clods, as those of the Wa∣ters of Vic le Comte, and S. Mion. Others in Chaffy form, as those of the Waters of Chastelguyon, Besse, Bar∣don, and S. Pardoux. Others in small sandy Grains, as those of the Waters of la Fonsrou∣illeuse, la Rocheposay, and S. Reyne. Others in a subtil Brown Powder, as those of the Waters of Provins, and al∣most all those of Normandy. There have been also observed some other Differences of these Earths, by putting them in distill'd Vinaigre, and burning them strongly in the Fire. Some were dissolv'd almost totally in distill'd Vinaigre with an Efferves∣cence, as doth the White Earth which results from the Coagulation of Natron, which is a Species of true Nitre; which Coagulation is made in an Instant, by
the Mixture of that part of Common Salt, which is not condens'd in a Hu∣mid. Such were the White Earths of some Nitrous Waters, as those of An∣dabre, Prugniez, Martres de Veyre, S. Mion, S. Floret, Jaude, Pont-Gibault, Josse, Esvahon, and S. Al∣ban. Others were dissolv'd only in part, and but little; as those of the Waters of Chaudesaigues, Vic en Carladois, Vernet, Chastelguyon, la Bourboule, Vichy, and Bourbon l' Archambault. Others were not dissolv'd at all; as those of the Waters of Bagniéres, Pons en Saintonge, and Premeau. Some others did only make the di∣still'd Vinaigre to take a high Tincture of a Hyacinth-Colour, which was lost in a few days by the Precipitation of a little Brown Powder, which seem'd to be Sulphurous, as that of the Waters of Vaujour, la Rocheposay, and S. Paul de Rouen. The Fire hath also discovered certain other Differences of these Earths; for in burning them strongly in the Fire, some have changed Colour, others not,
some have been Calcined, others Vitri∣fied. Of those which were White, and changed Colour by Fire, some have become Dark-Grey, as that of the Wa∣ter of Vernet; others Yellow, as that of the Water of S. Floret; others Ruddy as that of the Water of Prugniez; others Reddish, as that of the Waters of Mont d' Or, Vic le Comte, and S. Alban. Some others have not changed Co∣lour, as that of the Waters of Bagniéres, Baréges, Capvert, Barbazan, Encausse, Chaudesaigues, &c. Others were Calcin'd, as that of the Water of Passi, which was altogether Plastrous. Others were Vitrified, as that of the Water of Andabre. The Sulphurs, and Bitumens, as well Concrete, as Liquid, are not, according to their whole substance, mixt with these Waters, altho there is sometimes found somewhat of them in certain Springs. There is only their Saline part which is dissoluble in Water; that which is Fat & Inflammable being easily separated. And to discover them among
these Waters, it were necessary to make Observations at their Springs and in their Basins. There has been none as yet found in those which have been sent to the Academy. The other Mixtures less sensible have not been yet observed: But till Oppor∣tunity shall offer for their Discovery, if possible; the present Observations of the Qualities, Quantities, Agreements and Differences of Salts and Earths of so great a Number of Waters, which have been examined in the Royal Academy of the Sciences, and whereof we now make Public the Particular History, may be Useful and Serviceable to Phy∣sicians, who advise their Use, the better to make choice of those, which by rea∣son of the mixture of these Mineral Sub∣stances which are more sensible, may sit their Intentions for the restoring of the Health of Persons Diseased.
Particular OBSERVATIONS On the SALTS and EARTHS OF Mineral WATERS, Which have been Examined in the Royal Academy of the Sciences. ALL the Mineral Waters, which have been brought to and examined in the Acade∣my were in their Springs, some Hot, some Tepid, and others Cold: They also differed among themselves according to the Ob∣servation of the Taste; some being somewhat Aigre or Vinous, others
Austere or Ferruginous; others with∣out any Savour very manifest, or In∣sipid. All these sensible Differences, joyn'd to those which have been most remarkable in the Sediment of these Waters after Distillation or Evaporation, and principally in the Participation of certain Salts, whereof some had a resem∣blance to Common Salt, others to the Nitre of the Ancients, have given occasion to distribute them into certain Classes, thereby to dispose in some order the particular History of so great a Number of Observations which have been made in examining such a Diversity of Waters. In the First of these Classes are plac'd the Hot Waters, wherein was found a Salt having resemblance to Common Salt. In the Second are the Hot Waters, wherein was found a Salt resembling the Nitre describ'd by the Ancients. In the Third are the Tepid and In∣sipid Waters, whereof some have a Salt, either Common or Nitrous, and some have not. In the Fourth are the Tepid, some∣what
Aigre or Vinous Waters, which have some participation of the true Nitre. In the Fifth are the Cold, Insipid Waters, whereof some participate of a Salt resembling Common Salt; others in their Sediments discover no Salt. In the Sixth are the Cold Waters of a Ferruginous or Austere Taste. In the Seventh are the Cold Waters, of a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which participate of Common Salt. In the Eighth are the Cold Waters, likewise somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which participate of the true Nitre. There were no Hot Waters found that were Vinous; nor Cold Insipid Wa∣ters that were Nitrous. The First CLASS. Of the Hot Waters, wherein was found a Salt resembling Com∣mon Salt. OF this sort were the Waters of Bour∣bon Lancy, la Bourboule, Esva∣hon,
or Evos, Balleruc, Barbazan, Baré∣ges, Bagniéres, Digne, and Bourbonne. Of the Wa∣ters of Bourbon Lancy, in Bourbon∣nois.The great Number of Springs, the Magnificence of the Baths, the Anti∣quity of the Buildings, and the Care which our Kings have taken since the last Age in the repairing thereof, give to these Waters the Prerogative to be first considered. The Experiments have been made on the Waters of le Lymbe, the Springs of la Reyne, Escures, and S. Leger, brought in the Beginning of the Spring-time. The Water of the great Well which is called le Lymbe, is the warmest in its Spring: It was Limpid and without Taste. Having been slowly distill'd, there was found no difference between what pass'd first, and what last. It left at the bottom of the Cucurbites about 1/640 Sediment, whitish and Salt, from whence was separated 1/10 Earth, the other 9/10 were a pure Salt of the taste of Common Salt, which was condens'd in Grains of a Cubic Figure, like Sal-Marine. This Water continued always Limpid in the Cucurbites during the distillation.
To examine the Quality of this Salt, by comparison with Common Salt, They caus'd to be dissolv'd the one, and the other, apart in four times the Quan∣tity of Common Water, afterwards They mixt them with the like Quantity of Common Water wherein Mercury Sublimate had been dissolv'd; and it was observed that by the mixture of the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe there was produced neither any Trouble, nor Precipitation in the Sublimate Water, as also neither in the dissolution of Com∣mon Salt. The same was observ'd up∣on the Dissolution of Vitriol, which was not troubled either by the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe, or by Common-Salt. These two Salts being put apart into Common Water tinctur'd with Tournesole, changed not the Blew Co∣lour, as do Alum and Vitriol, and all other Acids which make it Red: But they did both alike precipitate the Salt of Lead dissolv'd in Common Water, and filtrated thro Grey Paper. Having thus compared the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe with Common Salt, and observ'd their Resem∣blances
together, They afterwards re∣mark'd the Differences of this Salt of the Water of le Lymbe, from Alum and Vitriol, as well by Sight as Taste, which they found Considerable; that by the Mixture made of these three substances dissolv'd apart in Common Water with the Tincture of Tournesole, the Blew Co∣lour which chang'd into a Clear-Red by the mixture of Alum, and into a Dark-Red by the mixture of Vitriol, chang'd not at all by the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe no more than by Common-Salt. In comparing this Salt of the Wa∣ter of le Lymbe with other Mineral Salts, which are commonly known, it was ob∣served that it fulminated not in the Fire with Combustible substances, as doth Salt-Petre; that the Taste of one had no resemblance with that of the other; that Salt-Petre dissolv'd in Common Water caus'd the Tincture of Tournesole to be∣come somwhat Red; which the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe did not, & that Salt-Pe∣tre dissolv'd in Common Water troubled not the Dissolution of the Salt of Lead, as doth the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe. It was also remark'd that this Salt of
the Water of le Lymbe was different from true Nitre; forasmuch as the true Nitre, such as is the Natron of Egypt, and the Na∣tural Borax, precipitated in an Orange-Colour Mercury Sublimate dissolv'd in Common Water, which the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe did not; which did not so much as trouble this Dissolution of Su∣blimate, as doth Sal-Gemm which renders it a little Milky, and as doth the Salt of Marle which whiteneth it still more. By all these Comparisons of the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe with other known Salts, it was observed that it had resem∣blance only to Sal-Marine, and other like Common Salts which are used for sea∣soning and preservation of Victuals. And because Sal-Gem, and the fixt Salt which is separated from Salt-Petre, in its refining, seem'd like to Common Salt, they examined both one and the other, to see to which of the two the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe had most resemblance, and it was ob∣served that it did more resemble the fixt Salt of Salt-Petre than Sal-Gemm, and that herein it agreed also with Common Salt. Sal-Gemm dissolv'd in Water,
and plac'd to evaporate by a gentle heat, does incrust on the surface of the Water; it troubles and makes White the Limpid Dissolution of Sublimate, it turns into Yellow the Green Tin∣cture of the dissolution of German Vi∣triol; and in a little time is condens'd in long and transparent Fibres in that Vitriol-Water; which the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe did not, as neither did Common Salt, and the fixt Salt of Salt-Petre. There appeared nothing Bituminous or Sulphurous in all this Water, nor in its Sediments. The other Waters of Bourbon Lancy, which were those of the Springs of la Reyne, Escures & S. Leger, & which in their Sources have different Degrees of Heat; the first being most Warm, but less then that of le Lymbe, the second less than the first, and the third only Tepid, were found to have like Sediments and in like proportion. All three had proportio∣nably somewhat less Salt than that of le Lymbe, but otherwise their Salt was alike. In lb V. of these Waters there was almost ʒj of Salt.
The Salt of these Waters being mel∣ted by the Fire in Crucibles became only Grey; and the Earth separated from the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe changing its Colour by the Fire became very Brown, and contracted a certain Brackishness; but that of the Waters of the other Springs changed not. Of the Wa∣ters of la Bourboule, in the Pa∣rish of Mu∣rat de Quairs.The Water of the Bath of the Town, and that of the Spring above the Bath are alike. They were Limpid and manifestly Salt. They were evaporated by a gentle he at, in Earthen Vessels, the better to observe the Changes arising. During their Evaporation, made apart, there were form'd Whitish Flakes, which did swim in the middle of the Liquor, and by degrees were pre∣cipitated to the bottom. The Total of the dry Sediment was 1/170 of the weight of the Water; it was almost all Salt, whence was separa∣ted only 1/20 Greyish Earth, which suffer'd no change by the Fire; but partly dissolv'd in distill'd Vinaigre. The Salt of these Waters was found to
resemble Common Salt; which was ex∣perimented, as before, on the Salts of the Waters of Bourbon Lanoy. The Water of the Spring above the Bath, had more Salt, and less Earth than that of the Bath. These Waters were taken in the be∣ginning of the Spring-time. Of the Wa∣ter of Esva∣hon, or Evos, in Combrail. les.The Water of the great Spring of the Baths was very Limpid and Insipid. It left after Evaporation 1/768 White Fibrous Sediment, of a Saline taste, the Salt whereof being separated from its Earth, had a resemblance to Common Salt. It changed not its white Colour by the Fire, and its Earth was found almost all dissolv'd in distill'd Vinai∣gre. This Water was taken in the Spring∣time together with that of the little Spring of the Town; and because the Water of the little Spring was found different from that of the great one of the Baths; the Observations made there∣on are referred to another Class.
Of the Wa∣ter of Bal∣leruc, in Langue∣doc.The Water of the Baths of Balleruc, being sent in the middle of the Summer, was found to be Limpid, but of a disa∣greeable Taste, and somewhat Salt. In Evaporation thereof there were made on the surface of the Water Sa∣line Films; which being finish'd there remain'd 1/128 Salt resembling Com∣mon Salt. It did not precipitate Mer∣cury Sublimate dissolv'd in Common Water, nor Vitriol so dissolv'd, as doth the true Nitre. It caused not the Tin∣cture of Tournesole to become Red, as doth Vitriol and Alum. It fulmi∣nated not upon Burning Coals, as Salt-Petre, but thickn'd the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, as doth the second part of Sal-Marine, which still retaineth a certain Mixture of the first, that hinder∣eth it from Coagulating strongly the Liquor of Salt of Tartar and Alcalies dissolv'd by the Air, or in Common Water. This Salt was not mixt with any Earth, which was separable by its Dis∣solution in Water. Being put in a Crucible on the Fire it was difficult to melt, and became Greyish.
Of the Wa∣ter of Bar∣bazan, in le Commin∣geois.The Water of Barbazan, being ta∣ken in the middle of the Spring-time, was Limpid, and without any Taste ve∣ry manifest. Only it left a certain Roughness upon the Tongue. During Evaporation which was made by a Gentle Heat, there arose white Films, thick, and very like to those made by Quick-lime on the Surface of Water. The Evaporation being finish'd, these Films remain'd dry at the bottom of the Vessels, in their first form. Their weight was 1/566 of that of the Water. They contain'd only about 1/6 Salt, resembling Common-Salt. The Earth which was a sort of White Chalk, receiv'd no change by the Fire. Of the Wa∣ters of Ba∣réges, in la Bigorre.The Water, which was taken up at the two Baths of Baréges about the middle of Summer, and was three Weeks before it came to our hands, smelt of the Fen and Mud. These Waters being evaporated apart had their Surface cover'd with a subtil Greyish Film, & there were little Ruddish Flakes swimming in the middle. They
left very little Sediment, Grey, Leafy, of a Saline Taste; which was but 1/4700 of the whole. The small Quan∣tity of Salt which they contain'd had resemblance to Common Salt consider'd according to the Mixture of its two parts; so that the second, which hath an Acidity, may surpass in Quantity the first, which hath none; for this Salt of the Waters of Baréges troubled and thickned the Dissolution of Salt of Tartar. Of the Wa∣ter of Bag∣niéres in la Bigorre.The Waters of Bagniéres, taken in the middle of the Spring-time, were those of the little Bath, the Spring de la Reyne, the Bath of S. Roch, the great Bath, the Spring de la Forgue, and the Spring de Salut. The Water of the little Bath, which is said to be hot in its Spring, almost to the third Degree, was Limpid and without any manifest Taste. In the Evaporation there were form'd White and Thick Films on the surface of the Water, and the dry Sediment made 1/488 of the weight of the Water whence it was separated. It had 1/3 Salt
like to that of the Water of Baréges. The Earth freed from its Salt was White and very Subtil. It dissolved not in distill'd Vinaigre, and chang'd not in the Fire either its Consistence or Colour. The Water of the Spring de la Reyne, which is said to be no less Hot than that of the little Bath, was very Limpid and without Taste. There were also form'd Films on the Surface of the Water, in the Evapora∣tion. The Sediment was 1/440 con∣taining but 1/4 Salt. The Qualities of the Salt and Earth of this Sediment differ'd nothing from those of the Salt and Earth of the Wa∣ter of the little Bath. The Water of the Bath of S. Roch, which in its Spring is likewise very Hot, was, as the others, very Clear and In∣sipid. In Evaporation there were form'd fewer Films on the Surface than in that of the little Bath, tho there was found more Sediment; for there was 1/3745 whence was drawn 1/5 Salt like to that of the Water of the little Bath,
and that of the Spring de la Reyne. The Earth was also alike. The Water of the great Bath, which is the Hottest, and which is only us'd for Bathing, was likewise without Taste, and very Limpid. In Evaporation there were form'd Films on the Surface, as in that of the little Bath; but its Sediment was found much less: It was only 1/716 which con∣tained not above 1/4 Salt, The Salt and Earth of this Water had the same Qualities with those of the Salt and Earth of the Water of the lit∣tle Bath. The Water of the Spring de la For∣gue, which is said in its Source to be Hot in the first Degree, and fit to drink, was also very Limpid and Insi∣pid. In Evaporation its Surface was co∣vered with Films like to those on the Water of the Spring de la Reyne. The Sediment remaining in form of a White Earth was 1/419, wherein was found somewhat more than 1/4 Salt, nothing different from that of the Water of the Spring de la Reyne: Their Earths were also alike.
The Water of the Spring de Salut, which is also proper for drinking, was, as the precedent, without Taste and very Clear. There were form'd on its surface very few Films during Evaporation, and it left very little Sediment, amoun∣ting to no more than 1/1600, which was almost nothing but a Salt re∣sembling the other Salts of these Wa∣ters. These Salts having been put apart in Crucibles on the Fire, to be melted, exhal'd some Spirits which made the Flame of the Coals of a Blew Colour; and being melted and cool'd, were found colour'd with a Redness of Clear Lacque, except the Salt of the Water of the Bath of S. Roch, which was onely Greyish. Of the Wa∣ter of Digne, in Provence.The Water of the Baths of Digne, being taken in the middle of the Sum∣mer, had a little Saltness, which never∣theless rendred it not disagreeable to the Taste, and was very Limpid. In its Sediment after Evaporation was found a Pure White Salt, resem∣bling
Common-Salt, the Weight whereof was 1/270 of the Weight of the Water. This Salt caus'd the Liquor of the Salt of Tartar dissolv'd by the Humid Air to Coagulate in an instant; as doth that part of Sal-Marine which is not Condens'd, but by a Heat which cau∣seth all the Humidity to evaporate that keeps it in a Liquid Consistence, after the Chrystallization of the other part thro Cold. Of the Water of Bourbon∣ne in Cham∣pagne.The Water of the Baths of Bourbon∣ne, taken in the Month of August, was of a Tast somewhat Saline: After Eva∣poration there was also found much Salt, to the Quantity of 1/142, without mixture of Earth, and it had resem∣blance to that part of Common Salt which is Condens'd and Chrystalliz'd thro Cold in a Humid; for it troubled not the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dis∣solv'd. There appear'd to us in this Water nothing Bituminous; but there was found somewhat of that kind in the Mud of the Baths whence it was taken;
it being the Propriety of Bitumens, not to mix with Water. If they be Liquid, they swim a top; if they be Thick & Earthy, they settle to the bottom among the Mud, which they make black, and of an ill Scent, by reason of the Sulphurous Salt which abounds in those substances. Some of this Mud being put in a Glass-Retort, and distill'd by a Gradual Heat, there came forth a troubled and whitish Water, of a Scent somewhat Sulphurous; afterwards by force of Fire came over a Water somewhat of a Ruddy Colour, and an Oyl. This Ruddy Water was impregnated with a Volatile Salt, which caus'd Mercury Sublimate dissolv'd in Common-Water to precipitate: It precipitated also the Earth of Vitriol, as Sulphurous Salts do, and made an Effervescence with the Spirit of Salt. What remain'd of this Mud in the Retort after Distillati∣on, retain'd still somewhat of a Sul∣phurous Salt mixt with Common Salt. This Sulphurous Salt was so Fixt in the Earth of this Mud, that it could not be separated but by a very great Fire: Neither is it mixt with the Water of
the Baths, whence this Mud is ta∣ken. The Second CLASS. Of the Hot Waters wherein there was found a Salt resembling Nitre, as describ'd by the An∣cients. OF this sort were the Waters of Bour∣bon l' Archambault, Chaudesaigues, Mont d' Or, Neris, the little Spring of Esvahon, the Baths of Vichy, and Sail lez Chasteau-Morand. Of the Wa∣ter of Bourbon l'Archam∣bault, in Bourbon∣nois.The Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault, taken in the Spring∣time, was Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat Nitrous. During the Evaporation made by a Gentle Heat, to observe its Sediment; there were form'd on its Surface White Films, which afterwards precipitated in Flakes. The whole Sediment was found to be 1/316 of the weight of the
Water, containing 1/10 White Earth and 9/10 Salt. In examining this Salt, it was ob∣serv'd that it had a Lixivial Taste, and was purely Nitrous. The Nitre whereto the Naturalists of the Academy have thought fit to refer the Salt of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archam∣bault, is the true Nitre describ'd by the Ancients; and commonly so call'd, which hath a resemblance to the Fixt Sulphurous Salt of Plants reduc'd into Ashes, and is different from Salt-Petre, which some Chymists take for Nitre. There is a kind of Fossil Nitre, which is taken out of the Earth in Grey, Com∣pact and Hard Lumps. There is also a sort Soft, less Compact, White, which shoots forth upon the Ground in certain parts of Hot Countries. There are also Waters impregnated therewith, as that of Nile. The Natron of Egypt, and the Natural Borax are also Species there∣of, and the Salt of Marle may be re∣ferr'd thereto, which is also a Sulphu∣rous Salt, but which hath more resem∣blance to the Volatile Salt of Plants than to Alcalies. All these Nitrous Salts
have something Sulphurous, which is not found in Salt-Petre, unless Alca∣liz'd, that is to say, reduc'd by the means of the Sulphur of Coals to the Nature and Quality of the Salt of the Herb Kaly. The Fixt Sulphurous Salts of Plants, and the true Nitres do cause Mercury Sublimate dissolv'd in Common Water to precipitate in the Colour of the Rinds of Ripe Oranges: They make Syrup of Violets to turn Green; they restore the Blew Colour of Tournesole, being changed and made Red by Acid Liquors. As also doth the Salt of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault; which Salt-Petre, Common Salt, Vitriol and Alum do not. There was found nothing Bitumi∣nous in this Water, nor any thing of Sulphureity, except the Nitrous part of its Salt. The Earth of its Sediment had nothing of Fat; it dissolv'd in part in distill'd Vinaigre. In lb IV. of this Water there was found ʒjss of Nitrous Salt, which Qua∣tity is sufficient to move the Belly a Purge as do Alcalies.
This great Quantity of true Nitre in the Water of the Warm Springs of Bourbon l' Archambault, may be con∣sidered as the Principal Cause of the Effects of this Water in those who drink thereof. And by the Considera∣tion of the Proprieties of this sort of Salt, which are to heat, dry, attenu∣ate, resolve, deterge, purge, &c. one may judge of the Agreeableness of this Water to the Constitutions of Per∣sons Diseased, and the Quality of their Diseases, in order to advise the Use thereof. Of the Water of Chaude∣saigues, in the High Country of Auvergne.This Water, being taken in the Spring time, was Limpid and Insipid, but of an ill Scent, it being Corrupted in the Bottles. In Evaporation thereof by a Gentle Heat, there was made a Mucilagi∣nous Sediment, like to Frog-spawn, of a Taste somewhat Saline, and which thickned like Gelly of Hartshorn. The whole dry Sedi∣ment amounted only to 1/1139 of the weight of the Water. It contain'd a little more than the Moity of Salt.
The Salt of this Sediment was found to be Nitrous; for it precipitated Mer∣cury Sublimate dissolv'd in Common Water in the Colour of the Rinds of ripe Oranges; as doth the true Nitre, and all Lixivial Salts. It chang'd the Colour of Syrup of Violets into Green, and restored the Blew Colour of Tourne∣sole being chang'd and made strongly Red by Alum-Water. This Salt being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, swell'd like Borax, and became Ruddy. The Earth of this Water receiv'd no Change by the Fire, tho strongly burnt in a Crucible: It dissolv'd in part in distill'd Vinaigre. Of the Wa∣ter of Mont d' Or, in Auvergne.This Water, being sent at the same time with the precedent, was Insipid, but somewhat Troubled. It left after Evaporation 1/284 Whi∣tish and Leafy Sediment, which was almost all Saline, having only 1/9 Earth. This Salt was likewise of the same Quality with the precedent, that is, Ni∣trous. Being put in a Crucible on the
Fire to melt, it swell'd not; it tur∣ned to a dark Red Colour; and its Earth being strongly burnt in the Fire, became Reddish. Of the Wa∣ter of Ne∣ris, in Bourbon∣nois.The Water of the Baths of Neris, taken in the Spring-time, was very Limpid and without Taste. Being evaporated by a most Gentle Heat, what remain'd in a dry Consi∣stence was in so little Quantity, that it made but 1/6272 of the weight of the Water. This Sediment was Saline; and ha∣ving been dissolv'd in thrice as much Common Water, there was separated from it a little Earth, and one part of the Water being gently evaporated, the Salt was condens'd thro Cold in Chry∣stals very like to Salt-Petre refin'd, but they did not fulminate on burning Coals. They caused Mercury Sublimate dis∣solv'd in Common Water to precipitate in an Orange Colour, as doth the true Nitre, and by other Experiments it was also found that this Salt was Nitrous, and had a resemblance to Natural Bo∣rax.
The Sediment of this Water being put on the Fire, without separating any of that little Earth mixt therewith, did melt and contract a Green Colour in the Crucible. Of the Wa∣ter of Esva∣hon, from the little Spring of the Town.This Water was found to differ much from that of the great Spring of the Baths of Esvahon. It left after Evapo∣ration 1/808 very White and Leafy Se∣diment, of a Saline Taste, the Salt whereof did resemble that of the Water of Neris, and also contracted a certain Greenness by the Fire. Of the Wa∣ter of la Grille de Vichy, in Bourbon∣nois.The Waters of Vichy are some Hot, some Tepid, and others Cold. The Hot and Tepid which were examin'd in the Academy, did participate of the true Nitre. They were taken in the Spring-time. The Water of the Grande Grille, which is Warm in its Spring, was Lim∣pid, of a weak Scent, and of a Taste somewhat Nitrous. During Evaporation there were form'd Greyish Films on the Surface of the Water. And at last was made a
Saline Concretion, which being dry, amounted to 1/176 of the weight of the Water; whence was separated 1/12 Grey, Fibrous Earth. The Dissolution of this Salt depura∣ted and freed from its Earth, having been evaporated, the first Concretion was made in Long, White, Transpa∣rent Chrystals like to Salt-Petre, but fulminated not upon burning Coals; and what was condens'd last in little Ruddish Grains had a Lixivial Taste. All this Salt was Nitrous, as that of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Ar∣chambault. The great Quantity of this Nitrous Salt doth necessarily con∣clude this Water more proper for Ba∣thing than Drinking, for in lb iv. of Water there was found of Salt ʒiij. This Salt, having been melted in the Fire, became Yellowish. Its Earth in part dissolv'd in distill'd Vinaigre, and changed not by the Fire. Of the Wa∣ter of Sail lez Cha∣steau-Mo∣raud.The Water of Sail was Limpid, and agreeable to drink, having no Taste. It was taken in the Spring-time. Being evaporated, it left very little
Sédiment, which was Greyish, Leafy, of a Nitrous and Lixivial Taste. The small Quantity of Salt found therein had resemblance to true Nitre. One part of this Sediment, not freed from its Salt, being put in a Crucible on the Fire, did melt and became Blew, as doth Salt of Tartar which hath been a long time melting. The Third CLASS. Of Tepid Insipid Waters, whereof some did partake of a little Salt, others had none. THe Number of Tepid Insipid Waters which have been examined in the Academy, hath not been great. There were only those of Encausse, Premeau, Bardon, and two Springs of Vichy. This Class being not large by reason of the small Number of this Sort of Wa∣ters, the other Differences of these Wa∣ters taken from the Diversity of their Salts, have not been so much considered as to make separate Classes.
Of the Wa∣ter of En∣causse, in le Com∣mingeois.This Water, being taken in the mid∣dle of the Spring-time, was very Lim∣pid, without any Taste very manifest, except that it was a little Austere. During the Evaporation made by a Gentle Heat, the surface of this Water was cover'd with White Films, broad, and thick, like to those which are made in the Dissolution of Quick-lime in Com∣mon Water. The whole Sediment was found to be 1/290 White substance, whence was se∣parated almost 1/3 Salt, which was like to Common Salt, according to the Ex∣periment practis'd on that of the Water of Bourbon Lancy. Being melted by the Fire it became Whiter than before. Of the Wa∣ter of Pre∣meau, in Burgundy near Nuits.This Water, being taken at the end of the Summer, was Limpid and without Taste, agreeable enough to drink; and had a certain Detersive Quality. To find out whether this Water par∣ticipated of any Bituminous Substance of the Scent of Amber, as hath been written, it was distill'd in Glass-Alem∣bics in Balneo Mariae. What came over into the Recipients had no Scent,
and appear'd not different from that which was not put to Distillation. Nei∣ther was there found any Sediment which had either the Consistence or Scent of Amber or Bitumen. It was also evaporated in Earthen Ves∣sels by a Gentle Heat, but what was evaporated had no Scent. During the Operation there was seen to swim in this Water certain little Grey Mucilages, and towards the end the Surface of the Water was cover'd with a Grey, Sandy Film; and the sides of the Vessels were lin'd with a Subtil, Grey Sand. To∣wards the bottom were Mucilages, which had nothing Bituminous. These Mucilages being dried were reduc'd to a Leafy Earth, and the whole Sedi∣ment, as well Leafy as Sandy, was in very little Quantity, and amounted but to 1/5120 of the weight of the Water. In this Sediment there was a little Salt of the Taste and Quality of Com∣mon Salt. The Earth was not Dis∣soluble in Spirit of Vinaigre. Being put on the Fire, and burnt, it became White.
Of the Wa∣ter of Bar∣don, near Moulins. This Water, being taken in the Spring-time, was Limpid and Insipid. Being evaporated it left but very little Greyish, Leafy Earth, without any manifest Salt. Of the Wa∣ter of the Tepid Springs of Vichy, in Bourbon∣nois.The Water of the Great Basin, which is said to be somewhat Acid in its Spring, was found Insipid being brought hither. In Evaporation there were form'd little Films on the surface, and after Evaporation the Sediment was 1/176 of the Weight of the Water; which con∣sisted of a Salt mixt with 1/22 Grey∣ish, Fibrous Earth, which was sepa∣rated from it. This Salt was of a Ni∣trous Quality, as that of the Grille of the same place. Being melted in a Cruci∣ble on the Fire, it took a Tawny Co∣lour. The Water of the little Basins was somewhat Aigre; and resembling that of the great Basin. Its Salt was alike, and in the same Proportion.
The Fourth CLASS. Of Waters Tepid, somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which have some par∣ticipation of true Nitre. OF this sort were the Waters of Vic le Comte, Vic en Carladois, Mar∣tres de Veyre, Jaude, Champ des Pauvres, and Beaurepaire. Of the Wa∣ter of Vic le Comte, in Auverg∣ne.This Water of Vic le Comte, from the Fountain du Cornet, taken in the Spring time, was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre and Vinous. It left no Impression of Dryness on the Tongue. Because the Acidity of this and other like Waters, which receive a Tincture with Galls, Pomegranate-Bark, Myro∣balans, &c. as do those wherein there is Vitriol, may seem to proceed from a participation of some Vitriolic Vapours, it was resolved to see whether by Distil∣lation there could be separated any Spi∣rit different from the rest of the Water:
Wherefore it being put to distil in Glass-Alembics by a very Gentle Heat, there was carefully observ'd whether there did arise any Acrimonious Vapour, like to that which affects the Nose of them who drink those Waters, which are some∣what Aigre and Vinous at their Rise from their Springs. But what did rise and di∣stil from the very beginning had neither Scent nor Taste; and what remain'd in the Alembics, instead of Acidity, had only a little Brackishness, which was augmented toward the End of the Di∣stillation. By these Experiments repeated on other Waters, which were likewise somewhat Aigre, it may be judg'd that the Acidity of these Waters proceeds from some subtil Mineral Vapour not Condensable, or which easily chan∣geth its Acidity into Brackishness. This Water of Vic le Comte was also evaporated in open Vessels, and it was observ'd that during the Evaporation there were form'd on the Surface little Films, which settled to the bottom in the form of little stony Clods. The Evaporation being finish'd there re∣main'd
1/192 White Sediment, whence was drawn almost 2/3 Salt resembling true Nitre. This Salt being melted on the Fire in a Crucible, swelled not, and became only Greyish. The Earth of this Sediment, which was White, being burnt in the Fire, became Reddish. It dissolv'd in part in distil'd Vinaigre. Of the Wa∣ter of Vic, in Carla∣dois.This Water, taken at the same time with the former, was found very Lim∣pid, and of a Taste somewhat Ai∣gre. There were form'd in Evaporation very subtil White Films on the Surface of the Water; towards the end where∣of there was made a White Sediment, Mucilaginous, of a Saline Taste, which being Dry, amounted but to 1/920 of the Weight of the Water; wherein was a Moity of Salt having a Nitrous Quality, which being melted by the Fire, changed not its Colour. The Earth of this Sediment dissolv'd in part in distil'd Vinaigre, and being strongly burnt in the Fire, became Greyish and somewhat Brackish.
Of the Wa∣ter of Mar∣tres de Veyre, in Auvergne.This Water, taken from the Rock of the Baths in the Spring-time, was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Ai∣gre and Vinous; leaving on the Tongue a certain impression of Dryness. There was found in the Bottles a small Quantity of Ruddish Sediment. During Evaporation there were form'd Films, White and very Subtil swimming thereon, which settling fixt themselves round about the Vessels. The Sediment of the whole Water eva∣porated to Dryness was White, of a Sa∣line Taste, and its Quantity amounted to 1/18 of the weight of the Water, whence was drawn almost a Moity of Nitrous Salt. This Salt having been melted on the Fire in a Crucible, be∣came of a Blewish Colour. The Earth being plac'd on the Fire, was strongly burnt, chang'd its Colour very little; but it became Cloddy, and contracted a certain Brackishness. Before and after the Ignition, it dis∣solv'd almost wholly in distil'd Vinai∣gre, with an Effervescence, as doth the Earthy, White and Insipid substance which results from the mixture of the
true Nitre, or of any Alkali, with that part of Common Salt which is not Condens'd thro Cold, and in a Hu∣mid. Of the Wa∣ter of Jaude in Auvergne.There were brought in the Spring-time, Waters from three Springs of Jaude, which are the little Spring of Jaude, that of Champ des Pauvres, and that of Beaure-paire. The Water of the first was very Lim∣pid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vi∣nous, and left a certain Impression of Dryness on the Tongue. In pouring out the Water from the Bottles in order to evaporation, there were found at the bottom some Sedi∣ments of a Feuille-morte Colour, which were separated. During Evaporation the Water was not troubled; nor had therein either Films or Flakes. What remain'd dry, amounted to 1/553 of the weight of the Water; being a Greyish substance con∣taining almost a Moity of Salt which had resemblance to true Nitre, and which being melted on the Fire in a Crucible, took a Red Colour.
The Earth of this Sediment dissolv'd almost wholly in distil'd Vinaigre, with much Effervescence; but chan∣ged not in the Fire. The Water of Champ des Pauvres was altogether like to the former, its Sediments alike, and its Salt also Ni∣trous. That of Beaurepáire had nothing different from the other two. The Salts of these three Waters ha∣ving been melted apart on the Fire in Crucibles, took a Red Colour more or less deep, according to the different de∣gree of the Fire. The Fifth CLASS. Of Cold Insipid Waters, which participate somewhat of a Salt resembling Common Salt, and some others in the Sediments whereof no Salt was found. OF this sort were the Waters of Cap∣vert, Availles, the Spring of Jonas at
Bourbon l' Archambault, S. Reine, Au∣teuil, Biévre, Passy, Chasteau-Gontier, Vaujour, la Rocheposay, Pons, Montendre, la Fronsrouilleuse, Mans, Belesme, and Verberie. Of the Wa∣ter of Capvert, in la Bi∣gorre.This Water, taken in the middle of the Spring-time, was Limpid, with∣out Scent or Taste. In Evaporation by a very Gentle heat, there were form'd on the Sur∣face of the Water White Films, like to those which are made upon Water wherein Marle Calcin'd hath been put. The Sediment of the whole Water eva∣porated was 1/748, whence was separa∣ted 1/4 Salt, resembling Sal-Marine, consi∣dered in the Conjunction of its two dif∣ferent parts. The Earth of the Sediment of this Water lost not its Whiteness in the Fire, and remain'd after a very strong Igni∣tion without any manifest Change. The Salt also being melted in a Cru∣cible on the Fire, changed not its Co∣lour.
Of the Wa∣ter of A∣vailles, in Poictou.This Water taken in the beginning of Autumn was Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat Brackish. In Evaporation there was form'd on the Surface a Film which cover'd it all over, the matter whereof was rough both to the Feeling and Taste, as a very fine Sand, or Cream of Tartar pulveriz'd. There were no Mucilages made therein, and toward the end of the Evaporation the Water became very Brackish: There remain'd at the bot∣tom 1/230 pure Salt, very Acrimonious, partly in great Cubical Grains, like the Salt of Brouage, partly in a solid Mass. This Salt caus'd the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, to coagulate, as doth the second part of Sal-Marine. Being put in a Crucible on the Fire to melt, it crackled as Common Salt; afterwards it exhal'd a Scent of Spirit of Salt; and after having been melted it became Grey. Of the Water of Jonas, at Bourbon l' Archam∣bault.This Water, being taken in the be∣ginning of the Spring-time, was Lim∣pid, and without manifest Taste. Being evaporated it left only 1/812
leafy Sediment, very White, encom∣passed with some Ruddish Earthiness. This Sediment had so little Brackish∣ness, that it was not sensible to the Taste: Nevertheless it thickned the Li∣quor of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, as doth the second part of Sal-Marine. This Earth in part dissolv'd in di∣stil'd Vinaigre, but chang'd not in the Fine. Of the Water of S. Reyne, in Burgun∣dy.This Water, taken in the be∣ginning of Summer, was Limpid, with∣out Scent or Taste, and agreeable to drink. During Evaporation the Surface of the Water was cover'd with a Subtil, Grey Film, Sandy and Insipid; and to∣ward the end it became thicker. The whole being evaporated there was found only 1/1036 Sediment, partly in White Leaves, very fine, and partly in Ruddish Gum, of a very Acute Saline Taste, and almost as Piquant as Sal Armo∣niac. The Salt of this Sediment being dis∣solv'd in Common Water, and mixt with the Tincture of Tournesole, did
not turn it Red, as do Alum and Vitriol; neither did it precipitate Mercury Su∣blimate dissolv'd in Common Water, as doth the true Nitre: But it did coa∣gulate strongly the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, as doth the second part of Sal-Marine; which Salt-Petre and Sal-Gem do not. Of the Wa∣ter of Au∣teuil, near Paris.This Water, being taken in the be∣ginning of the Summer, was Limpid and Insipid. During Evaporation it continued Limpid without Films or Flakes. Toward the end there was se∣parated a very little Sediment, which being dry'd was found to be White' and of a Saline Taste. Its weight was only 1/5500 of the weight of the Water. The Salt of this Sediment had resemblance to that part of Common Salt, which is Chrystalliz'd thro Cold. Of the Water of Passy, near Paris.This Water, being taken at the be∣ginning of Summer, was not very Lim∣pid: It appeared Whitish, and its Taste seem'd to be Plastrous: It left a cer∣tain Roughness and Dryness on the Tongue.
During Evaporation it forc'd out on its Surface certain Little, Grey, Dis∣continued Films; and left 1/700 Sediment, partly in Grey Leaves, partly in Gli∣stering Fibres, like Crude Plaster. This Sediment contain'd 1/7 Salt, which had resemblance to the second part of Sal-Marine, and did coagulate the Salt of Tartar dissolv'd in Common Water. The Earth of this Sediment did Cal∣cine in the Fire like Plaster; and by tempering it with Water, it stuck toge∣ther, as doth burnt Plaster. Of the Wa∣ter of Biévre, near Paris.This Water, which some have judg'd to be Mineral, was very Limpid, and al∣most Insipid. After Evaporation there remain'd so little Sediment, that it scarcely amoun∣ted to 1/7700, of the Weight of the Wa∣ter. It consisted of a White, Leafy Earth, of a Taste very little Brackish, resembling that of Common Salt. Of the Wa∣ter of Cha∣steau Gon∣tier, in Anjou.This Water, likewise by some thought Mineral, was Limpid, and without manifest Taste. The little Sediment which it left, being evaporated, made
but 1/2000 of the Weight of the Water; being a Grey Earth, very Brackish, the Salt whereof resembled both parts of Sal-Marine conjoyn'd. Of the Wa∣ter of Vau∣jour, in the Dutchy of la Valliére.This Water was Limpid and Insipid. Its Sediment, after Evaporation, was in very small Quantity; containing a Rud∣dish Earth, somewhat Brackish, which gathered together in little Ruddish Mu∣cilages swimming in the Water, that to∣ward the end did stick to the sides of the Vessels, and, as it were, lin'd them. The Salt of this Sediment resembled Common Salt, and its Earth being put in a little Crucible on the Fire, did half melt, and was reduc'd into Clods. It dissolv'd somewhat in distil'd Vinai∣gre, which took thence a Hyacinth-Co∣lour; but that afterwards precipitated into a deep Brown. Of the Water of la Roche∣posay, in Touraine.This Water, taken at the beginning of Summer, was Limpid, and without Taste. During Evaporation the Surface was cover'd with a White, Sandy Powder, which also did stick to the sides of the Vessels; there remaining at last but
very little of a Grey, Sandy Earth, of a Taste a little Brackish, which made only about 1/2700 of the weight of the Water. The little Quantity of Salt, which was in this Sediment, might be referr'd to Common Salt. The Earth being put on the Fire became White. It dissolv'd not in distil'd Vinaigre, which nevertheless was charg'd with a Hyacinth Colour; but this Colour was dissipated next Day by the Precipitation of some Powder. Of the Water of Pous, in Saintonge.This Water, being taken at the end of the Summer, was Limpid & without Tast. During Evaporation there were form'd on the Surface little white Films, very Subtil, and, as it were, Sandy. There remain'd a small Quantity of Earthy matter, Greyish, Light, Fi∣brous, of a Taste a little Brackish, which amounted not to so much as 1/3000 of the weight of the Water. The little Salt which was in this Se∣diment, seem'd not different from Com∣mon Salt. The Earth, separated from the Salt, being burnt in the Fire, be∣came
came somewhat White. It was not dis∣soluble in distil'd Vinaigre. Of the Wa∣ter of Mon∣tendre.This Water, taken at the same time with the former, was Limpid, but it scented of the Fen. During Evaporation it continued al∣so Limpid; only there appear'd toward the End very few Grey Mucilages; and there remain'd at last less Sediment than in that of Pons; consisting of a Grey, Brackish Earth, the Salt whereof had resemblance to Common Salt. Of the Water of Fons∣rouilleuse.This Water, being taken at the same time with the other, was Limpid, and likewise scented of the Fen. During Evaporation it continued al∣so Limpid; which being finisht, the sides and bottom of the Vessels were found slightly lin'd with a little Sandy Earth, Dark-Grey, somewhat Brackish, the Quantity whereof was somewhat more than that of the Sediment of the Water of Montendre, and less than that of Pons. The Salt of this Sediment did like∣wise resemble Common Salt.
Of the Wa∣ter of Mans.The Water of the Mineral Spring of Mans, being taken at the beginning of Summer, was Limpid and without Taste. During Evaporation there were form'd Concretions of little Ruddish Mucilages, and the whole being eva∣porated, there remain'd only a little Ruddish Earth, without manifest Brac∣kishness. This Earth having been strongly burnt in the Fire, receiv'd no apparent Change. Of the Wa∣ter of Be∣lesme, in Norman∣dy.This Water, being taken in the Month of July, was Limpid and Insi∣pid. During Evaporation it continued Limpid till towards the end, when there appeared on the Surface of the remainder a certain subtil Film: There remain'd at last very little Grey, Insipid Earth, and somewhat Rugged to the Feeling. Of the Water of Verberie, near Com∣piegne.This Water, taken at the end of June, was Limpid and without Taste. There was found at the bottom of
the Bottles a little Ruddy Sediment, and what was made by Evaporation was in very little Quantity; being a Ruddy, Leafy Earth, and without Brackish∣ness. The Sixth CLASS. Of Cold Waters having a Ferrugi∣nous, or Austere Taste. OF this sort are the Waters of Forges, S. Paul de Rouen, Bour∣berouge, Menitoue, Pont-Normand, Montbosq, Hebecrevon, Provins, A∣pougny, and Vahls. Of the Water of Forges in Norman∣dy.These Waters, being taken at the end of the Summer, had a Taste some∣what Ferruginous. The several Waters of la Source Roy∣ale, la Reynette, la Cardinale, being evaporated apart, did all leave very little Sediment, of a Dark-Ruddy Co∣lour, somewhat Brackish, and what little Salt they had was like Common Salt, and had no resemblance to Vitriol;
their Earths were also Ferruginous. Of the Water of S. Paul de Rouen.This Water, taken toward the end of the Month of June, was Limpid and without any manifest Taste, except a light Roughness, which imprest a Dry∣ness upon the Tongue. There was found at the bottom of the Bottles a small Quantity of Light Sediment, of a Yellowish Colour, inclining towards Ruddy. During Evaporation there were form'd Ruddy Mucilages, which pre∣cipitated to the bottom, and there stuck to the sides of the Vessels a little Rud∣dy Earth, the whole in very little Quan∣tity, and without manifest Brackish∣ness. This Earth, being put into distil'd Vinaigre, made it to take a Hyacinth-Colour, but what gave it that Colour, did afterwards precipitate in a Brown Powder. Of the Wa∣ters of Bourbe∣rouge, Menitoue, Pont-Nor∣mand, near Mortain, in Norman∣dy.These Waters of l' Election de Mor∣tain, in Normandy, were taken in the Spring-time. The Water of Bourbe∣rouge hath receiv'd its Name from the
Ruddy Earth, which is found in its Rivulet resembling Rust of Iron. It was Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat Ferruginous. Being evaporated, it left about the Vessels a slight Ruddish Crust, of a Sa∣line Taste, and at the bottom another small whitish and Insipid Crust. The Waters of Menitoue and Pont-Normand were found altogether like to that of Bourberouge. Of the Water of Montbosq, in l'Electi∣on de Bay∣eux.This Water, being taken in the Spring-time, was very Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat resembling that of Iron. The Sediment which it left after Evaporation was only a little Rud∣dy Earth, of the Taste of Common Salt. Of the Wa∣ter of He∣becrevon, near S Lo, in L'Electi∣on de Ca∣rantan.This Water, being likewise taken in the Spring-time, had a Taste manifestly Ferruginous. In Evaporation it left very little Se∣diment; which was only a little Rud∣dish and Saline Earth, sticking to the sides of the Vessels.
Of the Water of Provins.The Water of Provins from the Fountain de la Croix, being taken at the end of Summer, was troubled, and of a Ferruginous Taste. During Evaporation by a gentle Heat, the Surface was covered with many Grey Films, distinct from one another. There was made a Precipita∣tion of a little subtil Earth, of the Co∣lour of Iron-Rust, which stuck to the sides of the Vessels, which after Evapo∣ration were found lin'd therewith; and above this lining of Rust were the Grey Films. That part of this Red Earth, which stuck uppermost in Circular form, was somwhat Brackish, and grew moist by the Air; and what was lowest to∣ward the bottom of the Vessels, was not Brackish, and did not grow moist. The whole being dry'd and put together weighed only 1/1194. There being pour'd Water upon this Sediment, in order to dissolve the Salt which it contain'd, and the dissolution being filtrated thro Grey Paper, and the greatest part of the Water evapo∣rated, there was made a Grey Sediment; and the Liquor being pour'd into ano∣ther
Vessel to be still in part evapora∣ted, and afterward being expos'd to the Air, there was condens'd a little Salt in broad, flat Grains, having the Taste of Common Salt. This Salt had nothing Aluminous nor Vitriolic, neither had it resemblance to any thing but that part of Sal-Marine, which is Chrystalliz'd thro Cold and in a Humid. The Earth of the Sediment of this Water in part dissolv'd in distill'd Vinai∣gre, which it turn'd Yellow. Being burnt in the Fire, it took a Colour more Brown, and seem'd to resemble the Rust of Iron. Of the Wa∣ter of Apougny, near Seig∣nelay, in Burgundy.This Water, being taken in the Spring-time, was Limpid, and of a Fer∣ruginous Taste. During Evaporation, there were se∣parated Ruddish Earths, very Light, in Flakes, which did swim in the mid∣dle of the Water, and afterwards stuck to the sides of the Vessels. These Earths being dry'd had a little Brackishness, and their Quantity was very small.
Of the Water of Vahls, in Dauphiné, from the Spring called la Domi∣nique.This Water, taken in the Month of May, did seem very singular, and much different from other Ferruginous Wa∣ters, having somewhat Vitriolic. It was Limpid and without Scent; but its Taste was Vinous and Styptic, like to that of a small White-Wine, wherein a little Vitriol is dissolv'd. Its Stypticity was strong and disagreeable. It took a Black Colour, drawing to∣wards Blew, with Galls; as doth Wa∣ter wherein English Vitriol hath been dissolv'd. It made the Tincture of Tournesole of a Red Purple Colour, as doth the said Vitriol; but being mixt with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, it made no Precipitation, as it doth with Vitriol, and the whole Liquor became very Green. There was made at the bottom of the Bottles a little Yellowish Sediment, as happens in Water where∣in there is a Ferruginous Vitriol. This Water being put in Alembics to distil by a gentle Heat, as soon as it began to become Tepid, it lost its first Taste, and was no longer Acid; but retain'd only a Ferruginous Taste. What distill'd in the beginning was In∣sipid,
and also what followed, and the whole resembled simple Water. There remain'd only 1/1000 Greyish Substance, which had some resemblance to Vitriol lightly Calcin'd; having the Taste, but more gentle. This Saline substance being dissolv'd in Common Water, and mixt with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, became Black as Ink, with a certain Precipitation. Vitriol doth not make the like Blackness with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar. Those who have drunk this Water, have found it Heavy on the Stomach, and Emetic, and that it purgeth down∣wards, and makes their Stools Black. The Seventh CLASS. Of Cold Waters, having a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which participate of Common Salt, or have no Salt at all. OF this sort were the Waters of Cha∣stelguyon, Besse, S. Pierre, la Trau∣liére,
Vernet, Chanonat, S. Pardoux, S. Parise, and Rueilly. Of the Wa∣ter of Cha∣stelguyon, near Rion, in Au∣vergne.This Water, taken in the beginning of Spring-time, was Limpid, but had made some whitish Sediments in the Bottles. Its Taste did a little incline to somewhat Aigre, and was a little Vinous. During Evaporation there were form'd on the Surface White Films, very Thick, which cover'd it all over; but afterwards precipitated to the bot∣tom of the Vessels in thick Scales. The Sediment was 1/17, one Moity whereof was Salt, the other Earth. This Salt was very Acrimonious, and might be compar'd to that part of Sal-Marine, which is not Condens'd thro Cold and in a Humid, which was known by mixing it with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, which it caus'd to coagulate. This Salt being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, fum'd and produc'd a Scent of the Spirit of Common Salt. The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolv'd in distil'd Vinaigre. It con∣tracted somewhat of Brackishness in the Fire, and chang'd its Whiteness in a Yellowish Colour.
Of the Wa∣ter of Besse, near Mont d' Or, in Auvergne.This Water, taken at the beginning of the Spring-time, was Limpid, and of a very strong Vinous Taste. During a Gentle Evaporation it was observ'd, that there were form'd on its Surface very little Greyish Films, and that some Ruddish Powder stuck to the sides of the Vessels. There remain'd at last at the bottom a Whitish, Leafy Earth, almost Insipid, which amoun∣ted to 1/645 of the weight of the Water. There could be separated from thence but very little Salt, which did resem∣ble that of the Water of Chastel∣guyon. This Earth being freed from its Salt, and strongly burnt in the Fire, became somewhat Reddish; and before it was put on the Fire, it in part dissolv'd in distil'd Vinaigre. As for the Vinous Taste of this Wa∣ter, altho it was very strong, yet it was soon lost by the heat of the Fire; as was that of other Mineral▪ Waters, which were somewhat Aigre and less Vinous. In the distillation what pass'd in the beginning was Insipid, as also what pass'd in the middle, and end thereof.
Of the Water of S. Pierre de Clermont, in Au∣vergne.This Water, taken at the beginning of the Spring-time, was Limpid, but had made some Whitish Sediments in the Bottles. Its Taste inclin'd to some∣what Aigre and Vinous. During Evaporation there were form'd on its Surface White Films, which precipitated in little Flakes. The whole dry Sediment amounted to 1/240 of the weight of the Water, whence was drawn almost a Moity of Salt, re∣sembling that part of Sal-Marine, which is Chrystalliz'd thro Cold and in a Hu∣mid, and which mixeth without trou∣ble with Alcalies, or fixt Sulphurous Salts of Plants dissolv'd in Common Wa∣ter. The Earth of this Sediment being freed from its Salt, as much as could be by hot Water, dissolv'd with great effervescence in Spirit of Vinaigre. It contracted in the Fire a Remarkable Brackishness, and its Whiteness became Greyish. Of the Wa∣ter of Cha∣nonat, near Clermont, in Au∣vergne.This Water, being taken in Spring-time, was very Limpid, and inclining to somewhat Aigre.
It left after Evaporation a little Whi∣tish Sediment, which was heapt toge∣ther in little Flakes, amounting to about 1/1830, without mixture of any manifest Salt. This Earth dissolv'd almost wholly with an Effervescence in Spirit of Vi∣naigre, and became Reddish in the Fire. Of the Wa∣ter of Ver∣net, near Senectaire, in Au∣vergne.This Water, taken in the Beginning of the Spring-time, was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre and Vi∣nous. In Evaporation its whole Surface was cover'd with a Fat Film. The Sediment was in very small Quantity; consisting of a little Leafy, Greyish and Insipid Earth, which in part dissolv'd in di∣still'd Vinaigre; and being burnt in the Fire, its Colour was darkned. Of the Wa∣ter of S. Pardoux, in Bour∣bonnois.This Water, being taken in the Spring-time, was also somewhat Aigre and Vinous. Being evaporated, it likewise left a small Quantity of Insipid Earth.
Of the Water of la Trau∣liére, near S. Pardoux.This Water, taken in the beginning of Spring-time, was Limpid, its Taste was somewhat Aigre and Piquant. It was evaporated without Films, without Flakes, and without being troubled, and left a little Earthy Sedi∣ment of an Ash-Colour, and of a Taste somewhat Saline. The small Quantity of Salt which it contain'd, was found to resemble that part of Sal-Marine which is Chrystalliz'd thro Cold and in a Humid: Forasmuch as it troubled not the Dissolutions of Alcalies and true Nitres. Of the Wa∣ter of S. Parise, in Nivernois.This Water, taken in the Spring-time, was Limpid, of a Taste some∣what Aigre, which left a certain Harsh∣ness on the Tongue. During Evaporation there were form'd on the Surface Broad and White Films. The whole Sediment was 1/307 of the weight of the Water; consisting of a Whitish, Leafy Earth, without mix∣ture of Salt. It was dissoluble in distill'd Vinaigre, and chang'd not in the Fire.
The Eighth CLASS. Of Cold Waters somewhat Aigre and Vinous, which participate of a Salt resembling the Nitre of the Ancients. OF this Quality are the Waters of Pougues, S. Mion, S. Floret, Pont-Gibault, Josse, S. Arban, Camarets, and Vahls. Of the Wa∣ter of Pougues, in Niver∣nois.This Water, taken in the Spring-time, was Limpid, of an Acid Taste, and disagreeable to drink. During Evaporation its Surface was cover'd with White Films, which stuck to the sides of the Vessels, according as the Water diminished. There re∣main'd at last a Whitish, Leafy Sedi∣ment, of a Saline Taste, amounting to 1/492 of the weight of the Water; whence was drawn almost 1/3 Salt, ha∣ving the Qualities of the true Nitre, which were known by Experiments like
to those, which were made on the Salt of the Hot Water of Bourbon L' Archam bault. This Salt, being melted in a Cruci∣ble on the Fire, took a bright Red Co∣lour, which it kept being cool'd. The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolv'd in distill'd Vinaigre. Of the Wa∣ter of S. Mion, in Auvergne.This Water, taken in the Spring-time, was Limpid, somewhat Aigre, and Vinous. During Evaporation there were form'd some White Films, swimming on its Sur∣face, which afterwards by degrees pre∣cipitated, and stuck to the sides of the Vessels, there being also made some little Flakes in the middle of the Water. There remain'd at last a White, Cloddy Substance, of a Taste very Lixivial, the weight whereof was 1/300 of the weight of the Water; whence was separated almost 2/3 Salt, which was Nitrous as that of the Water of Pougues. This Salt being melted in a Crucible became only Greyish. The Earth of the Sediment dissolv'd with Efferves∣cence in distill'd Vinaigre; and being
burnt in the Fire, became a little Reddish. The Experiments on this Water ha∣ving been resum'd at the instance of a Person of Great Quality, who affirm'd to have receiv'd benefit by the Use thereof, which he design'd to repeat; it was observ'd that the Water sent by him was Limpid and somewhat Aigre. It took no Colour with Galls, and its weight exceeded not that of the Water of the Fountains of Paris, which come from the Springs of Rongis, by above 1/502. And altho this Water had no more sensible Acidity to the Taste, yet it turn'd the Blew Tincture of Tourne∣sole somewhat into Red, giving it a Purple Colour. This Water being put to Distillation in Balneo Mariae, what pass'd first in very little Quantity, did turn the Tincture of Tournesole less Red, but it somewhat troubled the Wa∣ter of the Dissolution of Mercury Su∣blimate; which it did not before Di∣stillation, nor did that which af∣terwards distill'd. What came at last did not turn Red the Tincture of Tournesole; and altho it troubled not the Dissolution of Mercury Sublimate,
it remarkably troubled that of Vitriol, and precipitated thence a Yellowish Powder. What remain'd of Earth and Salt, after Distillation, was found like to what was observ'd and related before. Of the Wa∣ter of S. Floret, near S. Cirque, in Auvergne.This Water, taken in the Spring-season, was Limpid and somewhat Aigre. During Evaporation there were amass'd together certain little Ruddish Flakes, which sticking to the sides of the Vessels form'd Gross Scales. The Sediment was found Ruddish, Leafy, and Saline: It amounted to 1/313, whence was drawn almost 1/2 Salt, resembling the true Nitre. This Salt, being melted in a Cruci∣ble on the Fire, became Ruddy; and the Earth of the Sediment being freed from the Salt, dissolv'd almost wholly in distill'd Vinaigre with great Efferves∣cence, and contracted in the Fire a cer∣tain Brackishness, and Yellowish Colour. Of the Water of Pont-Gi∣bault, in AuvergneThis Water, taken in the Spring-time, as all the others of Auvergne which were sent to the Academy, was Lim∣pid,
somewhat Aigre, and Vinous. During Evaporation there appeared no Concretion till towards the end, when there remain'd a White Sediment; the weight whereof was 1/556 of the weight of the Water: Wherein was found a little more than 1/2 Nitrous Salt, resembling that of the Water of S. Mion. The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolv'd in distil'd Vinaigre with an Effervescence; and became a little Brown in the Fire, without receiving any other manifest Alteration. Of the Wa∣ter of Josse, lez Marin∣gues.The Water sent from Josse in the Spring-time, was of two Springs, the one call'd le Petit Bouillon, the other le Grand Bouillon. The former was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre, a little Vinous; leaving on the Tongue an Impression of Dryness. During Evaporation there were form'd on the Surface little Films, which precipitated in small Flakes, and stuck to the sides of the Vessels. The dry Sediment amounted to 1/345 of its
weight; whence was extracted more than 1/ Ruddish Salt, of a Lixivial Scent, and which was discover'd to be Nitrous. It became Blewish after having been melted in the Fire. The Earth freed from this Salt, in part dissolv'd, with an Effervescence, in distil'd Vinaigre, and chang'd not its Colour by the Fire. The Water of the latter had a Vi∣nous Taste, stronger than the other; but its Sediments were alike, and its Salt likewise Nitrous. Of the Wa∣ter of S Ar∣ban, in Forest.This Water, taken in the Spring-time, was very Limpid, somewhat Ai∣gre, and a little Vinous. During Evaporation, made by a gentle heat, there were form'd on the Surface whitish Films, Subtil, Insipid, and Sandy, being Rough to the Feeling and Taste, as a very fine Sand. The whole dry Sediment was 1/640 Whitish, Leafy Substance, of a Lixivial Taste; whence was drawn about 1/2 Nitrous Salt, condens'd in Thick Tablets. The Earth of this Sediment dissolv'd almost wholly, with an Effervescence,
in distil'd Vinaigre, and took by the Fire a small Redness as of Clear-Lacque. Of the Wa∣ter of Pont de Cama∣rets, in Langue∣doc.At Pont de Camarets, between the Dioceses of S. Pons, Alby, and Castres, there are two Springs of Cold Water, distant two hundred Paces one from another, the highest call'd the Spring of Andabre, the lowest the Spring of Prugniez; the former, being sent in the Month of May, was Limpid, and of a Taste a little Vinous. Being put to evaporate, there were form'd no Films on its Surface, but there precipitated a Whitish Earth in little Flakes. The dry Sediment was found to be 1/262, having more than 3/4 Nitrous Salt. The Earth of this Sediment being put in distil'd Vinaigre, dissolv'd almost wholly with an Effervescence. Being strongly burnt in a Crucible on the Fire, it became almost Vitrified. Another part of this Earth being mixt with an equal part of its Salt, and put on the Fire to melt, in part pierc'd thro the Crucible, which was found on the out∣side,
as it were, lin'd with a Brown Email, and the inside of the Crucible was cover'd with a Clear-Red Email. The remainder of this substance became White at the bottom of the Crucible, after having swell'd very much. The other Water was very Limpid, and of a Taste more Vinous than the former; during Evaporation there were not form'd any Films swimming on the Surface but only little White Flakes, which precipitated to the bottom. The wholedry Sediment was 1/384 of the weight of the Water; and that Quantity was proportionally less than that of the Sedi∣ment of the Water of Andabre. It con∣tain'd also less Salt, which was only a Moity; being Nitrous as the other, and its Earth was less Dissoluble in di∣still'd Vinaigre, and less Fusible in the Fire. Of the Wa∣ter of Vahls, from the Springs la Marquise, and la Marie.Near Vahls, in Dauphiné, there are four Springs of Mineral Water, which are, la Do∣minique, S. Jean, la Marquise, & la Marie. The Water of the first being diffe∣rent from the other, the Experiments thereon have been refer'd to the Sixth Class.
The Water of the Spring of S. Jean, said to be a little Tepid and somewhat Aigre, was not sent to the Academy, because it had the same Qualities with the latter, being only a little more weak. The Water of la Marquise, the Spring whereof is near that of S. Jean, is Cold. 'Tis said its Taste is somewhat Aigre, and a little stronger than that of S. Jean; and that it purges more, as well by Siege as Urine. When we receiv'd this Water, its Taste seem'd rather Brackish than Acid, and it was judg'd that the Acidity which it hath in its Spring was weakned by Car∣riage. After Evaporation it left only a Ni∣trous Salt without mixture of Earth; being 1/135, White, and very Lixivial. It precipitated in a Minim Colour Mer∣cury Sublimate dissolv'd in common Water, as doth Salt of Tartar, and made a great Effervescence with the Spirit of Common Salt, as do the Acri∣monious Sulphurous Salts. The Water of the Spring la Marie, which is not far from la Marquise, hath
more Acidity than the other, according to report, and makes those who drink of it to urine more. We found therein no Acidity, but only a little Brackishness, as in the former. The Salt of its Sedi∣ment was found alike, and in less Quan∣tity; being only 1/197. Additions of the Mineral Waters of Chartres and Spa. THe design'd Impression of these Observations having been a long time hindred; in order to joyn this Treatise with other Works of the Na∣turalists of this Assembly, hath given occasion to add here the Experiments made on a Mineral Water lately dis∣cover'd near the City of Chartres, and also on the Water of Spa, which was brought for the use of the Queen. Of the Wa∣ter of Chartres, in Beausse.This Water being brought to the Laboratory of the King's Library, to∣ward the end of the Summer, scented somewhat of the Mud. It took not with Galls that dark Red, which is
said that it takes, newly from its Spring▪ Which happens to several weak Mine∣ral Waters, which presently lose that disposition in the Air. Being put to distil by a gentle heat, what pass'd first differ'd very little from what distill'd last, and the whole ap∣pear'd nothing different from Common Water. The dry Sediment of lb viii. of this Water distill'd, weighed only Gr. xx. which contain'd but Gr. iv. of a Ruddy and Gummous Salt, of an Acrimonious Taste, and resembling that of the Salt which is drawn from Common Earth. The remainder was a subtil Powder of a Grey Ruddish Co∣lour, which dissolv'd not in distill'd Vi∣naigre. There was perceiv'd in this Water but little of Vaporous Sulphurei∣ty. This Water, according to the Ob∣servations made thereon, ought to be rang'd in the Seventh Class. The Cures, which many Persons trou∣bled with divers Distempers have said to have receiv'd by the Use thereof, have excited the Curious to examine well its Qualities upon the place, and the Conditions of its Springs. They
have observ'd that this Water was found in several places of a Meadow near the Walls of the City, between the two Arms of the River, in certain Furrows, whence it springs, and runs to∣wards one of the Channels. This Water being newly sprung out of the Earth, hath the Propriety of extracting a Tincture from Galls; but there are other Furrows, where the Water having no Course, lo∣seth, by standing in the Air, this Proprie∣ty. And because in all the Ditches newly made in this Meadow, there is found Water having the same Taste, and do∣ing the same effect with Galls, and that in some places of the Caussey which separateth the Channel of the River from the Meadow, there runs a Water which hath also this Propriety of extra∣cting a Tincture from Galls, it hath been judg'd that all the Water of the Meadow comes from this River, and that it takes a Mineral Quality in pas∣sing thro this Earth, which renders it wholesom and proper for the Cure of many Diseases; and that this Water may be so much the better, forasmuch as being before expos'd to the Air in the
Channel of the River, it hath not that Crudity which those Waters have which proceed from deep Earths and Rocks. Whether its Mineral Quality be taken from the Earth of this Meadow, it were possible to discover somwhat by Experi∣ment on this Earth, observ'd as well in its Surface as at bottom, if the soaking thro of the Water of the River hindereth not the search. Of the Wa∣ter of Spa.This Water of Spa, brought into France, for the Use of the Queen about the end of Summer, and sent to the Laboratory of the King's Library, to be examin'd, was in four Bottles; one whereof was but half-full, having been ill stop't and the Water run out. The Water of this Bottle was a little trou∣bled; and altho it was still of a Taste moderately inclining to somewhat Aigre and Vinous, it tinctur'd not with Galls. The Water of the other three Bottles, which had been well stopt and were full, was very Limpid and of a Taste some∣what Aigre and Vinous. It took a Mi∣nim Colour with Galls. Being mixt with the Dissolution of
Mercury Sublimate made in Common Water, it troubled and rendred it Milky; and mixt with the Dissolution of Ger∣man Vitriol likewise made in Water, it troubled that also, and in a little time there was made a Precipitation of Rud∣dish, subtil Earth; as do those Waters wherein there is a Sulphurous Salt. The Acidity of this Water hindereth it not from troubling and precipitating Salt of Lead dissolv'd in Common Water: It made the Tincture of Tournesole to turn little Red, which a less Acidity tur∣neth much: Which gives occasion to judg that the Acidity of this Water is not Simple. Being put to distil by a very gentle heat in a high Glass-Alembic, to sepa∣rate the more Volatile and Subtil part, what pass'd first was not found different from what followed and what remain'd in the Cucurbite ceasing Distillation, after having drawn about 1/4; neither was there any Acidity in the whole Wa∣ter. What remain'd in the Cucurbit ha∣ving been put in an Earthen Vessel up∣on warm Ashes to evaporate gently, in order to observe whether there were made any Concretions during Evapo∣ration;
this Water remain'd always Limpid; and when there were no more than two Ounces in the Vessel, there were made new Essays, to know the Quality of the Salt therein, by putting a little of this Water as well in the Dis∣solution of Mercury Sublimate made in Common Water, which it troubled and made Milky, as on that of German Vi∣triol, which it also troubled with a cer∣tain Precipitation of Ruddish Earth, and also on Syrup of Violets, which became Green. All which Effects were Proofs of a Sulphurous Salt, confirming those drawn from the former Essays. The Vessel wherein the Evaporation was made, was found lin'd in its upper part near the edge, and all about, with a Saline Concretion, and lower toward the bottom it was lin'd with a Yellowish Earth almost Insipid, but a little Restringent. The Evaporation being finish'd, there remain'd of the whole Quantity of this Water, which was lb vij. ℥vj. ʒvj. an Earthy and somewhat Saline Sedi∣ment, being all over the inward Sur∣face of the Vessel. This Sediment be∣ing taken thence weigh'd only Gr. xlviij.
whereof 3/4 were a Light, Subtil, Rud∣dish Earth, and 1/4 was a Sulphurous Salt, which caus'd Mercury Sublimate to precipitate of a White Colour, as doth the Salt of Marle, and also the Volatile Salts of Plants and Animals, and not of a Red or Orange Colour, as do the true Nitres and Alcalies. This Par∣ticularity would have oblig'd us to have made a Ninth Class, wherein to have plac'd this foreign Water, if we had found the like in France, to have fill'd it up. Advertisements and Corollaries. THe great Quantity of Mineral Wa∣ter, which Physicians cause them to drink, to whom they prescribe the Use thereof, for the Cure of some Rebel∣lious Diseases, which yield not to Ordi∣nary Remedies; gives occasion to judge that the Principal Effect which they expect, is the cleansing of the Viscera by this Inward Washing. This Effect is considerable, because the most part of Chronical Diseases proceed from the Obstruction of the Viscera, which this
great Quantity of Drink may resolve. The Ease, which many Patients receive, is the reason why few Physicians give themselves the trouble of searching the particular Qualities of these Waters; which are nevertheless very different, and considerable enough to deserve In∣quiry, in order to make the better use of them, according to the Diversity of Diseases, and the different Constitution of the Diseased. 'Tis easy to judge that all Waters of Running Springs; such as are the Mi∣neral Waters which are us'd in Physic, may have particular different Qualities; if it be considered, that some of these Waters come from Places near the Sur∣face of the Earth, others from certain Places more Deep. Those which have not been able to penetrate further, be∣cause of Beds of Stone, or Fat Earth, which happen underneath, rest on this sort of Bottoms, and run out only where they find any Passages. They have their Originals either from the fall of Rain-Waters, or by the Percola∣tion of the Waters of Rivers and Lakes, or of the Sea, thro the Neighbouring
Earths, or those which they can reach; and in traversing these Earths, which are less compact, they dissolve the Salts which are there, and impregnate them∣selves with certain Subtil, Earthy Par∣ticles which are found by Evaporation. The Water which comes from Places more Deep, whither its Weight caus'd it to fall, according as it could pass, cannot rise again in its Liquid Consi∣stence without force; but being rarified by some inward heat of the Earth, it riseth in Vapours; afterwards resuming its first and Natural Liquid Consistence, by the Cold toward the Surface of the Earth, in coming forth it produceth Springs, and also little Lakes on the highest Mountains, whither it may very well rise, since that it mounteth even to the middle Region of the Air, where Snow is form'd, and whence Rain falls. These Waters being rarified in the Pro∣fundities of the Earth, whence they rise, receive easily Mixtures of Mineral Exhalations and Vapours, which are frequent in these Places; but these Mix∣tures being not often distinguish'd in these Waters rising from their Springs,
either by Scent or Taste, cannot be understood but by their Effects; the Assignment whereof to their proper Causes is not always easy and cer∣tain. The Information, which we give here, of the Salts and Earths of several Mineral Waters, will not fully satisfie the Curiosity of those who would be likewise instructed concerning the other Causes of the Proprieties of these Wa∣ters; since that besides the mixture of Concrete substances found in them, ac∣cording to the Observations here rela∣ted, there may also be contain'd sub∣stances not Concrete, so Subtil and so Volatile, that there can remain nothing in the Sediments which may be per∣ceiv'd to differ from the Salts and Earths; and which is not at all found in what passes by Distillation. This Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which is lost in the Air and by Heat, ought to have for its Subject a Spirituous and most Volatil Substance, which it were very desirable, were known. The Heat which some have in their Springs, and at co∣ming out of the Earth, may be attri∣buted
to hot Vapours which are mixt with them in their Course thro Subter∣raneous Profundities; where the Cold of the Air has no free access: And some particular Effects of these Waters on diverse Subjects, give occasion to judge that they are not Pure and Simple. Wherefore the Academy hath propos'd to labour, in order to the enquiry of these things, for the Satisfaction of the Curious and Public Benefit. In the mean while the Observations of the Salts and Earths of these Waters may serve as well in Physic as for Me∣chanic Arts; to make a judgment of the fitness of some of these Waters for cer∣tain design'd Uses. The two Genders of Salts, under which are rang'd the Salts of those Wa∣ters, whereof hitherto hath been spo∣ken, may possibly have Differences which divide each of these Genders in∣to several Species; as the Naturalists of the Royal Academy have remark'd in Salts drawn from the Ashes of several Plants; which have been observ'd some to resemble the true Nitre, others Com∣mon Salt, & to retain the participation of
the Specific Proprieties of their Subjects. Some of the Earths which are found together with these Salts in the Sedi∣ments of Mineral Waters evaporated or distill'd, may have particular Uses, ac∣cording to their Differences. Some Germans have remark'd that the White Earth of the Mineral Water of Schwal∣bach is Purgative. They had in the Academy some Bottles of this Water, the Taste whereof was Vinous and Strong. The Salt of its Sediment was Nitrous, and caus'd Mercury Subli∣mate dissolv'd in Common Water to precipitate in aNaca∣rate. deep Crimson, as do the Alcalies of Plants. The Earth se∣parated from this Sediment was White as Chalk, but there was not Quantity enough to make Experiment of its Pur∣gative Faculty, and we had neglected to observe this in several like Earths taken from the Nitrous Waters of this Kingdom. The true Nitre of the Ancients, being Sulphurous, and having resemblance to the Alcalies of Plants, hath likewise this Propriety, with them, to move by Siege. And this White Earth which is found with Nitrous Salts of Mineral Waters
may participate of the same Quality, even as the Coagulum of the Salt of Tartar made by the Second part of Sal-Marine, retains some Pro∣perties of its Salt, altho it be Insipid, and not Dissoluble in Water, but only in Acid Liquors, such as is distill'd Vi∣naigre, which dissolves it with an Ef∣fervescence; the like whereof hath been observ'd in several White Earths of Ni∣trous Mineral Waters. As to the Observation of the Tasts of the Waters brought to us, we have been only able to judge, by what hath been re∣mark'd by tasting them at their arrival. They who are upon the Place of their Springs may better make a distincti∣on, particularly in those which are somewhat Aigre and Vinous, the Taste whereof is either weakened or lost by being kept or expos'd to the Air. They may also better perceive the Degrees of their Colouring with Powders of Galls, Oak-leaves, Myro∣balans, Pomegranate-barks, and other like substances; and also judge more precisely of their Consistence and Weight. The Naturalists of the Royal
Academy have not been able to observe exactly all these things in the Waters which have been sent them from distant Places, and which might have receiv'd several Changes as well by Time as Car∣riage, both in their Taste and Disposition to take Colours with certain Substances, and in their Consistence more or less Thin and Subtil. The Method which they have followed in their Experiments on the Waters which have been sent them, may be serviceable to those who will examine them at their Springs, in order to gain a more exact knowledg of them. This Vaporous Substance of Mine∣ral Waters, which are somewhat Aigre and Vinous, is probably the first Being of Mineral Sulphur, and of the Concre∣tions thence arising. There are found Earths impregnated with this Acid, Va∣porous, Sulphurous Substance, from the Concretion whereof are sometimes made Sulphurous and Vitriolic Mine∣rals. And for the most part there is not made any Mineral Concretion discer∣nable in these Earths, where there is not found either Mineral Sulphur, or Vi∣triol, or Metal. This Mineral, Va∣porous,
and Indigested Substance may very well be the Principle of Vitriol, but in its first state it cannot be a Vitrio∣lic Product, if it be in those Earths where there is not already somewhat of Vitriol. It is more easy to observe it in its Pro∣ducts, when it hath receiv'd some Mine∣ral Concretion. The Humid Air penetra∣ting into the Mineral Stones, which are Insipid, but impregnated with a Mineral Sulphur, which is easily perceiv'd when 'tis disengag'd by Fire, does manifest∣ly give to the Taste a Sulphurous A∣cidity, which before was not sensible. And of the Concrete Sulphur of these Mineral Stones or Marchasites penetra∣ted by the Humid Air, is made a Con∣crete, Vitriolic Juice, which is the Pro∣duct of this Mineral Sulphur, the Prin∣ciple whereof hath been an Acid and most Vaporous Substance. Which also hath been observ'd in many Clayie Earths expos'd to the Air, which dissol∣ving into Powder, contracted at first an Acidity more sensible to the Nose than to the Tongue; afterwards there were made Sulphurous and Inflammable Concre∣tions, and at length Saline Concretions which were reduc'd to Vitriol.
This Subtil, Vaporous Substance, Acid, or rather Harsh, produceth not always Vitriolic Concretions; and it happens in many Earths that thro de∣fault of requisite dispositions it remains in its first Being. Then it is not a Va∣pour of Vitriol, and the Mineral Wa∣ters which pass thro the Earths where this Subtil Matter is found, and which contract an Acidity by mixture there∣with, ought not to be call'd Vitriolic. We have observ'd in many Waters im∣pregnated with this Acid Vapour, that nevertheless there was not found there any true Vitriol, or any Substance re∣sembling Alum, and that the Salt which remain'd in their Sediments was a Ni∣tre, such as the Ancients have describ'd, and which is as far different from Vi∣triol and Alum, as are Alcalies, or fixt Sulphurous Salts of Plants. The Salts, Vitriols, Alums, and other Concrete Substances dissoluble in Water, may be so mixt with Mineral Waters, that they may not be much perceivable except in their Sediments; but the Sulphurs and Bitumens are al∣ways easie to be discern'd in the Waters
wherein they are contain'd, because they either settle or swim on the Surface, being not capable of mixture as the Salts. We have not perceiv'd any in the Wa∣ters which have been sent us. Those which were the Hottest in their Springs have not seem'd to us more Sulphurous and Bituminous than the others. And if there is found any Sulphur or Bitu∣men in their Basins upon the sides of their Receptacles, or in their Mud, it may be that these are not those Inflammable Substances in the Earth which have rendred them Hot. It is more probable that they contract this Heat by the mixture of some Hot Va∣pours, which they meet with in Deep places thro which they pass. Experi∣ence doth sufficiently shew that no Com∣bustible matter takes Fire, or keeps it long without Air; and that to extinguish the Fire of Sulphurs and Bitumens in∣flam'd, it is enough to hinder them from the Communication of the Air, by covering well the Vessels which con∣tain these Substances. The Sulphurs which burn in Certain Cavities of Moun∣tains discover'd do not take Fire, but
in those places where they take Air; and when that which lies open is spent, the Fire ceases in what remains cover'd, altho it be equally Combustible. And if some Substances take a Fire strong enough not to be stifled under Ground, it causeth what covereth it to crack, to give it self Vent and take Air, as doth Powder in Mines. If there are not perpetual Subterra∣neous Fires, the Heat of some Mineral Waters, which continue to be Hot in their Springs, cannot be attributed to them. It is more probable that there are in se∣veral places of the Earth Hot Vapours and Exhalations, the Heat whereof is preserv'd in places Deep and Close, where the Air doth not penetrate to cool them, and where these substances Rari∣fi'd have not room enough to distend themselves more, and suffer some weak∣ning of their Heat, or Dissipation by a more great Rarefaction. But the Heat of these Vapours may be augmented by their pressing together in Close Passa∣ges, whereinto they insinuate themselves; and if they meet with Waters running thro the same Passages, they may heat them by mixing with them.
There have been made some Obser∣vations which give occasion to judge that the Waters of Hot Springs and Na∣tural Baths are made warm by Hot Va∣pors which pass with them. I. That these Hot Mineral Waters burn not the Mouth and Tongue of those who drink of them at their co∣ming forth from their Springs, as Com∣mon Water heated by Fire to a like De∣gree would do. Which seems to pro∣ceed from the Subtilty of the Substance which produceth this Heat in the Wa∣ter. The Flame of Spirit of Wine burns not the Hand so strongly, as that of a burning Coal. II. That the Heat of Mineral Waters doth not act on some tender substances, as doth that of Common Water rais'd by Fire to the same Degree; for it hath been seen that Dock-Leaves, which were softned and boyl'd easily enough in Common Water, moderately heated on the Fire, did not soften in the Mine∣ral Waters of Neris in Bourbonnois, which are the Hottest in France, and which are rendred difficult to drink by the excess of their Heat; but these
Leaves only chang'd Colour, and be∣came Yellowish, like dead dry'd Leaves. Which gives occasion to judge that this Heat proceeds from some Vapour or Exhalation different from Water, and more proper to dry than to soften, as doth Common Water, which humects. III. That these Waters are more Hot in their Springs by Night than by Day. Which may be caus'd by the Cool of the Air, which hindereth the Dissipation of the Hot Vapours and Ex∣halations which are mixt with them. IV. That these Waters being expos'd to the Air, from out their Springs, cool'd not so soon as doth Common Water heated by Fire. Because the Cold Air, which maketh the Motion excited by the Fire in Common Water soon to cease, keeps in the Hot Va∣pours which warm the Mineral Waters by their mixture, and hindereth them from dispersing so soon. V. That Hot Mineral Waters have no more Disposition to Boyl on the Fire than Common Cold Waters, there be∣ing as much time requir'd to cause the one to boyl as the other. Which clearly
shews that the Heat which Mineral Wa∣ters contract in the Earth, proceeds not from a Motion of their Particles excited by any Subterraneous Fire; for this Motion being continued and augment∣ted by the Fire of a Chimney or Fur∣nace, would cause them to boyl sooner than those which being Cold have not that Disposition by a Motion Com∣menc'd. Wherefore the Heat of Mi∣neral Waters proceeds from certain Warm Vapours or Exhalations mingled with them, which the Fire drives away before they can boyl thereon. If there is without Fire in the Earth, any Heat strong enough to warm the Waters of some Springs, it must neces∣sarily be that this Heat, which is com∣municated to Waters which are Warm from some Thousands of Years, and perhaps have ever been so, in order to perpetuate self, keeps in Deep places, and far distant from the Surface of the Earth, where the Air which en∣compasseth that, might weaken it by its Cold, which seems to be the most ex∣treme. According to this supposition, the Difference of Waters of Hot and
Cold Springs, whereof some are ob∣serv'd to make like Sediments, and to have Salts of the same Species, should proceed from this, that these Wa∣ters pass in the Earth thro Places more or less Deep. We observe that Waters which run on the Surface of the Earth are Cold, unless warm'd by the Sun, and we find not any Heat very manifest in the parts of the Earth which are not very Deep: Which gives occasion to judge that what there is of Heat remarkable in the Earth, ought to be plac'd far therein. It is not easy to comprehend the Qua∣lities of these Vapours or Exhalations which mix with Mineral Waters and warm them. It seems not necessary that they should be all Bituminous or Sulphurous, tho some are such. At Ain la Chapelle are found Flowers of Sulphur rais'd upon the Walls of Hot Springs which are there; and in the Burning Fountain of Dauphiné is seen a Flame which Issues forth with the Wa∣ter, and which probably was not Flame under the Earth, where it had not Air enough to burn, and scarcely the Wa∣ter
which issues forth with it is heated. But in many other Springs of Hot Mi∣neral Waters there is nothing seen either Sulphurous or Inflammable. There are many other Substances which are heated without taking Fire, the Va∣pours whereof mix with Hot Mineral Waters, but their Qualities are not un∣derstood but by the effects which they produce. The Royal Academy of the Sciences has not had Opportunities to observe the divers Effects of Mineral Waters, as well Hot, as Tepid and Cold, by employing them to different Uses. The Observations of the Effects of these Wa∣ters on Persons who use them in Drin∣king, Bathing, Pumping, Washing, Embrocation, &c. are reserv'd for the Physicians, whose Duty it is to know the Particular Constitutions of those Persons, and the State of their Health Declining or Improving. As for the Uses in Mechanical Arts, it may be easy to remark what one or other sorts of these Waters can do, in the steeping of Hemp, whitening of Linnen, dying of Wool and Silk, dressing of Leather,
tempering of Iron, boyling of Pease and such like, watering of Plants, wa∣tering of Cattle, &c. As for the Observations, concerning the different Weights and Consistences of Mineral Waters, they may be better made on the Places of their Springs, where they are not yet alter'd, either in Composition or Consistence; which they certainly are, being carried and kept, having lost some part of those Vaporous substances which being mixt with them, made their Consistence more Thin and Subtil; or having contracted some Corruption which hath rendred them more Thick and almost Mucila∣ginous; or having made a Precipita∣tion of some Mineral Earthiness, which being imperceptibly mixt with them, renders them less Subtil, and which is not ordinarily separated when they are drunk fresh, at which time they are judg'd more efficacious than when they are kept. The Instruments us'd by the Acade∣my to observe the Weight and Consi∣stence of Liquors, were the Araiometre and the Compound Balance.
The Araiometre is a little hollow Globe of Glass, having in its bottom a small Cavity to contain so much Quick∣silver as is necessary to make this Globe sink in the Liquor wherein it may be put. In its upper part is a little Pipe an Inch long; and at the end of this Pipe there is a small Scale to receive the ad∣justed Weights, which cause it to sink in different Liquors to a certain Mark made in the middle of this Pipe. By this In∣strument put in several Liquors is found not onely whether their Consistence be different, but also how much the Diffe∣rence is, by the Observation of the Weight of the Instrument, and of that which is put in the Scale, to make it sink equally in divers Liquors. The Compound Balance is an ordi∣nary Balance, moving easily, and very exact; to one of the Scales whereof is hung by some Horse-hairs a Cylinder of Tin or Leton well polish'd, having about four Inches Height and as much Diametre, to be able to take up in the Water the space which a Pint of Liquor of Paris Measure would take, and of such a weight that it may sink in all sorts
of Waters. This Cylinder being put in the Water the Weight and Consi∣stence whereof is to be observ'd, there is put in the other opposite Scale of the Ba∣lance so much weight as is necessary to keep the two Scales Equipois'd; and according to the difference of Weight, which is requisite to keep this equal Poise in divers Waters, judgment may be made of the difference of their Consi∣stence and Weight in like Quantity. And to know what is the Weight of this Quantity of Water which the Cylinder takes up, the Weight put in the op∣posite Scale is to be substracted from that of the Cylinder. This may be pra∣ctis'd on Mineral Waters taken at their Springs, and presently examin'd. The like Observations may be made on Common Waters, in ordinary Use, as well for drinking, as dressing of Vi∣ctuals, to the end that by the know∣ledge of their Properties judgment may be made what they contribute towards Health. These Waters, ordinarily call'd Common, in distinction from Mineral, being not altogether Pure and Simple, may have acquir'd divers Proprieties
by the diversity of Mixtures which in them are made, either in the Air or Earth. And altho they contain none of those Species of Minerals which may be re∣fer'd to the middle Mineral or Metallic Gender, the participation whereof gives the Name of Mineral to those Waters which are impregnated therewith; ne∣vertheless they have something Mine∣ral: for the Salts and Earths, which are always mixt with them, are Mineral Productions. And in the most part of the Waters sent for Mineral, whereon the Observations made in the Royal Academy are here related, there was found only Salt and Earth in different Proportions. The distinction between the Waters of this sort which are us'd only medicinally, and those which are commonly made Use of in order to Aliment, depending only upon More or Less of these mixtures. The Com∣mon Waters, which are esteem'd the best, are the most Subtil, Light, and less Mixt. FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. Martini Lister, è S. R. Lond. de Fontibus Medicatis Angliae, Exercitationes Duae. Londini. 1684. in 8o. THe Design of this Ingenious Author being to shew that in the several Mineral Wa∣ters of England, whereon he had made Experiment, were found only two sorts of Salts, viz. Com∣mon Salt, and a sort of Nitre, call'd by him Nitrum Calcarium; and only two sorts of Sediments, viz. Ocre and Chalk-stone; it may not be improper to mention this Book as confirming the Experi∣ments of our French Virtuosi.
A TABLE Of the WATERS, The Qualities whereof are exa∣min'd in this Book. A THe Water of Andabre, at Pont de Camarets, in Languedoc, P. 96. Of Apougny, near Seignelay, in Bur∣gundy, 82. Of Availles, in Poictou, 70. Of Auteuil, near Paris, 72. B. The Water of Bagniéres, in la Bigor∣re, 45.
Of Balleruc, in Languedoc, 43. Of Barbazan, in le Commingeois, 44. Of Bardon, near Moulins, 62. Of Baréges, in la Bigorre, 44. Of Belesme, in Normandy, 77. Of Besse, near Mont d' Or, in Auverg∣ne, 86. Of Biévre, near Paris, 73. Of Bourberouge, near Mortain, in Nor∣mandy, 79. Of Bourbon Lancy, in Bourbon∣nois, 36. Of Bourbon L' Archambault, in Bour∣bonnois, 51. Of Bourbonne, in Champagne, 49. Of la Bourboule, in the Parish of Mu∣rat de Quairs, 41. C. The Water of Capvert, in la Bigor∣re, 69. Of Chanonat, near Clermont, in Au∣vergne, 87. Of Chartres, in Beausse, 99. Of Chasteau-Gontier, in Anjou, 73. Of Chastelguyon, near Rion, in Au∣vergne, 85.
Of Chaudesaigues, in the High Coun∣try of Auvergne, 54. D. The Water of Digne, in Provence, 48. E. The Water of Encausse, in le Commin∣geois, 60. Of Evos, in Combrailles, from the Great Spring of the Baths, 42. Of Evos, from the little Spring of the Town, 57. F. The Water of Fonsrouilleuse, in Sain∣tonge, 76. Of Forges, in Normandy, 78. H. The Water of Hebecrevon, near S. Lo, in Normandy, 80.
I. The Water of Jaude, in Auvergne, 67. Of Jonas, at Bourbon l'Archam∣bault, 70. Of Josse, lez Maringues, 94. M. The Water of Mans, 77. Of Martres de Veyre, in Auvergne, 66. Of Menitoue, in Normandy, 79. Of Montbosq, in Normandy, 80. Of Mont d' Or, in Auvergne, 55. Of Montendre, in Saintonge, 76. N. The Water of Neris, in Bourbon∣nois, 56. P. The Water of Passi, near Paris. 72. Of Pons, in Saintonge, 75. Of Pont-Gibault, in Auvergne, 93.
Of Pont-Normand, in Normandy, 79. Of Pougues, in Nivernois, 90. Of Premeau, in Burgundy, near Nuits. 60. Of Provins, 81. Of Prugniez, at Pont de Camerets, in Languedoc, 96 R. The Water of la Rocheposay, in Tou∣raine, 74. S. The Water of Sail lez Chasteau Mo∣rand, 58. Of S. Arban, in Forest, 95. Of S. Floret, near S. Cirque, in Au∣vergne, 93. Of S. Mion, in Auvergne, 91. Of S. Pardoux, in Bourbonnois, 88. Of S. Parise, in Nivernois, 89. Of S. Paul de Rouen, 79. Of S. Pierre de Clermont, in Auverg∣ne, 87. Of S. Reyne, in Burgundy, 71. Of Spa, in the Country of Liege, 102.
T. The Water of la Trauliére, in Bourbon∣nois, 89. V. The Water of Vahls, in Dauphiné, from the Spring called la Dominique, 83. Of Vahls, from the Springs, la Marquise and la Marie, 97 Of Vaujour, in the Dutchy of la Val∣liere, 74. Of Verberie, near Compiegne, 77. Of Vernet, in Auvergne, 88. Of Vic, in Carladois, 65. Of Vic le Comte, in Auvergne, 63. Of Vichy, in Bourbonnois, de la Gril∣le, 57. Of Vichy, from the Great Basin, and the little Basins, 62. FINIS.
