D506 R14958 11846075 49847
THE DEBATE At Large, BETWEEN THE HOUSE of LORDS AND HOUSE of COMMONS, AT THE FREE CONFERENCE, HELD In the Painted Chamber, in the Session of the CONVENTION, Anno 1688. Relating to the Word, ABDICATED AND THE Vacancy of the THRONE, In the COMMON's Vote. Printed for J. Wickins; And to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1695.
The Debate at large, &c. Martis die 22 Januarij, 1688. IN the Convention met, upon his Highness the Prince of Orange's Letters, this Day in the House of Commons. A Motion being made that the House would appoint a Day, to take into Consideration the Condi∣tion and State of the Nation. Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the House, on Monday, next, at Ten of the Clock in the Morning, take into Consideration the State and Condition of the Nation. Lunae 28 die Januarij, 1688. The House then (according to the Order of Tuesday last) proceeded to take into Consideration the State and Condi∣tion of the Nation. Resolved, That the House do now Resolve it self into a Committee of the whole House, to take into Consideration the State and Condition of the Nation. Mr. Speaker left the Chair. Mr. Hamden took the Chair of the Committee.
Mr. Speaker Reassumed the Chair. Mr. Hamden Reported from the Com∣mittee of the whole House that, having taken into Consideration the Conditi∣on and State of the Nation, they had agreed upon a Resolve; which he Read in his Place, and then delivered the same in at the Clark's Table, where the same being Read, was as followeth. Resolved, That King James the Second, having Endeavoured to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by Breaking the Original Contract between King and People; and by the Advice of Jesuits, and other Wicked Person's, having violated the Fundamental Laws, and With-drawn himself out of the Kingdom, hath Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant. Resolved, That this House do agree with the Committee, That King James the Second, having Endeavoured to Subvert the Con∣stitution of the Kingdom, by Breaking the Original Contract between King and Peo∣ple; and by the Advice of the Jesuits,
and other wicked Persons, having Violated the Fundamental Laws, and having With∣drawn himself out of the Kingdom, hath Abdicated the Government; and that the Throne is thereby Vacant. Ordered, That Mr. Hamden do carry up the said Resolution to the Lords for their Concurrence. And it was carryed up to the the Lords, by Mr. Hamden, accor∣dingly. Sabbath. 2 die Feb, 1688. A Message from the Lords to the Commons, by Sir Miles Cook and Mr. Methwin, Two Masters in Chancery at∣tending the House of Lords. Mr. SPEAKER, The Lords have considered of the Vote of this House of the 28th. of January last, to which they concur with Amend∣ments; unto which Amendments they desire the Concurrence of this House. The Amendments made by the Lords to the Votes sent up to them from this House, the 28th. of January, were Read, and are as followeth, L. 8. Instead of the Word Abdicated Read Deserted.
L. 9. Leave out these Words, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant. Lunae 4 die Feb. 1688. To the First Amendment, Proposed by the Lords to be made to the Vote of the Commons of the 28th. of Janu∣ary, instead of the Word Abdicated, to insert the Word Deserted, the Com∣mons do not agree; because the Word Deserted doth not fully express the Conclusion necessarily inferred from the Premises, which your Lordships have agreed; for your Lordships have agreed, That King James the Second hath Endea∣voured to Subvert the Constitutions of the Kingdom, by breaking the Original Con∣tract between King and People, and hath Violated the Fundamental Laws, and With∣drawn himself out of the Kingdom. Now the Word Deserted respects only the With-drawing, but the Word Abdica∣ted respects the whole; for which Purpose the Commons made choice of it. The Commons do not agree to the Second Amendment to leave out the Words, And that the Throne is there∣by Vacant.
1st. Because they conceive, that, as they may well infer from so much of their own Vote as your Lordships have agreed unto, That King James the Second has Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant; so that if they should admit your Lord∣ships Amendment that he hath only De∣serted the Government; yet, even thence, it would follow that the Throne is Va∣cant as to King James the Second, Deser∣ting the Government, being in true Construction, Deserting the Throne. 2dly. The Commons conceive they need not prove unto your Lordships, That, as to any other Person, the Throne is also Vacant; your Lordships (as they conceive) having already admitted it, by your Addressing to the Prince of Orange the 25th. of December last, To take upon him the Administration of Pub∣lick Affairs, both Civil and Military; and to take into his Care the Kingdom of Ireland, till the meeting of this Conventi∣on. In pursuance of such Letters, and by your Lordships renewing the same
Address to his Highness, (as to Publick Affairs, and the Kingdom of Ireland,) since you met, and by Appointing Days of Publick Thanksgivings to be Observed throughout the whole Kingdom, all which the Commons conceive to apply that it was your Lordships Opinion, That the Throne was Vacant, and to sig∣nify so much to the People of this Kingdom. 3dly. It is from those who are upon the Throne of England (when there are any such) from whom the People of Eng∣land ought to receive Protection; and to whom, for that cause, they owe the Allegiance of Subjects; but there being none now from whom they expect Re∣gal Prrotection, and to whom, for that cause, they owe the Allegiance of Sub∣jects, the Commons conceive, The Throne is Vacant. Resolved, That the Earl of Wiltshire do go up to the Lords to desire a Conference upon the Subject matter of the Amendments. The Earl of Wiltshire Reports, That, he having attended the Lords to desire
a Conference, they had given Answer, That they did consent to a Conference im∣mediately in the Painted Chamber. Resolved, That the Comittee to whom it was referred to prepare Heads of Reasons at a Conference with the Lords, be the Managers of the said Conference. Mr. Hamden, Reports from the Com∣mittee appointed to Manage the Con∣ference with the Lords, That they had Attended the Lords at the Conference, and Communicated unto their Lord∣ships the Reasons why this House doth not Concur with their Lordships in the said Amendments. Martis 5 die Feb. 1688. Mr. Hamden Reports from the Con∣ference with the Lords, that the Earl of Nottingham spoke to this Effect, That the Lords had desired this Conference with the Commons, that they might be as happily United to the Commons in Opinion, as they are inseparable in their Interest; and that they are, at this time, uneasy that they cannot Concur with the
Commons in every thing; because it is of so great a Concern to the Nation, and from so great and Wise a Body. That he then delivered what the Lords had done in Reference to the Subject Matter of the last Conference, and said;  That the Lords did insist upon the First Amendment of the Vote of the House of Commons of the 25th. of January last, instead of the Word Abdicated, to have the Word Desert∣ed. 1st. Because the Lords do not find, that the Word Abdicated is a Word known to the Common Law of England and the Lords hope the Commons will agree to make use of such Words only, whereof the Meaning may be understood according to Law, and not of such as will be liable to doubtful Interpretations. 2dly.  Because in the most common Acceptation of the Civil Law, Abdica∣tion is a Voluntary Express Act of Renuntiation, which is not in this Case, and doth not follow from the Premises, That King James the
Second, by having With-drawn himself, after having endeavoured to Subvert the Constitution of the Government, by Break∣ing the Original Contract between King and People, and having Violated the Fun∣damental Laws, may be more properly said to have Abdicated, than Deserted. He said the Lords did Insist on the Second Amendment, to leave out the Words, And that the Throne is Vacant, for this Reason. For that although the Lords have agreed, that the King has Deserted the Government, and therefore have made Application to the Prince of Orange, To take upon him the Administration of the Government, and thereby to Provide for the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, yet there can be no other Inference drawn from thence, but only that the Exercise of the Government by King James the Second is Ceased; so as the Lords were, and are willing, to secure the Nation against the Re∣turn of the said King into this King∣dom; but not that there was either such an Abdication by him, or such a
Vacancy in the Throne, as that the Crown was thereby become Elective, which they cannot agree. I. Because, by the Constitution of the Government, the Monarchy is Heredita∣ry, and not Elective. II. Because no Act of the King alone can Barr, or Destroy the Right of his Heirs to the Crown; and therefore in Answer to the Third Reason alledg'd by the House of Commons, If the Throne be Vacant of King James the Second, Al∣legiance is due to such Person as the Right of Succession doth belong to. The Question being put that this House do agree with the Lords in the said First Amendment. It passed in the Negative. The Question being put that this House do agree with the Lords in the said Second Amendment. The House divided. The Yea's go forth, The Tellers for the Yea's, Sir Joseph Tredenham, and Mr. Gwyn. 151. The Tellers for the No's, Mr. Colt, and Mr. Herbert. 282.
And so it was Resolved in the Ne∣gative. Resolved, That a free Conference be desired with the Lords upon the Subject Matter of the last Conference. Ordered, That it be Referred unto, Sr. Robert Howard. Mr. Polexfyn. Mr. Paul Foley. Mr. Serj. Maynard. Mr. Serjeant Holt. Lord Faukland. Sr. George Treby. Mr. Sommers. Mr. Garraway. Mr. Buscowen. Sr. Tho. Littleton. Mr. Palmer. Mr. Hamden. Sr. Henry Capel. Sr. Thomas Lee. Mr. Secheveril. Major Wildman. Collonel Birch. Mr. Ayres. Sr. Richard Temple. Sr. Henry Goodrick. Mr. Waller. Sr. John Guyes. To manage the Conference. Ordered, That Mr. Dolbin do go up to the Lords, and desire a free Conference with the Lords upon the Subject Matter of the last Conference.
Mr. Dolben Reported, That he having (according to the Order of this House) attended the Lords to desire a Free Con∣ference with their Lordships, upon the Subject Matter of the last Conference, they had agreed to a Free Conference presently in the Painted Chamber. And the Managers went to a Free Confe∣rence, at the Free Conference in the Painted Chamber. Mr. H—den. MY Lords, the Commons have de∣sired this Free Conference from your Lordships upon the Subject Mat∣ter of the last Conference, that they may make appear unto your Lordships that it is not without suffitient Rea∣son, that they are Induced to Main∣tain their own Vote, to which your Lordships have made some Amend∣ments; and that they cannot agree to those Amendments made by your Lord∣ships for the same Reasons. My Lords, the Commons do very rea∣dily agree with your Lordships, That it
is a Matter of the greatest Concern∣ment to the Kingdom in general, its future Peace, and happy Government, and the Protestant Interest, both at Home and Abroad, that there be a good Issue and Determination of the Business now in Debate between Both Houses, and a speedy one as can con∣sist with the Doing of it in the best manner. This way of Intercourse be∣tween Both Houses by Free Conference, where there is full Liberty of Objecting, Answering, and Replying, the Com∣mons think the best Means to attain this End, and to Maintain a good Correspondence between Both Houses, which is so necessary at all Times, but more especially in the present Conjun∣cture; this, my Lords, will bring Ho∣nour and Strength to the Foundation that shall be laid after our late Con∣vulsions, and discourage our Enemies from Attempting to Undermyne it. It is true, my Lords, the present Difference between your Lordships and the Commons is only about a few Words; but the Commons think their
Words so Significant to the Purpose for which they are used, and so Pro∣per to the Case unto which they are applyed, that in so Weighty a Matter as that now in Debate, that they are by no means to be parted with: The Word Abdicated, the Commons conceive is of larger Signification than the Word your Lordships are pleased to use Desert; but not too large to be applyed to all the Recitals in the Begin∣ing of the Commons Vote, to which they meant it should be applyed. Nor ought it to be Restrained to a Volun∣tary Express Resignation, only in Word or Writing, Overt-Acts there are that will be significant enough to amount to it. My Lords, that the Common Law of England is not acquainted with the Word, it is from the Modesty of our Law, that it is not willing to suppose there should be any Unfortunate Oc∣casion of making use of it: And we would have been willing that we should never have had such an Occa∣sion as we have to have Recourse to
it. Your Lordships next Amendment is, that your Lordships have left out the last Words in the Commons Vote, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant. My Lords, the Commons conceive it is a true Proposition, and That the Throne is Vacant; and, they think, they make it appear, that that is no new Phrase; neither is it a Phrase that perhaps some of the old Records may be Strangers to; or not well acquainted with: But they think it not chargeable with the Consequences that your Lord∣ships have been pleased to draw from it, That it will make the Crown of En∣gland become Elective. If the Throne had been full, we know your Lord∣Ships would have assigned that, as a Reason of your Disagreement, by tel∣ling us who filled it; and it would be known by some Publick Royal Act, which might notify to the People in whom the Kingly Government resided; neither of which has been done; and yet your Londships will not allow the Throne to be Vacant.
My Lords, I am unwilling to detain your Lordships longer, from what may be better said for your Lordships Sa∣tisfaction in these Matters, by those whose Province it is: I am to acquaint your Lordships, that the Commons do agree, it is an Affair of very great Im∣portance. Here are other Gentlemen that are appointed to manage this Con∣ference, and will give their Assistance to bring it, we hope, to a happy Con∣clusion, in the Agreement of Both Houses, in this so very a Considera∣ble Point. Mr. S—rs. My Lords, what is appointed me to Speak to, is your Lordships First A∣mendment, by which the Word Abdi∣cated, in the Commons Vote, is chang∣ed into the Word Deserted; and I am to acquaint your Lordships what some of the Grounds are, that induced the Commons to insist upon the Word Ab∣dicated, and not to agree to your Lordships Amendment.
1st. The First Reason your Lordships are pleased to deliver, as for your Changing the Word is, That the Word Abdicated your Lordships do not find, is a Word known to the Common Law of England; and therefore ought not to be Used: And the next is, That the com∣mon Acceptation of the Word amounts to a Voluntary express Act of Renuntiation which (your Lordships say) is not, in this Case, nor will follow from the Pre∣mises. My Lords, as to the First of these Reasons, if it be an Objection, that the Word Abdicated hath not a known Sence in the Common Law of England, there is the same Objection against the Word Deserted; for there can be no Authority, or Book of Law produced, wherein any determined Sence is given to the Word Deserted: So that your Lordships first Reason hath the same Force against your own Amendment, as it hath against the Term used by the Commons.
The Words are both Latin Words, and used in the best Authors, and both of a known Signification; their Mean∣ing is very well understood; though it be true, their Meaning be not the same: The Word Abdicate doth natu∣rally and properly signify Entirely to Re∣nounce, Throw off, Disown, Relinquish a∣ny thing or Person, so as to have no fur∣ther to do with it; and that whether it be done by Express Words, or in Writing, (which is the Sence your Lordships put upon it, and which is properly called Re∣signation or Ceasion) or, by Doing such Acts as are Inconsistent with the Holding, or Retaining of the Thing; which the Com∣mons take to be the present Case, and therefore made Choice of the Word Ab∣dicate, as that which they thought did, above all others, most properly express that meaning: And in this latter Sence it is taken by Others, and that it is the true Signification of the Word, I shall shew your Lordships out of the best Authors: The First I shall mention is Grotius de Jure Belli & Pacis, L. 2. C. 4. S. 4.
Venit enim hoc non ex jure civili, ex jure naturali, quo quis{que} suum potest abdicare, & ex naturali Praesumptione qua voluisse, quis creditur, quod sufficienter significavit. And then he goes on, Recusari Haeredi∣tas non tantum verbis, sed etiam re potest, & quovis indicio voluntatis. Another Instance, which I shall men∣tion, to shew that for the Abdicate∣ing a thing, it is suffitient to do an Act which is inconsistent with the Re∣taining it, though there be nothing of an Express Renuntiation, is out of Cal∣vin's Lexicon Juridicum, where he says, (Generum abdicat, qui sponsam repudiat:) He that Divorceth his Wife, Abdicates his Son in Law. Here is an Abdication without Express Words; but is by doing such an Act as doth suffitiently signify his Purpose. The next Author, that I shall Quote, is Brisonius, de Verborum significatione who hath this Passage, Homo liber qui seipsum vendit, abdicat se statu suo: that is, He who sells himself, hath thereby done such
an Act as cannot consist with his former Estate of Freedom; and is therefore pro∣perly said, se abdicasse statu suo. Budaeus, in his Commentaries ad Le∣gem secundam, de Origine Juris, Expounds the Words in the same Sence, Abdicare se Magistratu est idem quod abire poenitus Magistratu:) He that goes out of his Office of Magistracy, let it be in what manner he will, has Abdicated the Ma∣gistracy. And Grotius, in his Book de Jure Belli & Pacis, L. 1. C. 4. S. 9. seems to expound the Word Abdicare, by ma∣nifeste habere pro derelicto: That is, That he who hath Abdicated any thing, hath so far Relinquished it, that he hath no Right of Return to it. And that is the Sence the Commons put upon the Word: It is an Entire Alienation of the Thing; and so stands in Opposition to Dicate: Di cat qui proprium aliquod facit; abdicat qui alienat, so says Pralejus in his Lexicon Juris. It is therefore insisted upon as the Proper Word by the Commons.
But the Word Deserted (which is the Word used in the Amendment made by your Lordships) hath not only a very doubtful Signification; but in the common Acceptance both of the Ci∣vil and Cannon Law, doth signify on∣ly a Bare With-drawing, a Temporary Quit∣ting of a Thing,and Neglect only, which leaveth the Party at Liberty of Returning to it again. Desertum pro Neglecto, says Spigelius in his Lexicon: But the Diffe∣rence between Disserere and Derelinqui∣re, is expresly layd down by Bartolus, up∣on the 8th. Law of 58th. Title of the 11th. Book of the Code, and his Words are these, Nota diligenter ex hac Lege, quod aliud est Agrum disserere, aliud dere∣linquire; qui enim derelinquit, ipsum ex poenitentia non revocat: sed qui deseret, intra biennium potest. Whereby it appears, my Lords, that, that is called Desertion, which is Tem∣porary and Relieveable: That is called Dereliction, where there is no Power of Right to Return.
So in the best Latin Authors, and in the Civil Law, Deserere Exercitum is used to signify, Soldiers leaveing their Co∣lours, Cod. Lib. 12. S. 1. And in the Cannon Law, to Desert a Benefice, signifies no more than to be Non-Resident; so is Calvin's Lexicon, Verb. Desert. secund. Canones. In both Cases, the Party hath not only a Right of Returning; but is Bound to Return again: Which, my Lords, as the Commons do not take to be the present Case; so they cannot think that your Lordships do; because it is ex∣presly said, in One of your Reasons gi∣ven in Defence of the last Amendment, That your Lordships have been, and are willing, to secure the Nation against the Return of King James; which your Lordships would not, in Justice, do, if you did look upon it no more than a Negligent With-drawing, which leaveth a Liberty to the Party to Return. For which Reasons, my Lords the
Commons cannot agree to the First Amendment, to insert the word De∣serted instead of Abdicated; because it doth not, in any sort, come up to their Sence of the thing: So, they do apprehend, it doth not reach your Lordships meaning, as it is expressed in your Reasons; whereas they look upon the Word Abdicated to express pro∣perly what is to be inferred from that Part of the Vote to which your Lord∣ships have agreed, That King James the Second, by going about to Subvert the Constitution, and by Breaking the Origi∣nal Contract between King and People and by Violating the Fundamental Laws, and With-drawing himself out of the Kingdom, hath thereby Renounced to be a King according to the Constitution, by avowing to Govern by a Despotick Power, unknown to the Constitution, and Inconsistent with it; he hath Re∣nounced to be a King according to the Law, such a King as he Swore to be at the Coronation, such a King to whom the Allegiance of an English Subject is due; and hath set up anō∣ther
kind of Dominion, which is to all Intents an Abdication or Abandoning of his Legal Title, as fully as if it had been done by express Words, And, my Lords, for these Reasons the Commons do insist upon the Word Abdicated, and cannot agree to the Word Deserted. Mr. Serjeant H—lt. My Lords, I am commanded, by the Commons, to assist in the Management of this Conference, and am to speak to the same Point that the Gentleman did, who spoke last to your Lordships First Amendment. As to the First of your Lordships Reasons, for that Amendment, (with Submission to your Lordships) I do conceive it not Suffitient to alter the Minds of the Commons; or to induce them to change the Word Abdi∣cated for your Lordships Word Deser∣ted.
Your Lordships Reason is, That it is not a Word that is known to the Common Law of England. But, my Lords, the Question is not so much, Whether it be a Word as Antient as the Common Law, (though it may be too) for that will be no Objection against the Use∣ing it, if it be a Word of a known and certain Signification; because that we think, will Justify the Commons making use of it, according to your Lordships own Expression. That it is an Antient Word, appears by the Authors that have been Quo∣ted, and its frequently met with in the best of Roman Writers, as Cicero, &c. And by the Derivation from Dico, an Antient Latin Word. That now it is a known English Word, and of a known and certain Significa∣tion with us, I will Quote to your Lordships an English Authority, and that is the Dictionary set forth by our
Countryman Minshaw, who hath the Word Abdicate as an English Word, and says that it signifies to Renounce, which is the Signification the Commons would have of it: So that I hope your Lordships will not find Fault with their useing a Word that is so Antient in it self, and that hath such certain Signification in our own Language. Then, my Lords, for that Part of your Lordships Objection, That it is not a Word known to the Common Law of En∣gland, that cannot prevail; for, your Lordships very well know, we have ve∣ry few Words in our Tongue that are of equal Antiquity with the common Law; your Lordships know the Language of England is altered greatly in the several Successions of Time, and the Intermix∣ture of other Nations; and if we should be Obliged to make use only of Words then known and in use, what we should deliver in such a Dialect would be very Difficult to be Understood. Your Lordships Second Reason, for
your First Amendment in changing the Word Abdicated for the Word Deserted is, Because in the most common Acceptation of the Civil Law Abdication is a Voluntary Express Act of Renuntiation. That is the general Acceptation of the Word, and, I think, the Commons do so use the Word in this Case, because it hath that Signification: But I do not know, whether your Lordships mean a Volun∣tary express Act or formal Deed of Re∣nuntiation: If you do so, I confess I know of none in this Case: But, my Lords, both in the Common Law of England, and the Civil Law, and in common Understanding, there are Ex∣press Acts of Renuntiation that are not by Deed; for if your Lordships please to observe, the Government and Magi∣stracy is under a Trust, and any Act∣ing contrary to that Trust is a Renoun∣cing of the Trust, though it be not a Renouncing by formal Deed; For it is a plain Declaration, by Act and Deed, though not in Writing, that he, who hath the Trust, Acting contrary, is a Disclaimer of the Trust; especially
my Lords, if the Actings be such as are Inconsistent with, and Subversive of this Trust: For, how can a Man in Rea∣son, or Sense, express a greater Renun∣tiation of a Trust, than by the Con∣stant Declarations of his Actions to be quite contrary to that Trust? This, my Lords, is so plain, both in Understanding and Practice, that I need do no more but Repeat it again, and leave it with your Lordships, That the doing an Act inconsistent with the Being and End of a Thing, or that shall not Answer the End of that Thing, but quite the contrary, that shall be Constru∣ed an Abbication and Formal Renunti∣ation of that Thing. Earl of N—m. Gentlemen, you of the Committee of the Commons, we differ from you indeed about the Words Abdicated and Deserted; but the main Reason of the Change of the Word and Difference, is upon the Account of the Consequence
drawn in the Conclusion of your Vote, That the Throne is thereby Vacant: that is, What the Commons mean by that Ex∣pression, whether you mean it is so Va∣cant as to null the Succession in the He∣reditary Line, & so all the Heirs to be cut off, which we say will make the Crown Elective? And it may be fit for us to settle that matter first, and when we know what the Consequence of The Throne being Vacant means in the Vote as you understand it, I believe we shall be much better able to settle the Difference about the Two Words. Mr. Serjeant M—d. My Lords, when there is a present Defect of One to exercise the Admi¦nistration of the Government, I con∣ceive, the Declaring a Vacancy, and Provision of a Supply for it, can never make the Crown Elective. The Commons apprehend there is such a Defect now; and, by consequence a present Necessity for the Supply of
the Government, and that will be next for your Lordships Consideration, and theirs afterwards. If the attempting the utter Destructi∣on of the Subject, and Subvertion of the Constitution, be not as much an Abdication as the attempting of a Father to Cut his Son's Throat, I know not what is. My Lords, the Constitution, notwith∣standing the Vacancy, is the same; the Laws that are the Foundations and Rules of that Constitution are the same: But if there be in any particular In∣stance, a Breach of that Constitution, that will be an Abdication; and that Abdication will infer a Vacancy. It is not that, the Commons do say, the Crown of England is alway and per∣petually Elective; but it is more neces∣sary that there be a Supply when there is a Defect, and the Doing of that will be no Alteration of the Monarchy from a Successive One to an Elective.
Lord Bishop of E—ly. Gentlemen, the Two Amendments made by the Lords, to the Vote of the Commons, are as to the Word Abdica∣ted, and as to the Vacancy of the Throne: That Abdicated may be Tacitely by some Overt-Acts, that Gentleman, (I think I may name him without Offence) Mr. Sommers, very truly did alledge out of Grotius: But, I desire to know, Whe∣ther Grotius, that great Author, in Treating on this Subject, doth not in∣terpose this Caution, If there be a Yield∣ing to the Times: If there be a going away, with a Purpose of seeking to Recover what is, for the present, Left or Forsaken: In plain English, If there were any thing of Force or just Fear in the Case, that doth void the Notion of Abdication: I speak not of Male-Administration, now of that hereafter. Mr. Serjeant M—rd. But, my Lords, that is not any Part of the Case declared by the Commons
in this Vote, when the whole Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, our Laws and Liberties, have been in Danger of being Subverted, an Enquiry must be made into the Authors and Instruments of this Attempt; and if he, who had the Administration intrusted to him, be found the Author and Actor in it, What can that be, but a Renuntiation of his Trust, and consequently his Place thereby Vacant? My Lords, Abdication (under Favour) is an English Word; and, your Lordships have told us, the true Signification of it is a Renuntiation. We have indeed, for your Lordships Satisfaction, shewn its meaning in Foreign Authors; it is more than a Deserting the Government, or Leaving it with a Purpose of Return∣ing. But we are not, I hope, to go to learn English from Foreign Authors, we can, without their Aid, tell the mean∣ing of our own Tongue.
If Two of us make a mutual Agree∣ment, to Help and Defend each other from any one that should Assault us in a Journey, and that he that is with me turns upon me and breaks my Head, he hath, undoubtedly, Abdicated my As∣sistance and Revoked. Lord Bishop of E—ly. The Objection of the Lords against the Word Abdicated, is, That it is of too large a Signification for the Case in Hand. It seems to be acknowledged, that it reacheth a great Way; and therefore the Lords would have a Word made use of, which (by the Acknow∣ledgment of that learned Gentleman) signifieth only, The Ceasure of the Ex∣ercise of a Right. If there be such a Defect as hath been Spoken of, it must be Supplyed; there is no Question of that. And I think we have, by another Vote, declared, That it is Inconsistent
with our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, to have a Papist to Rule over this King∣dom. Which I take to be only as to the Actual Exercise and Administration of the Government. It is Grotius his Distinction between a Right, and the Exercise of that Right; and, as there is a Natural Incapacity for the Exercise, as Sickness, Lunacy, Infancy, Doating Old Age, or an Incurable Dis∣ease, rendring the Party Unfit for Hu∣man Society, as Leprosie, or the like; so I take it, there is a Moral Incapacity; and, that, I conceive to be a full Irre∣moveable Perswasion in a false Religion, contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity. Then there must be a Provision, un∣doubtedly, made for Supplying this Defect in the Exercise, and an Inter∣mediate Government taken care for; because become necessary for the Sup∣port of the Government, if he to whom the Right of Succession doth belong makes the Exercise of his Government Unpracticable, and our Obedience to
him, Consistently with the Constituti∣on of our Religion, Impossible; but that, I take it, doth not alter that Right, nor is an Abdication of the Right. Abdication, no doubt, is by Adapti∣on, an English Word; and well known to English Men conversant in Books: Nor is it Objected, that it is not a Word as Antient, as it may be more Antient than the common Law of England; we find it in Cicero, and other old Roman Writers. But, as to Cicero, I would observe that there is a double Use of the Word; sometimes it is mentioned with a Pre∣position, and then it signifies the Re∣nouncing a Actual Exercise of a Right, as Abdicare a Triumpho: And, sometimes it hath the Accusative Case following it, and then it signifies the Renouncing of the very Right, as that which was men∣tioned, Abdicare Magistratum; so that the Signification (as the Lords in their Reason) is doubtful: And such Words,
we hope, the Commons will not think fit to use in a Case of this Nature and Consequence, as ours now in Debate. And besides, the Lords apprehended that great Inconveniencies will follow upon the Use of this Word, if it mean a Renouncing absolutely of the Right. It seems the Commons do not draw the Word Abdicated from His With∣drawing himself out of the Kingdom; for then Deserted would (no Doubt) have Answered. That Abdication is the same, whether a Man go out of the Kingdom, or stay in it; for it is not to be esteemed according to the Place, but the Power. If a Man stays in the Kingdom, this is Abdicare, with a Preposition, to Abdi∣cate the Exercise of the Government, but not the Right of Governing, according to the Constitution; and to such an Ab∣dication, (if it be so declared) my Lords, I believe, may soon agree.
Then, Gentlemen, there is another Distinction in those Authors that Writ concerning this Point, which are chiefly the Civilians; there may be an Abdicati∣on that may Forfeit the Power of a King only; and there may be One, that may Forfeit both that and the Crown too. It is a Distinction indeed in other Words, but to the same Sence: I will tell you presently why I use it. Those Abdications that are of Power on∣ly, are Incapacities; whether those I call Natural and Involuntary, as Defects of Sence, Age, or Body, or the like; or Moral and Voluntary, as Contrariety in Religion; an Instance whereof there was lately in Portugal, which was a For∣feiture only of the Power, and not of the Name and Honour of a King; for though the Administration was put into the youn∣ger Brother's Hand, the Pattents, and other Publick Instruments ran in the Elder Brothers's Name. This not, without all Doubt, Na∣turally
an Abdication in the full Extent of the Word; nor do I here (as I said) consider, whether that the King be gone out of the Kingdom, or stay in it; but only, whether he be fit for the Ad∣ministration, which must be Provided for, be he here, or gone away. But the highest Instance of an Abdi∣cation is, when a Prince is not only Unable to execute his Power, but Acts quite contrary to it; which will not be Answered by so bare a Word as En∣deavour. I take these to be all the Distinctions of Abdications. Now, if this last Instance of an Ab∣dication of both Power and Right, take Place in a Succeeding Monarchy, the Con∣sequence will be, That there is a Forfei∣ture of the whole Right; and then that Hereditary Succession is cut off; which I believe is not intended by the Com∣mons: There is indeed one Instance of the Use of such an Abdication in
Monarchy, and that is, that of Poland; and such an Abdication there makes the Throne Vacant; and those with, and in whom the Power is Invested of making Laws, (to wit the Senate) appoint one to Fit it: But that, and whatever other Instances of the like kind, these may be all of Elective Kingdoms; for though some of them are, or may be in King∣doms now Hereditary, yet they were, in those times, Elective, and since altered into Hereditary Successions. But, here is One thing, that is men∣tioned in this Vote, which I would have well considered, for the Preser∣vation of the Succession, and that is the Original Compact: We must think sure that meant of the Compact, that was made at the first Time, when the Go∣vernment was first Instituted, and the Conditions that each Part of the Go∣vernment should observe on their Part, of which this was the most Funda∣mental, That King, Lords, and Commons, in Parliament Assembled, should have the Power of making New Laws, and altering
of Old Ones: And that being one Law which settles the Succession, It is as much Part of the Original Compact as any: Then if such a Case happens, as an Abdication in a Successive Kingdom, with∣out Doubt, the Compact being made to the King, his Heirs, and Successors, the Disposition of the Crown cannot fall to us till all the Heirs do Abdicate too. There are indeed many Examples, and too many Interruptions in the Lineal Succession of the Crown of England: I think, I can instance in Seven since the Conquest, wherein the Right Heir hath been put by: But that doth not follow, that every Breach of the First Original Contract, gives us Power to Dispose of the Lineal Succession; especially, I think, since the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, and King James the first, that have E∣stablished the Oath of Allegiance to the King, his Heirs, and Successors, the Law is stronger against such a Disposition: I grant that from King William the First, to King Henry the Eighth, there has been Seaven Interruptions of the Legal Line of Hereditary Succession; but, I say, those
Statutes are made since that time, and the making of New Laws being as much a Part of the Original Compact, as the Observing Old Ones, or any thing else, we are Obliged to pursue those Laws, till altered by the Legislative Power, which singly, or joyntly, without the Royal Assent, I suppose, we do not pretend to; and these Laws being made since the last Interruption, we are not to go by any President that was made before the making those Laws. So that, all that I conceive, ought to be meant by our Vote is, But a Setting aside the Person that Broke the Contract: And, in a Successive Kingdom, an Abdi∣cation can only be a Forfeiture, as to the Person himself. I hope, and am perswaded, that both Lords and Commons do agree in this, Not to break the Line of Succession, so as to make the Crown Elective: And, if that be declared, that this Abdication of King James the Second reacheth no far∣ther than himself; and that it is to con∣tinue
in the Right Line of Succession, that I hope, will make all of One Mind, in this important Affair. Earl of C—n. As I remember, Mr. Sommers, who spoke to the signification of the Word Abdicated, did Quote Grotius, Galvin's Lexicon, and other Civil Lawyers, where the Express Words make it to be a Voluntary Act; and so are all the Instances that ever I Read or Heard of; that is, there either was some Formal Deed of Renuntiation, or Resig∣nation; or some Voluntary Act done of the Party's own; and such whereby they have shewn they did Devest themselves of the Royalties. I think truly, Gentlemen, it is very apparent that the King, in this Case, hath done nothing of this Nature: It is indeed said, by that learn'd and inge∣nious Gentleman, Mr. Sommers, That it may arise from the Facts, that in the Vote it has been declar'd he hath done, breaking
the Fundamental Laws, and the Origi∣nal Contract: and endeavouring to Sub∣vert the Constitution of the Kingdom. I will not discourse the Particulars that have been alledged, to make out this Charge; But I may say this much in General, That this Breaking the Origi∣nal Contract, is a Language that hath not been long used in this Place; nor known in any of our Law-Books, or Publick Records: It is sprung up, but as taken from some late Authors, and those none of the best received; and the very Phrase might bear a great Debate, if that were now to be spo∣ken to. Mr. Sommers did likewise speak something to the particular Case, and the Grounds of the Vote; he said, The King is Bounded by Law, and bound to perform the Laws made, and to be made. That is not denyed; I would take Notice, that his Obligation there∣unto doth not proceed from his Co∣ronation Oath; for our Law saith, He is as much King before he is Crowned, as he is afterwards; And there is a Na∣tural Allegiance due to him from the Sub∣jects
immediately upon the Descent of the Crown upon him. And though it is a very requisite Ceremony, to put him under a farther Obligation by the Con∣science of his Oath; yet I think it will not, nor can be denyed but that, as King, he was bound to Observe the Laws before; and no Body will make that Oath to be the Original Contract, as I suppose. But, my Lords and Gentlemen, if you do admit that it was never intend∣ed, by the House of Commons, to re∣late any further than to this King him∣self, I believe my own Opinion would concur to secure us against his Return to Govern us: But then, Why is there such a Contention about a Word? Doth all this imply more than Desertion? But it is said, that Abdication doth imply a perfect Renuntiation, which I cannot see how it is in this Case, so as to leave us at Liberty to supply as we please, and break the Line of Succession.
Mr. Serjeant Maynard says, That it is not indeed to make the Government per∣petually Elective. I would know, what he means by Perpetually: Our Breaking through the Line now, by a Choice out of the Lineal Course, is an Alteration and a President: And why may not others take the same Liberty we doe? And, Will not that make it Perpetually Elective? But truly, I think, no Act of ours can alter the Lineal Succession; for, by all the Laws we have now in Being, our Government appears to be Heredita∣ry in a Right Line of Descent: And up∣on any Descent, when any one ceaseth to be King, Allegiance is by Law due to his Legal Heirs, as Successor, before Co∣ronation, as after, I was in great Hopes that you would have offer'd something in Answer to One of my Lord's Reasons against that part of the Vote, which declares, The Throne to be Vacant.
That no Act of the King's alone can Bar or Destroy the Right of his Heir to the Crown, which is Hereditary, and not Elective. And then, if this matter goes no farther than King James the Second, in his own Person, How comes the Vacancy and the Supply to be Devolved upon the People? For if he only be set Aside, then it is apparent, whether the Crown is to go, to the Person that hath the next Right of Succession; and consequently there is no Vacancy. Earl of N—m. Gentlemen, I would not Protract Time, which is now so necessary to be Husbanded; nor perplex Debates a∣bout any Affair like that which lies now before us, It is not a Question barely about Words, but Things, which we are now Disputing. The Word Abdicated, it is agreed by Mr. Sommers, is a Word of Art; and he hath told us what its Significa∣tion is, from those that are Skilled
in the Art to which it belongs: He doth acknowledge that it is no Law∣word among English Lawyers; nor known to the Common Law: But then he saith, neither is the Word, used by the Lords, Deserted. I agree to him, that neither the One, or the Other are Words used in our Law; but the Inference I would draw thence is this, That we have no words applicable to this Case; because we never before had such a Case; and we must not draw Inferences of Law in such a Case, that are not deducible from Rules well known in our Laws. I will not Dispute what the Sence of the word Abdication is in the Civil Law; but that it is a Civil Law Word, is agreed to by me; and if it be, for that Reason, I am against using of it; because I am so much in Love with our own Laws, that I would use no VVords in a Case that so much concerns our Legal Constitution, but what are fetched from thence.
I hope I shall never see our old Laws altered; or if they be, God for∣bid, we should be the Voluntary A∣gents in such an Alteration. But, then we are told the Word Deserted doth not reach our Case; because the Signification of the Word is but a Temporary Leaveing, or Forsaking of his Power, which he may Reassume; nay, which in some Cases there is a Du∣ty upon him to Return unto. If that were all, Mr. Sommers hath given him∣self an Answer to that Objection, out of what he alledges of the Lords Rea∣sons, who have declared that they are willing, To secure the Nation against the Return of King James into this Kingdom; and will therefore concur with the Commons in any Act that shall be thought necessary to prevent such his Return: so that it should seem we were agreed in that Matter; and if that were the Point we should find Words proper, soon enough, to express our meaning by.
But, I find neither of these Words will, on the One Side or on the O∣ther, be allowed to signify this Mean∣ing; therefore we should (as I take it) come presently to think of some other that would. But, the Reasons why my Lords did chiefly insist upon the Alteration of the Word Abdicated was, Because they did apprehend, that it being a Word not known to our Laws, there might be other Inferences drawn from it than they do apprehend our Laws will War∣rant, from the Case, as it is stated in the Fact of this Vote; and, as they con∣ceive, is done in the concluding of the Throne's being Vacant. Therefore, I think it would shorten the present Debate, if we did settle that Point first; and, as we frequent∣ly in Parliamentary Proceedings, Post∣pone this, and that Paragraph in a Bill, till some others that may be thought fit to be Determined first, be agreed to, so we should Postpone the Debate about the word Abdicate, till the Vacancy of the Throne be Settled; for
if we were sure that the Throne were, or were not Vacant, we should easily light upon what Word were Proper to be used in this Case. I should therefore Propose, that we might Debate that first, because if there be an English Word of known Signification in our Law, which should signify no more than Renouncing for a Man's self; and which would not a∣mount to so much as Setting aside the Right of Others, that Word may be used; and, if no other, the Word Renouncing it self may be taken, which would be best agreed to. Acting against a Man's Trust (says Mr. Serjeant Holt) Is a Renuntiation of that Trust. I agree it is a Violation of his Trust to Act contrary to it; and he is accountable, for that Violation, to Answer what the Trust suffers out of his own Estate: But I deny it to be presently a Renuntiation of the Trust, and that such a one is no longer a Trustee.
I beg his Pardon, if I differ from him in Opinion, whom I acknowledge to have much more Learning in his Profession than I can pretend unto; But if the Law be, as he says, in a private Case; then I must beg leave to forbear giving my Opinion in a Case of this publick Nature that is now be∣fore us, till I know what such a Trust is, and what the Law says in such a Case. If indeed, you do pretend That the Throne is Vacant, and Both Houses agree to that Conclusion; I think it will be no matter what VVord is used about it: But, if we do not agree unto that Conclusion; I think it will be afterwards easy to shew which is the fittest Word to be stood upon; or to agree on some other. I Pray therefore (to shorten the De∣bate) that you Gentlemen would speak to this Point first; and when that is Resolved, I hope we shall easily come to an Agreement about the Other.
Sir George T—by. I think, my Lords, that we may not consent to begin at the End, and first to enquire of the Conclusion, be∣fore the Premises are settled: For the Vacancy of the Throne follows, as an Inference drawn from the Acts of the King's, which are expressed most ful∣ly by the Word Abdication; and to enquire what the Consequence is, when the Fact is doubtful, from which the Consequence is to ensue, is begin∣ing at the wrong End; till we state the Fact, we can assign no Consequence at all to it: Therefore, my Lords, I think the present Debate is to begin, where the Difference between the Two Houses doth begin, and that is at the Word Abdicated; and, when that is over, we shall regularly come to the other Point in Difference. We are gone back too far, when we offer to enquire into the Original Contract, Whether any such thing is known or understood in our Law or
Constitution? or, Whether it be new Language among us? And I offer this to your Lordships Consideration for Two Reasons, First, It is a Phrase and Thing used by the Learned Mr. Hooker in his Book of Ecclesiastical Polity, whom I mention as a valuable Authority, be∣ing one of the best Men, the best Church Man, and the most Learned of our Nation in his time, and his Works are very worthily Recommended by the Testimony of King Charles the First; He alloweth, That Government did Origi∣nally begin by Compact and Agreement. But I have yet a greater Authority than this, to influence this Matter, and that is your Lordships own, who have agreed to all the Vote, but this Word Abdicated, and The Vacancy of the Throne: And therefore so much enough to be said to that; and go back to Debate what is not in Difference, is to confound our selves, instead of En∣deavouring to compose Differences.
And truly, my Lords, by what is now Proposed, I think, we are desired to go as much too far fowards, when the Vacancy of the Throne is proposed to be the Question to be first Disputed before the Abdication, from which it is rred. But sure I am, it is very much beyond what the Vote before us doth lead us unto, To talk of the Right of those in the Succession: For that goes farther han the very last Part of the Vote; and it is still to lead us yet far∣ther, to say any thing about make∣ing the Crown Elective: For, I hope, when we come to answer your Lord∣ships Reasons, we shall easily make it out, that it is not in this Case; neither was there any Occasion given by this Vote to infer any such thing: VVe shall therefore, keep the Points as they are both in Order of Place, in the Vote, and of Reason in the thing; and, as we have done hither, to speak
to the words Abdicated and Deserted, the words to be Disputed about in the First Place. Another Lord did give One Reason against the useing the VVord Abdicated, Because it is a Word belongs to the Civil Law, and said, He would by no means exchange our own English Com∣mon Law for that. I intirely concur with that Noble Lord in that Point; but he did agree to us also, That there is no such Word in our Common Law as Deserted; that is, which should signi∣fie, by the Stamp the Law puts upon it, any Sence applicable to the Matter in Hand. Then, if we must not use our VVord, because unknown to our Common Law; neither must we use your Lordships for the same Reason, and so shall be at an entire loss what VVord to use; and so, indeed, they may well come to consider the Conclusion first, who leave us at Uncertainties on what Terms we are to Discourse; and there cannot be a greater Confusion in any Debate, than to state a Conclusion without the Pre∣mises;
which we must doe, if we can∣not agree how to word the Fact we infer from. My Lords, I shall not much differ from what, in general, has been said concerning the Sence of the Word Ab∣dicated; for it seems to be agreed on all Hands that it is a Renuntiation: Neither, will I contend for an Invo∣luntary Abdication; because I think it means a Voluntary Act: But truly what your Lordships mean, in your Reason against it, by the Word Express, I can∣not so well understand. That a King may Renounce his King∣ship, I think, may be made out both in Law & Fact, as well as any other Renun∣tiation; and that, as far as I can discern, by your Lordships Reasons, and this Days Debate hitherto, is not intend∣ed to be denyed by any: Indeed some of my Lords have told us, That there 'tis meant of the Exercise of a Right which may be Renounced, without Renouncing that Right. Whether that be a true
Distinction, or no, is not very Ma∣terial: but if it be, that the very Kingship it self (as including a Right to Govern) may be Renounced, and hath been, it will be no Difficulty to make out, by Instances in all Countries, not only where the Crown is, or was E∣lective; but also where it was Heredi∣tary and Successive. If a King will Resign or Renounce, he may do so, as particularly Char. 5th. Earl of P—k. That was an express Solemn Renun∣tiation. Sir George T—by. My Lords, the particular manner of Doing it, is (I take it) not matter in Debate just now before us, till it be settled whether a King can Abdicate at all, or Resign, or Renounce his Kingship at all; this then being granted That a King may Renounce, may Resign, may
Part with his Office, as well as the Exer∣cise of it; then the Question indeed is, Whether this King hath done so, or no? That he may do it, I take it for gran∣ted, it being an Act of the VVill: Then let us now inquire into the Facts, as set out in the Vote, VVhether this VVill of his be manifest? for that you have heard it may be discovered several ways; the Discovery may be by VVri∣ting, it may be by VVords, it may be by Facts: Grotius himself, and all Au∣thors, that treat of this Matter and the Nature of it do agree, That if there be any Word, or Action that doth suffiti∣ently manifest the Intention of the Mind and Will, to part with his Office; that will amount to an Abdication, or Re∣nouncing. Now, my Lords, I beg leave to put this Case, That had King James the II. come here into the Assembly of Lords and Commons, and expressed himself in VVriting, or VVords, to this Purpose, I was Born an Heir to the Crown of
England, which is a Government limi∣ted by Laws, made in full Parliament by King, Nobles, and Commonalty; and, upon the Death of my last Prede∣cessor, I am in Possession of the Throne; and, now I find, I cannot make Laws without the Consent of the Lords and Representatives of the Commons in Par∣liament; I cannot suspend Laws that have been so made, without the Con∣sent of my People; this indeed is the Title of Kingship I hold by Original Contract, and the Fundamental Consti¦tutions of the Government, and my Succession to, and Possession of, the Crown; on these Terms is Part of that Contract; this Part of the Contract I am weary of, I do Renounce it, I will not be obliged to Observe it; nay, I am un∣der an invincible Obligation not to com∣ply with it; I will not Execute the Laws that have been made; nor suf∣fer others to be made, as my People shall desire, for their Security in Re∣ligion, Liberty, and Property, which are the Two main Parts of the Kingly Office in this Nation. I say, suppose
he had so exprest himself, doubtless this had been a plain Renouncing of that Legal Regular Title which came to him by Descent: If then he, by Parti∣cular Acts, such as are enumerated in the Vote, has declared as much, or more than these Words can amount to, then he hath thereby declared his Will to Renounce the Government: He hath, by these Acts mentioned, mani∣festly declared that he will not Govern according to the Laws made; Nay, he cannot so doe; for he is under a Strict Obligation, (yea the strictest) and Superior to that of the Original Compact between King and People, to Act contrary to the Laws, or to Suspend them. By the Law, he is to administer Justice; aand to Execute his Office ac∣cording to the Tenour of those Laws; and, the Coronation Oath obligeth him likewise to consent to such Laws as the People shall choose: But on the contrary, by that unfortunate Perswa∣sion (in Point of Religion) that he
hath Embraced, he is Obliged to Sus∣pend the Laws that defend the Esta∣blished Religion, and to Treat it, as it has been (as we well know) cal∣led, as the Northern Heresy; and, un∣der Pain of Damnation to Extirpate it: And, in order to it, did set aside and Repeal all the legal Fences of it, with∣out Consent of Parliament. What the Endeavours and Practices of that kind have been in the last Reign, I suppose, we are not now to be told of, or Instructed in; and if (as is very Plain) this doth amount to a mani∣fest Declaration of his Will, no longer to Retain the Exercise of his Kingly Office, thus Limitted, thus Restrained, then in common Sence, as well as le∣gal Acceptation, he has suffitiently de∣clared his Renouncing of the very Office: As for his Departure out of the King∣dom, 'tis not material, whether it was Voluntary or Involuntary; but it is suffitient that his Actings declare, quo Animo, he went away, he no longer would pursue what he designed; and was so strongly Obliged unto the con∣trary,
by the Duty of his Office and Relation, and the Obligation of the Original Contract; as likewise his own Coronation Oath, and then he desires no longer to be here. So that, taking both these things together, that he will not,; nay he cannot (as thus perswaded in Point of Religion) Govern according to Law; and thereupon hath withdrawn him∣self out of the Kingdom: It is a ma∣nifest Declaration of his Express Re∣nouncing and Parting with his Kingly Office: And therefore I cannot depart from insisting upon this word Abdica∣ted, which doth so well correspond to the Fact of the Case, and so well express the true Meaning of the Com∣mons in their Vote: Nor can we Consent to the Postponeing this Point, till the other about The Vacancy of the Throne, be determined; for this is the very Foundation upon which we are to to proceed, for Establishing the Superstructure of the other Conclusion.
Earl of N—m. This Learned Gentleman that spoke last, says, It is necessary to prefer the Premises before the Conclusion, as being the Foundation of the Superstructure. Truly, I apprehend that this word Ab∣dicated was part of the Conclusion, and not of the Premises; The Vote runs thus, That by Breaking the Original Con∣tract, having endeavoured to subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, and having withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, he has Abdicated the Government, and the Throne is thereby Vacant. I take it to be (as I say) part of the Conclusion, the other part being joyned by a Copulative; therefore that which is but the other part of the Conclusion, is not to be inferred from the other part of the Premises. But take it to be (as you say) that The Vacancy of the Throne is another Di∣stinct Conclusion from all that preceded, as the Premises, and therefore it is to be
considered last; I would then beg the Favour of You, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, to answer me one Questi∣on about this Point of Abdication, Whe∣ther you mean by Abdication a Renoun∣cing for Himself, or for himself and his Heirs. If You mean only Abdication for Himself, it will have a different Influ∣ence upon the Debate and Resolution of the Case, as to the meaning of that You call the Conclusion; for then, How can the Throne be Vacant? But if it be meant for himself and his Heirs, then I apprehend it is no more than what you say at the end, That the Throne is indeed Vacant; and then this Abdication cannot be Part of the Premi∣ses, but must be the same Thing with, or Part of, the Conclusion: I will not undertake to dispute, Whether a King of England may, or may not, Renounce his Kingdom? For my own Part, I think he can, and I may go so far in Agreement with those that have spoken
to this Point, To yield that he may do it by implicit Acts, contrary to the Kingly Office. For a King to say, He will not govern according to Law; and for a King to act wholly contrary to Law, and do that which would Subvert the Constitu∣tion, is (I think) the same thing. But then I must say also, That I think there is a Difference between Saying so, and Doing something inconsistent with what the Laws require; for every De∣viation from the Law is a kind of Breach of the fundamental Laws; for I know no Law, as Laws, but what are Fundamental Constitutions; as the Laws are necessary, so far as to support the Foundation. But if every Transgression or Viola∣tion of the Law, by the Prince's Con∣nivance or Command, were such a Breach of the Fundamental Laws, as would infer an Abdication, then were it in vain to call any of his Ministers
or Officers to Account for any such Action. Then the Action is the King's, and not Theirs; and then adieu to the Maxim of, A King's not doing Wrong: And we may have Recourse to that other Respondent Superior, as more effe∣ctual Satisfaction. I take this Matter to be so plain, as to the Distinction that I have men∣tioned, that nothing can be more; and it has been thought so essentially necessary to have it clear and manifest, That those two great Instances of Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, were express solemn Renuncia∣tions, and those confirm'd in Parlia∣ment by the Lords and Commons, by the Act of Deposing them. Therefore I cannot infer from the Facts enumerated in the Vote, That this should be an Abdication for himself and his Heirs.
But therefore, because in this first Point it is disputable, what is meant by a Word not known of Significati∣on in the Law; it might, I think, do well to consider what is to be inferred from it: And therefore all I have now said, is only to this purpose, That either Both make One Conclusion, or else the Latter cannot be inferred from the For∣mer. Sir George T—y. I beg Leave to say something to what this Noble Lord has last spoke unto: When I call this Point of the Vacancy of the Throne a Conclusion, I did not mean altogether to exclude Abdication from being a Conclusion from the Parti∣culars enumerated before; for indeed it is the nature of a double Conclusion; One from the particular Facts mentio∣ned, That thereby King James has Ab∣dicated the Government.
The Other, from the Abdication, That thereby the Throne is Vacant: By the instanced Acts, he hath Abdicated the Government; and by his Abdicating the Government, the Throne is vacant. As to the rest of that which his Lordship is pleased to say, I perceive he does (as he must) agree to me, That a King may Renounce by Acts as well as Words, or Writings. But then, I would add, and agree with his Lordship also, That God forbid every Violation of the Law, or Deviation from it, should be reckon'd an Abdication of the Government. I desire to deliver my self from the Imputation of any such absurd Conceit. When a King breaks the Law in some few particular Instances, it may be sufficient to take an Account of it from those evil Ministers that were in∣strumental in it, why such a thing was done, which was against Laws? Why
such a Law was not Executed by them, whose Duty it was to see it put in Execution? You may, in ordinary Ca∣ses of breaking the Law, have Reme∣dy in the ordinary Courts and course of Justice. But sure! He does not take this to be such a Case, or these to be ordina∣ry Violations of the Law; and there∣fore in the extraordinary Cases, the ex∣traordinary Remedy's to be recurred unto; for the King having a limited Authority, by which he was obliged to keep the Laws made, as to the exe∣cutive part of the Government, and to observe the Constitution for making such New Laws as the People should find necessary, and present him for his Con∣sent; when he doth Violate, not a par∣ticular Law, but all the Fundamentals; nor Injure a particular Person in Reli∣gion, Liberty, or Property, but falls upon the whole Constitution it self, what doth all this speak? He therein saith, I will no more keep
within my limited Authority, nor hold my Kingly Office upon such Terms. This Title I had by the Original Con∣tract between King and People; I Re∣nounce that, and will assume another Ti∣tle to my self; that is, such a Title, as by which I may Act as if there were no such Law to Circumscribe my Authority. Where shall any Man come to have Redress in such a Case as this, when the Malefactor comes to be Party, un∣to whom all Applications for Relief and Redress from Injuries should be made, and so he himself shall be a Judge of his own Breaches of Law. This most apparently was the Case as to the Quo Warranto's, which was a plain Design to subvert the Constitution in the very Foundation of the Legislature. It is because the King hath thus vio∣lated the Constitution, by which the Law stands, as the Rule both of the King's Government, and the Peoples O∣bedience, that we say, He hath Abdicated
and Renounced the Government; for all other particular Breaches of the Law, the Subject may have Remedy in the ordina∣ry Courts of Justice, or the extraordi∣nary Court of Parliamentary Proceed∣ings: But were such an Attempt as this is, made on the Essence of the Constitu∣tion, it is not We that have brought our selves into this state of Nature, but Those who have reduced our legal well-establish'd Frame of Government into such a slate of Confusion, as we are now seeking a Redress unto. Earl of R—er. The Lords have given their Reasons why they altered the word Abdicated; because it is a word not known to the Common Law, and of doubtful Signi∣fication: Therefore it would be well if the Commons would please to ex∣press their own Meaning by it. I be∣lieve my Lords would be induced to Agree, that the King hath Abdicated, that is, Renounced the Government, for himself. If you mean no further than
that; and if You do so, Why should You not be pleased to explain your selves, that every one may know how the Matter stands, and to preserve a good Correspondence between Both Houses, in such a Juncture and Con∣junction as this? But if you do mean any thing more by it, than Abdication for Himself only, tho' their Lordships should agree to the using of the word Abdicated; yet this would prove a greater Argument against their Agreeing in the Other Point, a∣bout the Vacancy of the Throne? There∣fore, we would be glad to have you explain your selves, what you mean by it. Then there was a little Pause. Mr. H—en. If the Lords have nothing further to offer upon this Point, it will be fit for Us to go on to the other Amend∣ment, made by the Lords to Our Vote.
No Lord offering to speak, the Commons proceeded to the Se∣cond Amendment. Mr. Sach—rel. My Lords, Your Lordships Second Amendment to the Commons Vote, (to wit, To leave our the Words, And that the Throne is thereby Vacant) the House of Commons cannot agree with Your Lordships to that Amendment; and they do conceive they have many and great Reasons why they should not do it. But, my Lords, They very much wonder, how it comes here to be laid upon Them (as it seems to be, by one of your Lordships Reasons) That they, by using those Words of Abdication and Vacancy, signifie an intention of making an Alteration of the Constitution of the Government. I would not misrepresent Your Lord∣ships
Words, or misrepresent Your Meaning: But you are pleased to say, That you cannot agree to such an Abdica∣tion or Vacancy, as that the Crown should thereby become Elective: As if the Com∣mons had Thoughts of making the King∣dom Elective, when no such thing was either meant by Them, or can be de∣ducted from their Words. But, my Lords, One Reason why they differ from You is, They think (up∣on the nature of your Proceedings) they are in the Right, to insist upon their Vote, as they sent it up to your Lordships: And they conceive, as to all the Reasons your Lordships have been pleased to give them for your Al∣terations, not One of them hath so much Argument in them, as they might well expect. The Commons Reason for their Dis∣agreeing to this Amendment, was, Be∣cause they conceive (that, as they may well infer) from so much of their own Vote, as your Lordships have
agreed unto, That King James the Se∣cond hath Abdicated the Government; and that the Throne is thereby Vacant: So if they should admit your Lordships A∣mendments, That he hath only Deserted the Government; yet, even thence would follow, It's Vacant, as to King James the Second: Deserting the Government be∣ing, in true Construction, Deserting the Throne. Now, to this they do desire, That your Lordships will consider and see, Whe∣ther you give any Answer to this Rea∣son; or rather, Whether you do not leave the Matter still in the dark, and (in Truth) leave the Nation in a per∣petual state of War? Your Lordships Answer to that, Al∣tho' you have agreed, that the King has Deserted the Government, and there∣fore you have made Application to the Prince of Orange, To take upon him the Administration of the Government, and thereby provide for the Safety and Peace of the Kingdom; yet there can be no Infe∣rence
drawn from thence, but only that the Exercise of the Government by King James the Second, was ceased, so, as the Lords were, and are willing To Secure the Nation against the Return of the said King into this Kingdom; but not that there was either such an Ab∣dication by him, or Vacancy in the Throne, as that the Crown thereby became Elective; to which they can∣not agree. I desire now to know of your Lordships, what Part of this Rea∣son hath given an Answer to what the Commons said in their First Reason; That they may very well conclude from their own Vote, as to what your Lordships have therein agreed to, That the Throne is Vacant, as to King James the Second, Deserting the Government, and Deserting the Throne, being in true Con∣struction the same. Instead of answer∣ing this Reason, your Lordships come and apply it here, only to a bare Giving over the Exercise of the Government by King James. And, pray, my Lords, let us consider where we are.
If the Case be so, then King James the Second, who has only left the Ex∣ercise, continues in the Office, and is King still; and then all the Acts that we have done in this Convention, are wholly (as we conceive) not Justifiable; You are in no Place or Station to Relieve your selves, or the Nation, in this Exigence; unless you will think of setting up ano∣ther Regency by your own Authority, without his Consent; which, I conceive, by the Laws of England, you cannot do. What then follows upon all we have done? We have drawn the Nation into a Snare, by the Steps we have taken; and leave all in such an Intricacy, as we have no Power, by Law, to deliver them out of; nor can we answer for what we have done, unless the King should dye, and that would leave the Succession uncertain. My Lords, I only apply myself to con∣sider the Reasons of your Lordships, for insisting upon this Second Amendment;
because, I conceive, your Lordships have therein given no Answer to the Reason first given by the Commons, why they cannot agree to your Lordships Amendment. Mr. Poll—en. My Lords, your own Reasons (under Favour) do shew, That your Lordships do intend, that the King is still in the Government? This, I think, is most ap∣parent out of your own Reasons. For when you have declared, That the King hath Deserted the Government, and then say, No Inference can be drawn thence, but only, That the Exercise of the Government by King James the Second was Ceased; then you do thereby still say, That King James the Second is in the Government; for if only the Exercise be Ceased, the Right doth still remain: Then, I am sure, we have no reason to Agree with their Lordships in that Point.
Next, my Lords, truly we cannot see how this thing that you would have can be inferred from your own Vote, That only the Exercise of the Government by King James ceased; since you do not say, that he deserted the Exercise of the Government. And if your Lordships had any pur∣pose to express your Meaning by a pub∣lick Vote, That only the Exercise ceased, surely your Lordships would have put in the word Exercise there: But when in your Vote you say, The Government was deserted, you cannot mean only the Exercise of it. And that it is the first Reason that the Commons give your Lordships why we cannot by any means admit of your Lordships Amendment, because Throne and Government are in the true con∣struction the same; but the Exercise of the Government only (as you express it) and the Government it self, (if your Reason conclude right) are not the same. And we are to reason from the words expressed in the Vote.
Next, my Lords, we say. It cannot be inferred from the words, as they rest in your Lordships Vote, that only the Exercise of the Government as to King James the Second, did cease. For if we read that part about De∣serting the Government, with the rest of the Particulars that go before, his endeavouring to Subvert the Constitu∣tion of the Kingdom, breaking the Ori∣ginal Contract, violating the Fundamen∣tal Laws, and withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom; then can any Man of Understanding think that this deserting of the Government can be any thing else but somewhat that is agreeable to all those precedent Acts, which are not a ceasing of the Exercise of the Govern∣ment only, but a destruction of the Go∣vernment it self. But besides, my Lords, under Favour, the Administration or Exercise of the Kingly Government is in construction and consideration of Law all one and the same: And, I think, no body that would reason aright from thence can
say there is any distinction between Go∣vernment and the Exercise of the Go∣vernment; for whosoever takes from the King the Exercise of the Govern∣ment, takes from the King his King∣ship; for the Power and the Exercise of the Power are so joyned, that they cannot be severed. And the Terms themselves (taking them as the Law of England, which we are to argue from this Case, teacheth them) are so co-incident, that they cannot either subsist without consisting together: If a Man grant to another the Government of such a Place, this im∣ports the Exercise of the Government there to be granted thereby. As if the Islands belonging to this Crown and Dominion of England (as the Plantations abroad) if the King grants to any one the Government of Jamaica, or the like, sure no one will say, that That is not a Grant of the Exercise of the Government there.
So that where-ever a Government is granted, the Exercise of that Govern∣ment is meant and included, and there∣fore the supposed Distinction may be something indeed, if they be only no∣tionally considered; but it is a Notion altogether disagreeing to the Laws of England. When your Lordships say in your Reasons, That the Exercise of the Go∣vernment as to King James the Second is ceased, which as far as you can go in this Point, the Commons can by no means agree to this Reason; for by the words so used (the Exercise ceased) we apprehend, that you mean, the Kingship continueth still in him, and that only the Exercise is gone. And if it be so and it be utterly un∣lawful, and as great a Crime (as what Law saith it is not?) to make away from the King the Exercise of the Go∣vernment, as to take from him the Government, then it may do well for your Lordships to consider, whether
you are not Guilty of the same Crime and Thing which you would decline by your Amendment. The Commons therefore cannot ad∣mit, That there should be a taking away of the Exercise of the Govern∣ment from the King, any more than the taking away the Government which (we say) he hath himself given away by Abdication. And if K. James be our King still, we cannot by any means agree to the keeping of him out of the Kingdom; for if it be his Right to be King still, God forbid but that he should enjoy it, and be admitted to the Exer∣cise of it again. Then, my Lords, for the Conclusion that your Lordships have added to your Reason (as making it from the very Words of your Vote) that it is, That it would infer such a Vacancy in the Throne, as that the Crown should thereby become Elective; This, we conceive, is a con∣clusion, That he hath no Premisses ei∣ther from our Actions, or our Sayings, or our Votes, or any thing else in this
Case; nay, it is quite varying from all the Premisses: But when such a Conclusion can be shewn to follow from them, then it will be time e∣nough for us to give our Answer to it. But, my Lords, this is that we do insist upon; That if the Right of King∣ship be still (after all that is agreed on both hands) due to him, we can∣not in Justice agree to keep him from it. And if it be not his due Right, but by these Acts, his subversion of the Constitution, his breaking the original Contract, and violation of the Funda∣mental Laws, he hath Abdicated it (as we say) and this Abdication hath put him by his Right, and so his Right is gone from him (as we conceive it is); then, I think, we may lawfully go on to settle the Peace and Welfare of the Nation. But the Right to be still in him to have a Regency upon him without his own Consent, or till his Return, we take it to be a strange and impracticable thing, and would be introductive of a
new Principle of Government amongst us. It would be setting up a Com∣mon-wealth instead of our ancient re∣gulated Government, by a limited Mo∣narchy; then, I am sure, we should be justly blamed: And therefore we can by no means submit to your Lord∣ships Alterations of our Vote, upon any of the Grounds and Reasons that have as yet been offer'd. Earl of C—n. As to what Mr. P—n hath offe∣red, I desire to observe a word or two, and that is from the Commons second Reason for their disagreeing to their Lordships Amendments. You say there, That the Commons do conceive they need not prove to your Lordships, that as to any other Person be∣sides King James the Throne is also Va∣cant: Doth not this shew, that the meaning of the Vacancy is a Vacancy throughout, as well as with respect to King James. I ask your Pardon if I do not declare my own Opinion about the
Vacancy as to him; but all that I men∣tion this for, is to know your Meaning in this Point, how far the Vacancy is to extend. You said before, That He had Abdi∣cated the Government, and thereby the Throne was Vacant. How is it Vacant? Is it only as to King James, or is as to Him and all or any of his Posterity, or any of those that are in the remainder in the Royal Line in Succession? If it be as to them too, then it must necessa∣rily follow, that the Kingdom must thereby become Elective still, or the Government changed into a Common∣wealth; neither of which, we hope, the Commons intend by it. And therefore that made me ask before what a grave and learned Gentleman meant when he said it should not be perpetually Ele∣ctive. Mr. Serjeant M—d. I am sure, if we be left without a Government, as we find we are (why else have we desir'd the Prince to take
upon him the Administration?) sure we must not be perpetually under Anarchy, the word Elective is none of the Com∣mons word; neither is the making the Kingdom Elective the thing they had in their Thoughts or Intentions; all they mean by this matter, is to provide a Supply for this Defect in the Govern∣ment, brought upon it by the late King's Male Administration. And I do say again, this Provision must be made; and if it be, that would not make the Kingdom perpetually Elective? I stand not upon any Word, but am for the Thing, that a Provision be made to sup∣ply the Defect. Mr. P—n. Do your Lordships agree, That the Throne is Vacant as to King James the Second? If so, or if you will say it is full of any body else, and will name whom it is full of, it will then be time for the Commons to tell what to say to it. If your Lordships will please to shew that, we shall go on to give it an An∣swer.
Earl of C—n. Your own words in your Second Reason are, That You need not prove to us, that it is to any other Person the Throne is also Vacant: Then how should we name who it is full of? Admit for Discourse sake, but we do not grant it, for my part, I do not. I say, taking it to be Vacant, as to King James the Se∣cond, then you ask us, Who it should be Supply'd by: Must it not be Supply'd by those that should have come if he were dead? For, I pray consider, I take this Go∣vernment, by all our Laws, to be Here∣ditary Monarchy, and is to go in Suc∣cession by Inheritance, in the Royal Line; if then you say this Government is Vacant, that would be to put all those by that should take by Succession, and that will make the Kingdom Ele∣ctive for that time.
You say, The Throne is Vacant: then I may very well ask, Who hath the Right of filling up that Vacancy? We say, There is no Vacancy; if there is, pray is there any body that hath the Right of filling it up? Mr. Serjeant M—d. That is not the Question before us; yet that will come properly in debate, when we are agreed upon the Vacan∣cy. The Noble Lord says, It is by our Law an Hereditary Monarchy. I grant it; but though it should in an ordinary way descend to the Heir, yet as our Case is, we have a Maxim in Law as certain as any other, which stops the course; for no Man can pretend to be King James's Heir while he is living; Nemo est haeres viventis.
Earl of P—e. To that Point I think my Lord of C—n gave an Answer, That it should go to the next in the Line that were to take it, if the King were dead: for as we should be understood, we should make it a Case of Demise of our Kings, our Law calls it; that is, the King is dead in Law by this Abdication or Desertion of the Government, and that the next Heir is to take by Descent. You, Gentlemen, ask us who the Throne is full of; I think it is sufficient to know that there are Heirs who are to take by Lineal Succession, though we do not or cannot positively name the particular Person; and therefore we may well conclude there is no Va∣cancy. Suppose I should be told such a Gen∣tleman is in such a Room, and there I find him, and another man with him, and I come out and tell you so, and ask,
Which is he, you may be doubtful which of the two is the Man, but sure the one of them is he; but because you cannot tell which it is, shall I conclude no such one is there? If there be a doubtful Title, (that is, dubious in whom the Ti∣tle resides, but a certain Title as to some one) and I cannot directly name him that hath the immediate Right, yet it is sufficient to prevent the Vacancy, that there is an Heir or Successor, let him be who he will. Mr. Serjeant M—d. But your Lordships will neither agree it is Vacant, nor tell us how it is Full. King James is gone, we hear or know of no other, What shall the Nation do in this Uncertainty? When will you tell us who is King, if King James be not? Shall we everlastingly be in this doubt∣ful condition? Earl of P—e. Sure Mr. Serjeant M—d, you will agree there is One, and no more than
one, to whom a Right does belong of Succeeding, upon failure of King James. Has he no Heir known? Mr. Serjeant M—d. I say, No Man can be his Heir while he lives. If he has any, it is in Nubi∣bus, our Law knows none; and, What shall we do till he be dead? It cannot descend till then. E. of P—e. You agree, That notwithstanding King Charles the Second was abroad at his Father's Death, and did not actually Exercise the Government, yet in Law, immediately upon his Father's Decease, he was not the less Heir for that; nor was the Throne Vacant. Mr. Serjeant M—d. That is not like this Case, neither because the Discent was Legally imme∣diate; but here can be no such thing du∣ring
King James's Life, as an Hereditary Discent: So that either here must be an everlasting War entail'd upon us, his Title continuing, and we opposing his return to the Exercise of the Go∣vernment, or we have no Government for want of a Legal Discent and Suc∣cession. Pray, my Lords, consider the Con∣dition of the Nation till there be a Go∣vernment; no Law can be executed, no Debts can be compelled to be paid, no Offences can be punish'd, no one can tell what to do to obtain his Right, or defend himself from Wrong. You still say, The Throne is not Void, and yet you will not tell us who Fills it: If once you will agree, That the Throne is Vacant, it will then come orderly in debate, How it should, ac∣cording to our Law, be Filled. E. of N—m. The Objection (as I take it) that is made to these Reasons, the Lords have sent for their insisting upon the Amend∣ments,
is, That we have not fully answe∣red in them the Reasons given by the Commons for their not agreeing to those Amendments. Mr. S—l. My Lords, we say you have not fully answered the first of our Reasons. E. of N—m. Gentlemen, I intend to state the Ob∣jection so: That first Reason of yours I take to be this in effect, That our word (Deserted) being apply'd to the Government, im∣plies our Agreeing that the King hath Deserted the Throne, those two being in true construction the same; and then by our own Confession, the Throne is Vacant as to him. To this you say, my Lords have gi∣ven no Answer: Truly, I think it is a clear Answer, that the word (Deserted) may have another sence, and doth not
necessarily imply Renouncing entirely of a Right, but a ceasing of the Exercise. But then, if that does not Vacant the Throne as to him, the other Reason comes to be considered, How came you to desire the Prince of Orange to take the Administration upon him, and to take care of Ireland till the Conventi∣on, and to write his Letters circulary for this Meeting? And to renew your Address to the Prince, and to appoint a Day of Publick Thanksgiving? In answer to that, my Lords say, That tho the King's Deserting the Go∣vernment (as they agree he has done) did imply the Throne to be Vacant, yet they might justly do all those Acts mentioned in the Commons Reasons; because if barely the Exercise of the Go∣vernment were deserted, there must be a supply of that Exercise in some Per∣son's taking the Administration; and as none so fit, because of the Prince's relation to the Crown (and his pre∣sence here) to Address unto about it, so none so proper to make that Address, as the Lords; for in the absence of the
King they are the King and Kingdoms great Council, and might have done it by themselves, without the Commons; but being met in a full representative Body, they joyned with them. Mr. P—n indeed has said, There is no distinction in Law between the King∣ship and the Exercise of it. And That it is the same Crime, in consideration of Law, to take away the Exercise, as to take away the Kingship. I shall not dispute with that learned Gentleman (whom I very much honour for his Knowledge in the Profession of the Law) what Offence either of them would be now, for we are not discoursing concerning a Regency, how the Government should be Administred, but we are barely upon the Question, Whether the Throne be Vacant, so that we may have another King. But if we should grant a Vacancy as to the King himself, we are then told, the next in Succession cannot take, because no one can be Heir to one that is alive. Yet, I think, the Answer given by my Lords
before is a very good one, That tho the King be not dead Naturally, yet if (as they infer) he is so Civily, the next of course ought to come in as by Heredi∣tary Succession; for I know not any di∣stinction between Successors in the case of a Natural Death, and those in the case of a Civil one. For I would know if the next Heir should be set aside in this case, and you put in another, whether that King shall be King of England to him and his Heirs, and so being once upon the Throne, the ancient Lineal Succession be altered: If that be so, then indeed it is sufficiently an Elective Kingdom, by taking it from the right Heir. If it be not so, then I would ask, Whether such King as shall be put in, shall be King only during King James's Life. That, I suppose for many Rea∣sons, is not their meaning; but, at least he must be made King, during his own Life; and then if there be a Di∣stinction made as to the Succession be∣tween a Natural and a Civil Death,
if King James should dye during the Life of the new King, what would be∣come of the Hereditary Monarchy? Where must the Succession come in, when the next Heir to King James may not be next Heir to the present Suc∣cessor? Therefore we must reduce all to this point, which my Lords have hinted at in their Reasons, Whether this will not make the Kingdom Elective: for if you do once make it Elective, I do not say that you are always bound to go to Election, but it is enough to make it so, if by that President there be a breach in the Hereditary Succession, for I will be bold to say, you cannot make a stronger Tye to observe that kind of Succession, than what lyeth upon you to preserve it in this Case. If you are under an Obligation to it, it is part of the Constitution. I desire any one to tell me what stron∣ger Obligation there can be; and that, I say, is Reason enough for my Lords
to disagree to it, it bringing in the Danger of a Breach upon the Consti∣tution. Next, Gentlemen, I would know of you, if the Throne be Vacant, whether we be oblig'd to fill it; if we be, we must Fill it either by our old Laws, or by the Humour of those that are to chuse; if we Fill it by our own old Laws, they declare, That it is an Here∣ditary Kingdom, and we are to take the next to whom the Succession would be∣long, and then there would be no need of standing upon a Vacancy. If we are to Fill it according to the Humour of the Times, and of those that are to make the Choice, that di∣verts the course of Inheritance, puts it into another Line: And I cannot see by what Authority we can do that, or change our Ancient Constitution, with∣out committing the same Fault we have laid upon the King.
These are the Objections against the Vacancy of the Throne, which occur to me; and We, my Lords, desire a Sa∣tisfaction to them before we agree to the Vacancy. And, I think, the Answering them will lead us unto that which I take to be the main point in question, Whether the Vacancy of the Throne, and Filling it again, will not, as my Lords say, en∣danger the turning this Hereditary Mo∣narchy of ours into an Elective one. Mr. S—l. My Lords, it seems very strange to us, that this Question should be asked us, when we come to shew, That your Lordships Reasons for leaving out this part of our Vote are not satisfactory, neither do answer the Reasons we gave for our not agreeing to your Lordships Amendmonts: And it is much stranger that we should be asked, Whether this Vacancy extend to the Heirs, when
you will not tell us, whether it be Va∣cant as to King James himself. You put it upon us to say, the Exe∣cution or Exercise of the Government is ceased; but you will not say the Throne is vacant, so much as to him: And if it be not, what have we to do, or consider, or debate, of any conse∣quence, whether it will infer an Election or not? We desire of your Lordships that which we think is very proper; first, to know whether the Throne be vacant at all: If it be, then our Proposition in the conclusion of our Vote is true, That the Throne is thereby vacant. My Lords, I think we come here very much in vain, till this Point be setl'd; What Satisfaction can it be to your Lord∣ships, or Us, or the Nation, to know that such things as are mentioned in the Votes have been done by King James, and that he has deserted (as you say) the Government, if he still retain a Right to it, and your Lordships
will not declare he hath no Right, but amuse the Kingdom with the doubtful words of the Exercise (as to him) Cea∣siug. If that be all you mean, what need the Question be asked, how far it is va∣cant, for it should seem it is not vacant at all. E. of N—m. Will you please to suppose it Vacant as to King James, that is, that he hath no Right? Then let us go on to the next step. Mr. S—l. That, my Lords, we cannot do, for all our business is to maintain our own, That the Throne is Va∣cant. Mr. S—s. My Lords, your Lordships, as a Rea∣son against the word Abdicate, say, It is not a word known in our Common Law. But the word Vacant, about which we
are now disputing, cannot have that Objection made to it; for we find it in our Records, and even apply'd in a parallel Case to this of ours, in 1 Hen. IV, where it is expresly made use of more than once, and there it doth import what I think it doth im∣port in this Vote of the House of Com∣mons, now in debate, and to require any further or other Explication of it than the Record gives, will be very hard and unreasonable; for we are here to give the Commons Reasons for main∣taining their own Vote, and nothing else. If your Lordships please to look in∣to the Record in that case, there was first a Resignation of the Crown and Government made and subscribed by King Richard the Second, and this is brought into the Parliament, and there they take notice, that the Sedes Regalis (those are the words) fuit vacua; and the Resignation being read both in Latin and in English, in the Great Hall at Westminster, where the Parliament
was then assembled, it was accepted by the Lord's and Commons. After that, it proceeds further; and there are Articles exhibited against Ri∣chard the Second, and upon these Arti∣cles they went on to Sentence of Deposi∣tion and Deprivation, and then follow∣eth the words in the Record; Et con∣fessim ut constabat ex proemissis & eorum occasione Regnum Angliae cuui pertinentiis suis vacare. Then Henry the Fourth ris∣eth up out of his place as Duke of Lan∣caster, where he sate before, and stand∣ing so high, that he might be well en∣ough seen, makes this Claim to the Crown: The words in the Record are, Dictum regnum Angliae sic ut praemitur Vacans una cum Corona vendicat. After that, the Record goeth on, That upon this Claim the Lords and Commons being asked, What they thought of it, they unanimoufly con∣sented, and the Archbishop took him by the Hand, and led him ad Sedem Regalem Proedictum, &c.
Nay, and after all this, it is there taken notice of, and particularly ob∣served that prius Vacante sede Regali, by the Leasion and Deposition aforesaid all the publick Officers ceased; there is care taken for Hen. IV's taking the Royal Oath, and granting of new Com∣missions. My Lords, the Commons do there∣fore apprehend, that with very good Reason and Authority they did in their Vote declare the Throne to be Vacant. But as to the going further to enquire into the Consequences of that, or what is to be done afterwards, is not our Commission, who came here only to maintain their Expressions in their Vote against your Lordships Amend∣ments. E. of R—r. In a free Conference the Points in question are freely and fully to be de∣bated; and my Lords, in order to their
agreement with the Commons, are to be satisfied what is meant, and how far it may extend. You, Gentlemen, that are the Ma∣nagers for the House of Commons, it seems, come with a limited Commissi∣on, and will not enter into that Con∣sideration which (as our Reasons ex∣press) hath a great weight with my Lords, Whether this Vote of the Com∣mons will not make the Monarchy of England, which has always hereto∣fore been Hereditary, to become Ele∣ctive. That the Vacancy of the Throne will infer such a Consequence, to me appears very plain; And I take it from the Argument that that last Gen∣tleman used for the word Vacant, out of the Record of Richard the Second's time, that is cited for a President for that word. But as that is the only Pre∣sident, yet it is attended with this very Consequence; for it being there declared, That the Royal Seat was
Vacant, immediately did follow an Election of Henry the Fourth, who was not next in the Right Line; Did not then this Hereditary Monarchy in this In∣stance become Elective? When King Charles the Second died, I would fain know, whether in our Law the Throne was Vacant. No sure, the next Heir was immediately in the Throne. And so it is in all Hereditary Successive Go∣vernments. Indeed, in Poland, when the King dyes, there is a Vacancy, because there the Law knows no certain Successor: So that the difference is plain, that where∣ever the Monarchy is Hereditary, upon the Ceasing of him in possession, the Throne is not Vacant; where it is Elec∣tive, 'tis Vacant. Earl of C—n. I would speak one word to that Record which Mr. S—s men∣tioned, and which the Lord that spake
last hath given a plain Answer unto; by making that difference (which is the great Hinge of the matter in de∣bate) between Hereditary and Elective Kingdoms. But I have something else to say to that Record. First, It is plain in that Case King Richard the Second had absolutely re∣signed, renounced, or (call it what you please) Abdicated in Writing un∣der his own Hand. What is done then? After that, the Parliament be∣ing then sitting, they did not think it sufficient to go upon, because that Wri∣ting might be the Effect of Fear: And so, not voluntary; thereupon they pro∣ceed to a formal Deposition upon Ar∣ticles, and then comes in the Claim of Hen. IV, After all this, Was not this an Ele∣ction? He indeed saith, That he was not the next Heir, and claimed it by De∣scent from Henry the Third; yet he that was really the next Heir did not appear, which was the Earl of Maroh;
so that Henry the Fourth claimed it as his indubitable Right, being the next Heir that then appeared. But, Gentlemen, I pray consider what follow'd upon it; All the Kings that were thus taken in (we say Elected, but the Election was not of God's Approba∣tion) scarce passed any one Year in any of their Reigns, without being disturbed in the possession. Yet, I say, he himself did not care to owe the Crown to the Election, but Claimed it as his Right. And it was a plausible Pretence, and kept him and his Son (though not without interru∣ption) upon the Throne. But in the time of his Grandson Henry the Sixth, there was an utter Overthrow of all his Title and Possession too: For if you look into the Parliament Roll, 1 Edw. 4. the Proceedings against King Richard the Second, as well as all the rest of the Acts during the Usurpation (as that Record rightly calls it) are annul'd, repeal'd, revok'd, revers'd, and all the
words imaginable used and put in, to set those Proceedings aside as illegal, unjust, and unrighteous. And, pray what was the Reason? That Act de∣duceth down the Pedigree of the Royal Line, from Henry the Third to Richard the Second who dy'd without Issue, and then Henry the Fourth (saith the Act) Usurped; but, That the Earl of March, upon the Death of Richard the Second, and consequently Edward the Fourth from him, was undoubted King by Conscience, by Nature, by Custom, and by Law. The Record is to be seen at length, as well as that 1 Hen. 4. and being a later Act, is of more Authority. And after all this, (I pray consider it well) the Right Line is restored, and the Usurpation condemned and re∣pealed. Besides, Gentlemen, I hope you will take into your consideration, what will become of the Kingdom of Scotland if
they should differ from us in this Point, and go another way to work, then will that be a divided Kingdom from ours again. You cannot but remember how much Trouble it always gave our An∣cestors, while it continued a divided Kingdom; and if we should go out of the Line, and invest the Succession in any point at all, I fear you will find a Disagreement there, and then very dan∣gerous Consequences may ensue. Sir R—H—d. My Lords, The Proceedings and Expressions of the House of Commons in this Vote are fully warranted by the President that hath been cited, and are such as where∣in there has been no interruption of the Government according to the Consti∣tution. The late King hath, by your Lord∣ships concession, done all those things, which amount to an Abdication of the
Government, and the Throne's being thereby Vacant: And had your Lord∣ships concurred with us, the Kingdom had long e're this been setled, and every body had peaceably followed their own business. Nay, had your Lordships been pleased to express your selves clearly, and not had a mind to speak ambiguously of it, we had saved all this Trouble, and been at an end of Disputing. Truly, my Lords, this Record that hath been mentioned of Henry the Fourth, I will not say is not a Presi∣dent of Election, for the Arch-Bishop stood up, and looked round on all sides, and asked the Lords and Commons, Whether they would have him to be King; and they asserted, (as the words of the Roll are) That He should Reign over them. And so it is done at every Co∣ronation. As to his Claim, they did not so much mind that, for they knew that he Claimed by Descent and Inheritance,
when there was a known Person that had a Title before him. For, that which a Noble Lord spoke of touching the Publick Acts that have been done since the King left us, I may very well say, we think them legally done; and we do not doubt but that Power which brought in another Line then, upon the Vacancy of the Throne by the Leasion of Richard the Second, is still, according to the Constitution, residing in the Lords and Commons, and is legally sufficient to supply the Vacancy that now is. That Noble Lord indeed said, That your Lordships might not only with the Commons advise the Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration, and joyn with us in the other things, but that you might have done it of your selves, as being in the absence of the King, the Great Council of the Nation.
My Lords, I shall not say much to that point, your Lordships Honours Privileges are great, and your Councils very worthy of all Reverence and Respect. But I would ask this Question of any Noble Lord that is here, Whether, had there been an Heir, to whom the Crown had quietly descended in the Line of Succession, and this Heir certainly known, your Lordships would have as∣sembl'd without his calling, or would have either Administer'd the Govern∣ment your selves, or advised the Prince of Orange to have taken it upon him? I doubt you had been (pardon me to say it) all guilty of High-Treason, by the Laws of England, if a known Suc∣cessor were in possession of the Throne, as he must be if the Throne were not Vacant. From thence, my Lords, your Lord∣ships see where the Difficulty lyes in this matter, and whence it ariseth, be∣cause
you would not agree the Throne to be Vacant when we know of none that possess it. We know some such thing hath been pretended to as an Heir Male, of which there are different Opinions, and in the mean time, we are without a Govern∣ment; and, Must we stay till the Truth of the matter be found out? What shall we do to preserve our Constitu∣tion, while we are without a safe or legal Authority to act under the same according to that Constitution, and in a little time it will, perhaps, through the distraction of our Constitution, be utter∣ly irremediable? I do not deny, but that your Lord∣ships have very great Hardships to conflict with in such a Case, but who is the occasion of them? We all do know the Monarchy is Hereditary; but how, or what shall we do to find out the Successor in the Right Line?
You think it will be a difficult thing to go upon the Examination who is Heir; perhaps it will be more difficult to Resolve in this Case, than it might be in another: For though heretofore there have been Abdications and Vacan∣cies, it has been where the King has been of the same Religion of the Esta∣blish'd Worship of the Nation; and amongst those that pretended to the Succession, the several Claimers have been Persons born and bred up in that Religion that was Establish'd by Law; or it may be there hath been a Child in the Womb at the time of the Vacancy. But then, my Lords, there would not be much difficulty to examine, Who should Inherit, or what were fit to be done. I confess, I say, there are Diffi∣culties of all sides, or else your Lord∣ships sure would have spoke out before now: And if you had been clear in it your selves, you would have let the Commons and the World have known
it. But it not being clear, must we al∣ways remain thus? Use what words you will, Fill up, or Nominate, or Elect, it is the thing we are to take care of, and it is high time it were done. My Lords, There is no such Consequence to be drawn from this Vote, as an Intention or a Likelihood of altering the Course of the Government, so as to make it Elective, the Throne hath all along de∣scended, in an Hereditary Succession, the main Constitution hath been pre∣served. The President of Henry the Fourth is not like that of Elections in other Countries; and I am sorry there should be any occasion for what is necessary to be done now. But when such Difficulties are upon the Nation, that we cannot extricate our selves out of, as to the Lineal Suc∣cessor, your Lordships, I hope, will give
us leave to remember Salus populi est Suprema Lex. And if neither You nor we can do any thing in this Case, We, who are met under the Notion of an Assembly or Convention of the States, then have met to no purpose; for after we have Voted our selves to be without a Go∣vernment, (which looks as if some∣thing were really intended as to a Set∣tlement) all presently sinks, and we are as much in the dark as we were before. And, my Lords, I pray give me leave to say one thing more: Your Lordships say, You will never make a President of Election, or take upon you to Alter the Succession. With your Lordships Favour, the Set∣tlement of the Constitution is the main thing we are to look after. If you pro∣vide for the supply of the Defect there, that point of the Succession will, with∣out all question, in the same method,
and at the same time be surely provided for. But, my Lords, you will do well to consider; Have not you your selves al∣ready limited the very Succession, and cut off some that might have a Line at Right? Have you not concurred with us in our Vote, That it is inconsistent with our Religion and our Laws to have a Papist to Reign over us? Must we not come then to an Election, if the next Heir be a Papist? Nay, suppose there were no Protestant Heir at all to be found, would not your Lordships then break the Line? By your Lordships Vote that is so inconsistent, you do suppose a Case of the greatest Consequence that can be, may happen; and if that should hap∣pen to be our Case, that the whole Pro∣testant Line should fail, would not that necessitate an Election, or else we must submit to that which were inconsistent with our Religion and our Laws?
If your Lorships then, in such a Case, must break through the Succes∣sion, I think the Nation has reason to expect you should take care to supply the present Defect, where the Succession is uncertain. My Lords, If this should not be agreed unto, what will be the Consequence? We that used, and justly, to boast of li∣ving under the Best of Governments, must be left without any one; for, your Lordships, it seems, cannot agree with us to supply and Fill up this Gap in it, or tell us who is the Successor: And we must not do it our selves by E∣lection; which is the only way left us to provide for our Settlement. Truly my Lords, upon the whole, I cannot tell what condition we shall be in, or what we can do further; but we must even part, and break up in Confusion, and so leave the Nation to extricate it self, as well as it can, out
of this Distraction. But then, at whose Door that will lye, I must leave to your Lordships own Thoughts. E. of P—e. We have indeed passed such a Vote, as that Gentleman says, against a Po∣pish Prince's reigning over us, but I should think that amounts to no more than a Resolution, that by a Law to be made we will take care of it in Par∣liament: Therefore I think that which we aim at, and that which the Consti∣tution of our Gouernment does require, is, to put things in a legal method: And, in order to it, I would have the Legal Successor declared and proclaimed, and then a Parliament summoned in that Prince's Name, and the whole matter setled there. An Act made by a King de facto is Void as to a King de jure; therefore I would have the Constitution preserved, and would desire, that all that is done
in this matter may be again done in Par∣liament. E. of C—n. Sir R—H—d was pleas'd to say, That by the same method that the Throne now should be Filled, by the same the Successor should be Dclared, and the Right Line Setled. Is not that declaring the Crown to be Elective? Suppose you say nothing, but Fill the Throne, Is it not to take away the Right Line of Inheritance? And, Will not such Successor claim it for his Po∣sterity? Truly, I think if the Right Line be Declared in the same way that the Successor is, then we take upon us to dispose of the Inheritance of the Crown absolutely; which, I think, by all the Law I ever read or could hear of among us, is out of our Power; and, that nei∣ther House, or both Houses together,
have power to do any thing relating to the Succession, but by Act of Parlia∣ment; which the two Houses by them▪selves cannot make. Sir R.—T—e. I think we are now going too far in this matter; the Question before us is on∣ly, Whether there be a Vacancy in the Throne. After we have done with that, I do not see how this will preclude the consideration of any Claim to the Suc∣cession. Your Lordships say, You are under great Difficulties upon this Subject. But, my Lords, till you have declared the Throne Vacant, I must presume to say, I do not see how it is possible for any of us to make one step towards a Settle∣ment. If there be any Claims to the Crown, that consideration will be next; and how to come at them, I conceive we
are in the same Capacity as our Prede∣cessors were to provide for all Exigen∣cies as shall emerge, and for the sup∣plying all Defects in the Govern∣ment. It is true, by the Acts of Queen Eli∣zabeth and King James, first, we have the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance that are to be, and have been taken by all Persons. But, my Lords, there is an old Oath of Fidelity, that useth to be required in Leets, and that by the ancient Law of England every man ought to take that is Sixteen Years of Age; and this was as much obliging to the King, his Heirs and Successors, as any of those later Oaths are, for they seem only to be made to exclude foreign Authorities, and not to infer any new Obedience or Subjection; therefore I am only saying, we are in as natural a capacity as any of our Predecessors were to provide for a Remedy in such Exigencies as this.
I do not intend to trouble your Lord∣ships any farther than the words of the Vote lead me. If the Throne were Full, what do we do here; nay, how came we hither? I would fain know, whether all that is mention'd in one of our Reasons of the Administration being committed to the Prince, and those other Acts, do not all imply at least that we are in such a Case as wherein the Throne is Vacant, otherwise, if it had been full, I appeal to any one, whether we could have as∣sembled or acted in any other Name, or by an other Authority, than his that filled it. Then do not all these things declare, that there is a Vacan∣cy? My Lords, I have done, having said this, That it is a subsequent consideration, how the Throne shall be Filled, and all the Particulars that relate to it remain entire, after this Resolution taken.
But I think we are at present to go no further. No Man, I hope, thinks there is a just Ground for any Appre∣hension of an Intention to change the Government; I am sure there is no Ground for any such Apprehension: So that we have all the reason in the World still to insist, That your Lord∣ships should agree with us, that the Throne is Vacant, or we shall not be able to move one step further towards a settlement. Sir T—L—e. My Lords, So much has been said in this mat∣ter already, that very little is to be added. But give me leave to say unto your Lordships, That those Amendments your Lordships have made to the Com∣mons Vote, are not agreeing with your other Votes, nor any of the Acts done
since the Abdication. Had it been in the common ordinary case of a Vacancy by the King's Death, your Lordships in December last would sure have let us know as much: But it is plain you were sensible we were without a Go∣vernment, by your desiring the Prince to take the Administration, and to issue out his Letters from this Conven∣tion. But, my Lords, I would ask this Question, whether upon the original Contract there were not a power pre∣served in the Nation to provide for its self in such Exigencies? That contract was to settle the Con∣stitution as to the Legislature which a noble Lord in the beginning spoke of; so we take it to be: And it is true, that it is a part of the Contract, the making of the Laws, and that those Laws should oblige all sides when made; but yet so, as not to exclude this origi∣nal constitution in all Governments that commence by compact, that there
should be a Power in the States to make provision in all times, and upon all occa∣sions, for extraordinary Cases and Ne∣cessities, such as ours now is. I say nothing now as to the Heredi∣tary Succession; our Government has been always taken to be Hereditary, and so declared when there has been occasion to make provision otherwise than in the direct Line. But our matter is singly upon a Point of Fact, Whether the Throne be Vacant (as the Commons say it is) by the Abdication of King James the Second. This present Vacancy is nearest to that of Richard the Second, of any that we meet with in our Records; and the Phrase being there used, we insist upon it as very proper. And when that is agreed unto, the House will, no doubt, declare their Minds in another Consequential Question that
shall arise in a Proper way. But this is all we can speak to now. Sir G—T—y. To discourse, Whether the Crown of England would by this means become Elective, is altogether unnecessary; and I think your Lordships have given no Reasons that are sufficient to make the Objection out, neither any Answers to the Commons Reasons for their Vote. It seems to me an odd way of Rea∣soning, first to mistake the meaning, and then give Reasons against that mi∣staken meaning. The Question is only here, Whether we can make good this Proposition, That the Throne is Vacant by the Abdica∣tion of tht late King.
I confess, 'tis a melancholy thing to discourse of the Miscarriages of Govern∣ments, but 'tis much more afflictive to talk of unhinging all the Monarchy by a breach upon the direct Line of the Succession, as, if the Crown of England did actually descend to Lewis the Four∣teenth, it would not be in the power of the States of this Kingdom to divolve it upon another Head, A Noble Lord put an Instance of two Men in one Room, one of whom was really such a one: But though a stander by could not directly tell which was he, yet it could not be said by him, that such a one was not there. But if you please, I will put this Case: Suppose there were two Men in one Room, that no one alive could tell which was which; as suppose this to be the Case of the two Children of Edward the Fourth, that they had been kept close Prisoner by their Uncle Ri∣chard
the Third, so long, that there were no living Witnesses able to tell which was the eldest of the two, that would occasion a difficulty much what as intricate as ours here. One of them must be Eldest, but by rea∣son of the uncertainty, must not an Election be made of them? And, could any thing else do but an Ele∣ction? But, I say, the proper single Questi∣on here is, Whether we have well said, and well affirmed upon the Pre∣mises that are mentioned in the for∣mer part of the Vote, that he was Ab∣dicated, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant. Your Lordships in part agree; for you say, He has Deserted the Govern∣ment; then you say, He is not in it. And it is as much as to say, He has left the Kingdom destitute of a Go∣vernment.
Now, if there be any sence in which our Proposition is true, will you deny the whole Proposition, because it may be taken in a sence that is dubious and uncertain, as to the Consequen∣ces. You cannot say the Throne is Full; if then there be a Doubt with you, to be sure it is not like to be evident to us, especially in this Case, considering who your Lordships are. You are the Persons that usually are or ought to be present at the Delive∣ry of our Queens, and the proper Wit∣nesses to the Birth of our Princes. If then your Lordships had known who was on the Throne, we should certain∣ly have heard his Name from you, and that had been the best Reason against the Vacancy as could have been given.
My Lords, We say no more than our Ancestors have said before us, as you see by the Parliament-Roll, 1 Henry IV; and I must maintain the Record to this pur∣pose, that the Government is Vacant, as it is there declared, and as it is ex∣pressed in our Vote: So that we have not invented or coined a word for our turn, neither is the Notion new, it is a word that has been used before in a Case as near this as any can be▪ But it is objected, that That should be no President, because of what fol∣low'd upon that Vacancy of the Throne. I desire that your Lornships would read the Record. The next thing there, is, Henry the Fourth cometh himself, and says, He Claimed the Crown as descended from Henry the Third, and the Lords and Commons assented. It is true, the Arch∣bishop did propose him (as was usual at Coronations) and he did there
actually ask them, Whether they did chuse him for their King; they agreed to it, and the Arch-Bishop makes a Dis∣course upon the Virtues of a Man to Govern the Nation better than a Child; and then he is placed in the Throne. And this I take to be a proper, plain, applicable President in our Case. But that Noble Lord's Objection strikes at the very Heart of it, if the Objection be rightly made, That all these Proceedings, and so consequently the Words and Phrases there used, are all repealed, 1 Edw. 4. My Lords, It is very well known, and readily agreed by us, that Edward the Fourth came in in disaffirmance of the Title of the House of Lancaster. As those times went, whenever there was any Turn in Government, (as there were several) there were new and contrary Declarations about the Title to the Crown, made constantly in
Parliament; and what one Parliament setled, another undid. But then this Advantage we have on our side, that as we have this first Pre∣sident for us, so we have the last; for I need go no farther than the Parliament Roll of 1 Henry VII. 12.16. where the Record is set right again. The Act for Deposing Richard the Second is indeed by 1 Edw. IV. Repeal∣ed, and saith, That Henry the Fourth usurped the Crown, and murder'd Ri∣chard the Second; and thereupon it proceeds to attaint Henry the Sixth. But then comes in Henry the Seventh, and 1 Henry VII. there is an Act made, that sets aside all the Acts and Attain∣ders made against his Line, and conse∣quently repealed 1 Edw. IV, which re∣pealed 1 Hen. IV. And I would observe one thing by the way concerning Henry the Fourth: He was of the Line of Lancaster, and when he came to the Crown, would
not endure to have his Crown reckon∣ed only Matrimonial, or suffer the Stile to go in the Names of Henry and Eli∣zabeth, as he must have done if he had stuck to the Title by the Right Line of Succession: No, he always stood up for his own Title, though he had the Hei∣ress of the House of York in his Bo∣som. Therefore, my Lords, his Act for re∣storing the Record of 1 Henry IV. again, it is as good an Authority as it was be∣fore, and somewhat better; for it hath the  on its side, which is unre∣pealed to this day. E. of P—e. Henry the Seventh had a good Right and Title by Marriage to the Crown, in re Ʋxoris. No one can question but his own Title, as descended from Hen∣ry the Fourth, was an Usurpation; and he would not suffer any one to pre∣scribe
which Title was best, as long as it was acknowledg'd he had one good one That this Kingdom is Hereditary we are not to prove by President in the List of our Kings and Queens; for we shall scarce find above three in any di∣rect Line, without some interruption; and therefore we are not to fetch our Presidents or Proofs so far as those days. And this I speak for the Reason which was hinted before. The Laws made are certainly part of the Original Contract; and by the Laws made, which establish the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, we are ty'd up to keep in the Hereditary Line, being sworn to be true and faithful to the King, his Heirs and Successors; whereas the old Oath was, only to bear true Allegiance to the King. There (I take it) lies the Reason why we cannot (of our selves) without break∣ing that Contract, break the Succession, which is setled by a Law, and cannot
be altered but by another, which we our selves cannot make. Sir G— T—y. Your Lordship is pleased to say Hen∣ry the Seventh's Title by Descent was an Usurpation. I think it is pretty hard to determine what Title he did govern by, since though his Wife was the Lineal Heir, yet she had no part, or so much as a Name in the Administra∣tion. And if it were too great an Issue to be try'd then, it will be harder to do it now. And it has been said, It was his Mother's Counsel to him, not to declare particularly upon what Foot his Title stood. But, my Lords, if we should allow none for Acts of Parliament, but those that were made in the Reigns of Here∣ditary Kings, and in the Right Line, I doubt we should want the greatest part of those Laws that compose the Vo∣lume
of Statute-Books, and the Records by which we enjoy a great part of our Inheritances and Possessions. Mr. Serjeant M—d If we look but into the Law of Na∣true (that is above all Humane Laws) we have enough to justify us in what we are now a doing, to provide for our selves and the Publick Weal in such an Exigency as this. Sir R—T—e. If Laws made about the Succession be so obliging, what then shall we say to the Succession of Queen Elizabeth, who had an Act of Parliament (to the keeping of which an Oath was requi∣red) against both her and her Sister.
E. of P—e. But to shew what Opinion she her self and the Wise Men of her Times had, and were of, in this point, there is an Act, made in her Reign, and yet in being, which declares it to be a Proemunire to affirm, The Parlia∣ment cannot settle the Succession of the Crown, or alter it. Entails in Parliament have been of the Crown, both ancient and modern, yet the Au∣thority of another subsequent Act has prevail'd against such an Entail: So that it should be done, I say, in Parlia∣ment. Sir R—T—e I think we are in as full a Capacity to take care of the Government as any of our Predecessors, in such an Exi∣gence; and if we do as they have done
before us, that is not to be called a changing of the Monarchy from an He∣reditary to an Elective. E. of N—m. After this long Debate, pray let us endeavour to come as near as we can to an Agreement: We have proposed some Questions, about which my Lords desired to be satisfied; You, Gentle∣men, have not been pleased to give an Answer to them, and we have no great Hopes of getting one from you, as this Debate seems to be mana∣ged. On your part, you have declared, That you do acknowledge the Monar∣chy is Hereditary and Successive in the Right Line; then I cannot see how such an Acknowledgment consists with the Reasons you give for your Vacancy; for I cannot imagine how a Kingdom can be an Hereditary Kingdom, and that King who hath Children now in
being (at the time of his forsaking the Government) can have the Throne Vacant both of him and his Chil∣dren. The Course of Inheritance, as to the Crown of England, is, by our Law, a great deal better provided for, and runs stronger in the right Line of Birth than of any other Inheritance. No Attainder of the Heir of the Crown will bar the Succession to the Throne, as it doth the Descent to any common person. The very Descent, by Order of Birth, will take away any such De∣fect. And so was the Opinion of the great Lawyers of England, in the Case of Henry the seventh. Then cannot I ap∣prehend how any Act of the Father's can bar the Right of the Child (I do not mean that an Act of Parliament cannot do it); I never said so, nor thought so, but I say, no Act of the Father's alone can do it, since even the Act of the Son, which may endanger
an Attainder in him, cannot do it, so careful is the Law of the Royal Line of Succession. This is declar'd by many Acts of Parliament, and very fully and particularly by that Statute 25 Henry the Eighth, Cap. 22, entituled, An Act concerning the King's Succession; where the Succession of the Crown is limited to the King's Issue-Male first, then Fe∣male, and the Heirs of their Bodies one after another, by course of Inhe∣ritance, according to their Ages, as the Crown of England hath been accusto∣med and ought to go in such Ca∣ses. If then the King hath done any thing to divest himself of his own Right, it doth not follow thence, that That shall exclude the Right of his Issue; and then the Throne is not Vacant, as long as there are any such Issue; for no Act of the Father can Vacant for himself and Children.
Therefore if you mean no more than but the divesting his own Right, I de∣sired you would declare so: And then suppose the Right gone as to him, yet if it descend to his Lineal Successor, it is not Vacant. And I told you, One Reason my Lord's did stand upon against agreeing to the Vacancy, was, Because they thought your Vote might extend a great deal further than the King's own Person. But your all owning it to be a Li∣neal Inheritance, and this Vacancy, me∣thinks, do not by any means con∣sist. You declare, you never meant to alter the Constitution; then you must preserve the Succession in its ancient course: So I did hear a worthy Gen∣tleman conclude it to be your Intention to do. But by what methods can it be done in this Case by us? I desire to be
satisfied in a few things about this very matter. I desire first to know, Whether the Lords and Commons have Power by themselves to make a binding Act or Law. And then I desire to know, Whether according to our ancient Le∣gal Constitution every King of En∣gland, by being seated on the Throne, and possessed of the Crown, is not there∣by King, to him and his Heirs. And without an Act of Parliament, (which we alone cannot make) I know not what Determination we can make of his Estate. It has been urged indeed, That we have in Effect already agreed to what is contain'd in this Vote, by Voting, That it is inconsistent with our Reli∣gion and Laws to have a Popish Prince to Rule over us.
But I would fain know, Whether they that urge this, think that the Crown of Spain is Legally and Actual∣ly excluded from the Succession by this Vote. No Man sure will undertake to tell me, That Vote of either House, or both Houses together, can Alter the Law in this or any other point. But because I am very desirous that this Vote should have its Effect, I de∣sire that every thing of this Nature should be done in the antient usual Method, by Act of Parliament. GOD forbid that since we are hap∣pily deliver'd from the Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Power, we should assume any such Power to our selves; What Advantage should we then give to those who would quarrel with our Settlement for the Illegality of it? Would not this, which we thus endeavour to crush, break forth into a Viper?
For that Record of 1. Henry the Fourth, I acknowledge the words of the Royal Seat being Vacant are us'd. But since you your selves tell us of it, That Henry the Fourth did claim by Inheritance from his Grandfather, that, methinks, may come up to what I would have the declared sence of both Houses upon this Question; (to wit) The Throne might be Vacant of Richard the Second, but not so Va∣cant but the claim of the immediate Successor was to take place, and not be excluded, but entirely preser∣ved. And Richard the Second seems to have had the same Opinion, by delivering over his Signet to them. Our Laws know no Inter regnum; but upon the Death of the Predecessor the next Heir is in uno & eodem in∣stanti.
It was so Resolv'd even in Richard the Second's own Case; for at his Grandfather's Death it was a Questi∣on, Whether King Richard the Second or the Eldest Son of his Grandfather, then living, should succeed; and it was Resolved, That he ought to have it, be∣cause of his Right of Inheritance; which is the more remarkable, because of the contest. And when Richard the Third usurped his Crown, to make his Claim good to the Right of Inheritance, he Bastardiz∣ed his own Nephews. And so it was in all the Instances of the Breaches that were made upon the Line of Succession, which were some Seven (but all illegal); for such was the Force of the Laws, that the Usurpers would not take the Crown upon them, unless they had some specious pretence of an Hereditary Title to it.
That which I would have Avoided by all means, is, the Mischievous Con∣sequences that I fear will ensue upon this Vacancy of the Throne, (to wit) the utter Overthrow of the whole Costitution of our Government. For if it be so, and the Lords and Com∣mons only remain as parts of it, Will not this make the King one of the Three Estates? Then is he the Head of the Commonwealth, all united in one Body under him. And if the Head be taken away, and the Throne Va∣cant, by what Laws or Constitutions is it that we retain Lords and Com∣mons? For they are knit together in their common Head; and if one part of the Government be dissolved, I see not any Reason but that all must be dis∣solved. Therefore 'tis of very great im∣portance that we come to an Explana∣tion, how far you mean the Throne to be Vacant; and that if it reach to the King and his Heirs, (notwithstand∣ing
all the the Acts of Parliament about the Succession) we may consider how the consequences of that will effect the Constitution; for, I presume to say, it may then be in your power as well as to say, we shall have no King at all. I was mistaken by the Gentlemen who took notice of what I said the Lords might do of themselves, in the absence of the King: I would not be understood to say, the Government devolved upon the Lords; but I may say they are the Governments great Council in the interval of Parliaments, and may have greater sway by the Privilege of their Birth, in the Exigen∣cies of the State: As appears in seve∣ral Instances, and particularly the first of Henry the Sixth, and during his In∣fancy. There was a Case put by one Gen∣tleman, about the two Sons of Edward the Fourth, being kept Prisoners so long, till it could not be known by
any Living Witnesses which was the Eldest: I would only ask that Gen∣tleman, Whether in that case he would say the Throne were Vacant; certainly there would have been One in the Throne. But then it followeth, that though there should be an Uncertainty of the particular Person, yet that would not infer a Necessity that the Throne should be Vacant. Upon the whole matter, you seem to understand your own words to signifie less than they do really im∣port. I do not find that you purpose to make the Kingdom Elective; and yet you talk of supplying the Vacancy by the Lords and Commons. You do not say, That the King has left the Crown for himself and his Heirs; and yet your words speak of a Vacancy, and nothing of the Suc∣cession;
but you do not tell us what you mean. Therefore, if this matter were ex∣plained, that my Lords may know how far the Intention of the Vote reacheth, that it may not abroad, or hereafter, be construed to go beyond such Meaning, (that is) as to the King himself, and not to his Heirs, perhaps there might quickly be a hap∣pier Accommodation than can be ex∣pected while things remain thus, still in doubt, and in the dark. Gentlemen, If any of you can settle this Mat∣ter in its true Light, it would do very well; and it is You must do it; for the Words are Yours, and so we must be told your Signification and Intention by your selves. If you mean by Abdication and Va∣cancy only that the King has left the Government, and it is Devolved upon the next Successor, that may perhaps
satisfie my Lords, and we may agree upon some Settlement. I must confess, any Government is better than none; but I earnest∣ly desire we may enjoy our Ancient Constitution. Therefore I again renew my Re∣quest, That you would come to such an Explanation as may breed an U∣nion between the two Houses, for the strength of your Consultation and Resolutions in this great Emergency. If the Kingdom were indeed Ele∣ctive, we were in a Capacity of E∣lecting, but pro hac Vice, according to the Constitution, this Question would be greater than what it was before; but then the great Debate in it would only be, Who should first have the Honour of Laying the ve∣ry Foundation of the New Govern∣ment. But as this case stands upon the Foot of our Ancient Laws, and Fun∣damental
constitution, I humbly be∣seech you to consider, Whether at the same time that in this way you get an Establish'd Government, you do not overturn all our Legal Foun∣dations. Mr. P—F—y. I hope, my Lords, there is no danger of shaking our Fundamentals in this case; but we are pursuing those Methods that agree with our Laws and Constitution: For though the Monarchy of this Nation be He∣reditary in the Ordinary course of Suc∣cession, yet there may fall out a case wherein that cannot be comply'd with, and a plain Vacancy may ensue. For, put the case the whole Royal Lines should fail, (as they are all mortal as well as we our selves are) should we in that case have no Goveenment at all? And, who then should we have but the Lords & Commons? and I think that case comes nearest to the case in question, where the Successor is not known; for if he had been, we should have heard of him
before now. And, what is the reason that it should then in the former case devolve to Lords and Commons, but that there is no King? And they being the Representative Body of the Kingdom, are the only remaining apparent parts of the Government, and are only to sup∣ply the Defect by providing a Successor. And, is here not the same Reason here? We are without a King, I am sure I do not know of any that we have: If that fall out to be the case now, that will inser a Vacancy with a witness; and it will be of necessity that the Lords and Commons take care to supply it. Mr. G—E—e. My Lords, We are led, and, I think, out of the Way, into a very large Field, hunting after the Consequences of a Vote not yet setl'd or agreed unto: We have, as I con∣ceive, nothing but the Vote it self to consider of, or debate upon: We do not intend to prejudice any Legal Right: But what the consequences of this Vote may be, before the Vote it self be pas∣sed,
I believe no Man can reasonably pretend to ascertain, unless he have the Spirit of Prophecy. The Throne may be Vacant as to the Possession, without the exclusion of one that has a Right to the Succession, or a Dissolution of the Government in the Constitution; neither will there be room for the Objection of a King de facto, and not de jure, which some of the Lords were pleased to express their Fears of. This Gentleman that stands by me in∣stanced in a Record, and that was mista∣ken, as a President for the proceeding in this Case; it was only mention'd by him to shew, that by using the word Vacant the Commons did no more than our Ancestors did before us; and there∣fore it was not an unknown word or thing to have the Throne Vacant. We do apprehend we have made a right and apt Conclusion from the Pre∣mises, for otherwise all the Vote is but Historical.
We declare the Late King hath broke the Original Contract, hath violated the Fundamental Laws, and hath with∣drawn himself out of the Kingdom, that he hath Abdicated, actually Renounced, the Government. What occasion was there for such a Declaration as this, if nothing were concluded from it? That were only to give the Kingdom a compendious Histo∣ry of those Miseries they have too well learnt by feeling them. Therefore there was a necessity to make some Conclusion; and none so natural as this; That we are left with∣out a King in the words of the Vote; that the Throne is thereby Vacant, which it may be as to the Possession, and yet the Right of Succession no way preju∣diced. But, my Lords, we come here, by the Commands of the House of Com∣mons, to debate the Reasons of their Vote and your Lordships Amendments,
not to dispute what will be the conse∣quences, which is not at present our Province. And so the Conference ended, and the Members of each House returned to their respective Houses. Die Jovis 7mo Feb. 1688. A Message from the Lords, by Sir Ro∣bert Atkins and Sir Edward Nevill. Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to tell you, That they have agreed to the Vote sent them up of the 28th of January last, (touching which there was a free Con∣ference yesterday) without any Altera∣tions.
FINIS.
