E2759 11205357 46761
VOTES and RESOLVES OF THE COMMONS-HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT. Iune 15. Iuly 13. CAROLI Regis THE House of COMMONS being on Friday last informed of a Scandalous and Seditious Printed Paper or Pamphlet, intituled [Sundry reasons humbly tendred to the most Honourable House of PEERS, by some Citizens and Members of London, and other Cities, Burroughs, Corporations and Ports against the new intended Bill, for Governing and Reforming CORPORATIONS.] did appoint a Committee to examine, and make enquirie touching the Author, Printers, and Publishers thereof. And upon Report this day made by Mr. Churchill of the Examination, and Evidence before the Committee, touching the said Seditious Pamphlet; Mr Prynn (being present, and confessing himself, to be the Author thereof, and that he had caused the same to be Printed) was ordered to withdraw, And the House then pro∣ceeding to debate the Matter, Resolved upon the Question, That the said Printed Paper intituled [Sundry Reasons, humbly tendred to the most Honou∣rable House of PEERS, by some Citizens and Members of London, and other Cities, Burroughs, Corporations and Ports; against the new intended Bill, for Governing and Reforming CORPORATIONS.] is an Illegall, False, Scandalous, and Seditious Pamphlet. Resolved, That Mr. Prynn be called into his Place, to receive the Reprehension and Censure of the House, for Contriving the said Pamphlet, and causing it to be Printed. And Mr Prynn being accordingly called in, and being in his place, Mr Speaker, did then acquaint him with the Judgment of the House, and gave him a Grave and Severe Reprehension. Whereupon Mr Prynn, did (with much Ingenuity and Reverence to the House,) declare his Humble submission to, and concurrence with the Censure and Judgement of the House, upon the said Printed Paper, and his hearty Sorrow for his Offence, and did render humble Thanks to the House, for their Mercy and Favour to him, above his Deserts. Resolved upon the Question, That this House being well satisfied with the Demeanour and acknowledgement of Mr Prynn, doth Remit his Offence. ORdered that these Votes and Proceedings, be forthwith Printed and Published. WILL. GOLDESBURGH Cler. Dom. Com. LONDON Printed by R. Hodgkinson, 1661.
