E4 11315476 47431
A NEW DICTIONARY OF THE Terms Ancient and Modern OF THE Canting Crew. In its several TRIBES, OF Gypsies, Beggers, Thieves, Cheats, &c. WITH An Addition of some Proverbs, Phrases, Figurative Speeches, &c. Useful for all sorts of People, (especially Foreigners) to secure their Money and preserve their Lives; besides very Diverting and Entertaining, be∣ing wholly New. By B. E. Gent. LONDON, Printed for W. Hawes at the Rose in Ludgate-street, P. Gilbourne at the Corner of Chancery-lane in Fleet-street, and W. Davis▪ at the Black Bull in Cornhill.
THE PREFACE. BEfore I present the Reader, with the following Dictiona∣ry of the Beggers and Gypsies Cant, I think it not amiss to premise a few Words concerning the Beg∣gers and Gypsies themselves, by way of an Historical Account, of the Antiquity of the one, and the Uni∣versality of the other.
It makes not a little for the Ho∣nour of the Beggers, that their Ori∣ginal according to some Accounts, is no less Ancient than that of Christi∣anityit self; for in the Opinion of Charron, as the Slaves went off, the Beggers came in their Place. So much at least is granted, That the Jews who allow'd of Slaves, had no Beggers. What shall we say, but that if it be true, that the Emanci∣pating or Freeing of Slaves was in∣deed the making of Beggers; it fol∣lows that Christianity which is dai∣ly employed in Redeeming Slaves from the Turks, Ransom'd no less than all at once from Pagan Slavery at first, at no dearer a Rate, than the Rent-charge of maintaining the Beg∣gers, as the Price and Purchace of our Freedoms.
As for the Antiquity of the Eng∣lish Beggers, it may be observed, That the first Statute which makes Provi∣sion for the Parish-Poor, is no older than Queen Elizabeth; from which it may be fairly Collected, Thatthey entred with us upon the Disso∣lution of the Abbeys, as with them abroad, upon the Delivery of the Slaves.
For the Gypsies, they and the Foul Disease have alike the Fate to run through a Geography of Names, and to be made free of as many Coun∣tries, as almost there are Languages to call them Names in; for as the French call the Pox, the Italian Disease, they again give it to the Spaniards, as these to the French; so the French call the Gypsies Boemie, or Bohemians, belike, because they made their first Appea∣rance in Bohemia of any Part of Europe; the Italians Name them Zingari or Saracens, the Spaniards Itanos as we Egyptians; whether it be, that the Italians give them the Turks, as the Spaniards give them the Moors, as being both the next Neighbors to each; I take not up∣onme to Determine, only it may be observed, betwixt the Comple∣ment of either kind, the Odds is no greater than this, of giving a Nati∣on a Clap, or of laying a brood of Bastards at it's Door. Though Holland has no Beggers, if the Dutch themselves are not the greatest Beggers in the World; and Switzerland has no Thieves, if the Swiss who are altogether Soldiers, are not the greatest of Thieves. Yet, I say, neither the States that are with∣out Beggers, nor the Cantons that are without Thieves, are notwith∣standing either the one or the other, without Gypsies. So as what they want of Beggers and Thieves in point of Antiquity, the Gypsies claim a∣bove both, in point of Universality.
But though Gypsies are found in all Christian Countries, yet are they not in all Countries alike; their Na∣tureand Genius being diverse, in pro∣portion to the Countries amongst whom they Stroul; so that the same Question remains upon them, as is started of the Winds, as Universal Travellers as the Gypsies, that it seems a Doubt, Whether they partake more of the Nature of the Countries whence they rise, or of those through which they Pass? Nor is it also new to meet the Beggers and the Proverbs together, for the Fashion is as old as Plautus, who puts the Proverbs and the Jests in the Mouth of his Slaves. And in the Character of Sancho Pancha, Cer∣vantes has Trod in the same Steps; in the History of Don Quixot, San∣cho being distinguished no less by his Proverbs, than his Asse. And be∣tween the Slaves and the Beggers, the Difference is no greater, than be∣tween Fathers and their Heirs.
If some Terms and Phrases of better Quality and Fashion, keep so ill Company, as Tag-Rag and Long-Tail; you are to remember, that it is no less then Customary, for Great Persons a broad to hide themselves often in Disguises among the Gypsies; and even the late L. of Rochester a∣mong us, when time was, among o∣ther Frolicks, was not ashamed to keep the Gypsies Company.
A NEW DICTIONARY. A B A B A Bram-cove, c. a Na∣ked or poor Man, also a lusty strong Rogue. Abram-men, c. the se∣venteenth Order of the Canting-crew. Beggers antickly trick'd up with Ribbands, Red Tape, Foxtails, Rags, &c. pre∣tending Madness to pal∣liate their Thefts of Poul∣trey, Linnen, &c. A C Academy, c. a Bawdy∣house, also an University, or School to learn Gen∣teleman like Exercises. Accoutrements, c. fine rigging (now) for Men or Women, (formerly) only Trappings for Horses. Well accoutred, c. gen∣tilly dress'd. Acquests, and Acquisi∣tions, the rights of For∣tune purchased by La∣bour, Arts or Arms, oppos'd to Hereditary and Paternal. Acteon, a Cuckold. Acteon'd, Cuckolded, or made a Cuckold of. A D A D Adam's-ale, Water. Adam-tiler, c. a Pick∣pocket's Camerade, who receives Stolen Money or Goods, and scowers off with them. Addle-pate, one full of Whimsies and Projects, and as empty of Wit.
Addle-plot, a Martin∣mar-all. Adrift, loose. I'll turn ye adrift, a Tar-phrase; I'll prevent▪ ye doing me any harm. A F Affidavit-men, Knights of the Post, Mercenary Swearers for Hire, Inha∣bitants (formerly) of White Friers, now dis∣persed. Aft and Abaft, to∣wards the Stern, or hin∣der Part of the Ship. A I Aim, Endeavour or De∣sign. To aim, or level at a Mark, he has mist his Aim or End. Air of a Song the Tune. Air of a Face or Pic∣ture, the Configuration and consent of Parts in each. Airy, Light, brisk, plea∣sant; also a Nest of Hawks. He is an Airy Fellow. A L Alabaster, mixt by all the knavish Perfumers with the Hair-Powder they sell, to make it weigh heavy, being of it self very cheap, that their Gain may be the greater, found destruc∣tive to the Hair and Health. Alsatia White Friers. Alsatia the higher, the same. Alsatia the lower, the Mint in Southwark. Alsatians, the Inhabi∣tants, such as, broken Gentlemen, Tradesmen, &c. Lurking there.
Allay, the Embasing of a purer and finer Met∣al, by mixing it with an inferior or coarser Met∣al, as of pale Gold with a Silver-Allay, or of deep Gold with an Al∣lay of Copper; also whatever is used to qua∣lify what is bitter or nauseous in Compositi∣ons, as gilding of Pills,sweetning of Boluses, or Powders. Aloft, above or over Head; also anciently an Upper-room or Garret, now more us'd in Com∣pounds, as Cock-loft, Hay∣loft, &c. Altemall, altogether. Altitudes, the Man is in his Altitudes, he is Drunk. A M Ambidexter, one that goes snacks in gaming with both Parties; also a Lawyer that takes Fees of Plaintif and Defendant at once. Ambient-Air, Air a∣broad oppos'd to that pent and shut up in Wells, Vaults, Caves, &c. Or else the outward Air in the House, oppos'd to that shut up in the Cavi∣ties of Vessels, Glasses, Vials, &c. Ambrol, among the Tarrs for Admiral. Amphibious Creatures of a doubtful kind, or of a double Element; as a Bat is between a Bird and a Beast; an Otter between a Beast and a Fish; and a Puffin with the rest of the Sea-Fowl, between Fowl and Fish. Amuse, to throw dust in one's Eyes, by divert∣ing one from a serious Thought to a pleasant one. Amusement, a Blind or Disengagement from deep Thoughts to more Diverting. A N An Ark, c. a Boat or Wherry. Anglers, c. Cheats, pet∣ty Thievs, who have a Stick with a hook at the end, with which they pluck things out of Windows, Grates, &c. also those that draw in People to be cheated. Animal, a Fool. He is a meer Animal, he is a very silly Fellow.
Antechambers, forerooms for receiving of Visits, as the back and DrawingRooms are for Lodgings, anciently called Dining∣rooms. Antidote, a very home∣ly Woman, also a medi∣cine against Poyson. Antient, at Sea, for Ensign, or Flag. Anticks, little Images on Stone, on the out side of old Churches. An∣tick postures or dresses, such as are odd, ridiculous and singular, the habits and motions of Fools, Zanies, or Merry-an∣drews, of Mountebanks, with Ribbands, mis∣matched colours and Feathers. Antiquary, a curious Critick in old Coins, Stones and Inscriptions, in Worm-eaten Records, and ancient Manuscripts; also one that affects and blindly doats, on Relicks, Ruins, old Customs, Phrases and Fashions. Antiquated Rogue, Old, out of date, that has forgot or left off his Trade of Thieving, &c. also superannuated, ob∣solete Customs, or Words, such as are worn out, out of use and Fashion. A P Apart, severally, asun∣der. Apartments, Rooms a∣part, private Lodgings, inner Chambers, secret and withdrawn from the rest. Recesses of the House opposed to the Ante chambers. A R Arack, an East-Indian Brandy, or strong Spirit drawn from Rice, and (sometimes) Roes of Fish, best when old, much us'd in Punch, the double distill'd Goa most esteem'd. Arch, Rogue, Witty. Wag, Pleasant. Whore, Cunning. Arms, to bear Arms, a Profession not unbe∣coming a Gentleman, for Books and Arms are Gentlemens Burdens.
Armour, in his Armour Pot-valiant. Aristippus, a Diet-drink, or Decoction of Sarsa, China, &c. Sold at cer∣tain Coffee-houses, and drank as Tea. Arsworm, a little di∣minutive Fellow. A S Ascendant, Power, In∣fluence, as, he has the As∣cendant over him, or an Hank upon him; also the Horoscope, or point of the Ecliptic that rises at one's Nativity. Assig, now us'd for Assignation, an Appoint∣ment or meeting. Assuming, conceited, as, an Assuming Fellow, one that abounds in his own Sense, and impo∣ses it upon every Man else. Assurance, Confidence, as, a Man of Assurance, one that has a stock of Confidence. A U Aunt, a Bawd, as one of my Aunts, one of the same Order. Autem, c. a Church, also Married. Autem-mort, c. a Mar∣ried-woman, also the Twenty fourth Order of the Canting Tribe, Tra∣velling, Begging (and often Stealing) about the Country, with one Child in Arms, another on Back, and (sometimés) lead∣ing a third in the Hand. Auxiliary-beauty. Dress, Paint, Patches, setting of Eye-brows, and lick∣ing the Lipps with red. B Babler, a great Talk∣er. Backt, dead, as he wishes the old Man backt, he longs to have his Father upon six Mens shoulders, or as his Back's up, he is in a fume, or angry.
Bacon, as he sav'd his Bacon, he has escap'd with a whole Skin. A good voice to beg Bacon,said in jear of an ill voice. Badge, a mark of Distinction among poor People; as, Porters, Wa∣ter-men, Parish-Pensi∣oners and Hospital-boys, Blew-coats and Badges being the ancient Live∣ries. Badgers, they that buy up a quantity of Corn and hoard it up in the same Market, till the price rises; or carry it to another, where it bears a better. Also a Beast for sport, Badger Eartheth, Lodgeth. Badjob, an ill bout, bargain, or business. Baffle, to worst, or de∣feat. A baffled Cause, worsted, defeated. Baggage, a Whore or Slut. Bagonet or Bionet, a Dagger. Bail-dock, the place in the Court, where the Prisoners are kept till called to be Arraign'd. Balsom, c. Money. Balderdash, ill, unplea∣sant, unwholesom mix∣tures of Wine, Ale, &c. Banbury-story▪ of a Cock and a Bull, silly chat. Banditti, Highway∣men, (Horse or Foot) Rogues of any kind, now, but strictly Italian Out∣laws. Bandog, a Bailiff, or his Follower, a Serge∣ant, or his Yeoman; al∣so a very fierce Mastive. Bandore, a Widows mourning Peak; also a Musical Instrument. Bandy, a play at Ball with a Bat; also to fol∣low a Faction. Bandy-legg'd, crooked. Bang, a blow, to Bang, to beat. Banillas, a Seed grow∣ing in a Cod, somewhat resembling a Kidney∣bean, on Trees in the In∣dies, much us'd in Cho∣colate.
Banter, a pleasant way of prating, which seems in earnest, but is in jest, a sort of ridicule, What do you banter me? i. e. do you pretend to imposeupon me, or to expose me to the Company, and I not know your meaning. Bantling, a Child. Barker, a Salesman's Servant that walks be∣fore the Shop, and cries, Cloaks, Coats, or Gowns, what d'ye lack, Sir? Barketh, the Noise a Fox makes at Rutting time. Barnacle, c. a good job, or a snack easily got, also Fish growing on Ships sides when foul, and a Brake for unruly Horses Noses, also the Gratuity to Jockeys, for selling or buying Horses. Barnadcles, c. the Irons Fellons wear in Goal. Bar-wig, between a bob and a long one. Basset. a Game at Cards. Baste, to beat, as, I'll baste your sides Sirrah, I'll bang you lustily. Bastonado-ing, a Cud∣gelling. Batten, c. to Fatten. Battner, c. an Ox. Batter, the Ingredi∣ents for a Pudding or Pan-cake, when they are all mixt and stirred to∣gether. Battery, beating, assault, also, striking with the Edge and feble of one's Sword, upon the edge and feble of his Adver∣saries. Batter'd-bully, an old well cudgell'd and bruis'd huffing Fellow. Baubee, a half-penny. Baubels, c. Jewels, al∣so trifles and Childrens Play-things. Bawdy-baskets, c. the Twenty third Rank of Canters, with Pins, Tape, Obscene Books, &c. to sell, but live more by Stealing. Bawdy-batchelors, that live long Unmarried. Bawdy-house-bottle, a very small one.
Bay-windows, embow∣ed, as of old, standing out from the rest of the Building. Stand at bay, as Deer will, when close∣ly pursued, or beinghard run, turn Head a∣gainst the Hounds. B E Beach, the Sea-shore. or Strand. Bear-garden-discourse, common, filthy, nasty Talk. If it had been a Bear it would have bit you, of him that makes a close search after what just Iies under his Nose. As good take a Bear by the Tooth, of a bold desperate Undertaking. Go like the Bear to the Stake, or hang an Arse. As many tricks as a dancing Bear▪ or more than are good. Beard splitter, an enjoy∣er of Women. Beateth, the noise a Hare makes at Rutting time. Beating, striking the Feble of the Adversary's Sword, with the Fort and edge of one's own. Beau, a silly Fellow that follows the Fashions nicely, Powdering his Neck, Shoulders, &c. Beautrap, a Sharper. Beck, c. a Beedle. Beetle-head, a heavy dull Block-head. Beldam, a scolding old Woman. Belle, a nice, gay, fluttring foolish Woman that follows every Fash∣ion, also fair. Belloweth, see Roe. Belly-cheat, c. an A∣pron. Belsh, all Mault drinks. Belweather, chief or Leader of the Flock, Master of misrule, also a clamorous noisy Man. Bene. c. good. Bene-cove, c. a good Fellow. Bene-ship, c. very good, also Worship. Bene-bowse, c. strong Liquor, or very good Drink. Bene-darkmans, c. good night. Benfeakers of Gybes, c. Counterseiters of Passes. Benefit of Clergy, see Neck-verse. Ben, a Fool. Bennish, Foolish.
Beside-himself, distract∣ed, beside the Cushion, a mistake, beside the Lighter, in a bad condition. Besom, a Broom. Bestrid, Mounted or got up astride. Bess, c. bring bess and glym, c. forget not the Instrument to break o∣pen the Door and the Dark-lanthorn. Betty, c. a small Engin to force open the Doors of Houses; also, a quar∣ter Flask of Wine. Bever, an afternoon's Lunchion. Beveridge, a Garnish∣money, for any thing; also Wine and Water. Bevy, a company of Roes, Quails, &c. Bevy Grease. Roes fat. Bewildred, at a stand or nonplus in Business, not knowing what to do, also lost in a Wood. B I Biddy, a Chicken, also Bridget. Big, choice Barley-ma∣king, the belt Mault. Biggin, a Woman's Coif. Biggot, an obstinate blind Zealot. Biggotry, an obstinate blind Zeal. Bil-boa, c. a Sword. Bite the Bil from the Cull c. whip the Sword from the Gentleman's side. Bilk, c. to cheat. Bilk the Ratling-cove, c. to sharp the Coach-man of his hire. Bilk'd, c. defeated, disappointed. Billeting. Foxes Excre∣ments. Billeting of Soldi∣ers, Quartering them. Billet-deux, a Love∣letter. Bill-of sale, a Bandore, or Widow's Peak. Billingsgate-dialect, Scolding, ill Language, foul Words. Binding, securing the Adversary's Sword with Eight or ten Inches of one's one, upon Five or six of his. Bing, c. to go, &c.
Bing awast, c. get you hence. Bing'd awast ina Darkmans, c. stole a∣way in the Night-time.Bing we to Rume vile. c go we to London. Bingo, c. Brandy. Bingo-boy, c. a great Drinker or Lover there∣of. Bingo-club, c. a set of Rakes, Lovers of that Liquor. Birds of a Feather, c. Rogues of the same gang; also, those of the same Profession, Trade or Employment. To kill two Brids with one Stone, to dispatch two Busines∣ses at one Stroke. Bird-witted, Wild∣headed, not Solid or Stay∣ed, opposed to a Sober-Wit. Bit, c. Robb'd, Cheat∣ed or Out-witted. Also Drunk, as, he has bit his Grannam; he is very Drunk. Bit the Blow, c. accomplish'd the Theft, plaied the Cheat, or done the Feat: You have Bit a great▪ Blow, c. you have Robb'd some body of a great deal, or to a con∣siderable value. Bite, c. a Rogue, Shar∣per or Cheat; also a Womans Privities. Bite the Biter, c. to Rob the Rogue, Sharp the Sharper, or Cheat the Cheater. Bite the Cully, c. to put the cheat on the sil∣ly Fellow. Bite the Roger, c. to Steal the Portmanteau. Bite the Wiper, c. to Steal the Hand-kerchief. The Cull wapt the Morts bite. c. the Fellow enjoyed the Whore briskly. He will not bite, or swallow the Bait. He won't be drawn in, to bite on the bit; to be pinched, or reduced to hard Meat, a scanty or sorry sort of Living. Bitter-cold, very Cold, B L Black and White, un∣der one's Hand, or in Writing. Blab, a Sieve of Se∣crets, a very prating Fel∣low that tells all he knows.
Black-box, a Lawyer. Black-coat, a Parson. Black-guard, Dirty, Nasty, Tatter'd roguish Boys, that attend (at the Horse-Guards) to wipe Shoes, clean Boots, water Horses, or run of Errands. Blackjack, a Leather-Jug to drink in. Black-Indies, Newca∣stle, from whence the Coals are brought Blackmuns, c. Hoods and Scarves of Alamode and Lustrings. Black-mouth, foul, ma∣licious, Railing, or Re∣flecting. Blacken, to blast or a∣sperse. Black-spy, c. the Devil. Blank, baffled, down∣look't, sheepish, guilty. Bleak, sharp, piercing Weather. Bleach, to whiten. Bleaters, c. they that are cheated by Jack-in-a box. Bleating-cheat, c. a Sheep. Bleed freely, c. part with their Money easily▪ Blemish, when Hounds or Beagles find where the Chace has been, and make a proffer to enter, but return. Blew-John, Wash, or Afterwort. Blind-cheeks, the Breech. Kiss my Blind-cheeks, Kiss my Ar— Blind-excuse, a sorry shift. A Blind Ale-house, or Blind Lane, obscure, of no Sign, Token, or Mark. Blind-harpers, c. Beg∣gers counterfeiting blind∣ness, with Harps or Fid∣dles. Blind-man's-buff, a play us'd by Children blind∣folded. Bluffed, contract∣ed from Blind-man's-buff, he that is Blinded in the Play. Blind-man's-holiday, when it is too dark to see to Work. Blind side, every Man's weak Part. Bloated, Smoked Her∣ings; also, one puffed or swelled with false Fat, and has not a Healthy Complexion.
Blobber-lipp'd, very thick, hanging down, or turning over. Block, a filly Fellow. Block-houses, c. Prisons, also Forts upon Rivers. Blockish, Stupid. Blockstock, See Block. Bloss, c. a Thief or Shop-lift, also, a Bullies pretended Wife, or Mis∣tress, whom he guards, and who by her Tra∣ding supports him, also a Whore. Blot the Skrip and jark it, c. to stand Engaged, or be Bound for any body. Blot in the Tables, what is fair to be hit. Blot in a Scutcheon, a blemish or imputation upon any one. Bloud, 'twill breed ill Bloud, of what will pro∣duce a misunderstanding or Difference. Blower, c. a Mistress, al∣so a Whore. Blowing, c. the same. Blow-off-on the groun∣sills, c. to lie with a Wo∣man on the Floor or Stairs. Blown upon, seen by several, or slighted; not blown upon, a secret piece of News or Poetry, that has not taken air, spick and span-new. To blow Hot and Cold with a Breath, or play fast and loose. Blow off the loose corns, c. to Lie now and then with a Woman. It is blow'd, c. it is made pub∣lick, and all have notice. Blubber, Whale-oyl, (imperfect.) Blubbering, much Cry∣ing. Bluffer, c. a Host, Inn∣keeper or Victualler, to look bluff, to look big, or like Bull-beef. Blunder, an Ignorant Mistake. Blunderbuss, a Dunce, an unganely▪Fellow, also a short Gun carrying Twenty Pistol-Bullets at one Charge. Bluster, to huff, a blus∣tring Fellow, a rude rat∣ling Fellow. Boar, see wild Boar.
B O Boarding-school, c. Bride∣well. Boarding-scholars, c. Bridewell-birds. Bob, c. a Shop-lift's camrade, affistant, or re∣ceiver; also a very short Periwig, and for Robert. It's all bob, c. all is safe, the Bet is secured Bob'd, c. Cheated, Trick'd, Disappointed, or Baulk'd. Bob-tail, a light Wo∣man, also a short Ar∣row-head. Bode-ill, to presage or betoken ill. Also in Hol∣land, a Bode is a Messin∣ger, attending the Burgo-Masters, and executing their Orders. Bodle, Six make a Pen∣ney, Scotch Coin. Boer, a Country-Fel∣low or Clown. Boerish, Rude, Unman∣nerly, Clownish. Boggs, Irish Fastnes∣ses or Marshes. Bog-houses, Privies. Bog-landers, Irish Men. Bog-trotters, Scotch or North Country Moss∣troopers or High-way Men formerly, and now Irish Men. Boisterous Fellow or Sea, Blustering, Rude, Rough. Boldface, Impudent. A Bold Harbour, where Ships may Ride at An∣chor with safety, a bold Shore where Ships may Sail securely. Bolter of White Friers, c. one that Peeps out, but dares not venture a∣broad, as a Coney bolts out of the Hole in a Warren, and starts back again. Bolting, the leaping by one's Adversary's Left∣side quite out of all mea∣sure. Boltsprit, a Nose. He has broke his Boltsprit, he has lost his Nose with the Pox. Bombast-poetry, in Words of lofty Sound and humble Sense.
Bone, c. to Apprehend,Seize, Take or Arrest. I'll Bone ye, c. I'll cause you to be Arrested. We shall be Bon'd, c. we shall be Ap∣prehended for the Rob∣bery. The Cove is Bon'd and gon to the Whit, c. the Rogue is taken up and carried to Newgate, or any other Goal. The Cull has Bon'd the Fen, (for Fence) or Bloss that bit the Blow, c. the Man has Taken the Thief that Robb'd his House, Shop, or Pickt his Pocket. He has bit his Blow, but if he be Bon'd, he must shove the Tumbler, c. he has Stole the Goods, or done the Feat, but if he be Taken, he'll be Whipt at the Cart∣tail. I have Bon'd her Dudds, Fagg'd, and Brush'd, c. I have took away my Mistress Cloathes, Beat her, and am troop'd off. Boning the Fence, c. find∣ing the Goods where Conceal'd, and Seizing, he made no bones of it, he swallow'd it without Drinking after it. Bonny-clapper, sower Butter-milk. Booby, a dull heavy Lob. Booberkin, the same. Boon, a Gift, Reward, or Gratification. Boon-companion, a mer∣ry Drinking Fellow. Boot, a Scotch Torture, or Rack, for the Leg, is to draw to Confession. What Boots it? What Avails it? Booty-play, False, Cheat∣ing, also Plunder, he Bowls Booty, when great Odds are laid, and he goes Halves, his Cast is designed by Bad. Boracho, a But, a Drun∣kard, and a Hogskin. Borde, c. a Shilling, half a Borde, c. Sixpence. Bordel-lo, a Bawdy-House. Boreson or Bauson, a Badger. Bottle-head, void of Wit.
Bottom, a Man of no Bottom, of no Bafis of Principles, or no settle∣ment of Fortune, or ofno Ground in his Art. Let every Tub stand on it's own Bottom, or every one look to his own foot∣ing. A Tale of a Tub with the Bottom out, a sleeveless frivolous Tale. Boughs, he is up in the Boughs, or a top of the House, of one upon the Rant, or in a great Fer∣ment. Bounce, to boast and vapour. A meer Bounce, a Swaggering Fellow. Bouncer, c. a Bully. Bout, a Tryal, Act, Essay. Bowse, c. Drink, or to Drink, see Benbowse and Rumbowse. Bowsy. c. Drunk. We Bows'd it about, we Drank damn'd hard. Bowsingken, c. an Ale∣house. The Cul tipt us a Hog, which we melted in Rumbowse, c. the Gen∣tleman gave us a Shilling, which we spent in Strong Dink. Box, to Fight with the Fists. Box it about Boys, Drink briskly round. In a wrong Bow, of one that has taken wrong measures, or made alse steps. A pretty Box, a Compleat little House, also a small drinking place. B R Bracket-face, Ugly, Homely, Illfavor'd. Bragget, Meed, and Ale sweetned with Honey. Brag, Braggadoeio, A vapouring, Swaggering, Bullying Fellow. Brat, a little Child. Branchers, Canary-Birds of the first Year. Bravado, a Vapour∣ing, or Bouncing. Bravo, a Mercenary Murderer, that will Kill any Body. Brawl, Squabble, or Quarrel. To Brangle, and Brawl, to Squabble and Scold. Brazen-fac'd, Bold, Impudent, Audacious.
Bread and Cheese Bow∣ling-green, a very ord'na∣ry one, where they playfor Drink and Tobacco. all wet, as 'tis called. Bread and Cheese Con∣stables, that trats their Neighbors and Friends at their coming into Office with such mean Food only. Breaking Shins, c. bor∣rowing of Money. Breast, in the breast of the Judge, what he keeps in Reserve, or Suspence. Briers, in the Briers, in trouble. Brook, he cannot brook it, bear or endure it. Brickle, Brittle, apt to Break. Bristol-milk, Sherry. Bristol-stone, Sham-Di∣amonds. Broach'd, Opinion or Doctrine, Published, Divulged. Brimming, a Boor's co∣pulating with a Sow, also now us'd for a Man's with— Brim, or Brimstone, a very Impudent, Lew'd Woman. Brock, see Hart. Brock's Sister, see Hind. Broke, Officers turn'd out of Commission, Tra∣ders Absconding, Quit∣ting their Business and Paying no Debts. Bromigham-conscience, very bad, Bromigham-protestants, Dissenters or Whiggs. Bromigham-wine, Balderdash, Sophisticate Taplash. Brother-starling, that Lies with the same Wo∣man, or Builds in the same Nest. Brother of the Blade, a Sword-Man or Sol∣dier. Gussit, a Pimp, Procurer, al∣so, a Whore-Master. Quill, of the Scribbling Tribe. String, a Fidler, or Musician. Brothel-house, a Bawdy House. Brow-beat. to Cow, to Daunt, to awe with Big Looks, or Snub.
Brown-study, a Deep Thought or Speculation. Brush, c. to Fly or Run away. The Cully is Brusht or Rub'd, c. the Fellow is march'd off, or Broke. Bought a Brush, c. Run away: Also a small Faggot, to light the o∣ther at Taverns, and a Fox's Tail. Brusher, c. an exceed∣ing full Glass. B U Bub, c. Drin̄k. Rum-bub, c. very good Tip. Bub, or Bubble, c. one that is Cheated; also an Easy, Soft Fel∣low. Bubber, c. a drinking Bowl; also a great Drin∣ker, and he that used to Steal Plate from Pub∣lick-houses. Bube, c. the Pox. The Mort has tipt the Bube up∣on the Cully, c the Wench has Clapt the Fellow. Buckaneers, West-In∣dian Pirates, of several Nations; also the Rude Rabble in Jamaica. Buckle, to Bend or give Way. He'll buckle to no Man, he won't Yield or Stoop to any Man. Buck, Great Buck, the Sixth Year. Buck of the first Head, the Fifth Year, a Sore, the Fourth Year, a Sorel, the Third Year, a Pricket, the Se∣cond Year, a Fawn, the First Year. A Buck Lodg∣eth. Rouze the Buck, Dis∣lodge him. A Buck Growneth or Troateth, makes a Noise at Rutting time. Buck-fitches, c. old Lea∣cherous, Nasty, Stinking Fellows; also He Pole∣cats, and their Fur Buck's Face, a Cuck∣old. Buck, Copulation of Conies Bucksom, Wanton, Merry.
Budge, c. one that slips into an House in the Dark, and taketh Cloaks, Coats, or what comes next to Hand, march∣ing off with them; also Lambs-fur, and to stir,or move. Standing Budge, c. the Thieves Scout or Perdu. Bufe, c. a Dog. Buffcoat, a Soldier, or Redcoat. Buffer, c. a Rogue that kills good sound Horses, only for their Skins, by running a long Wyre in∣to them, and sometimes knocking them on the Head, for the quicker Dispatch. Buffenapper, c. a Dog∣stealer, that Trades in Setters, Hounds, Spaniels▪ Lap, and all sorts of Dogs, Selling them at a round Rate, and him∣self or Partner Stealing them away the first op∣portunity. Buffers-nab, c. a Dog's Head, used in a Counter∣feit Seal to a false Pass. Buffle-head, a Foolish Fellow. Buffoon, a Great Man's Jester or Fool. Buffoonery, Jesting or playing the Fool's Part. To stand Buff, to stand Tightly or Resolutely to any thing. Bugher, c. a Dog. Bugging, G. taking Money by Bailiffs and Serjeants of the Defen∣dant not to Arrest him. Busy-bodies, Pryers into other Folks Con∣cerns, such as thrust their Sickle in another's Harvest; and will have an Oar in every Boat. As busy as a Hen with one Chick, of one that has a great deal of business and nothing to do Bulchim, a Chubbingly Boy or Lad. Bulls-Eye, c. a Crown or Five shilling Piece. Bull-head, see Miller's Thumb. Bull, an absurd con∣tradiction or incon∣gruity; also false Hair worn (formerly much) by Women. A Town-bull, a Whore-master. To look like Bull-beef▪ to look Big and Grim. Bulk and File, c. one jostles while the other Picks the Pocket.
Bulker, c. one that lodges all Night on Shop∣windows and Bulkheads. Bulky, strong like common Oyl, also of large bulk or size. Bullet-headed, a dull silly Fellow. Bully, c. a supposed Husband to a Bawd, or Whore; also a husfing Fellow. Bully huff, c. a poor sorry Rogue that haunts Bawdy-houses, and pre∣tends to get Money out of Gentlemen and o∣thers, Ratling and Swear∣ing the Whore is his Wife, calling to his as∣sistance a parcel of Hec∣tors. Bully-fop, c. a Mag∣got-pated, huffing, silly ratling Fellow. Bully-rock, c. a Hector, or Bravo. Bully-ruffins, c. High∣way-men, or Padders. Bully-trap, c. or Trapan, c. a Sharper, or Cheat. Bum, a Bailiff, or Ser∣jeant; also one's Breech. Bumbast, see Bombast. Bumbaste, to Beat much, or hard, on the Breech. Bumble, Cloaths setting in a heap, or ruck. Bumfodder, what serves to wipe the Tail. Bumpkin, a Country Fellow or Clown. Bumper, a full Glass. Bundletail, a short Fat or squat Lass. Bungler, an unper∣forming Husband, or Mechanic. Bung, c. a Purse, Pock∣et, or Fob. Bung-nipper, c. a Cut∣purse, or Pickpocket. Claying the Bung, c. cut∣ting the Purse, or Pick∣ing the Pocket. Bunting-time, when the Grass is high enough to hide the young Men and Maids. Buntlings, c. Petty∣coats. Hale up the Main∣buntlings, c. take up the Woman's Pettycoats. Bunny, a Rabbit.
Bur▪ a Cloud, or dark Circle about the Moon, boding Windand Rain; also the part next to the Deer's Head. Burlesque, Raillery in Verse, or Verse in Ridi∣cule. Burnish, to spread, or grow broad; also to refresh Plate, being the Trade of a Burnisher, depending on Gold and Silver-Smiths. Burnt, Poxt, or swing∣ingly Clapt. Burnt the Town, when the Soldiers leave the Place without paying their Quarters. Burre, a Hanger on, or Dependant. Bustle, a Fray, Stir, Tumult in the Streets; also a Noise in any Place. What a Bustle you make▪ What a Hurry or Rattle you Cause? Bustle about, to be very Stirring, or be∣stir one's Stumps. Butcher'd, Barbarous∣ly Murder'd on the Ground, or Kill'd before his Sword is out; also in Cold Bloud. Butter, c. to double or treble the Bet or Wager to recover all Losses: No Butter will stick on his Bread, nothing thrives or goes forward in his Hand. He knows on which side his Bread is Butter'd, or the Stronger side, and his own Inte∣rest. Butter-boxes, Dutch∣men. Butter'd Bun, Lying with a Woman that has been just Layn with by another Man. Buttock, c. a Whore. Buttock-broker, a Bawd, also a Match-maker. A Buttock and File, c. both Whore and Pickpock∣et. Buttock and Twang, or a downright Buttock and sham File, c. a Common Whore but no Pickpock∣et. Buzzard, c. a foolish soft Fellow, easily drawn in and Cullied or Trickt. B Y By-blow, a Bastard.
C Cabal, a secret Junto of Princes, a seated knot of Statesmen, or of Conspirators against the State in Counter-Cabal. Cabbage, a Taylor, and what they pinch from the Cloaths they make up; also that part of the Deer's Head where the Horns are Planted. Cabob, a Loin of Mut∣ton Roasted with an Onyon betwixt each joint; a Turkish and Per∣sian Dish but now used in England. Cacafuego, a Shite-fire; also a furious fierce Fel∣ow. Cackle, c. to discover. The Cull Cackles, c. the Rogue tells all. Cackling-cheats, c. Chickens, Cocks or Hens. Cackling-farts, c. Eggs. Cadet, or Cadee, a Gentleman that Bears Arms in hopes of a Commission; also a younger Brother. Caffan, c. Cheese. Cakehis, Cake is Dough, of a Miscarriage or failure of Business. The Devil ow'd her a Cake, and has pai'd her a Loaf, when instead of a small, a very great Disaster, or Misfortune has happen'd to a Woman. Call, a Lesson, Blow∣ed on the Horn to com∣fort the Hounds. Caliver, a small Sea-Gun. Calle, c. a Cloak or Gown. Cambridge-Fortune, a Woman without any Substance. Cameleon-Diet, Air, or a very thin slender Diet. Cameronians, Field-Conventiclers, (in Scot∣land) great outward Zealots, and very squee∣mish Precisians. Camesa, c. a Shirt or Shift.
Campaign-coat, Ori∣ginally only such asSoldiers wore, but after∣wards a Mode in Cities. See Surtout. Canary-Bird, a little Arch or Knavish, a very Wag. Cane upon Abel, a good Stick or Cudgel well-favoredly laid on a Man's Shoulders. Canal, a Channel, Kennel, Pipe, Passage, fine Pond, or small Ri∣ver. Cannal, choice Coals, very Fat or Pitchy that Blaze and Burn plea∣santly. Canibal, a cruel rigid Fellow in dealing; also Men-Eaters. Cank, c. Dumb. The Cull's Cank, c. the Rogue's Dumb. Cannikin, c. the Plague, also (among the Dutch) a little Kan with a Spout to pour out the Wine or▪ Beer, making it Froth As great as Cup and Cann; or as great as two Inkle∣makers. Cant, c. to speak, also (Cheshire) to grow Strong and Lusty; also to Kick or throw any thing away. Canterbury, a sort of a short or Hand-gallop; from the Road leading to that famous City (of Kent) on which they Ride (for the most part) after that manner. Canting, c. the Cy∣pher or Mysterious Lan∣guage, of Rogues, Gyp∣sies, Beggers, Thieves, &c. Canting-crew, c. Beg∣gers, Gypsies; also Dis∣senters in Conventicles, who affect a disguised Speech, and disguised Modes of Speaking, and distinguish themselves from others by a pecu∣liar Snuffle and Tone, as the Shibboleth of their Party; as Gypsies and Beggers have their pecu∣liar Jargon; and are known no less by their several Tones in Pray∣ing, than Beggers are by their whining Note in Begging.
Cap, c. to Swear. I'll Cap downright, c. I'llSwear home. Or (in a∣nother Sense) he may fling up his Cap after it▪ when a thing or business is past Hope. Capitation Drugget, a Cheap, Slight Stuff, called so from the Tax of that Name. Capricious, Whimsical▪ Fantastic, Freakish. Captain-Hackum, c. a Fighting, Blustring Bul∣ly. Captain-Queere-nabs, c. a Fellow in poor Cloths, or Shabby. Captain-sharp, c. a great Cheat; also a Huffing, yet Sneaking, Coward∣ly Bully; and a noted English Buckaneer. Captain-Tom, a Leader of, and the Mob. Captious, Touchy, Snuf∣fy, apt to take Excepti∣on. Caravan, c. a good round sum of Money about a Man, and him that is Cheated of it; also a great Convoy of Arabian, Grecian, Persian, Turkish, and other Mer∣chants, Travelling with Camels from Place to Place; also a sort of Wagon. Carbuncle-Face, very Red and full of large Pimples▪ Card-Wool, to cleanse and prepare it for Spin∣ning: Also a Game; a sure Card, a trusty Tool, or Confiding Man; a cooling Card, cold com∣fort, no hope; a Lead∣ing Card, an Example or Precedent. Cargo, c. a good round Sum of Money about a Man; also the Lading of a Ship. Carouse, to Drink hard, or Quaff heartily. Carpet-road, Level and very good.
Carriers, Pigeons that will with safety, and almost incredible Swift∣ness convey Letters from one Place to another, much used at Smyrna and Aleppo; also Milk-wo∣mens Hirelings, or Ser∣vants, that carry thePail Morning and Even∣ing. Carrots, Red hair'd People, from the Colour of the well known Root of that Name, whence came Carrot-pated, used in derision. Carted-Whore, Whipt publickly, and packt out of Town. The Cart be∣fore the Horse, of a thing preposterous, and out of Place. Cash, c. Cheese. Case, c. a House, Shop, or Ware-house; also a Bawdy-house. Toute the Case, c. to view, mark, or eye the House or Shop▪ There's a peerey, 'tis snitcht, c. there are a great many People, there's no good to be don. 'Tis all Bob, and then to dub the gigg, c. now the coast is clear, there's good Booty, let's fall on, and Rob the House. A Case fro, c. a Whore that Plies in a Bawdy-house. Caster, c. a Cloak. Cast, to Bowl. A bad cast, an ill laid Bowl, or at great distance from the Jack. He is Cast for Felon and Dose, c. found guilty of Felony and Burglary. Cat, a common Whore or Prostitute. Catch-fart, a Foot-Boy. Catching-harvest, when the Weather is Showery and Unsettled. Catch-pole, a Serjeant, or Bayliff that Arrests People. Cat-in-pan, turn'd, of one that has chang'd Sides or Parties. Who shall hang the Bell about the Cat's Neck, said of a desperate Undertaking. Catchup, a high East-India Sauce. Caterwauling, Men and Women desirous of Co∣pulation, a Term bor∣rowed from Cats. Cathedral, old-fashi∣oned, out of Date, An∣cient; also a chief Church in a Bishop's See.
Catharpin-fashion, when People in Company Drink cross, and not round about from the Right to to the Left, or according to the Sun's motion; also small Ropes to keep the Shrouds, taut or tight, and the Mast from Rolling. Catting, drawing a Fellow through a Pond with a Cat. Catstick▪ used by Boies at Trap-ball. Cattle, Whores. Sad Cattle, Impudent Lewd Women. Catmatch, c. when a Rook is Engag'd a∣mongst bad Bowlers. Cavalcade, a publick Show on Horseback. Cavaulting School, c. a Bawdy-house. Caudge-paw'd, Left Handed. Caveating, or Disen∣gaging, slipping the Ad∣versary's Sword, when 'tis going to bind or se∣cure one's own. Caw handed, awkward not dextrous, ready or nimble. C H Changeable-ribbon, or Silks, of diverse Colours, resembling those of Doves-necks, or of the Opal Stone. Chafe, in a great Chafe, a great heat or pet. To Chafe, to fret or fume. Chafing, fretting or fum∣ing, Chafing and fretting, being the same with fretting and fuming, hence a Chafing dish, that carries Fire. Chaft, c. well beaten or bang'd; also much rub'd or bath'd. Chagrin, moody, out of humour, pensive, me∣lancholy, much troub∣led.
Chalk, used in Pow∣der by the Perfumers to mix with their Grounds; and also scented Hair-Powders, being cheap and weighing heavy; found to Burn and de∣stroyWiggs and all Hair in general. Chanticlere, a Cock. Chape, the Tip at the End of a Fox's Tail; also the Cap at the End of the Scabbard of a Sword. Character, a distin∣guishing Sign or Mark of Distinction, the same among Great Men or Ministers, that a Badge is among Low and little People. As a Man of Cha∣racter, of Mark or Note, as Privy-Chancellors Judges, Foreign Minis∣ters, Ministers of State, &c. Chare-women, Under∣drudges, or Taskers, as∣sistants to Servantmaids. Char, a Task or Work. A good Char well Char'd, a Work well over. Chates, c. the Gal∣lows. Chat, Talk, Prate. Chatter, to Talk fast or jabber. Chattering Fellow, a noisy prating Man. Chatts, c. Lice. Squeeze the Chatts, c. to Crack or Kill those Vermin. Cheap, Contemptible. How Cheap you make your self, how Contemptible you render your self or undervaluevour self. Chear, good or bad, high or ordinary fare. How Chear you? How fare you? Chear up, be of good courage, hence chearful, or chearly, for one in Heart, or that keeps up his Spirits; pre∣ty chearly, indifferent hearty or lightsom. Cheats, Sharpers, which see; also Wristbands or sham Sleeves worn (in good Husbandry) for true, or whole ones. Chicken, a feeble, little creature, of mean Spi∣rit; whence a Chicken∣hearted Fellow, or Hen∣hearted Fellow, a Das∣tard. Childish, Foolish. Childing-women, Breed∣ing.
China-Ale, From the well known East-IndianDrug of that Name, of which they ought to put some, but they seldom do any into it, making it sweet only and adding a little Spice. Chink, c. Money, be∣cause it chinks in the Pocket. Chip, a Child. Chip of the old Block, a Son that is his Father's likeness; more particu∣larly the Son of a Coo∣per, or one brought up to the same Trade. Chirping-merry, very pleasant over a Glass of good Liquor. Chit a Dandyprat, or Dergen. Chittiface, a little pui∣ny Child. Chitchat, idle Prate, or empty Talk. Chive, c. a Knife. Chop, to change, or barter. Chopping-boy, a bounc∣ing Boy. to chop up Pray∣ers, to huddle thom up, or slubber them over in posthast▪ A Chop by chance, a rare Contingence, an extraordinary or uncom∣mon Event, out of course. Chopps, (of a Man) his Face (of Mutton) a Bone or Cut. Chounter, to talk pert∣ly, and (sometimes) an∣grily. Chouse, to cheat or trick. Chop▪houses, where Both boy'd and roast Mutton (in chopps) are alwayes ready. Chub, c he is a young chub, or a meer chub, c. ve∣ry ignorant or inex∣perienc'd in gaming, not at all acquainted with Sharping. A good Chub, said by the Butchers; when they have met with a silly raw Custo∣mer, and they have Bit him. Chuck farthing, a Pa∣rish-Clerk (in the Satyr against Hypocrites) also a Play among Boies. Chum, a Chamber∣fellow, or constant Com∣panion.
Church yard-cough, thatwill terminate in Death. Churl, an Ill-natur'd Fellow; a selfish, sordid Clown. To put a Churl upon a Gentleman, to Drink Ale or any Mault-Li∣quor immediately after Wine. C I Ciento, an old Game at Cards. Citt, for Citizen. Civil List, all the Officers and Servants in the King's Family. C L Clack, a Woman's Tongue. Clammed, Starved, or Famished. Clan, Family, Tribe, Faction, Party in Scot∣land chiefly, but now any where else. Clank, c. a Silver-tan∣kard. Clanker, a swing∣ing Lie, Clank-napper, c. a Sil∣ver-tankard Stealer. See Bubber, Rum▪clank, c. a large Silver-tankard. Tip me a rum Clank a Booz▪ c. give me a double Tankard of Drink, Clap, a Venereal Taint. Clapperclaw'd, beat soundly, or paid off in earnest. Clapperdogeon, c. a Begger-born and Bred. Clark, or Clerk, Scholar or Book-learned.
Clerk-ship, or Clergy, Scholarship or Book-learning, though of late the one be more restrain∣ed to a Clergyman, and the other appropriate to a Clergyman's Skill or Qualifications; because it may be heretofore, none but the Clergy were learned, or so much as taught to Read. Hence the Benefit of Cler∣gy, (or Reading) & legit ut Clericus, in the Law, for him that cou'd Read his Neck-verse, like a Clerk or Scholar, when so few perhaps were Scholars or Clerks, that every one that could but only Read,passed for no less: We say still, the greatest Clarks (or Scholars) are not the Wisest Men: And the Scots much to the same Effect. An Ounce of Mother-Wit is worth a Pound of Clergy, or Book-learn∣ing. Claw'd off, lustily lasht, also swingingly Poxt. Clear, c. very Drunk. The Cull is clear, let's Bite him. c. The Fellow is Damn'd Drunk, let's Sharp him. Cleave, has two con∣trary Senses under one Sound; for to cleave, (Verb Neuter) is to cling close or stick fast, and to cleave, (verb Ac∣tive) is to part or divide; as to cleave asunder, when Cleft and Cloven. Clench, a pun or qui∣ble; also to nick a Busi∣ness by timing it. Cleymes, c. Sores with∣out Pain raised on Beg∣gers Bodies, by their own Artifice and cunning, (to move charity) by bruising Crows-foot, Speerwort, and Salt to∣gether, and clapping them on the Place, which frets the Skin, then with a Linnenrag, which sticks close to it; they tear off the Skin, and strew on it a little Powder'd Ars∣nick, which makes it look angrily or ill fa∣voredly, as if it were a real Sore. Click, c. to Snatch. I have Clickt the Nab from the Cull, c. I whipt the Hat from the Man's Head. Click the rum Top∣ping, c. Snatch that Wo∣man's fine Commode. Clicker, the Shoe-maker's Journey-man, or Servant, that Cutts out all the Work, and stands at or walks before the Door, and saies, what d'ye' lack Sir, what d'ye buy Madam. Clicket, Copulation of Foxes, and sometimes, used waggishly for that of Men and Women. Clinker, c. a crafty Fel∣low.
Clinkers. c. the Irons Felons wear in Goals. Clip, to hug or em∣brace. To clip and cling▪ of a close hug or fast embrace. To Clip the Coin, to diminish or Im∣pair it. To clip the King's English, not to Speak Plain, when one's Drunk. Clod-hopper, c. a Plough∣man. Clodpate, a heavy, dull Fellow. Close, reserv'd, silent, not talkative, or open. Close-confident, a trusty Bosom-friend. Close-fisted, coverous, stingy, pinching. Clotts, or thick dropps of Bloud clottered or in clots. Cloud, c. Tobacco. Will ye raise a Cloud, c▪ shall we Smoke a Pipe? Clouds, or Cloudy-Sky in opposition to clear open Sky; as Clouds in Gemms and Stones, to clear ones; and Clouded Face, to a clear pleasant one. Under a Cloud, in disgrace, under misfor∣tunes or disasters; Speaks in the Clouds, of one that flies or soars in Talking above the common reach or capacity. Cloudy, dark complex∣ion'd. Clout, c. a Handker∣chief. Cloy, c. to Steal. Cloy the Clout. c. to Steal the Hankerchief. Cloy the Lour, c. to Steal the Mo∣ney; also, in another Sense, to Cloy, is to Nau∣seate or Satiate. Cloyers, c. Thieves, Robbers, Rogues. Cloying, c. Stealing, Thieving, Robbing; al∣so Fulsom or Satiating. Clowes. c. Rogues. Clown, a Country-Fellow, also one very ill-bred or unmannerly, Being. Clownish, rustical, un∣polish'd, uncouth.
Club, each Man's par∣ticular Shot; also a Society of Men agree∣ing to meet according to a Scheme of Orders under a slight Penaltyto promote Trade and Friendship. Cluck, the noise made by Hens, when they set upon their Eggs to Hatch and are disturb'd, or come off to Eat, and also when they wou'd have Eggs put under them for that purpose. Clump, a Heap or Lump. Clunch, a clumsy Clown, an awkward or unhandy Fellow. Clutch the Fist, or close the Hand, whence Clu∣tches. I'll keep out of your Clutches or Claws; the Clutches of the Parish, the Constable or Bea∣dle. Clutchfisted, the same as Closefisted. Clutter, Stir. What a Clutter you keep? What a stir you make? Cly, c. Money. To Cly the Jerk, c. to be Whipt. Let's strike his Cly, c. let's get his Mo∣ney from him; also a Pocket, Filed a cly, c. Pickt a Pocket. C O Coach∣wheel Fore Hind Half a Crown. A Crown or Five Shilling-Piece. Coals to Newcastle when the Dràwer car∣ries away any Wine in the Pot or Bottle. To blow the Coals, to raise differences between Par∣ties. He'll carry no Coals. not be Pissed upon, or Imposed upon, nor bear a Trick, or take an Af∣front, or tamely pass by any ill Treatment. Let him that has need blow the Coals, Let him Labour that wants. Cob, a Dollar (in Ireland.) Cobble, to mend or patch. Cobbled, bunglingly done. Cobble-colter, c. a Tur∣key. A rum Cobble-col∣ter, c▪ a fat large Cock-Turkey.
Cobweb-cheat, easily found out. Cobweb-pretence, slight, trivial, weak. Cock-a-hoop, upon the high Ropes Rampant, Transported. Cockish, wanton up∣pish, forward. Cockale, pleasant Drink, said to be provocative. Cock-baw'd, a Man that follows that base Em∣ployment. Cocker, one skill'd in, or much delighted with the sport of Cock-fight∣ing. Cockney, Born with∣in the Sound of Bow∣bell; (in London) also one ignorant in Country Matters. Cock-oyster, the Male. Cock-pimp, a Supposed Husband to a Bawd. Cock-robbin, a soft easy Fellow. Cock-sure, very Sure. Cod, a good sum of Money; also a Fool. A meer Cod, a silly, shallow Fellow. A rum Cod, c. a good round sum of Money. A jolly or lusty Cod, c. the same. An honest Cod, a trusty Friend. Codders, gatherers of Peascods. Cod's Head a Fool. Codsounds, the Pith or Marrow in the Cod's Back, esteem'd as choice Peck. Cofe, c. as Cove. Cog, to cheat at Dice, Cog a Die; to conceal or secure a Die; also the Money or whatever the Sweetners drop to draw in the Bubbles; also to wheedle, as Cog a Dinner to wheedle a Spark out of a Dinner. Cogue, of Brandy, a small Cup or Dram. Coker, c. a Lye, rum Coker, c. a whisking Lye. Cokes, the Fool in the Play, or Bartholomew-Fair, and hence (per∣haps) Coxcomb, Cold, shy, or averse to Act.
Cold Tea, Brandy. A couple of cold words, a Cur∣tain-Lecture. Cold-Iron,Derisory Periphrasis for a Sword. In cold Blood, when the heat of War, or Passion are over. The Matter will keep cold, it will stay a while, and not be the worse for keeping. Cole, c. Money. Coliander-seed, c. Mo∣ney. Collation, a Treat or Entertainment. College, c. Newgate; also the Royal Exchange. Collegiates, c. those Pri∣soners, and Shop-keepers. Collogue, wheedle. Colquarron, c. a Man's Neck. Colt, c. an Inn-keeper that lends a Horse to a Highway-man, or to Gentlemen Beggers; al∣so a Lad newly bound Prentice. Coltish, said when an old Fellow is frolicksom or wanton; or he has a Colt's Tooth. Colt-bowl, laid short of the Jack by a Colt-bowler, a raw of unexperienc'd Person. Colt-veal, very red. Come, c. to Lend. Has he come it? c. has he lent it you? Comical, very pleasant, or diverting. Coming-women, such as are free of their Flesh; also breeding Women. Commission, c. a Shirt. Commode, a Womans Head-dress, easily put on, and as soon taken off, Common-garden-gout, or rather Covent-gar∣den, the Pox. Common Women, Whores, Plyers in the Sreets and at Bawdy-Houses. Complement, the Ship's or Regiment's compleat Number or Company. Comfortable Importance, a Wife. Conceited, a Self-lover, and Admirer, Wise in his own Opinion. Coney-sitteth. Confect, c. Counter∣feit.
Conger, a Set or Knot of Popping Book-sellersof London, who agree among themselves, that whoever of them Buys a good Copy, the rest are to take off such a particular number, as (it may be) Fifty, in Quires, on easy Terms. Also they that joyn to∣gether to Buy either a Considerable, or Dan∣gerous Copy. And a great over-grown Sea-Eel. Conjurers, Astrologers, Physiognomists, Chiroman∣cers, and the whole Tribe of Fortune-tellers, by the common Peo∣ple (Ignorantly) so called. Consent, Leave, Ap∣probation, Agreement. Affected by Consent, as one Sore Eye infects the other, (unseen) because they are both strung with one Optic Nerve: As in two Strings set to an Unison, upon the Touch of One, the other will Sound. Consult of Physicians, Two, or more. Content, a thick Li∣quor, made up in Rolls in imitation of Choco∣late, Sold in some Coffee-Houses. Contre-temps, making a Pass or Thrust with∣out any advantage, or to no purpose. Convenient, c. a Mis∣tress; also a Whore. Conveniency, c. a Wife; also a Mistress. Conundrums, Whimms, Maggots, and such like. Cony, a silly Fellow, a meer Cony, very silly in∣deed. Cook-ruffin, c. the De∣vil of a Cook, or a very bad one. Cool-crape, a slight Chequer'd Stuff made in imitation of Scotch Plad. Cooler, a Woman. Cool-Lady, a Wench that sells Brandy (in Camps) Cool-nantz, Brandy. Cool Tankard, Wine and Water, with a Lemon Sugar and Nutmeg.
Copper-nos'd, extreme∣ly Red. Coquet, a flippant, pert Gossip. Corky-brain'd Fellow, silly, foolish. Corinthian, a very im∣pudent, harden'd, bra∣zen fac'd Fellow. Cornish-hug, a hard gripe, or squeeze. Corn-jobber, an Enhan∣cer of the Price, by early buying, monopo∣lizing, and sharp tricks. A great Harvest of a little Corn, a great adoe in a little Matter. He mea∣sures my Corn by his own Bushel, he muses as he uses, he thinks me Bad be∣cause he is so himself. Cornuted, made a Cuckold of. Corny-fac'd, a very Red or Blue pimpled Phiz. Cosset, a Fondling Child. Cosset-Colt or Lamb, brought up by Hand, made Tame, and used to follow any Body a∣bout the House. Costard, the Head I'll give ye a knock on the Costard, I'll hit ye a blow on the Pate. Coster-monger, a Whole∣sale Dealer in Apples, Pears, &c. Cot for Cotquean, a Man that meddles with Womens matters. Cotton, they don't cotton, they don't agree well. Cote, a sorry, slight Country-House or Ho∣vel, now a Cottage. Hence the Compounds yet in use, of Dove-cote, Sheep-cote, &c. Couchée, going to Bed I was at Court at the Couchee, I attended the King at his going to Bed. Couch a Hogs-head, c. to go to Bed. Cove, c. a Man, a Fel∣low, also a Rogue. The Cove was bit, c. the Rogue was out-sharp'd or out∣witted. The Cove has bit the Cole, c. The Rogue has Stolen the Money. The Cove's a rum Diver, c. that Fellow is a clea∣ver Pick-pocket.
Covey of Whores, a well fill'd Bawdy-house; also of Partridges, a Nest or Brood. Counterfeit-cranks, c. the Twentieth Rank or Order of the Canting Tribe. Counterfeit, a Cheat or Impostor. A Counter∣feiter of Hands, a For∣ger. A Counterfeiter of Persons, a Sham. Counter∣feit Gemms or Jewels, Bristol-stones. Counter∣feits, for the most part exceed the Truth. Thus a Flatterer pleases more than a Friend; a Brag∣gadochio-coward thun∣ders more than a Hero; a Mountebank promi∣ses more than a Doctor, and a Hypocrite over∣acts a Religious Man, as a Counterfeit Gem is often fairer than a True one. Country-put, a silly Country-Fellow. Couped up, Imprison'd, Environ'd, Surrounded, Pent up. Court-promises, fair Speeches, or empty Pro∣mises without perfor∣mances. Much the same with Court-holy-water. Court-card, a gay flutter∣ing Fellow. Court-tricks, State-Policy. Course, or rather
Coarse, homely, or∣d'nary, oppos'd to fine; as Coarse treatment, rough or rude Dealing; Coarse fare, homely Food; a Coarse Dish, a mean one; Coarse or Hard-Favor'd, oppos'd to Fair or Handsom. Of Course, of Custom; out of Course, extraordinary, or out of the way; a Horse-Course a Race, also the place where the Race is Run. A Water-course, a Drain. Course of Law, the proceedings, at Law. The Law must have its Course, or run freely. I'll take a Course with you, I'll hamper ye, or stick close on your Skirts. A Course of Physick, an Order or set Constitution of Physick, for a continuance orcourse of time. Course of the Sun, Yearly or Daily, a Yearly or Dai∣ly Revolution. Course of he Moon, the Circle of a Month. Court-holy-water, Court Promises. Cow-hearted, fearful or Hen-hearted. Cows-thumb, when a thing is done exactly, nicely, or to a Hair. Cows-baby, a Calf. Coxcomb, a Fool; a silly Coxcomb, a very foolish Fellow. Crabbed, sower, churls. C R Crab-lice. Cock, Male Hen, Female. Vermin breeding in Moist and Hairy Parts of the Body. Crack, c. a Whore. Cracker, c. an Arse; also Crust. Crackish, c. Whorish. Cracking, Boasting Vaporing. Crackt-credit, Lost, Gone, Broken. Crackt-title, Unsound. Crackt-brains, lost Wits. Crackmans, c. Hedges. Cramped, a weight with a string tied to one's Toe, when a Sleep, much used by School-boies, one to a∣nother; also obstructed or hampered in any Business whatever. Crag, a Neck; also a Rock. Cramp-rings, c. Bolts or Shackles. Cramp-words, difficult or uncommon. Crank, brisk, pert. Cranksided-ship, that does not bear Sail well. Cranked-shells or Stones, wrinkled or wreathed. Crap. c. Money. Nim the Crap, c. to Steal the Money. Wheedle for Crap, c. to coakse Money out of any Body. Crash, c. to Kill. Crash, the Cull, c. Kill the Fellow. Crashing-cheats, c. Teeth. Craz'd, Mad. Crazy, infirm or dis∣temper'd.
Creatures, Men raisedby others, and their Tools ever after. Creeme, to slip or slide any thing into ano∣ther's Hand. Crew, the Coxon and Rowers in the Barge, or Pinnace, are called the Boats-crew, in distinction from the Complement of Men on Board the Ship, who are term'd the Ships-company, not Crew; also an ill Knot or Gang, as a Crew of Rogues. Crimp, one that un∣dertakes for, or agrees to unlade a whole Ship of Coals. To play Crimp, to lay or bet on one side, and (by foul play) to let t'other win, hav∣ing a share of it. Run a Crimp, to run a Race or Horse-match fouly or knavishly. He Crimps it, he plays booty. A Crimping Fellow, a sneak∣ing Cur. Crinkums, the French Pox. Crispin, a Shoe-maker, from the St. of that Name, their Patron. Crispin's Holy-day, ev'ry Munday in the Year, but more particularly the Twenty fifth of October, whereon the whole Fraternity fail not to lay they Hearts in Soak. Crochets in the crown, whimsies, Maggots. Crockers, Forestallers, Regraters, see Badgers. Croker, c. a Groat or Four-pence. The Cull tipt me a Croker, c. the Fellow gave me a Groat. Crony, a Camerade or intimate Friend; an old Crony, one of long stand∣ing; used also for a tough old Hen. Crop, one with very short Hair; also a Horse whose Ears are Cut. Crop-ear'd-Fellow, whose Hair is so short it won't hide his Ears. Croppin-ken, c. a Privy, or Bog-house. Crop-sick, Stomack∣sick.
Crossbite, c. to drawin a Friend, yet snack with the Sharper. Crosspatch, a peevish froward Person. Crotiles, Hares Excre∣ments. Crow-over, to insult or domineer. To pluck a Crow with one, to have a bout with him. Strut like a Crow in a Gutter, said in jeer of the Stalk∣ing of a proud Fellow. The Crow thinks her own Bird the Fairest, applied to those that▪ dote on their foul Issues. As good Land as any the Crow Flies over, with regard it may be, to the Crow's being a long Li∣ver; as no Carrion will kill a Crow, to his being so hardy a Bird. Crowder, a Fidler. Crown, the top of the Head or Hat; Imperi∣al or Regal Crown. Where the Earth is raised it is said, to be Crown'd with Hills, in Poetry. The End Crowns all, said both of the Event of Actions, and Finishing▪ of Works. In the Crown-Office, Drunk; also to Crown, to pour on the Head. Cruisers, c. Beggers; also nimble Friggats Coasting to and fro for Prizes, and to carry Or∣ders, &c. Crump; c. one that helps Sollicitors to Affi∣davit-men, and Swearers, and Bail, who for a small Sum will be Bound or Swear for any Body; on that occasion, putting on good Cloaths to make a good appearance, that Bail may be ac∣cepted. Crump-back'd, Crook∣ed or Huncht-backt Crumplings▪ wrinkled Codlings, usually the least, but sweetest. Crusty▪beau, one that lies with a Cover over his Face all Night, and uses Washes, Paint, &c. C U
Cub, or young Cub. c. a new Gamester drawnin to be rookt; also a young Bear, a Fox▪ and a Martern the first Year. Cucumbers, Taylers. Cucumber-time, Tay∣lers Holiday, when they have leave to Play, and Cucumbers are in sea∣son. Cudgelliers, a Mob rudely arm'd; also Cud∣gel-Players. Cuffin, c. a Man. Cuffin-quire, c. see Quire-cuffin. Culp, a kick, or blow, also a bit of any thing. Culp of the Gutts, (Suf∣folk) a hearty kick at the Belly. Cull, Cully, c. a Man, a Fop, a Rogue, a Fool or silly Creature that is easily drawn in and Cheated by Whores or Rogues. Cully napps us, c. the Person Rob∣b'd, apprehends us. A Bob-cull, c. a sweet-hu∣mour'd Man to a Whore, and who is very Com∣plaisant. A Curst-cull, c. an ill-natur'd Fellow, a Churl to a Woman. Culm, the small or dust of Sea-coal. Cunning-shaver, a sharp Fellow. Cup-shot, Drunk. Cup of Comfort, as Cup of the Creature, Strong-liquor. A Cup too low, when any of the Company are mute or pensive. To carry one's Cup even between two Parties, to be equal and indifferent, between them. Many things fall out between the Cup and the Lip, or many things intervene between the forming and accom∣plishing a Design. Cur, a Dog of a mun∣grel Breed, good for nothing. Curle, c. Clippings of Money. Currish-fellow, snap∣ping, snarling. Curmudgeon, an old Covetous Fellow, a Miser. Currant-coyn, good and Lawful Money. Currant Custom, a received cu∣stom, the
Current, Stream; alsohumor or bent of the People. Cursitors, c. Vaga∣bonds; the first (old) Rank of Canters. Curst, a curst Cur, a sower, surly, snarling, fierce Dog; a Curst Cow has short Horns. Curtals, c. the Ele∣venth Rank of the Can∣ting Crew. Curtail'd, cut off, shorten'd. Curtezan, a gentile fine Miss or Quality Whore. Curtain-Lecture, Wo∣mens impertinent Scold∣ing at their Husbands. Cushion, beside the Cu∣shion, beside the Mark. Cut, Drunk. Deep Cut, very Drunk. Cut in the Leg or Back, very drunk. To Cut, c. to Speak. To Cut bene, c. to Speak gently, civilly or kind∣ly; to Cut bene (or ben∣nar) Whidds, c. to give good Words. To Cut quire whidds, c. to give ill Language. A Cut or Chop of Meat. Cut and come again, of Meat that cries come Eat me. A cutting wind, very sharp. Of the pre∣cize Cut or Stamp, a de∣mure starcht Fellow. No Present to be made of Knives, because they Cut kindness. Ready Cut and Dried, or turned for the purpose. Not Cut out for it, nor turned for it. To Cut another out of any business, to out-doe him far away, or excell, or circumvent. I'll cut you out business, I'll find you Work enough. A Book with Cuts or Figures; Brass or Wooden Cutts or Prints from Copper∣plates, or Wood. A Cut thro at House or Town, where sharp and Large Reckonings are impo∣sed, as at Gravesend, Deal, Dover, Portsmouth, Plimouth, Harwich, Hel∣voetsluyce, the Briel, and indeed all Sea-ports, nay and Common-wealths too, according to the obser∣vation of a late Learned Traveller in his ingeni∣ous Letters publish'd in Holland.
D Dab, c. expert exqui∣site in Roguery a Rum∣dab, c. a very Dextrous fellow at fileing, thiev∣ing, Cheating, Sharping, &c. Heii a Dab at it, He is well vers'd in it. Dablers, in Poetry, meer Pretenders. Dace, c. Two-pence, Tip me a Dace. c. Lend Two-pence, or pay so much for me. Dag▪ a Gun. Draggle-tail, a nasty dirty Slut. Damask the Claret, Put a roasted Orange slasht smoking hot in it. Damber, c, a Rascal. Damme-boy, a roaring mad, blusttring fellow, a Scourer of the Streets. Dancers, c. Stairs. Dandyprat, a little pu∣ny Fellow. Dangle, to hang. Dapper-fellow, a short pert, brisk, tidy Fellow. Darby, c. ready Mo∣ney Darbies, c. Irons, Shac∣kles or Fetters. Darkmans▪, c. The night, The Child of dark∣ness, c. a Bell-man. Darkmans-Budge. c, a House-creeper, one that slides into a House in the dusk▪ to let in more Rogues to rob. Dash, a Tavern-Draw∣er. A dash of Gentian, Wormwood, or stale Beer, a slight touch or tincture of each, to dash or brew as Vintners jumble their Wines together, when they sophisticate them. A dash of Rain, a sudden, short, impetuous pour∣ing down, to distinguish it from a soft Shower, or a sprinkling of Rain. Dastard, a Coward. Dawn, Day-break or peep of Day, as the Dusk is twilight or sha∣dow of the Evening. One may see day at a little hole, or discover the Lyon by his Paw.
Dawbing, bribing; also ill painting or thick lay∣ing on of Colours:Hence bedawb'd with Gold or Silver-Lace, when it is laid thick or close on. D E Dead Cargo, not a quarter or half freighted. To wait for dead mens shoes, for what is little worth, or may never come to pass. To play or work for a dead horse for a trifle. Dead-men, empty-Pots or bottles on a Tarvern∣table. Dear Joies, Irishmen. Debauchee, a Rake-hel▪ Decayed, Gentleman or Tradesman, broken. Deckt-out, tricked up in fine Cloaths, Decus, c. a Crown or five shilling-piece. The Cull tipt me a score of De∣cuses, c. my Camerade lent me five Pounds. Deft-Fellow, a tidy, neat, little Man. Defunct, dead and gone. Degen, c. a Sword Nimm the Degen, c. steal the Sword, or whip it from the Gentleman's Side. Deists, against the Tri∣nity. Dells, c. the twenty sixth order of the canting Tribe; young bucksome Wenches, ripe and prone to Venery, but have not lost their Virginity, which the vpright man pretends to, and seizes: Then she is free for any off the Fraternity; also a common Strumpet. Dequarting, throwing of the left Foot and Bo∣dy backwards. Dergin, a very short Man or Woman. Desperate Fellow, fit for any lew'd Prank or Villany, desperate condi∣tion, with out any hopes. Devil-drawer, a sor∣ry Painter. Deuseavile, c. the Country. Deuseavile-Stampers, c, Country-Carriers. Dews-wins, c. two Pence.
Dewitted, cut in pieces, as that great States∣manIohn de Witt, was in Holland Anno 1672. by the Mob. D I Diamond cut Diamond, bite the Biter. Dibble, a poaking Stick to set Beans with. Die like a Dog, to be hang'd, the worst Em∣ployment a Man can be put to. Die on a Fish-day, orin his shoes the same, die like a Rat. To be poy∣soned. Dig▪ the Badger, dis∣lodg him. Dimber, c. pretty. Dimber-cove a pretty Fellow. Dim-mort, c. a pretty Wench. Dimber-Damber, c. a Top-man or Prince among the Canting Crew; also the chief Rogue of the Gang, or the compleatest Cheat. Dimple, a small grace∣ful dent in the Chin called in Ignoramus, Love's pretty Dimple. Din, c. what a din you keep! what a noise you make! Dine with Duke Hum∣phrey, to go without a Dinner. Ding, c. to knock down. Ding the Cull, c. knock down the Fellow. Ding-boy, c. a Rogue, a Hector, a Bully, Sharp∣er. Ding-dong, helter-skel∣ter. Dint, edge or force dint of the sword, edge of the Sword, dint of argument, force or pow∣er of Argument, Dippers, Ana-baptists. Dipt, engag'd or in debt, Land pawn'd or mortgag'd. Damnably dipt, deep in debt, He has dipt his Terra firma, he has mortgaged his dirty Acres. He has dipt his Bill, he is almost drunk. The cull has dipt his Tol, c. the Spark has pawn'd his Sword. The Dell has dipt her Rigging, c. the Whore has pawn'd her Cloaths.
Dirty Acres, an Estate in Land. Dirty Beau, a slovenly Fellow, yet pretending to Beauishness. Dirty puzzle, a sorry Slattern or Slut. Disaffection, a disorder of any part of the Body▪ Disaffected to the State▪ Malecontents or factious Disgruntled, disobliged or distasted. Disingenuous, or indi∣rect dealing, oppos'd to dealing on the Square. Disguis'd, drunkish. Dismal ditty, a Psalm at the Gallows; also a dull Ballad, or filly Song. Dive, c. to pick a Pocket. Diver, c. a Pick-poc∣ket. D O Doash, c a cloak. Dock, c. to lie with a woman. The Cull Dockt the Dell in the Darkmans the Rogue lay with a Wench all night. Doctor, c. a false Die, that will run but two or three Chances. They put the Doctor upon him, c. they cheated him with false Dice. Dog'd, follow'd close, way-laid. Agree like Dog and Cat, of those that are at variance. Every Dog will have his day, none so wretched but has his good Planet. An easy thing to find a Stick to beat a Dog, or it costs lit∣tle to trouble those that cannot help themselves. It is an ill Dog is not worth the whistling after; or spare to speak spare to speed. He play'd me a Dog-trick, he did basely and dirtily by me. Dogged, Sullen, pout∣ing, or in the Dumps. Doggrel, a Term for the meanest and basest Verse; such as Ballads, Bellmens-songs, and the like Meeter of snow-hill. Doit▪ half a Farthing. Dutch Money, eight to a Penny, not a doit left, he has spent all.
Doll, a wooden to make up Commodes upon, also a Child's Ba∣by. Doltish, c. Foolish. Dolthead, a Fool. Domerars, c. Rogues, pretending to have had their Tougus cnt out, or to be born dumb and deaf, who artificially turning the tip of their Toungs, into their Throat, and with a stick makeing it bleed, weak people think it the stump of their Tongue; one of whom being askt ha∣stily how long he had been dumb? answer'd but three weeks, this is the twenty first. Order of Canters, the Word also signifing Mad-men. Dotard, An old drow∣sy Fellow come to Do∣tage. Doudy, An ugly coarse hard favored Wo∣man. She is a meer Dou∣dy, that is, very ugly. Dover-court all Speak∣ers and no Hearers. Down-hills, c▪ Dice that run low. Doxies, c. She-beggers, Trulls, Wenches, Whores, the twenty fifth Rank of Canters; being neither, Maids, Wives, nor Wid∣dows, will for good Vi∣ctuals, or a very small piece of money prosti∣tute their Bodies, pro∣testing they never did so before, and that meer necessity then oblig'd them to it (tho' com∣mon Hackneys) These are very dextrous at picking Pockets (in the action) and so bar∣barous as often to mur∣der the Children thus got. D R Drab, a Whore, or Slut, a Dirty drab, a ve∣ry nasty Slut. Drag, a Fox's Tail.
Dragg'd, through the Horse-pond or Bog-house. Batlives and Sergeants are served so that pre∣sume to arrest any Body within the Verge of the Court-royal, or Precintsof the Inns of Court. Dragg'd up, as the Rakes call it, educated or brought up. Dray, of Squirrels. Drawers, c Stockings. Drawing, Beating the Bushes after the Fox. Draw-Latches, c. the fourth (old) Order of the Canting Tribe of Rogues. Drawling in Speech, or dreaming of Speech when the Words are drawn out at length, and keep as great a distance from one another, as if they were not all of a Com∣pany. Dreaming▪ Fellow, a dull, drowsy, heavy Creature. Drift, Design, Aim, Intent. Drill, to draw in, and entice by degrees; also boring of Pearl. Dripper▪ a sort of Clap, or venereal glea∣ting Dripping-weather, the same with dropping. Dromedary, c. a Thief or Rogue, also a kind of Camel with two bun∣ches on his Back. You are a purple Dromedary, c. You are a Bungler or a dull Fellow at thieving. Drommerars, c. see Domerars. Droppers, c. Sweetners. Drop a cog, c. to let fall (with design to draw in and cheat) a Piece of Gold; also the piece it self. Drop▪in-his-eye, almost drunk. Droop, to fall away, to pine, to break with Age or Infirmity, a drooping bird that hangs the Wing. Drovers, Horse-leaders in Fairs, or Markets, and Graziers or Drivers of Beasts. Drub, beat with a stick or Cable-end. Drudge, or rather dredge, the way of catch∣ing Oysters; also a labo∣rious Person. Drumbelo, a dull hea∣vy Fellow. Ameer drum∣belo, a very Slug.
Drunk with a continu∣nado. de die in diem. Dry blows, or dry-bast∣ing for Rib-roasting. Dry-bob, a smart or sharp Repartee. Dry-boots, a sly, close cunning Fellow. Dry-drinking, without a bit of Victuals. Dry∣wine, a little rough upon, but very grateful to the Palate. Dry youth, sharp, close▪ witty. D U Dub, c. a Pick-lock-key. Dub, the Giger, c. open the Door. We'll strike it upon the dub, c. we will rob that Place. Dubber, c. a Picker of Locks. Dub'd, Knighted. A Duce, c. two Pence, Duck-leggs, short-leggs▪ Dudds, c. Cloaths or Goods. Rum dudds, c. fine or rich cloaths or Goods. Dudd, Cheats wonne. c. Cloaths and things stolen. Abram Cove has wonne (or bit) Rum dudds. c. the poor Fellow has stolen very costly Cloaths. Dudgeon, Anger, Quar∣rel, Displeasure. Duke of Exeter's Daugh∣ter, a Rack in the To∣wer of London, to tor∣ture and force Confessi∣on; supposed to be in∣troduced by him, some∣times (formerly) now not in use. Dullard, a heavy dull stupid Fellow. Dulpickle, the same. Dum-found, to beat soundly. I dumfounded the sawcy Rascal, I bang'd his Back tightly. In the dumps, troubled, cha∣grin, melancholic. Dunaker, c. a Cow∣stealer. Duncarring, Buggering. Dunner, a Sollicitor for Debts. Dunn'd, teiz'd, or much importun'd. Dunder-head, a dull heavy Creature.
Dundering Rake, a thun∣dering Rake, or of theRank, one develishly lewd. Dup, c. to enter, or open the door, dup the ken, c. enter the House, dup the boozing ken and booz a gage, c. go into the Ale-house and drink a Pot. Durance, a Prison. Durk, a short Dagger, in use with the Scots, as Stilletto is with the Itali∣ans. Dusk, or Twilight, the shadow of the Even∣ing, as Dawn is Day∣break or peep of Day. Dust, money, down with your Dust, deposit your Money, pay your Reckoning. Also in ano∣ther sence, dust it away drink quick about. Dutchified, in the Dutch Interest, or of that Faction. Dutch-Reckoning, or Alte-mall, a verbal or Lump-account without particulars. E Eager, warm, or earn∣est in Debate; also sharp Liquors, as hard Beer, Wine turned soure, &c. Hence the Compounds, Vinegar, Alegar. Eagle, c. the winning Gamester. Earnest, c. Part or Share. Tip me my earnest, c. give me my Snack or Di∣vidend. Easy, facil, supple, pliable, managable. He is an easy fellow, very silly or soft, an easy mort, c. a forward or coming wench. E B Ebb-water, c. when there's but little Money in the Pocket. E D
Edge-tools, as Scythes, Swords, and such as are set or ground, as Razors. Knives, Scissors, Sheers, &c. to distin∣guish them from flat Tools and Tongs, &c. 'tis ill jesting with Edge-toolsor trusting unexpert Men with dangerous things. Fall back fall edge or come what will. E F Effort, an Endeavour or Proffer, a Weak Effort, an Offer in vain. E G Egge one on, to prick him on, to provoke or stir him up. He'll be glad to take Eggs for his money, or to compound the matter with Loss. You come in with your five Eggs a penny, and four of 'em addle, of a Pragmati∣cal Prater, or Busi-body, that wasts many Words to little purpose. To leave a Nest-egg, to have alwaies a Reserve to come again. As sure as Eggs be Eggs. When no∣thing is so sure. As full of Roguery as an Egg is is full, of Meat. E L Elbow-grease, a deriso∣ry Term for Sweat. It will cost nothing but a little Elbow-grease; in a jeer to one that is lazy, and thinks much of his La∣bour. Who is at your El∣bow? a Caution to a Ly∣er. He lives by shaking of the Elbow; a Game∣ster. Elonge, to stretch for∣ward the right Arm and Leg, and to keep a close Left-foot. Elevated, pufft up; also raised to Honour, Dignity, &c. Above the common Elevation, above the common Level. Eminence a Rising op∣posed to a flat Ground, rais'd to an Eminence of pitch of greatness; to make a figure, or be a Man of mark in the World, i. e. to be con∣spicuous, as a City set on a Hill cannot be hid. His Eminence, the Title given to a Cardinal. E M Empty-fellow, Silly. Empty-skull'd, Foolish.
Empty-talk, silly, idlevain Discourse, more Noise then Sense. E N Ends, Aim, Design, Drift, and variously used in composition, as, Candle-ends, Ends of gold and silver, Shreds of either. Cable-ends, finger-ends, for ex∣tremity or utmost part of either. Tis good to make both Ends meet, or to cut your Coat accord∣ing to your Cloth. Every thing has an End, and a Pudding has two. English-cane, an oak∣en Plant, English Manufacture, Ale, Beer, or Syder. Ensnaring Questions In∣terrogatories laid to trap and catch one. Entries, where the Deer have lately passed the thickets. E P Epicure-an, one that that indulges himself, nice of Palate, very curious and a critick in eating. E Q Equip, c. to furnish one. Equip, c. rich; also having new Clothes▪ Well equipt, c. plump in the Pocket, or very full of Money; also very well drest. The Cull equipt me with a brace of Meggs, c. the Gentleman furnish'd me with a couple of Guineas. E R Eriffs, Canary-birds two years old. E V Evasion, a Shift, sly or indirect Answer. Eves-drop, to be an Eves-dropper, one that skulks, lurks at or lies under his Neighbor's Window or Door. E W
Ewe, or the White Ewe,c. a Top-woman among the Canting Crew, very Beautiful. E X Execution-day, Wash∣ing-day; also that on which the Malefactors Die. Exigence, a special or extraordinary occasion, a pinch. Expedient, a ready shift or trick to deliver one from any difficulty, or danger near at hand. Ey, of Pheasants, the whole Brood of young ones. Eye-sore, an Annoy∣ance, whatever is griev∣ous or offensive, an unwelcome dish or guest. All that you get you may put in your Eye and see ne'er the worse, a pleasant Periphrasis or Round of Words, for getting no∣thing at all. 'Tis good to have an Eye to the main Chance, or look to your Hits. What the Eye ne'er sees the Heart ne'er rues: Or out of Sight, out of Mind. F Facer, c. a Bumper without Lip-room. Face in Wine, the Colour. A good Face, a very fine bright Colour. To make a Face, to make a show or feign; also to wryth contract or distort the Face in Con∣tempt or Derision. To set a good Face upon a bad Cause, or Matter, to make the best of it. A good Face needs no Band, or no advantage to set it off. The Broad fac'd Bird, or the Bird that is all Face under Feathers, a Periphrasis for an Owl. Face about to the Right or Left, turn about. to Face Danger, to meet it. Fa∣cing of the Sleeve, the Turn-up. Facetious, full of Mer∣ry Tales and Jests, plea∣santly merry.
Factitious, Bodies madeby Art, as Glass, Paper, and all Compound or made Metals, as Brass, Steel, Pewter, Latin, &c. Fadge, it won't fadge or doe. Fag, c. to Beat. Fag'd, c. Beaten. Fag the Bloss, c. bang the Wench, Fag the Fen, c. drub the Whore. Faggot the Culls, c. Bind the Men. Faggots, Men Mus∣ter'd for Souldiers, not yet Listed. Fair Roe-Buck, the Fifth Year. Fair Speech, or fine Words. Fair-spoken, or Courteous. A Fair Day, or Fair Weather. Fair in the Cradle, and foul in the Saddle, a pretty Boy, and a hard-favor'd Man. Soft and Fair goes far; or not more Haste than good Speed. Fair and far off; wide of the Mark. You have made a Fair Spech, said in derisi∣on of one that spends many Words to little purpose. A Fair or Mar∣ket for Beasts. A Day af∣ter the Fair, a Day too late, of one that has out-stayed his Markets. Fall-a-bord, fall on and Eat heartily. Fallacies, Cheats, Tricks, Deceipts. Falter, to fail or more particularly a failure, or Trip of the Tongue, entangled with the Pal∣sy, produced also from excess of Drink, or Guilt. Famms, c. Hands. Fambles, c. Hands. Famble-cheats, c. Gold∣rings, or Gloves. Famgrasp, c. to agree or make up a Difference. Famgrasp the Cove c. to agree with the Adver∣sary. Family of Love, Lewd Women, Whores; also a Sect. Fangs, Beast-claws as Talons are of a Bird.
Fanning, or refreshing of the Trees or Woods with Wind. Fanning or refreshing of a CloseRoom, opening the Windows. Fire-fanns, little Hand-Skreens for the Fire. Fantastick, Whimsical, Freakish, or Capricious. A Fantastick Dress, very particular, remarkable, Fardel, a Bundle. Fardy, for Ferdinando. Fare, Hire; also a litter of Piggs. Farting-crackers, c. Breeches. Fast-friends, sure or trusty. Fastner, c. a Warrant. Fastnesses, Boggs. Fat, the last landed, inned or stow'd of any sort of Merchandize whatever, so called by the several Gangs of Water-side-Porters, &c. Fat Cull, c. a rich Fel∣low. All the Fat is in the Fire, of a miscarri∣age or shrewd Turn. Change of Pasture makes Fat Calves, of him that thrives upon mending his Commons. Faulkner, c. see Tum∣bler, first Part. Faytors, c. the Second (old) Rank of the Canting Crew. F E Feat, strange, odd. Feats of Activity, ex∣ercise, or Agility of Bo∣dy in Tumbling, turning through a Hoop, Run∣ning, Leaping, Vaulting, Wrestling, Pitching of the Bar, Quoiting, &c. or Slights of Hand, Tricks, Legerdemain, &c. Feats of Chivalry, Ex∣ploits of War, Riding the great Horse, Tilting, Tournaments, Running at the Ring, &c.
Feather-bed-lane, any bad▪ Road, but particu∣larly that betwixt Dun∣church and Daintrie. He has a Feather in his Cap, a Periphrasis for a Fool. Play with a Feather, of things that are game∣som and full of Play, as Kittens and Kids. To Feather his Nest, to en∣rich himself by indirect means, or at the Expenceof others. Fine Feathers make fine Birds. Gay Cloaths make fine Folks. Feble, the narrowest Part of the Sword-blade nearest the Point. Feinting, or Falsifying, to deceive the Adver∣sary, by pretending to thrust in one Place, and really doing it in ano∣ther. Fence, c. to Spend or Lay out. Fence his Hog, c. to Spend his Shilling. A Fence, c. a Receiver and Securer of Stolen-goods. Fencing Cully, c. a Bro∣ker, or Receiver of Sto∣len-goods. Fencing-ken, c. the Magazine, or Ware∣house, where Stolen-goods are secured. Ferme, c. a Hole. Fermerly Beggers, c. all those that have not the Sham-sores or Cley∣mes. Ferret, c. a Trades∣man that sells Goods to young Unthrifts, upon Trust at excessive Rates. Ferreted, c. Cheated; also driven out of Holes and lurking Places, and hunted as Conies, by a little, Fierce, red-eyed Beast. Hence Ferret-eyed: or Eyes as red as a Ferret. Fetch, a Trick or Wheedle. A meer Fetch, that is far fetched, or brought in by Head and Shoulders. Fetids, Vegetables, or Animals, rank and strong-scented; as Gar∣lick, Assa soetida, &c. Pole-cats, Foxes, Goats, &c. Fewmets, Deers Ex∣crements. F I Fib, c. to beat; also a little Lie. Fib the Cove's quar∣rons in the Rum-pad, for the Lour in his Bung, c. Beat the Man in the High-way lustily for the Money in his Purse.
Fickle, mutable, or changeable, of manyMinds in a short time. Fiddle, c. a Writ to Arrest. Fiddle-faddle, meer silly Stuff, or Nonsense; Idle, Vain Discourse. Fidlers-pay, Thanks and Wine. Filch, c. to Steal. Filchers, c. Thieves, Robbers. A good Filch, c. a Staff, of Ash or Hazel, with a Hole through, and a Spike at the bottom, to pluck Cloathes from a Hedge or any thing out of a Casement. Filching-cove, c. a Man-thief. Filching-mort, c. a Wo∣man-thief. File, c. to Rob, or Cheat. The File, c. a Pick-pocket. Fine-mouth'd, nice, dainty. Finical, spruce, neat. Finify, to trick up, or dress sprucely. Fire-drakes, Men with a Phenix for their Badge, in Livery, and Pay from the Insurance-Office, to extinguish Fires, cover∣ing their Heads with an Iron-pot, or Head∣piece; also a Fiery Me∣teor, being a great une∣qual Exhalation infla∣med between a Hot and a Cold Cloud. Fire-ship, a Pockey Whore. Fire-side, a Health to the Wife and Chil∣dren. Firkin of soul Stuff, a very Homely coarse corpulent Woman. Fishing Bill, in Chance∣ry, to make what Dis∣coveries may be. Who Cries Stinking Fish? or who dispraises his own Ware? Good Fish when it is Caught, of what is not got so soon as reckoned upon. All is Fish that comes to Net, of him that flies boldly at all Game. I have other Fish to Fry, I am otherwise taken up, engag'd, or have other Business on my Hands.
Fixen, a froward, pee∣vish,Child; also a She-Fox. Fizzle, a little or low∣sounding Fart. F L Flabby, flimsy, not sound, firm or solid. Flagg, c. a Groat; also a coarse rough Stone us'd in Paving. To Flagg, to fall off, droop, decline, or fail; also to suspend or let fall a Suit or Prosecuti∣on. The Flag of Defi∣ance is out, (among the Tarrs) the Fellow's Face is very Red, and he is Drunk. Flam, a Trick, or Sham-story. Flanderkin, a very large Fat Man or Horse; also Natives of that Country. Flanders-fortunes, of small Substance. Flanders-pieces, Pictures that look fair at a dist∣ance, but coarser near at Hand. Flapdragon, a Clap or Pox. Flare, to Shine or glare like a Comet or Beacon. Flash, c. a Periwig. Rum Flash, c. a long, full, high-priz'd Wig. Queer Flash, c. a sorry wea∣ther-beaten Wig, not worth Stealing, fit only to put on a Pole or dress a Scare-Crow. Flash∣ken, c. a House where Thieves use, and are connived at. Flasque, a Bottle (or it's resemblance) of Sand, bound about with Iron, into which the melted Metal is by Coyners and others pour∣ed; also a Pottle or five Pints and half, that quantity, formerly of Florence, now of any Wine: A Box for Gun∣powder; a Carriage for Ordinance; an Arch∣line somewhat distant from the corner of the Chief, and swelling by degrees toward the mid∣dle of the Escutcheon.
Flat, dead Drink; al∣so dull Poetry or Dis∣course. Flavour, Scent of Fruits; as Peaches, Quinces, &c. Or of Wines, as Rhe∣nish, Canary, &c. Flaunting, tearing-fine. To Flaunt it, to Spark it, or Gallant it. Flaw, a water-flaw and a crack in Chrystals, as well as a speck in Gemms and Stones. Flaw'd, c. Drunk. Flay, to flea or skinn. He'll flay a Flint, of a meer Scrat or Miser. Flear, to grinn. A Flearing Fool, a grinning silly Fellow. Fleece, to Rob, Plun∣der or Strip; also Wooll, the true Golden-Fleece of England, a clear Spring, or Flowing Foun∣tain of Wealth. Fleet, swift of Wing or Foot, in flight or Course, used not only of Birds upon the Wing, but of winged Arrows, resembling them in Flight. Flegmatic, dull, heavy. A Flegmatic Fellow, a drows yinsipid Tool, an ill Companion. Flesh-broker, a Match∣maker; also a Bawd; between whom but lit∣tle difference, for they both (usually) take Money. Flibustiers, West-In∣dian Pirates, or Bueka∣neers, Free-booters. Flicker, c. a Drink∣ing Glass. Flicker snapt, c. the Glass is broken. Nim the Flicker, c. Steal the Glass. Rum Flicker, c. a large Glass or Rum∣mer. Queer Flicker, c. a Green or ordinary Glass. To Flicker, to grin or flout: Flick∣ering, grinning or laugh∣ing in a Man's Face. Flicking, c. to cut, cutting. Flick me some Panam and Cash, c. cut me some Bread and Cheese. Flick the Peeter, c. cut off the Cloak-bag or Port-manteau.
Flip, Sea Drink, ofsmall Beer. (chiefly) and Brandy, sweetned and Spiced upon occa∣sion: A Kan of Sir. Clous∣ly, is among the Tarrs, a Kan of choice Flip, with a Lemon squeez'd in, and the Pill hung round. Flippant, pert and full of Prattle. Flimsy, flabby, not firm, sound or solid. Flocks and Herds, Flocks are of lesser Cat∣tel, Herds are of Black Cattel, a Flock of Sheep or Goats, and some∣times of Birds, as Pid∣geons; and in Imitation of the Gregarious Crea∣tures, Men, that are sociable, are said to follow and flock after one another as Sheep, or to flock together to see Shows and Specta∣cles. Flog, c. to Whip Flog'd, c. severely Lasht. Flogging-cove, c. the Beadle, or Whipper in Bridewell, or any such Place. Flogging-stake, c. a Whipping-post. Flogg'd at the Tumbler, c. Whipt at the Cart's Arse. Flogging, c. a Naked Wo∣man's whipping (with Rods) an Old (usu∣ally) and (sometimes) a Young Lecher. As the Prancer drew the Queer-Cove, at the crop∣ping of the Rotan, the Rum Pads of the Rum vile, and was Flogg'd by the Rum Cove, c. the Rogue was dragg'd at the Cart's tail through the chief Streets of London, and was soundly Whipt by the Hangman. Florence, a Wench that is rouz'd and ruff∣led. Florentine, a made Dish of Minced Meats, Currans, Spice, Eggs, &c. Bak'd. Flounce, to toss, to fling and flounce, to fling and toss. Flout, a jeer, to flout or jeer.
Flummery, a cleans∣ingDish made of Oat∣meal boyl'd in Water to a kind of Jelly or Consistence and strain∣ed. Flush in the Pocket, c. full of Money. The Cull is flush in the Fob, the Spark's Pocket is well Lined with Money. Flushing in the Face, a frequent redning, occasion'd by a sudden Question, sur∣prize, and also from a distemper'd Liver. Flustered. Drunk. Flute, c. the Recorder of London, or of any other Town. Flutter, or Flie low, anciently to Flitter, hence a Flitter-mouse or Bat; as much as to say, a Fly∣ing Mouse, as an Owl is a Flying-Cat. Flyers, c. Shoes. Flying-Camps, Beggers plying in Bodies at Fu∣nerals. F O Fob, c. a cheat, trick; also a little Pocket. Fob off, slyly to cheat or deceive. Fogus, c. Tobacco. Tip me gage of Fogus, c. give me a Pipe of To∣bacco. Foiling, the Footing of Deer on the Grass, scarce seen. Folks, the Servants, or ordinary People, as Country-folks, Harvest-Folks, Work-folks, &c. The Folks Bread or Pud∣ding, for the coarsest Bread or Pudding. Fool's Coat, or Colours, a Motley of incon∣gruous Colours too near a Kin to match, as Red and Yellow, which is the Fool's Coat with us, as Blew and Green is with the French. A Fool's-Coat, a Tulip so called, striped with Red and Yellow. Fools-Cap, a sort of Paper so called.
Footman's Mawnd, c. an artificial Sore made with unslack'd Lime, Soap and the Rust of old Iron, on the Backof a Begger's hand, as if hurt by the bite or kick of a Horse. Foot-pad, c. see Low∣pad, for one Foot in the Grave, a Pariphrasis an old Man. He has the length of his Foot. Fop, Foppish, one that is singular or affected in Dress, Gestures, &c. Foplin, the same, on∣ly younger. Forebode, to presage, betoken or fore-show. Foreboding-signs, tokens, Presages of ill Luck; as spilling of the Salt, a Hare's crossing the Way; Croaking of Ravens; Screaking of Screach-Owls. Or of ill Weather, either natural Signs or artificial; as, Aches, Corns, Cry of a Peacock, Water-galls, Weather-Glasses, &c. Forecast, contrivance or laying a design; Pre∣caution, or the Wisdom of Prevention, which is beyond the Wisdom of Remedy. To Forecast, to contrive, or digest Matters for Execution. Foreman of the Jury, he that engrosses all the Talk to himself. Forestall, to antedate or anticipate. Fork, c. a Pick-pocket. Let's fork him, c. let us Pick that Man's Pocket, the newest and most dextrous way: It is, to thrust the Fingers, strait, stiff, open, and very quick into the Pocket, and so closing them, hook what can be held between them. Fork is often Rakes Heir, or after a scraping Father comes a scatter∣ing Son. Forlorn-hope, c. losing Gamesters; also in ano∣ther Sense, a Party of Soldiers, &c. put upon the most desperate Ser∣vice. Fort, the broad Part of the Sword-blade near∣est to the Hilt. Fortune, a rich Maid, or wealthy Widdow, an Heiress.
Fortune-hunters, Pur∣suers of such to obtainthem in Marriage. A Creature of Fortune, one that Lives by his Wits. A Soldier of Fortune, the Heir of his own Right∣hand as the Spaniards call him. A Gamester of Fortune, one that Lives by shaking his Elbow. He has made his Fortune, he has got a good E∣state. Fortune-Tellers, c. the Judges of Life and Death, so called by the Canting Crew: Also Astrologers, Physiognomists, Chiroman∣cers, &c. Founder'd Horse, Lame. Ship at Sea▪ that sprung a Leak and Sunk down∣right. Foundling, a Child dropt in the Streets for the Parish (the most a∣ble) to keep. Foul Jade, an ordinary coarse Woman. Foul Wine, when it stinks; also when unfine, or Lees flying in the Glass. Fox, the second Year; also a sharp cunning Fellow. Fox'd, Drunk. He has caught a Fox, he is very Drunk. An old Fox, after the second Year; also a subtil old Fellow; also an old broad Sword. A Fox-blade, a Sword-blade with a Fox (or some thing like it) Grav'd on it, esteem'd good Me∣tal. Foxkennelleth, Lodg∣eth. Foy, a farewell or tak∣ing leave, usually a Part∣ing-glass. To Pay his Foy, to make his Friends Merry, before he leaves them. Foyl-cloy, c. a Pick-pocket, a Thief, a Rogue. Foyst, c. a Cheat a Rogue; also a close strong Stink, without Noise or Report. F R
Fraters, c. the eighth Or∣der of Canters, such as Beg with a Sham-pa∣tentsor Briefs for Spitals, Prisons, Fires. &c. Fray, an Encounter, or Disorder. Better come at the latter end of a Feast, than the beginning of a Fray. To Fray, to scare or frighten; also to break or crack in wearing. Hence frail, brittle or soon broke; and when Deer rub and push their Heads against Trees to get the pells of their new Horns off. Freak, a Whim or Maggot. Freakish, Fantastic, Whimsical, Capricious. Freameth, see Wild Boar. Free-booters, Lawless Robbers, and Plunderers; also Soldiers serving for that Privilege without Pay, and Inroaders. Freeholder, he whose Wife goes with him to the Ale-house; also he that has to the Value of Fourty Shillings (or more) a Year in Land. Freeze, a thin, small, hard Cyder much us'd by Vintners and Coo∣pers in parting their Wines, to lower the Price of them, and to advance their Gain. French Gout, the Pox. A blow with a French Faggot-Stick, when the Nose is fallen by the Pox. Frenchified, in the French Interest or Mode; also Clapt or Poxt. Fresh-man, a Novice, in the University. Fresh-water-seamen, that have never been on the Salt, or made any Voyage, meer Land-Men. Fret▪ to fume▪or chafe; also Wine in ferment∣ing is said to be upon the Fret. Fricassee, any Fried Meats, but chiefly of Rabbets. Friggat well rigg'd, a Woman well Drest and Gentile. Frigid, a weak disa∣bled Husband, cold, im∣potent. Frippery, old Clothes.
Froe, c. for Urowe, (Dutch) a Wife, Mi∣stress, or Whore Brush to your Froe, (or Bloss,) and wheedle for Crap, c. whip to your Mistress and speak her fair to give, or lend you some Money. Frog-landers, Dutch∣men. Frolicks, lewd or mer∣ry Pranks, pleasant Ram∣bles, and mad Vaga∣ries. Frummagem'd, c. choak∣ed. Frump, a dry Bob, or Jest. F U Fuants, Excrements of all Vermin. Fubbs, a loving, fond Word used to prety lit∣tle Children and Wo∣men; also the Name of a Yacht. Fuddle, Drink. This is Rum fuddle, c. this is excellent Tipple. Fuddle-cap, a Drunk∣ard. Fulsom, is a Nauseous sort of Excess; as ful∣som fat, loathsom fat, or fat to loathing. Fulsom flattery, nauseous or gross Flattery laid on too thick; as Embroidery too thick Laid on is dawbing with Gold or Silver-lace. Fumbler, an unperform∣ing Husband, one that is insufficient, a weak Brother. Fumblers▪Hall, the Place where such are to be put for their Nonper∣formance. Fun, c. a Cheat, or slippery Trick; also an Arse. What do you fun me? Do you think to Sharp or Trick me? I'll Kick your Fun, c. I'll Kick your Arse. He put the Fun upon the Cull, c. he sharp'd the Fellow. I Funn▪d him, c. I was too hard for him, I out-wit∣ted or rook'd him.
Fund, or Fond, a Bank, or Stock or Ex∣chequer of Money, or Moneys worth; also a Bottom or Foundation.A Staunch Fund, a good Security. Funk, c. TobaccoSmoak; also a strong Smell or Stink. What a Funk here is! What a thick Smoak of Tobacco is here! Here's a damn'd Funk, here's a great Stink. Furbish-up, to Scrub-up, to Scowre, or Refresh old Armour, &c. He is mightily Furbish'd-up on a suddain, when a Man not accustom'd to wear fine Cloaths, gets a▪ good Suit on his Back. Fur-men, c. Aldermen: Fussocks, a meer Fus∣socks, a Lazy Fat-Ars'd Wench. A Fat Fussocks, a Flusom, Fat, Strapping Woman. Fustian-verse. Verse in Words of Iofty Sound, and humble Sense. Fustiluggs, a Fulsom, Beastly, Nasty Woman. G Gad up and down, to Fidle and Fisk, to run a Gossiping. Gadding Gossips, way∣going Women, Fidging and Fisking every where. A Gad of Steel. Gag, c. to put Iron∣pinns into the Mouths of the Robbed, to hin∣der them Crying out. Gage, c. a Pot or Pipe. Tip me a Gage, c. give me a Pot or Pipe, or Hand hither, the Pot, or Pipe. Gallant, a very fine Man; also a Man of Metal, or a brave Fel∣low; also one that Courts or keeps, or is Kept by a Mistress, Gal∣lant a Fan, to break it with Design, or Pur∣pose to have the Oppor∣tunity and Favour to Present a better. Gambals, Christmas Gamballs, merry Fro∣licks or Pranks.
Game, c. Bubbles drawn in to be cheated; also at a Bawdy-house, Lewd Women. Have ye any Game Mother? Have ye any Whores Mistress Baw'd; and in anotherSense. What you game me? c. do you jeer me, or pretend to expose me, to make a May-game of me. Gamesome, Wanton, Frolicksom, Playful. Gan, c. a Mouth. Ganns, c. the Lipps. Gang, an ill Knot or Crew of Thieves, Pick∣pockets or Miscreants; also a Society of Porters under a Regulation, and to go. Gape-seed, whatever the gazing Crowd idly stares and gapes after; as Puppet-shows, Rope∣dancers, Monsters, and Mountebanks, any thing to feed the Eye. Garish, gaudy, taw∣dry, bedawbed with Lace, or all bedeck't with mismatcht, or sta∣ring Colours. Garnish▪money, what is customarily spent a∣mong the Prisoners at first coming in. Gaume, see Paume. Gaunt, lank, thin, hol∣low. G E Gears, Rigging or Ac∣coutrements, Head-gear the Linnen or dress of the Head. In his Gears, ready Rigg'd or Drest. Out of his Gears out of Kelter, or out of sorts. It wont Gee, it won't Hit, or go. Gelt, c. Money. There is no Gelt to be got, c. Trading is very Dead. Gentian-wine, Drank for a Whet before Din∣ner. Gentry-cove, c. a Gen∣tle-man. Gentry-cove-ken, c. a Nobleman's or Gentle∣man's House. Gentry-mort, c. a Gen∣tlewoman. George, c. a half Crown piece. He tipt me Forty Georges for my Earnest, c. he paid me Five Pounds for my Share or Snack. G I Gibbrish, the Canting Tongue, or Jargon.
Gig, c. a Nose; also a Woman's Privities. Sni∣chel the Gig, c. Fillip the Fellow on the Nose. A young Gig, a wanton Lass. Gigger, c. a Door. Dub the Gigger, c. open the Door with the Pick-lock that we may go in and Rob the House. Giglers, c. wanton Women. Gigling, Laugh∣ing loud and long. Gill, a Quartern (of Brandy, Wine, &c.) also a homely Woman. Every Jack must have his Gill. There's not so Ord'nary a Gill, but there's as Sorry a Jack. Gill-ale, Physic-ale. Gillflurt, a proud, Minks. Gilt, c. a Pick-lock; also a Slut or light Housewife. Gimcrack, a spruce Wench; also a Bauble or Toy. Ginger-bread, Money. Gingerly, gently, soft∣ly, easily. Gin, a snare or nooze, to catch Birds, as a Spring is to catch Hares. Gingumbobs, Toies or Baubles. Ginny, c. an Instru∣ment to lift up a Grate, the better to Steal what is in the Window. Gipp, to cure or cle∣anse Herrings in order to Pickling. Girds, Taunts, Quips Gibes or Jeers. Bitter Girds, Biting sharp Reflections. Under his Girdle, within his Power, or at his Beck. If you are angry, you may turn the Buckle of your Girdle be hind you, to one Angry for a small Matter, and whose An∣ger is as little valued. Give Nature a Fillip, to Debauch a little now and then with Women, or Wine. G L Glade, Shade. Glance of an Eye, a Cast of the Eye; at the first Glance, at a Brush, or at the first Cast.
Glanders, filthy yel∣low Snot at (Horses)Noses, caught from Cold. Glare, a Glister; also the weak Light of a Comet, Candle, or Glow-worm. To Glare, or blaze like a Comet, or Candle. Hence Glore, as Pottage Glore, or Shine with Fat. Glaive, a Bill or Sword. Glaver, to Fawn and Flatter. A Glavering Fellow, a False Flatter∣ing Fellow. Glaze, c. the Win∣dow. Glazier, c. one that creeps in at Casements, or unrips Glass-win∣dows to Filch and Steal. Glaziers, c. Eyes. The Cove has Rum Glaziers, c. that Rogue has ex∣cellent Eyes, or an Eye like a Cat. Glee, Mirth, Pastime. Gleam, a weak or wa∣terish Light; hence a Glimmering or Twink∣ling of a Star. Glib, Smooth, with-, out a Rub. Glib-tongued Voluble, ready or Nim∣bleto-ngued. Glim, c. a Dark-Lan∣thorn used in Robbing Houses; also to burn in the Hand. As the Cull was Glimm'd, he gangs to the Nubb, c. if the Fel∣low has been Burnt in the Hand, he'll be Hang'd now. Glimfenders, c. And∣irons. Rum Glimfenders, Silver Andirons. Glimflashy, c. angry or in a Passion. The Cull is Glimflashy, the Fellow is in a Heat. Glimmer, c. Fire. Glimjack, c. a Link∣boy. Glimmerer, c. the Twen∣ty second Rank of the Canting Tribe, begging with Sham Licences, pretending to Losses by Fire, &c. Glimstick, c. a Candle∣stick. Rum Glimsticks, c. Silver Candlesticks. Queer Glimsticks, c. Brass, Pew∣ter or Iron Candlesticks.
Glow, either to Shine or be Warm, as Glow∣wormfrom the first, and glowing of the Cheeks, or glowing of Fire, with re∣lation to the last. G O Goads, c. those that Wheedle in Chapmen for Horse-coursers. Goalers-Coach, a Hur∣dle. Goat, a Lecher, or very Lascivious Person. Goatish, Lecherous, Wanton, Lustful. Gob, c. the Mouth; also a Bit or Morsel; hence Gobbets, now more in use for little Bits; as a Chop of Meat is a good Cut. Gift of the Gob, a wide, open Mouth; al∣so a good Songster, or Singing-master. God's Penny, Earnest Money, to bind a Bar∣gain. Gold-droppers, Sweet∣ners, Cheats, Sharpers. Going upon the Dub, c. Breaking a House with Picklocks. Gold-finch, c. he that has alwaies a Purse or Cod of Gold in his Fob. Gold-finders, Emptiers of Jakes or Houses of Of∣fice. Good Fellow, a Pot-com∣panion or Friend of the Bottle. Goose, or Goose-cap. a Fool. Find fault with a Fat Goose, or without a Cause. Go Shoe the Goose. Fie upon Pride when Geese go Bare-legg'd. He'll be a Man among the Geese when the Gander is gon, or a Man before his Mother. A Tayler's Goose Roasted, a Red-hot smoothing Iron, to Close the Seams. Hot and heavy like a Tay∣ler's Goose, may be appli∣ed to a Passionate Cox∣comb. Goree, c. Money, but chiefly Gold. Gossips, the Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings; also those that are noted for Gossiping, much Idle Prating, and Tittle Tat∣tle.
G R Graces, or Ornaments of Speech. With a good Grace, what is Becom∣ing, Agreeable. Withan ill Grace, what is Unbe∣coming or Disagreeable. Grafted, made a Cuck∣old of. Grannam, c. Corn. Grannam-gold, old Hoarded Coin. Granny, an old Wo∣man, also a Grandmo∣ther. Grapple, to close in Fisticuffs or Fighting, Oppos'd to Combating at Arms-end; also a fastning of Ships toge∣ther in an Engagement with Grappling Irons, a kind of Anchors (or resembling them) with four Flooks and no-Stock. Grasp, to Catch and Holdfast. or press with the close Fist. Grating, harsh Sounds, disagreeable, shocking and Offensive to the Ear. Great Buck, the Sixth Year. Great Hare, the Third Year and afterwards. Gratings, the che∣quer'd Work clapt on the Deck▪ of a Ship to let in the Light and Air. Green-bag, a Lawyer. Green-gown, a throw∣ing of young Lasses on the Grass and Kissing them. Green-head, a very raw Novice, or unexperi∣enc'd Fellow. Greshamite, a Virtuo∣so, or Member of the Royal Society. Grig, c. a Farthing; also a very small Eel. A merry Grig, a merry Fel∣low. Not a Grig did he tip me, c. not a Farthing wou'd he give me. Grilliade, any Broild Meats, Fish or Flesh. Grimaces, Mops and Mows, or making of Faces. Grim, Stern, Fierce, Surly.
Grinders, c. Teeth The Cove has Rum Grin∣ders, c. the Rogue has excellent Teeth. Gripe, or Griper, an old Covetous Wretch; also a Banker, Money Scrivener, or Usurer. Griping, is an Epithet commonly affixed either to the Exactions of Op∣pressive Governors, or to the Extortions of Usurers; Griping Usu∣rers, and griping Usury being as ordinary in English as Usura vorax in Latin. Griskins, Steaks off the Rump of Beef; also Pork-bones with some tho' not much Flesh on them, accounted very sweet Meat Broyled. Gropers, c. blind Men. Grotesque, a wild sort of Painting mostly us'd for Banquetting or Sum∣mer-houses. Grounds, Unscented Hair Powder, made of Starch, or Rice. see Alabaster. Grownd-Sweat▪ a Grave▪ Growse, Health-polts. Growneth, the Noise a Buck makes at Rutting time. Groyne, corruptly by the Tarrs for Coronna, a Seaport of Galicia in Spain. Grub-street News▪ false, Forg'd. Grum, the same as Grim, Stern or Fierce. Grumbletonians, Male∣contents, out of Hum∣our with the Govern∣ment, for want of a Place, or having lost one. Grumbling of the Giz∣zard, Murmuring, Mut∣tering▪ Repining, Re∣senting. Grunter, c. a Sucking Pig. Grunting Cheat, c. a Pig. Grunting Peeck, c. Pork.
Guard, of old Safe∣guard, now shortned into Guard, either for State, as Princes have their Guards, or for se∣curity so Prisoners have theirs; also the Shell ofa Sword, and the best Posture of Defence. Gugaws, Toies, Tri∣fles. Gull, c. a Cheat. Gull'd, c. Cheated, Rookt, Sharpt. Gullet, a Derisory Term for the Throat, from Gula. Gull-gropers, c. a By∣stander that Lends Mo∣ney to the Gamesters. Gundigutts, a fat pur∣sy Fellow. In the Gun, Drunk. As sure as a un, or Cock-sure. Out of Gun∣shot; aloof from Dans∣ger, or out of Harm's way. Gun-powder, an old Woman. Gust or Gusto, a right Relish, Savour, or true Taste of any thing. A Delicious Gusto, Wines, Fruits, or Meats of a curious or pleasant Taste. A Gust of Wind, a short, sudden, furious Blast, as we say a Dash of Rain, for a sudden, short, im∣petuous Beat of Rain. Guzzle, Drink. Guzzling, Drinking much. Gut-foundred, exceed∣ing Hungry. Gutling, Eating much. A Gutling Fellow, a great Eater. Gutter-Lane, the Throat. Gutters, the little streak in a Deer's Beam. Gutting, An House, Rif∣ling it, Clear∣ing it. An Oyster, Eat∣ing it. Gutts, a very fat, gross Person. G Y Gybe, c. any Writing or Pass Sealed; also Jerk or Jeer. Gyb'd, c. Jerkt or Whipt. Gybing, jeering.
Gypsies, a Counterfeit Brood of wandering Rogues and Wenches, herding together, and Living promicuously, or in common, under Hedges and in Barns,Disguising themselves with Blacking their Faces and Bodies, and wearing an Antick Dress, as well as Devising a particular Cant, Scroll∣ing up and down, and under colour of Fortune∣telling, Palmestry, Physi∣ognomy, and Cure of Diseases; impose all∣waies upon the unthink∣ing Vulgar, and often Steal from them, what∣ever is not too Hot for their Fingers, or too Heavy to carry off. A Cunning Gypsy, a sharp, sly Baggage, a Witty Wench. As Tann'd as a Gypsy, of a Gypsy-hue or colour. Gyrle, see Roe. H Habberdasher of Nouns and Pronouns, School∣master or Usher. Hab-nab, at Aventure, Unsight, Unseen, Hit or Miss. Hack, the Place where the Hawk's meat is laid. Hack and Hue, to Cut in Pieces. Hacks or Hackneys, hirelings. Hackney-whores, Common Prostitutes. Hackney-Horses, to be let to any Body. Hackney-Scriblers, Poor Hirelings Mercenary Writers. Hackum, a c. Fighting Fellow, see Captain Hack∣um. Haddums, The Spark has been at Haddums, He is Clapt, or Poxt. Hag, an old Witch. Hagged, Lean, Witch∣ed, Half-Starved. Hagboat, a huge Ves∣sel for Bulk and Length, Built chiefly to fetch great Masts, &c. Hagbut, a Hand-gun Three quarters of a Yard long. Haggle, to run from Shop to Shop, to stand hard to save a Penny. A Hagler, one that Buys of the Country-Folks, and Sells in the Market, and goes from Door to Door. Halfbord, c. Six Pence.
Half a Hog, c. Six Pence. Half Seas over, almost Drunk. Hamlet, c: a High Con∣stable. Hamper'd, caught in a Nooze, entangled, or embarassed in an intri∣cate Affair. Handy, Dextrous. Handy Blows, Fifty-cuffs. Handycrafts, the Ma∣nual Arts of Mechanic Trades. A great Two∣banded Sword, a swinging broad Sword. A great Twohanded Fellow, a huge swinging Fellow. Such a thing fell into his Hand, of one that improves a∣nother's Notion, Speech, or Invention. He will make a Hand of it, he will make a Penny of it, or make it turn to Ac∣count. They are Hand and Glove, of Friends or Camerades that are Inseparable, and almost to the same purpose, Clove and Orange. Change Hands, and change Luck, or to Play your Cards in another Hand. The same Hand and Fair Play, when they Play on without changing Hands. Many Hands make light Work. You stand with your Hands in your Pockets, to an Idle Fellow that finds nothing to do. Hank, He has a Hank upon him, or the Ascen∣dant over him. Hanker after, to Long or wish much for. Hanktelo, a silly Fel∣low, a meer Cods-head. Hans-en-kelder, Jack in the Box, the Child in the Womb, or a Health to it. Hard Drink, that is very Stale, or begining to Sower. Hard-drinking, excessive Soking, or to∣ping aboundance. Hard Bargain, a severe one. Hard-favor'd, Ugly, Homely. Hard Frost, a Keen or Sharp one. Hard Case, a severe or deep Misfortune, or ill Treatment. Hard Mast∣er or Dealer, a very near one or close.
Hare, the second Year. A great Hare, the third Year, Leveret the first Year. To hold with the Hare and run with the Hound, or to keep fair with both Parties at once. Hare-lipp'd, Notcht or turn'd up in the mid∣dle. Hare-sleep, with Eies a'most open. Hared, Hurried. Hare Seateth or Formeth, the proper term for the Place where she Setts or Lies. A Hare Beateth or Tappeth, makes a noise at Rutting time. He has swallow'd a Hare, he is very Drunk. Harking, Whispering on one side to borrow Money. Harman, c. a Con∣stable. Harmans, c. the Stocks. Harman-beck, c. a Bea∣dle. Harp-upon, a business to insist on it. Harridan, c. one that is half Whore, half Bawd. Hart, the Sixth Year, A Stag, the fifth Year. A Staggard, the fourth. A Brock the third. A Knobber, the second. Hind Calf, or Calf▪ the First. Hart Harboureth, Lodg∣eth. Hart Royal, having been Hunted by a King or Queen. Unharbour the Hart, Dislodge him. A Hart Belleth, maketh a Noise at Rutting time. A Hart goeth to Rut, the Term for Copulation. Hartfordshire-kindness, Drinking to the same Man again. Harthold or prety Hear∣ty, of good Courage, or pert Spirit. Hasty, very Hot on asudden. The most Haste the worst speed, or Haste makes Waste, of him that loses a Business by hur∣rying of it. You are none of the Hastings, of him that loses an Opportuni∣ty or a Business for want of Dispatch.
Hatchet-fac'd, Hard∣favor'd, Homely. Un∣derthe Hatches, in Trou∣ble, or Prison. Haut-bois, Oaks, Bea∣ches, Ashes, Poplars, &c. Also well known and pleasant Martial Music. Havock, Waste, Spoil, They made sad Havock, they Destroy'd all before 'em. Hawk, c. a Sharper. Hawkers, Retail News-Sellers. Hawking, going about Town and Country, with Scotch-Cloth, &c. or News-Papers; also Spitting difficultly. Hay, a separate En∣closure of Wood Land, within a Forrest or Park, Fenced with a Rail or Hedge, or both. To Dance the Hay. To make Hay while the Sun Shines, or make good use of one's Time. Hazy Weather, when it is Thick, Misty, Fog∣gy. Hazle-geld, to Beat any one with a Hazle-Stick or Plant. H E Heady, strong Liquors that immediately fly up into the Noddle, and so quickly make Drunk. Headstrong, Stubborn; Ungovernable. A Scald Head is soon Broke. Head-Bully of the Pass or Passage Bank, c. the Top Tilter of that Gang, throughout the whole Army, who Demands and receives Contribu∣tion from all the Pass Banks in the Camp. Hearing Cheats, c. Ears. Hearts-ease, c. a Twen∣ty shilling piece; also an ordinary sort of Strong Water; and an Herb called by some the Tri∣nity, by others, Three Faces in a Hood, Live in Idleness, Call me to you, or Pansies, an ex∣cellent Antivenerean. &c. Heathen Philosopher, a sorry poor tatter'd Fel∣low, whose Breech may be seen through his Pocket-holes.
Heave, c. to Rob. Heave a Bough, c. to Rob a House. Heaver, c. a Breast. Heavy, is either gross in Quantity, or slow in Mo∣tion, because ordinari∣ly the one is not without the other, and therefore we say, heavy Bodies move slowly. A heavy Fellow, a dull Blockish Slug. Hector, a Vaporing, Swaggering Coward. Hedge, to secure a des∣perate Bet, Wager or Debt▪ By Hedge or by Style, by Hook or by Crook. Hedge-bird, a Scoun∣drel or sorry Fellow. Hedge-creeper, c. a Robber of Hedges. Hedge-grapes, very Crabbed, wholly unfit to make Wine. Hedge-priest, a sorry Hackney, Underling▪ Illiterate, Vagabond, see Patrico. Hedge-Tavern, or Ale∣hovse, a Jilting, Sharp∣ing Tavern, or Blind Ale-house. It hangs in the Hedge, of a Law-suit or any thing else Depend∣ing, Undetermined. As common as the Hedge, or High-way, said of a Prostitute or Strumpet. Hell, the Place where the Taylers lay up their Cabbage, or Remnants, which are sometimes very Large. Hell-born-babe, a Lewd, Graceless, No∣torious Youth. Hell-cat, a very Lewd Rakehelly Fellow. Hill-driver, a Coach∣man. Hell-bound, a Profli∣gate, Lewd Fellow. Helter-skelter, Pell∣mell. Hempen-widdow, one whose Husband was Hang'd. Hem, to call after one with an inarticulate Noise. Homuse, see Roe. Hen-hearted, Coward∣ly, Fearful.
Hen-peckt Friggat, whose Commander and Offi∣cers are absolutelysway'd by their Wives. Henpeckt Husband, whose Wife wears the Breeches. Herd of Dear or Hares, a Company. H I Hick, c. any Person of whom any Prey can be made, or Booty taken from; also a silly Coun∣try Fellow. Hide-bound-horse, whose Skin sticks very close, and tite like a Pudding Bag, usually when very Fat. Hide-bound-muse, Stiff, hard of Delivery, Sir J. Suckling call'd Ben. Johnson's so. Higglede-piggledy, all to gether, as Hoggs and Piggs lie Nose in Arse. High Flyers, Impudent, Forward, Loose, Light Women; also bold Ad∣venturers. High-shoon, or Clouted-shoon▪ a Country Clown. High Pad, c. a High∣way Robber well Moun∣ted and Armed. Highjinks, a Play at Dice who Drinks. Hightetity, a Ramp or Rude Girl. High Tide, c. when the Pocket is full of Money. Hind, the Plough-boy or Ploughman's Servant at Plough and Cart. Hinde, the third Year; Hearse or Brockets Sister, the second Year; Calf the first Year. Hip, upon the Hip, at an Advantage, in Wrest∣ling or Business. Hissing, the Note of the Snake and the Goose, the Quenching of Me∣tals in the Forge; also upon any dislike at the Play-house, and some∣times tho' seldom in the Courts of Judicature, upon any foul Proceed∣ings. The like is don, also in other larger As∣semblies. H O
Hob, a plain CountryFellow; or Clown, also the Back of a Chim∣ney. Hobinal, the same. Hobbist, a Disciple, and fond Admirer of Thomas Hobbs, the fam'd Philosopher of Malms∣bury. Sir Posthumus Hob∣by, one that Draws on his Breeches with a Shoeing-horn; also a Fellow that is Nice and Whimsical in the set of his Cloaths. Hob-nail, a Horse Shoe-nail; also a High-shoon or Country Clown. Hobsons-choice, that or None. Hocus-pocus, a Juggler that shews Tricks by Slight of Hand. Hodge, a Country Clown, also Roger. Hodmendods, Snails in their Shells. Hodge-podge, see Hotch∣potch. Hog, c. a Shilling; also see Wild Boar. You Darkman Budge, will you Fence your Hog at the next Boozing-ken, c▪ do ye hear you House Cree∣per, will you Spend your Shilling at the next Ale∣house. A meer Hog or Hoggish Fellow, a greedy▪ covetous, morose Churl▪ A Hog-grubber, a close∣fisted, narrow-soul'd sneaking Fellow. He has brought his Hoggs to a fair Market, or he has Spun a fair Thread. Great Cry and little Wooll, as the Man said, when he Shear'd his Hoggs, La∣bour in Vain, which the Latines express by Goats∣wooll, as the English by the shearing of Hoggs. Hogg-steer, see Wild Boar. Hogen-mogen, a Dutch Man; also High and Mighty, the Sovereign States of Holland. Hogo, for Haut Goust, a strong Scent; also a high Taste or Relish in Sauce. Hold his Nose to the Grind-stone, to keep him Under, or Tie him Neck and Heels in a Bargain.
Hollow-hearted, False,Base, Perfidious, Trea∣cherous. Holyday-bowler, a very bad Bowler. Holyday Cloths, the Best. Blind Mon's Holyday, when it is Night. Hop-merchant, a Danc∣ing-master. To Hop, de∣notes the Progressive Motion of Reptiles on the Ground, whence Grashopper, and Answers to the Fluttring or slow Flight of Insects in the Air; or Else the Tran∣sits or Leaps of a Bird from one Perch to ano∣ther in a Cage, or the Skips of a Squirrel from Tree to Tree and Bough to Bough in the Wood. Homine, Indian Corn. To beat Homine, to pound that in a Mortar. Honey-moon, the first Month of Marriage. Hood, the ancient Cover for Men's Heads, (before the Age of Bon∣nets and Hatts) being of Cloath Button'd un∣der the Chin, not un∣like a Monk's Cowl▪ Two Faces under one Hood, a Double Dealer. Hood wink'd, Blind∣folded or Bluffed. Hoof it, or Beat it on the Hoof, to walk on Foot. Hookt, over-reached, Snapt, Trickt. Off the Hooks, in an ill Mood, or out of Humor. By Hook or by Crook, by Fair Means or Foul. Hookers, c. the third Rank of Canters; also Sharpers. Hopper-arst, when the Breech sticks out. Horn-mad, stark sta∣ring Mad because Cuck∣olded.
Horse-play, any rude Boisterous sort of Sport. You must not look a Given Horse in the Mouth, or what is freer then Gift? One Man may better Steal a Horse than another look on. The Master's Eye makes the Horse Fat. An ill Horse that can't carry his own Provender. Set the Saddle on the Right Horse, lay the Blamewhere the Fault is. The Cart before the Horse. A short Horse is soon Curried, a little Business is soon Dispatched. The Gray Mare is the better Horse, said of one, whose Wife wears the Breeches. Fallen away from a Horse∣load to a Cart-load, spok∣en Ironically of one considerably improved in Flesh on a sudden. Host, an Inn-keeper or Victualler; also an Ar∣my. Hostess, a Land-la∣dy. To reckon without your Host: Or count your Chickens before they are Hatcht. Hot, exceeding Pas∣sionate, Hot Work, much Mischief done, or a great Slaughter. Hot-cockles, a Play a∣mong Children▪ It re∣vives the Cockles of my Heart, said, of agreeable News, or a Cup of Comfort, Wine or Cor∣dial Water. Hot Pot, Ale and Bran∣dy boyled together. Hot Spur, a fiery furi∣ous passionate Fellow; also early or forward Peas. Hotch-potch, an Oglio or Medly of several Meats in one Dish. House of Call, the usual lodging▪ Place of Jour∣ney-men Tailers. House Tailers, Uphol∣sterers. How, to a Deer. Howleth, the Noise a Wolf maketh at Rutting time. H U Hubbub, a Noise in the Streets made by the Rabble. Huckster, a sharp Fel∣low. Hucksters, the Re∣tailers of the Market, who Sell in the Market at second Hand. In Huckster's Hands, at a desperate Pass, or Con∣dition▪ or in a fair way to be Lost.
Hue, c. to Lash; al∣so the Complexion or Colour. Hued, c. Lasht or Flogg'd. The Covewas Hued in the Naskin, c. the Rogue was severe-Lasht in Bridewell. Hue and Cry, the Country rais'd after a Thief. Huff, a Bullying Fel∣low. Captain Huff, any noted Bully, or Huffing Blade. To Huff and Ding, to Bounce and Swag∣ger. Hugger-mugger, Close∣ly or by Stealth, Under board: To Eat▪ so, that is, to Eat by one's self. Hulver-head, a silly foolish Fellow. Hum-cap, old, mellow and very strong Beer. Hum and haw, to He∣sitate in Speech; also to delay, or difficultly to be brought to Con∣sent. Hummer, a loud Lie, a Rapper. Hum, or Humming Liquor, Double Ale, Stout, Pharoah. Hummums, a Bag∣nio. Humorist, a Whimsi∣cal Fantastical Fel∣low. Hump-backt, Crook-backt. Hump-shoulder'd, or Crook-shoulder'd. Humptey-dumptey, Ale boild with Brandy. Hunch, to justle, or thrust. Hunks, a covetous Creature, a miserable Wretch. Hunting, c. decoying, or drawing others into Play. Hunteth for his Kind, see Otter. Hurly-burly, Rout, Riot, Bustle, Confusion. Hurrican, a violent Storm or Tempest; al∣so a disorder or confusi∣on in Business. Hurridun, see Harri∣dan. Hush, very still, quiet. All was Hush, a great or profound Silence. Husht up, concealed, or clapt up without Noise. Husky-lour, c. a Gui∣nea, or Job.
Hussy, an abbreviati∣on of Housewife, and sometimes a Term of Reproch, as, how nowHussy, or she is a Light Hussy, or Housewife. Hut, from; a Term much us'd by Carters, &c. Also, a little House or slight Abode for Sol∣diers, Peasants, &c. Huzza, Originally the Cry of the Huzzars, or Hungarian Horsemen; but now the Shouts and Acclamations, of any Soldiers, or of the Mob. I Jabber, to Talk thick and fast, as great Pra∣ters do, or to Chatter like a Magpye. Jack, c. a Farthing, a small Bowl (the mark) to throw at, an Instru∣ment to draw on Boots, hence Jack-boots; also a Leathern Vessel to Drink out of, and an Engine to set the Spit a going. Jack in an Of∣fice, of one that behaves himself Imperiously in it. Every Jack will have a Gill, or the Coursest He, will have as Coarse a She. He wou'd n't tip me Jack, c. not a Farthing wou'd he give me. Jack-adams, a Fool. Jack-a-dandy, a little impertinent insignificant Fellow. Jack Kitoh, c. the Hang∣man of that Name, but now all his Successors. Jack in a Box, c. a Sharper, or Cheat. Jackanapes, a Term of Reproach, a little sorry Whipper-snapper; also a well known wag∣gish Beast▪ As full of Tricks as a Jackanapes. Jack-sprat, a Dwarf, or very little Fellow, a Hop-on-my-thumb. Jack at a Pinch, a poor Hackney Parson. Jack-hawk, the Male.
Jacobites, Zealous Sticklers for the late King James, and his Interest; also sham or Collar Shirts, and Hereticks Anno 530, following one Jacobus Syrus, who held but one Will, Nature and Ope∣rationin Christ, Cir∣cumcision of both Sex∣es, &c. Jade, a Terme of Re∣proch given to Women, as Idle Jade, Lazy Jade, silly Jade, &c. As dull Jade, tried Jade, to a heavy or over-ridden Horse. Jakes, a House of Office. Jague, c. a Ditch. Janizaries, formerly, only the Grand Signior's Foot Guard, chosen out of Tributary Chris∣tians, taken early from their Parents, and perverted to Mahume∣tanism, ever accoun∣ted their best Sol∣diers; but now any Prince's or great Man's Guards; also the Mob sometimes so called, and Bailives, Serjeants, Fol∣lowers, Yeomen, Setters, and any lewd Gang de∣pending upon others. Jarke, c. a Seal. Jarke-men, c. the Four∣teenth Order of the Canting Tribe; also those who make Coun∣tefeit Licences and Pas∣ses, and are well paid by the other Beggers for their Pains. Jarrs, Quarrels, Dis∣putes, Contentions. Jason's Fleece, c. a Ci∣tizen cheated of his Gold. Jayl-birds, Prisoners. I C Ice-houses, Reposito∣ries to keep Ice and Snow under Ground all Sum∣mer, as there are Con∣servatories to House Orange-Trees, Limes, and Myrtles in the Win∣ter. Break Ice in one place and it will Crack in more, or find out one slippery Trick, and suspect a∣nother. When the Ice is once broke, or when the Way is open others will Follow. Ice or Icicles, little pendulous pieces of Ice under the Eaves. I D
Idioms, Proprietiesof any Speech or Lan∣guage, Phrases or par∣ticular Expressions, pe∣culiarto▪ each Language. Idio-syncrasies, peculiar Constitutions, or Af∣fections, incident only in particular to some Temperaments, as se∣veral Sympathies and Antipathies, as different and unaccountable as the Variety of Gifts and Talents in Men. J E Jenny, c. an Instru∣ment to lift up a Grate, and whip any thing out of a Shop-window. Jesses, short Strapps of Leather fastned to the Hawk's Leggs. Jetting along, or out, a Man Dancing in his Gate, or Going; also a House starting out far∣ther than the rest in the Row. Jew, any over-reach∣ing Dealer, or hard, sharp Fellow. He treat∣ed me like a Jew, he used me very barbrously. Jews, Brokers behind St. Clement's Church in London, so called by (their Brethren) the Tailers. I G Ignoramus, a Novice, or raw Fellow in any Pro∣fession; also, we are Ig∣norant, written by the Grand Jury upon Bills, when the Evidence is not Home, and the Par∣ty (thereupon) Dis∣charg'd. J I Jig, a Trick; also a well known Dance. A Pleasant Jig, a witty, arch Trick. Jigget, (of Mutton) the Leg cut off with part of the Loin. Jilt, a Tricking Whore. Jilted, abused by such a one; also deceived or defeated in one's Expectation, especially in Amours.
Jingling, the Noise of Carriers Horses Bells, or Ringing of Money that chinks in the Poc∣ket. Jingle-boxes, c. Lea∣thern Jacks tipt and hung with Silver Bells former∣ly in use among Fuddle caps. Jinglers, c. Horse-Coursers frequenting Country Fairs. Jingle-brains, a Mag∣gor-pated Fellow. Jiniper-Lecture, a round scolding Bout. I L Ill fortune, c. a Nine-pence. Ill-mann'd, a Hawk not well broke, taught or train'd. I M Impost-taker, c. one that stands by and Lends Money to the Gamester at a very high Interest or Premium. Implement, Tool, a a Property or Fool, easily engag'd in any (tho' diffi∣cult or Dangerous) En∣terprize. Importunate, Dunning, pressing. Importunity of Friends, the stale Excuse for com∣ing out in Print, when Friends know nothing of the Matter. I N Inadvertency, any slip or false step, for want of Thinking and Re∣flection. Inching-in, Encroach∣ing upon. One of his Inches, of his Size or Stature. Won by Inches, dearly or by little and little. Give you an Inch and you'll take an Ell, of one that presumes much on little Encouragement. Incog, for Incognito, a Man of Character or Quality concealed or in disguise.
Incongruous, or an In∣congruity; Treating any Person not according tohis Character, or ap∣pearing in any Country, without conforming to the Habits and Customs of the Place, as teach∣ing a General the Art of War, talking with an Ambassador without his Language, or the help of an Interpreter, moving the Hat to Tur∣ks, that never stirr their Turbants, or cal∣ling for a Chair with such Nations, as sit al∣waies crosse-legg'd up∣on Carpets. Indecorum, any viola∣tion of the Measures of Congruity, in Story, Painting, or Poetry, as introducing Persons to∣gether that are not Con∣temporaries, and of the same Age, or represent∣ing them with Habits, Arms or Inventions, un∣known to their Times, as the Romans with Gunns or Drumms, which wou'd be no less Preposterous and Ab∣sard than Painting the Noblemen of Venice on Horseback, or describ∣ing the West Indians be∣fore the Arrival of the Spaniards, with the Ship∣ping, Horses, and Arms of the Europeans. Indulto, his Catholic Majesty's Permission to the Merchants to unlade the Galeons, after his Demands are adjusted. In his Ale or Beer, Drunk, tho' it be by having too much of that in him. Iniskilling-men, fam'd for their Prowess, in the late Irish Wars; also the Royal Regiment (of Citizens) in derision so called, soon rais'd, and as soon laid down. Inke, the Neck from the Head to the Body of any Bird the Hawk doth prey upon. Inkle, Tape. As great as two Inkle-makers, or as great as Cup and Cann. Inlayed, well inlayed, at ease in his Fortune, or full of Money.
Inmates, Supernume∣raries,who have no House or Being of their own, and yet are no Members of the House or Family they Live in, from whom they differ in the same Nature, as the Excrescences of Trees do from the Fruits either Genuin or Grafted; as Misletoe of the Oak, Galls, &c. differ from the Mast or Acorns. Insipids, Block-heads; also things that are tastless. Interlopers, Hangers on, retainers to, or de∣penders upon other folks; also Medlers and Busy∣bodies, intruders into other Men's Professions, and those that intercept the Trade of a Com∣pany, being not legally authorized. Intrigues, Finesses, Tricks of War, or State, as Court-tricks, Law∣quirks, tho' in War they are rather called Strata∣gems. Intriguing, Plotting, Tricking, Designing, full of Tricks and Subtil∣ties. Inveterate, either Ene∣mies that are implaca∣ble and of long con∣tinuance, or Diseases that are confirmed, deep∣rooted and riveted. J O Joan, a homely Joan, a Coarse Ord'nary Wo∣man, Joan in the Dark is as good as my Lady, or when the Candles are out all Cats are Gray. Job, c. a Guinea, Twenty shillings, or a Piece. Half a Job, c. half a Guinea, Ten shillings, half a Piece, or an An∣gel. Jobbers, see Badgers, Matchmakers, Salesmen, Stock-jobbers. Jobbernoll, c. a very silly Fellow. Jock or Jockumcloy, c. to copulate with a Woman.
Jockum-gage, c. a Chamberpot. Tip me the Jockumgage, c. give me orhand me the Member∣mug. Rum Jockum-gage, c. a Silver-chamberpot. Jockey's, rank Horse-Coursers, Race Riders; also Hucksters or Sellers of Horses, very slippery Fellows to deal with. Jolter-head, a vast large Head; also Heavy and Dull. To Jolt or Shake, jolting or shaking of a Coach. Jordain, c. a great Blow or Staff; also a Chamberpot. I'll tip him a Jordain if I transnear, c. I will give a Blow with my Staff if I get up to him. Joseph, c. a Cloak or Coat. A Rum Joseph, c. a good Cloak or Coat. A Queer Joseph, c. a coarse ord'nary Cloak or Coat; also an old or Tatter'd one. I R Irish Toyles, c. the Twelfth Order of Can∣ters; also Rogues carry∣ing Pinns, Points, La∣ces, and such like Wares about, and under pre∣tence of Selling them, commit Thefts and Rob∣beries. Iron-doublet, a Prison. I T Itch-land, Wales. J U ugglers, Nimble and expert Fellows at Tricks, and Slights of Hand, to distinguish them from Tumblers, that perform Bodily Feats, or Feats of Activity, by play∣ing of Tricks with the whole Body. Jukrum, c. a License. Jumble-gut-lane, any very bad or rough Road. To Jumble, to shake much or often.
Justice, I'll do Justice Child, c. I will Peach or rather Impeach or Discover the whole Gang, and so save my own Bacon; also in a∣notherSense, I'll do you Justice Sir, I will Pledge you. K Kate, c. a Pick-lock. 'Tis a Rum Kate, c. that is a Cleaver Pick-lock. K E Keel-bullies, Lighter∣men that carry Coals to and from the Ships, so called in Derision. Keel-hale, to draw by a Rope tied to the Neck and fastned to a Tackle (with a jerk) quite un∣der the Keel or bottom of the Ship. Keffal, a Horse. Kelter, out of Kelter, out of sorts. Ken, c. a House. A bob Ken, or a Bowman∣ken, c. a good or well Furnished House, full of Booty, worth Rob∣bing; also a House that Harbours Rogues and Thievs. Biting the Ken, c. Robbing the House. Ken-miller, c. a House∣breaker. Friend John, or sweet Tom, 'tis a bob Ken, Brush upon the Sneak, c. 'tis a good House, go in if you will but Tread softly, and mind your Business. Now we have Bit, c. the House is Robb'd, or the Business is done. There's a Cull knows us, if we don't pike he'll Bone us, c. that Fellow sees us, if we don't scour off, he will Apprehend us. Ding him, c. Knock him Down. Then we'll pike, tis all Bowman, c. we will be gone, all is well, the Coast is clear. Keeping Cully, one that Maintains a Mistress, and parts with his Mo∣ney very generously to her.
Kicks, c. Breeches. A high Kick, the top of the Fashion; also singu∣larity therein. Tip us your Kicks, we'll have them as well as yourLoure, c. pull off your Breeches, for we must have them as well as your Money. Kid, c. a Child; also the first Year of a Roe, and a young Goat. Kidnapper, c. one that Decoys or Spirits (as it is commonly called) Children away, and Sells them for the Plan∣tations. Kidder, c. see Crock∣er. Kidlay, c. one who meeting a Prentice with a Bundle or Parcel of Goods, wheedles him by fair Words, and whipping Sixpence into his Hand, to step on a short and sham Errand for him, in the mean time Runs away with the Goods. Kidney, (Beans) French. Of that Kidney, of such a Stamp, Of a strange Kidney, of an odd or unaccountable Humor. Kilkenny, c. an old sorry Frize Coat. Kill-Devil, Rum. Kill two Birds with one Stone, Dispatch two Businesses at one Stroak. Kimbaw, c. to Trick, Sharp, or Cheat; also to Beat severely or to Bully. Let's Kimbaw the Cull, c. Let's Beat that Fel∣low, and get his Money (by Huffing and Bully∣ing) from him. Kinchin, c. a little Child. Kinchin-coes, c. the Sixteenth Rank of the Canting Tribe, being little Children whose Parents are Dead, hav∣ing been Beggers; as also young Ladds run∣ning from their Mast∣ers, who are first taught Canting, then thieving. Kinchin-cove, c. a lit∣tle Man. King's Head Inn, or the Chequer Inn in Newgate∣street, c. the Prison, or Newgate. King's Pictures, c. Mo∣ney. King of all Beasts of Venery, a Hare.
King of the Gypsies, the Captain, Chief, or Ring∣leader of the Gang, the Master of Misrule. Kindly, Fruit, or Sea∣son, towardly. Kindness will creep where it can∣not go. Kinchin-morts, c. the Twenty seventh andlast Order of the Canting Crew, being Girls of a Year or two old, whom the Morts (their Mo∣thers) carry at their Backs in Slates (Sheets) and if they have no Children of their own, they borrow or Steal them from others. Kissing the Maid, an Engine in Scotland, and at Halifax in England, in which the Head of the Malefactor is Laid to be Cut off, and which this way is done to a Hair, said to be invent∣ed by Earl Morton who had the ill Fate to Handsel it. Kissing goes by Favour, I suppose a∣nother sort is meant by this Proverb than the foremention'd K N Knack, or Slight in any Art, the Craft or Mystery in any Trade, a petty Artifice, or Trick like those upon the Cards. Knacks or Toies, a Knack-shop, or Toy-shop, freight with pretty Devices to pick-Pockets. Knave in Grain, one of the First Rate. Kna∣ves and Fools are the Com∣position of the whole World. Knight Errant, the Knight or Hero in Ro∣mances, that alwaies is to Beat the Giant, and Rescue the destressed Damsel. Knight-Errantry, Ro∣mantick and Fabulous Exploits, out of the common Road, and above the ordinary Size, such as the wild Adven∣tures of wandering Knights. Knight of the Blade, c. Hector or Bully.
Knight of the Post. c. a Mercenary common Swearer, a Prostitute to every Cause, an Irish Evidence. Knight of the Road, c. the chief High-wayman best Mounted and Arm∣ed, the Stoutest Fellow among them. Knobber, see Hart. Knock in the Cradle, a Fool. Knock-down, very strong Ale or Beer. Knock off, to give over Trading; also to A∣bandon or Quit one's Post or Pretensions. Knowledge is no Bur∣den. Knowledge makes one laugh, but wealth makes one dance. Knot, achoice Bird, something less than a Ruff. Knotting, making Fringe. L Labourinvain, lost Labour, such as washing of Blackamoors, shearing of Hoggs, hedging in the Cuckoe, &c. Lac'd Coffee, Sugar'd. Mutton, a Woman. Lacing, Beating, Drub∣bing, I'll Lace your Coat Sirtah, I will Beat you soundly. Ladder, see Badger, first Part. Lady, a very crooked, deformed and ill shapen Woman. Lady-birds, Light or Lewd Women; also a little Red Insect, varie∣gated with black Spots. Lag, c. Water; also Last. Lag-a dudds, c. a Buck of Cloths. As we cloy the Lag of Dudds, c. come let us Steal that Buck of Cloths. To Lagg behind, or come after with Salt and Spoons. Lagg of the Flock, the Hindmost. Lambaste, to Beat soundly. Lamb-pye, Beating or Drubbing. Lamb-skin-men, c. the Judges of the several Courts.
Lambs-wool, roasted Apples and Ale. Lame Excuse, a sorry Shift or Evasion. Land-lopers or Land∣lubbers, Fresh-water Sea∣men so called by the true Tarrs; also Vaga∣bonds that Beg and Steal about the Country. Land-pirates, c. High∣waymen or any other Robbers. Land-lord and Land∣lady, Host and Hostess; also Possessors of Land or Houses, and Letters out of either to farm or for Lodgings. How lies the Land? How stands the Reckoning? Who has any Lands in Appleby? a Question askt the Man at whose Door the Glass stands Long. Lank, Gaunt, Thin, Hollow, Lean, Mea∣ger, Slender, Weak. Lank Ears of Corn, very thin Ears. Lanspresado, c. he that comes into Company with but Two pence in his Pocket. Lantern-jaw'd, a very lean, thin faced Fel∣low. A Dark-Lanthorn, the Servant or Agent that Receives the Bribe (at Court.) Lap, c. Pottage, But∣ter-milk, or Whey. 'Tis rum Lap, c. this is excellent Soupe. Larbord, on the left side or Hand. Lare-over, said when the true Name of the thing must (in decency) be concealed. Largess, a Pittance properly given to Reap∣ers and Harvest Folks, now used for any petty Donative, or small Gratuity. Latitudinarian, a Church∣man at large, one that is no Slave to Rubrick, Canons, Liturgy, or Oath of Canonical O∣bedience, and in fine looks towards Lambeth, and rowes to Geneva.
Layd-up-in Lavender, when any Cloaths or other Moveables are pawn'd or dipt for pre∣sentMoney; also Rodds in Pickle, of Revenge in reserve, till an oppor∣tunity offers to show it. Lawn, a naked Space in the middle of a Park or Forrest, left Until∣led, and without Wood, contrary to a Hay, which see in it's proper Place; also very thin Linnen, formerly much Worn. Layr, the Impression where any Deer hath Harboured or reposed. Leachers, Lascivious or Lustful Men. L E Leader Pate, a dull, heavy, stupid Fellow. Leaders, the first Play∣ers, Generals of Armies, and Men of most sway in great Councils or Assemblies; also the Fore-horses in Coaches and Teams. Who Leads? Who begins or Plays first. Leash, Three; also the String where with a Grey-hound is Led. Leather-head, a Thick∣skull'd, Heavy-headed Fellow. Leather-mouth'd Fish, Carp, Roach, &c. hav∣ing their Teeth in their Throats. Leathern Convenience, (by the Quakers) a Coach. Leaves, of a Tree, of a Book, of Doors, or Window-shutters, and of folding Tables; I must turn over a new Leaf with you, or take another Course with you Legerdemain, Jugglers Tricks; also Sharping. Lesses, Boars Excre∣ments. Let's take an Ark and Winns, c. let us hire a Skuller.
Let's buy a Brush, or Let's Lope, c. let us scour off, and make what shift we can to secure our selves from being apprehended. Let him Laugh that Wins: Let the World say whatthey will, if I find all well at Home. Let every Man meddle with his own. Leveret, the first Year, see Hare. Levite, a Priest or Parson; also those of the Tribe of Levi, whose Inheritance the Priest∣hood▪ (craft and all) was. Levy, the Prince's, or any great Man's time of Rising. Leystall, a Dunghil. L I Lib, c. to Tumble or Lye together. Libben, c. a private dwelling House. Libbege, c. a Bed. Libkin, c. a House to Lye in; also a Lodging. Libertines, Pleasant and profuse Livers, that Live-apace, but wildly, without Order, Rule, or Discipline, lighting the Candle (of Life) at both Ends. A short Life and a Merry one. Life is sweet. Life is half Spent, before we know what it is. Lickt, Pictures new Varnished, Houses new Whitened, or Women's Faces with a Wash. Lifter, c▪ a Crutch. Light Finger'd, Thievish▪ Light-mans, c. the Day or Day-break. Light Friggat, a Whore; also a Cruiser. Light Woman, or Light Huswife, Lewd, Who∣rish. Light-timber'd Fellow, limber or slender Lim∣b'd; also weak. Lilly-white, c. a Chim∣ney-sweeper. Linnen-armorers, c. Tailers. Line of the old Author, a Dram of Brandy. Litter, any thing clat∣ter'd up, out of Place or Order, What a litter here is? What a toss and tumble? Also a Litter of Cubbs, young Foxes; of Whelps, Puppies, young Doggs. Little Barbary, Wap∣ping▪
Little Fellow or Action,Contemptible, Base, Sneaking, Ungentle∣man-like. L O Loblolly, any ill-cookt Mess. Lob-cock, a heavy, dull Fellow. In Lob's Pound, Laid by the Heels, or clap'd up in Jail. Lobster, a Red Coat Soldier. Lock all fast, c. one that Buys and Conceals Stolen Goods. The Lock, c. the Magazine or Ware-house whither, the Thieves carry Stolen Goods to be secur'd; also an Hospital for Pockey Folks in Kent∣street. Lockram-jaw'd, Thin, Lean, Sharp-visag'd. Loge, c. a Watch. I suppose from the French Horloge, a Clock or Watch. Filed a Cly of a Loge, or Scout, c. Pickt a Pocket of a Watch. Biting a Loge, or Scout, c. the same. Loggerhead, a heavy, dull Fellow. To go to Loggerheads, to go to Fisticuffs. Lolpoop, a Lazy, Idle Drone. To Loll, to Lean on the Elbows; also to put out the Tongue in derision. Long-headed, Wise, of great reach and fore∣sight. Long-meg, a very tall Woman. Long-shanks, Long-leg∣ged. Long-winded Pay-master, one that very slowly, heavily, or late Paies. Looby, a lazy dull Fel∣low. Looking-glass, a Cham∣ber-pot. Loon-slatt, c. a Thir∣teen Pence half Penny. A Loon, see Lout. A False Loon, a true Scotch Man, or Knave of any Nation. Lord, a very coorked deformed, or ill-shapen Person. Lore, Learning or Skill in any Thing.
Louse-land, Scotland. A Scoth Louse-trap, a Comb. Lout, an heavy, idle Fellow. To Lout, to Low like a Cow, or Bellow like a Bull. Loure, c. Money. Low Tide, when there's no Money in a Man's Pocket. Low-pad, c. a Foot-Pad. L U Lubber. Lubberly, a heavy, dull Fellow. Lud's-bulwark, c. Lud∣gate Prison. Luggage, Lumber. Luggs, Ears: Hence to Lug by the Ears. Ye can he make a Silk-Purse of a Sowe's Luggs, a Scotch Proverb. To Lug out, to draw a Sword. Lullaby-cheat, c. a Child. Lumber, Rubbish, Trash, Trumpery. Lumpish, heavy dull, drowsy. Lurched, Beaten at any Game. Left in the Lurch, Pawn'd for the Reckoning, or left at Stake to Smart for any Plot. Lure, c. an idle Pam∣phlet; also a Bait. Throw out a Lure, to lay Bait. Lurries, c. Money, Watches, Rings, or o∣ther Moveables. L Y Lyome, the String wherewith a Hound is Led. M Mab, a Slattern. Mab'd up, Drest carelesly, like a Slattern, of such a one it is said. Her Cloths sit on her, like a Saddle on a Sow's Back. Queen Mab, Queen of the Fai∣ries. Mackarel, c. a Bawd. Mackarel-back, a very tall, lank Person.
Machiavilian, onewickedly or knavishly Politic. Machines, Vessels full of Carcasses and Bombs, under Shelter or Covert of the Smokers, to come close up under Walls, Forts, Fortifications, &c. being fixt to Blow up the same. Also Engines or Instruments of divers Arts, and Movements upon the Stage. Madam Van, c. a Whore, The Cull has been with Madam Van, c. the Fellow has enjoyed such a one. Mad-cap, a frolicksorn Person. Made, c. Stolen. I Made this Knife at a heat, c. I Stole it clea∣verly. Mad Tom, alias of Bedlam, the Eighteenth Rank of Canters. Madge-howlet, an Owl. Maggot, a whimsical Fellow, full of strange Fancies and Caprichio's, Maggotty, Freakish. Maiden-sessions, when none are Hang'd. Mailes, the Breast-Feathers of a Hawk. Main, great, excellent, choice, rare; also the Sea. Maingood, very good. With Might and Main, Tooth and Nail. Make, c. a half Pen∣ny. Make-bait, a Trouble-House, or Mischief-ma∣ker, a stirrer of Strife, and maker of Debate, a Boute feu, or Incendiary. Male-contents, Disaf∣fected to the State, out of Humor with the Go∣vernment. Malkin or Maukin, a Scare-crow, Drest and Set up to fright the Birds. Also a Scovel (of old Clouts) to cleanse the Oven: Hence Malkin∣trash, for one in a rueful Dress, enough to Fright one. There are more Maids than Malkins, Mawks, the same ab∣breaviated. Mawkish, a Wallowish, ill Tast. Malmesey-nose, a jolly, red Nose.
Man o'th' Town, aLew'd Spark, or very Debaushe. Manning, a Hawk, making him endure Company. Mannikin, a Dwarf, or diminutive Fellow. Mantles, when Drink is brisk and smiles; also when a Hawk stretch∣eth one of her Wings after her Leggs, and so the other. Margery-prater, c. a Hen. Marinated, c. Trans∣ported into some for∣reign Plantation; also Fish Soused. Marriage-music, Chil∣drens Cries. Marks, the Footing of an Otter. Marrel, a Bird about the bigness of a Knot, but not good Meat. Martern, a Wild Cat, the second Year, called a Cub, the first. A Mar∣tern Treeth, Lodgeth; Tree the Martern, Dis∣lodge him. Masons-mawn'd, c. a Sham sore above the Elbow, to counterfeit a broken Arm, by a Fall from a Scaffold, expos'd by subtil Beggers, to move Compassion, and get Money. Masons-Word, who ever has it, shall never want, there being a Bank at a certain Lodge in Scotland for their Relief▪ 'Tis communicated with a strict Oath, and much Ceremony, (too tedious to insert) and if it be sent to any of the Socie∣ty, he must, (nay will) come immediately, tho' very Busy, or at great Distance. Match or Make, the Copulation of Woolves. Match-makers, a bet∣ter sort of Procurers of Wives for Men, or Hus∣bands for Women, Mai∣den-head-jobbers, Vir∣ginity Sellers, Bro∣kers, &c. Maul'd, swingingly Drunk, or soundly Beat. Maunders, c. Beggers.
Maund-ing, c. to Beg, Begging. Maundring-broth, Scold∣ing. Mawdlin, weepingly Drunk, as we say the Tears of the Tankard. What are you Mawdlin you Rake? are ye' neither Drunk, nor Sober? May-games, Frolicks, Plaies, Tricks, Pastimes, &c. Do you make a May-game of me? do you Abuse or Expose me? M E Mead, a pleasant Sum∣mer Drink, made of Water and Honey, Boyl∣ed, and Bottled fine, in great vogue in Moscovy, where 'tis said the best in the World is made. Meadites, a Faction of Quakers, that follow most, and are in the In∣terest of Mead. Meal-mouth, a sly, sheepish Dun, or Solli∣citor for Money. Measure, the Distance of Duellers. To break Measure, to be out of the Adversaries reach. Mechanic, a Trades∣man; also a mean, in∣considerable, contemp∣tible Fellow. Meggs, c. Guineas. We fork'd the rum Cull's Meggs to the tune of Fifty, c. We Pickt the Gentle∣man's Pocket of full Fourty Guineas. Mellow, a'most Drunk; also smooth, soft Drink. Melt, c. to spend Money. Will you Melt a Bord▪ c. Will you spend your Shilling? The Cull Melted a couple of Decusses upon us, c. the Gentle∣man spent ten Shillings upon us. Member-mug, a Cham∣ber-pot. Mercury, Wit; also Quick-silver, and a Cou∣rant or News-Letter. Mercurial, Witty; also one Born under ☿, i. e. when that Planet is Lord of the Horoscope or Ascendant at Birth.
Marcury Women, Whole∣sale News-sellers, whoRetail to the Hawkers. Metheglin, a strong Drink, made of new Wort and Honey. Mew, when Deer cast their Horns; also the Place where the Hawk is set down, during the time she raiseth her Fea∣thers. Meyny, the Folks, or Family-Servants. Hence Menial-Servant, yet in use, for a Domestic or Family-Servant. M I Mifty, apt to take Pet, or be out of Humor. Mill clapper, a (Wo∣man's) Tongue. As Safe as a Thief in a Mill, a waggish Periphrasis for for a Miller, who is a Thief by his Trade. Milcb-kine, a Term us'd by Goalers, when their Prisoners will bleed freely to have some Fa∣vor, or be at large. Mill, c. to Steal, Rob, or Kill. Mill-a-ken, c. to Rob a House, Milling the Gig with a Betty, c. Breaking open the Door with an Iron-Crow. Milling the Glaze, c. Break∣ing open the Window▪ Mill them, c. Kill them. Miller, c. a Killer or Murderer. Mill-a-crackmans, c. to break a Hedge. Mill-a-bleating-cheat, c. to kill a Sheep. Mill a-grunter, c. to Kill a Pig. Mil-ken, c. a House∣breaker. Mill the Gig with a Dub, c. to open the Door with a Pick∣lock or false Key. Miller's-Thumb, or Bull-head, a Fish with a broad Head, and wide Mouth, two Finns near his Eyes, and as many under his Belly, and on his Back, and one be∣low the Vent, his Tayl round, and his Body cover'd with Whitish, Blackish and Brownish Spotts. Mince the Matter, to tell it Sparingly or by Halves.
Miniature, Painting in little. Minks, a proud Flirt. Mint, c. Gold; also a late Sanctuary (in Sowthwark) for such as broke either out of Ne∣cessity, or in Design to bring their Creditors the more easily to a Com∣position. Hence Minters, the Inhabitants. Miquelets, Mounta∣neers, (in Spain) or Spa∣nish Rapparies. Miscreant, alewd, wick∣ed Fellow. Mish, c. a Shirt or Smock. Mish-topper, c. a Coat or Petticoat. Miskin, a Dunghil or Lay-stall. Miss, a Whore of Quality; also a little Girl. M O Moabites, Serjeants, Bailiffs and their Crew. Mob, the Vulgar, or Rab∣ble, Mobile, Mobility, Mock-song, that Ridi∣cules another Song, in the same Terms and to the same Tune. A Mock-Romance, that ridicules other Romances, as Don Quixot. A Mock-Play, that exposes other Playes, as the Rehearsal. A Mock-holy-day. To Mock, or mimick another. Moggy, in Scotch, as Peg in English, for Mar∣garet. Moil, to Drudge or Labour Hard. To Moil and Toil, to Slave at it. A Moiling Fellow, a Drudge or great Pains∣taker. Molinet, a Chocolate Stick, or little Mill. Mongrel, c. a Hanger on among the Cheats, a Spunger. Of a Mon∣grel-race or Breed, a Curr or Man of a base, ungenerous Breed. Mood, Humor. In a merry Mood, or good Humor; in an ill Mood, or out of Humor. Moody, Humorous.
Moon-eurser, c. a Link∣boy, or one that under Colour of lighting Men,Robs, them or leads them to a gang of Rogues, that will do it for him. Moon-men, c. Gipsies. Moon-blind, a sort of Horses, weak-sighted. Moppet, a pretty Mop∣pet, a very pretty little Baby. Mopsie, a Dowdy, or Homely Woman. Mopeied, one that can't see well, by living too long a Maid. Mop'd, Maz'd. Mopus, c. a half Pen∣ny or Farthing. A meer Mopus grown become dispirited, dull and Stu∣pid. Morglag, a Watch∣man's brown Bill; as Glaives, are Bills or Swords. Morisco, a Morris or Morrice-dance, being belike some Remains of a Moorish Custom with us, as the Juego de Toros, or Feast of Bulls is, in Spain. Mort, or Death, is Blown at the Death of the Deer. Morts, c. Yeomen's Daughters; also a Wife, Woman, or Wench. Moss-Troopers, so cal∣led from the Mosses, wast Lands in Lanca∣shire, as the Bog-Trotters in Ireland, are from the Boggs there. Mother, a Bawd. Mother-midnight, a Midwife (often a Bawd.) Mouchets, Patches for Ladies Faces. Moveables, c. Rings, Watches, Swords, and such Toies of value. As we bit all the Cull's Cole and Moveables, c. we Won all the Man's Mo∣ney, Rings, Watches, &c. Very Moving, prevail∣ing, powerful, perswad∣ing. Mountings, a Soldier's Arms and Cloths.
Mouse-trap. The Par∣son's Mouse-trap, Mar∣riage. He watcht me, as a Cat does a Mouse, i. e. narrowly. A Man or a Mouse, a Prince or a Peasant. A Mouse in the Pot is better than no Flesh,or something has some Savour. 'Tis pitty to fling Water on a Drown'd Mouse, or to depress the Miserable. A sorry Mouse, that has but one Hole, or a poor Creature that has but one Shift. Mouth, a noisy Fel∣low. A Mouthing Fellow, a Bawling or Scolding Person. He never Speaks, but his Mouth opens. Mouth half Cockt, gaping and staring at every thing they see. Mower, c. a Cow. Mow-heater, c. a Dro∣ver. M U Muck, Money, Wealth; also Dung to manure Land. Muckworm, a cove∣tous Wretch. Muckinder, a Child's Handkerchief tied by the side. Muddled, half Drunk. To Muddle on, tho' so, yet to Drink on. Muff, c. a Woman's Secrets. To the well wear∣ing of your Muff Mort, c. to the happy Consum∣mation of your Marri∣age Madam, a Health. Muffling-cheat, c. a Napkin. Muggletonians, the Sect or Disciples of Lo∣dowick Muggleton. Mulligrubs or Mumps, a Counterfeit Fit of the Sullens. Mum-for-that, not a Word of the Pudding. Mumble, to Mutter or Speak between the Teeth. Mum-chance, one that sits mute. He looks like Mum-chance that was Hang'd for saying of no∣thing. Mum-glass, the Monu∣ment, erected at the City∣charge, in Memory of the dreadful Fire 1666, which consum'd the greatest Part of it. Mumpers, c. Gentile-Beggers, who will not accept of Victuals, but Money or Cloths.
Mumpers-Hall, c. se∣veralAle-houses in and about this City and Suburbs, in Allies, and By-places, much used by them, and resorted to in the Evening, where they will be very Mer∣ry, Drunk, and Frolick∣som. Mun-corn, half Wheat, half Rye. Muns, c. the Face. Toute his Muns, c. note his Phis, or mark his Face well. Musick. It makes ill Musick, of any unwel∣com or unpleasing News. Touch that String most which makes best Musick, or that cannot be Harp∣ed upon too often that pleases. The Musick's paid, c. the Watch-word among High-way-men▪ to let the Company they were to Rob, alone, in return to some Courtsey from some Gentleman among them. Must, new Wine, or Wine on the Lea. After Beef, Mustard, of a thing preposterous, or out of Place; as we say, the Cart before the Horse. Mute, when Hounds or Beagles run long with∣out opening, or making any Cry; also a certain dumb Executioner a∣mong the Turks. Muting, the Excre∣ments of a Hern or Hawk. Mutter, to Speak in∣wardly and between the Teeth. Mutton-monger, a Lo∣ver of Women; also a Sheep-stealer. Mutton-in-long-coats, Women. A Leg of Mut∣ton in a Silk-Stocking, a Woman's Leg. Muzzle, c. a Beard, (usually) long and nasty. M Y Myrmidons, c. the Constable's Attendants, or those whom he com∣mands (in the King's Name) to Aid and as∣sist him; also the Watch∣men.
N Nab, c, a Hat, Cap, or Head; also a Cox∣comb. I'll Nab ye, c. I'll have your Hat or Cap. Nim the Nab, c. to Steal the Hat or Cap. Nab'd, c. Apprehended, Taken or Arrested. Nab-cheat, c. a Hat. Nab-girder, c. a Bridle. Nanny-house, a Baw∣dy-house. Nap, c. by Cheating with the Dice to secure one Chance; also a Clap, or Pox, and a short sleep. Nap the Wi∣per, c. to Steal the Hand∣kerchief. You have Napt it, c. you are Clapt Sir. To be caught Napping, to be Surpriz'd, or Ta∣ken a sleep. Napper, c. a Cheat, or Thief. Napper of Napps, c. a Sheep-stealer. Nappy-Ale, very Strong, Heady. N'are-a-face-but his own, Not a Penny in his Pocket. Narrow, when the Biass of the Bowl holds too much. 'Tis all Nar∣row, said by the Butch∣ers one to another when their Meat proves not so good as expected. A Narrow-soul'd Fellow, poor or Mean-spirited, stingy. Narrow or near search or Escape, watch him nar∣rowly or nearly. Of a Nar∣row or slender Fortune. Nask, c. or Naskin, c. A Prison or Bridewell. The old Nask, c. the Ci∣ty Bridewell. The new Nask, c. Clerkenwell Bridewell. Tuttle Nask, c. the Bridewel in Tut∣tle-Fields. He Napt it at the Nask, c. he was Lasht at Bridewell. Natural, c. a Mistress, a Wench; also a Fool. Natural-children, Ba∣stards. Mr. Nawpost, a fool∣ish Fellow. Nay-word, a common By-word, or Proverb. Nazie, c. Drunken.
Nazie-cove, c. a Drunk∣ard. Nazy-nabs, c. Drunk∣en Coxcombs. N E Neb, the Bill of a Bird, and the slit or point of a Pen. She holds up her Neb, she turns up her Snout to be Kist. Neck-stamper, c. the Pot-Boy at a Tavern or Ale-house. Neck-verse, a Favor (formerly) indulged to the Clergy only, but (now) to the Laity also, to mitigate the Rigor of the Letter of the Law▪ as in Man-slaughter, &c. Reading a Verse out of an old Manuscript Latin Psalter, (tho' the Book now used by the Ordi∣nary is the same Printed in an old English Cha∣racter) saves the Crimi∣nal's Life. Nay now even the Women (by a late Act of Parliament) have (in a manner) the benefit of their Clergy, tho not so much as put to Read; for in such Cases where the Men are allow'd it; the Women are of course sizz'd in the Fist, without run∣ning the risque of a Halter by not Reading. Negro Flat. Hawk Nos'd, Hook'd. Roman Rais'd in the middle like King∣ston Bridge. Needle-point, c. a Shar∣per. Neither-Vert, all sorts of Under-wood. Neighborly, Friendly, Kind, Loving, Oblig∣ing. You Live a great way off good Neighbors, to him, that is the Trum∣pet of his own Praises. Nestlings, Canary-Birds, brought up by Hand. What a Nestling you keep, how restless and uneasy you are. Nest of Rabbets.
Nettled, Teiz'd, pro∣voked, made uneasy.He has pist upon a Nettle, he is very uneasy, or much out of Humor. In Dock, out Nettle, upon the change of Places, when one is no sooner out, but another is in his Place. N I Nice, squeemish, pre∣cise. More nice than wise, a Sir Courtly Nice, a silly empty, gay, foolish Fellow. Nickum, c. a Shar∣per; also a Rooking Ale-house or Innkeeper, Vintner, or any Retail∣er. Nick it, to win at Dice, to hit the Mark, to Drink the pin to, or but∣ton. Old Nick, the Devil. Nick and Froth built the Pye at Aldgate, sharping in the Reckonings and cheating in the Measure built that (once) Noted House. Nickum-poop, a Fool, also a silly soft, Uxori∣ous Fellow. Nick-ninny, an empty Fellow, a meer Cod's Head. Nig, c. the Clippings of Money. Nigler, c. a Clipper. Nigging, c. Clipping. Nigling, c. accom∣panying with a Wo∣man. Night-Magistrate, a Constable. Night-men, Gold-fin∣ders, Tom-turd-men. Night-rale, a Woman's combing Cloth, to dress her Head in. Night-walker, c. a Bell-man; also a Light Woman, a Thief, a Rogue. Nigit, a Fool. Nigmenog, a very silly Fellow. Nikin, a Natural, or very soft creature; also Jsaac. Nim, c. to Steal, or whip off or away any thing. Nim a Togeman, c. to Steal a Cloak. Nim a Cloak, c. to cut off the Buttons in a Crowd, or whip it off a Man's Shoulders.
Nim-gimmer, c. a Doc∣tor, Surgeon, Apothe∣cary or any one that cures a Clap or the Pox. Ninny, c. a Canting whining Begger; also a Fool. Ninny-hammer, a silly Senseless Fellow. Nip, c. a Cheat; also to Pinch or Sharp any thing. Nip-a▪bung, c. to cut a Purse. To Nip, to Press between the Fin∣gers and Thumb with∣out the Nails, or with any broad Instrument like a pair of Tongs as to squeeze between Edg∣ed Instruments or Pin∣cers. Nipping Frost or Wind, Sharp or Cutting. To Nip in the Bud, of an early Blast or Blite of Fruit; also to crush any thing at the beginning. Nipperkin, c. half a Pint of Wine, and but half a Quartern of Bran∣dy, Stron gwaters, &c. Nipps, c. the Shears with which Money was won't to be Clipt. Nit, wine that is brisk, and pour'd quick into a Glass; also a young Louse. Nitts will be Lice. Nizy, c. a Fool, or Coxcomb. N O Nob, c. a Head. Nocky, c. a silly, dull Fellow Noddle, a Head. Noddy, c. a Fool. Knave-Noddy, a Game on the Cards. Nokes, a Ninny or Fool; also a noted Droll but lately Dead. Nol, Oliver. Old Nol, the late Usurper Crom∣wel. Noggin, (of Brandy) a Quarter of a Pint. A Noble, Six and eight∣pence. He has brought a Noble to Nine Pence, of one that has reduced his For∣tune.
Noise, used either of Harmonious or con∣fused Sounds, Noise of Thunder, or of a Mill, Noise of the Hounds, aNoise of Fiddles, of Trum∣pets and Drums, a Noise of Swords, or clashing; make a Noise Tom, Hot Pud∣ding-Pies. Non-con, one that don't conform to the Church of England. Nonjurors▪ Clergymen and others (Officers in the Army, Navy, &c.) That refus'd to take the Oaths to King WIL∣LIAM and Queen MARY, and were turn'd out of their Liv∣ings and Employments. Nooz'd, or caught in a Nooze, married; also Hanged. Nose-gent, c. a Nun. As plain as the Nose in your Face, of a fair mark that cannot be hid. He has a good Nose, of a Smell-Feast. He holds up his Nose, of one that is Haughty, and carries his Head high. He is led by the Nose, of one that is easily imposed upon. You make a Bridge of his Nose, when you pass your next Neighbor in Drinking, or one is preferr'd over another's Head. Follow your Nose, said in a jeer to those that know not the way, and are bid to Smell it out, as we say to Smell a Post. N U Nub, c. the Neck. Nubbing, c. Hanging. Nubbing-cheat, c. the Gallows. Nubbing-Cove, c. the Hangman. Nubbing-ken, c. the Sessions-house. Nug, a Word of Love, as, my Dear Nug, my Dear Love. Nugging-Dress, an odd or particular way, out of the Fashion. Numms, c. a Sham, or Collar. Shirt, to hide the t'other when Dirty. Num-skul, a Foolish Person. Nut-crackers▪ c. a Pil∣lory. The Cull lookt through the Nut-crackers the Rogue stood in the Pillory.
O Oaf, a Wise-acre, a Ninny or Fool, Oasish Silly. Oak, an Oak, c. a rich Man, of good Sub∣stance and Credit. Oats. One that has sown his wild Oats, or having run out of all, begins to take up and be more Staied. O B Oberon▪ King Oberon or little Oberon, King of the Fairies. O F Office. His Office, any Man's ordinary Haunt, or Plying-place, be it Tavern, Ale-house, Gaming-house or Bowl∣ing-green. A cast of your Office, or a Touch of your Employment. Be good in your Office, a Ca∣veat to those that are apt to forget themselves in it. O G Ogles, c. Eyes. Rum Ogles, c. fine, bright, clear, piercing Eyes. Ogling, c. casting a sheep's Eye at Handsom Women. The Gentry∣mort has rum Ogles, c. that Lady has charm∣ing black Eyes. O L Old-Coney, after the first Year. Old-dog-at-it, good or expert. Old-dog-at-common-pray∣er, a Poor Hackney that cou'd Read, but not Preach well. Old Harry, a Com∣position used by Vint∣ners, when they bedevil their Wines. Old-Mr-Gory, c. a piece of Gold. Old Nick, the Devil. Old Mob, a noted Hawker.
Old-Toast, a brisk old Fellow. A pleasant Old Cuff, a frolicksom old Fellow. Oliver's Skull, a Cham∣ber-pot. Olli-Compolli, c. the by-name of one of the principal Rogues of the Canting Crew. O N One in Ten, a Parson▪ One of my Cosens, a Wench. O P Open-Arse, a Medlar; also a Lewd Woman. Open House, or Open Doors, free for all Co∣mers or Goers. Open-handed, in Spend∣ing, oppos'd to close∣fisted. Open in Speech, to reserv'd. Open-Sea when there is a free Trade, oppos'd to a Sea shut up in War, by Pi∣rates, Privateers or Em∣bargo's of Ships. Opiniator, an Assum∣ing positive Fellow, an obstinate self-conceited Coxcomb. O R Orator to a Mountebank, the Doctor's Decoy who in conjunction with Jack Pudding, amuses, diverts and draws in the Patients. O T Otter, an Amphibious Creature, betwixt a Beast and a Fish, a great des∣troyer of Fish, afford∣ing much sport in Hun∣ting. Otter watcheth, Lodgeth. Vent the Otter, Dislodge him. An Otter whineth, makes a noise at Rutting time. Hun∣teth for his Kind, the Term for their Copula∣tion. O V Over-vert, all manner of High Woods.
Over-sight, has twocontrary Significations under one Sound, for an Oversight is either the Care or Charge of, or Inspection into any Affair, or else an Over∣sight Imports a Slip or Error committed in it, for want of due Care and Circumspection. Over-shoes over Boots, or to go Through-stitch▪ Overdo, double Diligence. Oven, The Mother had never lookt for her Daugh∣ter in the Oven, if she had not been there her self before, or, she muses as she uses. Out-at-heels, or El∣bows, in a declining Con∣dition, going down the Wind. Out-run the Constable, to Spend more than is Got, or Run out of an Estate, to run Riot. Outside, that is the Out∣side, or utmost Rate. O U Owlers, those who privately in the Night carry Wool to the Sea-Coasts, near Rumney-Marsh in Kent, and some Creeks in Sussex, &c. and Ship it off for France against Law. O Y Oyl of Barley, strong Drink. O X Ox-house. He must go through the Ox-house to Bed, of an old Fellow that Marries a young Woman. The black Ox has not trod upon his Foot, of one that has not been Pinch'd with Want, or been Hard put to it. P
Pack, a Fardel or Bun∣dle. Pack of Knaves, the worst of all the Pack, or a Knave in Grain. Pack of Juries, Packing of Cards, Pick a Pack, Pack up your Nawls and be gone,Packing of Parties and Elections. A common Pack∣horse, a Hackney or common Drudge, one made a Slave of. Pad, c. the High Way, and a Robber thereon; also a Bundle. Rum Pad, c. adaring or stout High∣way-man. Paddington-Fair, c. an Execution of Malefactors at Tyburn; also a real Fair at the Village of that Name, near that Place. Goes upon the Pad, or a Padding, c. Robbs upon the High∣way. A Pad, an easy Pacing Horse. Padds, worn by the Women to save their Sides from being Cut or Mark'd with the Strings of their Petty-coats. Pageant, a thing Drest up and set out to make a Show. A Piece of Pa∣geantry, a thing that makes a Figure in a Show or Play, as Play-house Kings and Generals Strut and Stalk upon the Stage. Pain, not in Pain, not in Care or Concern. Painter, the Rope that lies in the Ship's Long∣boat, or Barge, alwaies ready to Fasten her, or Hale her on Shoar. I'll Cut your Painter for ye, I'll prevent ye doing me any Mischief; the Tar-Cant, when they Quar∣rel one with another. What pleases the Painter, when any Representati∣on in the Productions of his or any Art is un∣accountable, and so is to be resolv'd purely in∣to the good Pleasure of the Artist. Pale of the Church, in or out of the Church's Enclosure. Pall'd, Flat, Dispiri∣ted, or Dead Drink. Pallet, a little Bed; also the Receiver of the Painter's Colours mingl∣ed, as the Shells are of his several Colours un∣mingled; also one half of the Pale in Heraldry. Palm, the Attire of a Buck.
Paltry Fellow, a sor∣ry, base, mean, con∣temptible Varlet. Palliards, c. the Sea∣venth Rank of the Cant∣ing Crew, whose Fa∣thers were Born Beggers, and who themselves fol∣low the same Trade▪ with Sham Sores, mak∣ing a hideous Noise, Pretending grievous Pain, do extort Cha∣rity. Pam, the Knave of Clubbs. Pamper'd, Priest High-Fead. Horse Panam, c. Bread▪ Pantas, a Disease in Hawks. Panter, c. a ▪Hart. Pantry, Buttery. Pantler, Butler. Paper-Buildings, slight, Wooden, or old. Paper-Skul, foolish, soft, silly. Paper-Wars, Letter∣combats. Papers, Writings, or Deeds. Paplar, c. Milk-pot∣tage. Par, Gold and Silver at a like Proportion. Parasite, a Trencher-Friend, a meer Whee∣dle. Parell, Whites of Eggs, Bay-Salt, Milk and Conduit-Water beat to∣gether, and poured into a Vessel of Wine to Cure it's Fretting, in order to Fine it, and make it Drink up. Parie, to put By a Thrust or Blow. Parings, c. the Clip∣pings of Money. Parlous, or Perillous Man, a notable, shrew'd Fellow. Parsimonious, Near, Niggardly, Pinching, Stingy.
Pass, a Way, Lane, River, Leave; also con∣dition. What a Sad Pass things are come to? In what an ill State they are. That Shamm won't Pass, that Trick won't take. Do the Waters Pass well? much in use at the Wells, do they Move as they ought▪To Passe upon one, to top upon him, or impose upon him; also a Term at Billiards, when the Ball goes through the Court or Porch, it is said to pass. Passage, a Camp-Game, with three Dice, Doublets, making up Ten or more, to Pass or Win, any other Chances lose. Pass bank, the Stock or Fund thereto belong∣ing; also the playing Place Cut out in the Ground almost Cock∣pit waies. Pat, apposite, or to the purpose. Patering, the Maun∣dring or pert Replies of Servants. Patering of Prayers, Muttering of them, from the thick Repeating of so many Paters or Pater-nosters. No Penny, no Pater-nosters, no Pay, no Prayers. Patrico, c. or Pater∣cove, c. the Fifeteenth Rank of the Canting Tribe, stroling Priests that Marry under a Hedge without Gospel or Common-prayer Book, the Couple stand∣ing on each side a Dead Beast, are bid to Live together till Death them do's Part, so shaking Hands, the Wedding is ended; also any Minist∣er, or Parson, Pateepan, a little Pye, or small Pasty. Patrole, the Rounds. Paume, when a Die or Piece of Money is hid in the Hand, to secure the Game, or Wager. He Paumes it, he Cheats, or Plaies Foul. Paw, a Hand. Pawn. To Pawn any Body, to steal away and leave him or them to Pay the Reckoning. Pay through the Nose, Excessively, or with Extortion. P E Peak, c. any kind of Lace.
Pearls▪ the little Knobson the Bur (which see) of a Stag. Peck, c. Meat. Peckidge, c. Meat. Rum Peck, c. good Eat∣ing. The Gentry Cove tipt us rum Peck and rum Gut∣lers, till we were all Bow∣sy, and snapt all the Flick∣ers, the Gentleman gave us so much good Victu∣als, and Canary, that we were all Damn'd Drunk, and broke all the drinking Glasses. Peculiars, Plants, Ani∣mals and Fossiles, pro∣per and particular to some one Country, and rarely if ever found in others, as English Scur∣vy-grass, Sarsa, Sassafras and Guajacum, all West Indian Druggs; and so for Animals, English Maistiffs, Irish Grey∣hounds. Barnacles, and Soland Geese peculiar to Scotland, as Puffins, to the Isle of Man; also Parishes exempt from other Ordinaries, and peculiarly belonging to the See of Canterbury. Peculiar, c. a Mistress; also particular, private, proper. Pedant, a meer Scho∣lar, a School-master, a Man of one kind of Learning or Business, out of which he is good for nothing. Pedantry, a Learning and Skill of one Colour. Ped, a Basket. Pedlars, Scoth Mer∣chants; also English Retailers of Goods, that stroll from Town to Town. Pedlars-French, a sort of Gibrish or made Lan∣guage, easy to be Learnt and Understood, used by Gypsies, &c. Also the Beggers Cant. Peeking Fellow, a meer Sneaks, one that peeps in every Hole and Cor∣ner; also a thin, weasel∣faced Fellow. Peeper, c. a Looking-glass. Track the Dancers, and pike with the Peepers, c. whip up the Stairs, and trip off with the Looking-glass.
Peepers, c. Eyes. Peepy, c. Peeping, c. Drowsy, Sleepy. As the Cull Peeps let's Mill him, c. when the Man is a Sleep, let's Kill him. Peery, c. fearful, shy, sly. The Cull's Peery, c. the Rogue's afraid to venture. Peeter, c. a Portman∣tle or Cloak-bag. Bite the Peeter, c. to whip off the Cloak-bag. Biter of Peeters, c. one that makes a Trade of whip∣ping Boxes and Trunks from behind a Coach or out of a Waggon, or off a Horse's Back. Pea-goose, a silly Crea∣ture. Peg at Cocks, to throw at them at Shrovetide. Gon to Pegtrantums, Dead. Pel-mel, helter-skelter, Pelt, a Heat or Chafe. What a Pelt you are in? what a Chafe your in? Also the Dead Body of any Fowl the Hawk has killd. Pelts, Beast Skinns. Pelting-village, Blind, Obscure. Penelope's Web, to do and undo. Pennance-bord, c a Pil∣lory. Pennites, that Faction of Quakers that follow most and are in the In∣terest of William Pen, the chief Proprietor and Governor of Pensylvania, a Country lying betwixt Forty and Forty five Degrees of Latitude, in America, much improv'd, and like to florish. Penny-worth. I'll fetch my-Pennyworth out of him, or make him earn what he cost me.
Penny-white, said of her, to whom Fortune has been kinder than Nature. Penny-wise and Pound-fool∣ish, Sparing in a little and Lavish in a great Deal, save at the Spiggot and let it out at the Bung∣hole. A Penny-worth for one's Penny, for what is worth one's Money. To get a Penny, to endea∣ver to Live; to turn andwinde the Penny, to make to most of one's Money, ot Lay-it out at the best Advantage. Pennyless, poor, sharp, bare of Money. Penurious, pinching▪ hard, parsimonious, little. Pentice Nab, a very broad-brm'd Hat. Pepperd off, Damnably Clapt or Poxt. Pepper-proof, not Clapt or Poxt. Pericranium, the Head or Skull. Perking, the late D▪ of M. allo any pert for∣ward silly Fellow. To Perk up, to hold up the Head after Drooping. Periwinkle, a Perruque or Periwig; also the same as Pinpatches. Pestilent-fine, Tearing-fine. Pet, a Fret. To be in a Pet, or out of Humor. Peter Lug, Who is Pe∣ter Lug? Who let's the Glass stand at his Door? Petrify, to turn to Stone. Petrification, Concre∣tions, either such as are hardned into Stone, by exposing them to Air, as Coral; or by casting them into Cold petrify∣ing Waters, as Wood. Pettycoat-Pensioner, a Gallant, or one Main∣tain'd for secret Service. P H Phanatics, Dissenters from the Church of England. Pharoah, very strong Mault-Drink. Phenix-men, the same as Fire-drakes. Philadelphians, a new Sect of Enthusiasts pre∣tenders to Brotherly Love, &c. Philistines, Serjeants Bail∣iffs and their Crew; al∣so Drunkards. I fell a∣mong the Philistines, I chopt upon a knot of Drunken Fellows. Phis, for Physiogno∣my, Face or Aspect. P I Picking, little Steal∣ing, Pilfering, petty Larceny.
Pickthank, a Tale∣bearer, or an Insinua∣tor by any means to curry Favor. Pickaroon, a very small Privateer; also a shab∣by poor Fellow. Pickled, very Arch or Waggish. In Pickle, Poxt. Rodds in Pickle, or revenge in Lavender. Pig, c. Sixpence. The Cull tipt me a Pig, c. the Man gave me Sixpence. Pig of the Sounder, see Wild Boar. Pigsnie, a word of Love. Pig-widgeon, a silly Fellow. Pike, c. to run away, flee, quit, or leave the Place; also to Die. As he Pikes, c. he walks or goes. Pike on the been, c. run away as fast as you can. Piked off, c. run away, fled, broke; also Dead. To pass the Pikes, to be out of Danger. Pillau, a Hen and Rice Boil'd, a Turkish Dish, but now in use in England, France and Holland. Pillory, a Baker; also a Punishment mostly heretofore for Beggers, now for Perjury, Forg∣ery and suborned Per∣sons. Pimp, the same as Cock-bawd. Pimp-whisking, a Top Trader that way; also a little mean-spirited, narrow-soul'd Fellow. Pimlico, a noted Cake∣house formerly, but now converted into a Bow∣linggreen, of good report at Hogsden near London. Pin, a small Vessel containing Four Gallons and a half, or the Eighth part of a Barrel. To Pin himself upon you, or to Hang on. To Pin one's Faith on another's Sleeve, or take all upon Trust, for Gospel that he saies. Not a Pin to chuse, when there is little or no dif∣ference. Upon a merry Pin, or in a pleasant Mood. Nick the Pin, to Drink fairly. Pimginnit, a large, red, angry Pimple.
Pinch, to Steal, or Slily convey any thing away. To Pinch, to Cut the Measures of Ale, Beer, &c. To Pinch on the Parson's side, or Sharp him of his Tythes. At a Pinch, upon a Push or Exigence. Pinch gut-hall, a noted House at Milend, so Nick∣nam'd by the Tarrs, who were half Starved in an East-India Voiage, by their then Commander, who Built (at his return) that famous Fabrick, and (as they say) with what he Pinch'd out of their Bellies. Pinch-gut-money, al∣low'd by the King to the Seamen, that Serve on Bord the Navy Royal, when their Provision falls Short; also in long Voyages when they are forced to Drink Water instead of Beer. Pinpatches, a small Shel-fish very like a Snail, but less, Caught on the Ouzes at low Tide, in Rivers near the Sea, and Sold cheap. Picquant, a sharp Re∣flection; also a poynant Sawce. Pink't, Prickt with a Sword in a Rencounter or Duel. He Pink'd his Doublet, he Run him Through. Piquet, a game at Cards. Pit, c. the hole un∣der the Gallows into which those that Pay not the Fee, viz. 6s 8d, are cast and Buried. Pit-a pat, or Pintle de Pantledy, sadly Scared, grievously put to it. Pitcher-bawd, the poor Hack that runs of Er∣rands to fetch Wenches or Liquor. Little Pitchers have large Ears, Chil∣dren may over-hear, and discover Secrets. The Pitcher do's not go so often to the Well, but it comes home Broke at last, of him that after many lucky Adventures or narrow Escapes, miscarries in the End.
Pithy jest, or Sen∣tence, that couches a great deal in a little room. Pittance, a small Largess or petty Gratui∣ty. P L Placaert, a Dutch Pro∣clamation, or Order of the States. Plad, Scotch striped Stuff. Plaint for Complaint, he made his Plaint to me, or made his Complaint to me. Hence Plaintiff and Defendant at Law, for Complainant and Defendant. Planks, thrown out to save those that can Swim in a Wreck; also Flooring. Plant, c. to lay, place, or hide. Plant your Whids and Stow them, c. be wary what you say or let slip. Plaister of hot Gutts, one warm Belly clapt to another. Plate-fleet come s in, when Money comes to Hand. Platter-fac'd-jade, a ve∣re broad, ord'nary faced Woman. Plausible, smooth, spe∣cious, Taking. Play it off, to play Booty; also to thorw a way, at Gaming, so much and no more. He Plaies it off, he Cheats. Pliant, supple, flexible, ductile, manageable, Wax to every Thumb. Plodder, a Porer in Records, Writings or Books, a dull Drudge, or hard Student. A Plod∣ding Lawyer, a Labori∣ous Lawyer. A Plodding Horse, a good Drudge or Pack-horse. Pluck the Ribond, or Pluck Sir O—n, ring the Bell at the Tavern. Plump-in-the-pocket, flush of Money Plyer, c. a Crutch. P O
Poching, a sly destroy∣ingof Game, with Dogs, Netts, Snares &c. Contrary to the Laws; also an Egg Boyld in Water out of the Shell. Poke, a Bag, Sack, or Pocket. To buy a Pig in a Poke, or unsight or unseen. To carry your Passions in your Pocket, or smother your Passions. Poker, one that con∣veys Coals (at Newcas∣tle) in Sacks, on Horse∣back; also a pointed Porr to raise the Fire, and a Sword. Polt on the Pate, a good Rap there. Poltron, a Coward. Ponyard, a short Dag∣ger or Stilletto. Porker, c. á Sword. Porters, Hirelings to carry Burthens, Beasts of Burthen, or else Menial Servants set to Guard the Gates in a great Man's House, of whom Dr. Donne said pleasantly, that he was ever next the Door, yet the seldomest Abroad of any of the Family. Portable, Pocketable. Portage, Carriage of any thing, whether by Land or Water. Posse Mobilitatis, the whole Rabble in a Body. Post, Employment, Office, Station; also an advanced, or advanta∣gious piece of Ground: A Pillar in the Way or Street. From Pillar to Post, from Constable to Constable. Pot-hooks, Scrawls or bad Writing. Pot-valiant, Drunk. Pot and Spit, Boyl'd and Roast. A little Pot is soon Hot, of a little Fel∣low soon made angry. The Pot calls the Kettle black A—, when one accuses another of what he is as Deep in himself. Poulain, a Bubo. Powder monkeys, Boys planted at the Guns a Bord the Ship, to fetch Gun-powder, &c. in the Engagement.
Powdring-Tub, thepocky Hospital at Kings∣land near London. Poyson'd, Big with Child. Poyson-pate, red Hair'd. P R Prancer, c. a Horse. Prancers-nab, c. a Horse's Head used in a Sham-Seal to such a Pass. Prancers-poll, c. the same as before; also the Sign of the Nag's Head. Mount the Pran∣cer, c. get on the Horse's Back. Pranks, Tricks. Pratts, c. Buttocks; also a Tinder-box or Touch-box. Prating-cheat, c. a Tongue. Prateroast, a Talking Boy. Precarious, what is Disputable and uncer∣tain, as being purely at the Pleasure and Cour∣tesy of another. Precaution, Forecast, or the Wisdom of Pre∣vention, which is be∣yond that of Remedy. Precipitate, Rash, Headstrong, Unadvised, Inconsiderate, hurrying in Business. Precisians, Strait-lac∣ed, Squeemish, Foolish∣ly Scrupulous. Preservatives. Anti∣dotes to keep off, or prevent Diseases. Priest-craft, the Art of awing the People, man∣aging their Consciences, and diving into their Purses. Pretext, Show, Colour, Pretence, or Excuse. Prey, c. Money. Prick, the first Head of a Fallow Deer; also a Skewer. Pricker, a Huntsman on Horse Back. Pricketh, the Footing of a Hare on the hard Highway, when it can be perceived. Prickear'd Fellow, a Crop, whose Ears are longer than his Hair. Prick-louse, a Taylor.
Prickt, decayed Wine,tending to Sower. The Prick and Praise of our Town, that bears the Bell from all the Rest, in all Exercises, as Wrestling, Running, Leaping, Vault∣ing, Pitching of the Barr, &c. Priest-link'd, Married. Priest-ridden, wholly influenc'd, and abso∣lutely govern'd by that Tribe. Prig, c. a Thief, a Cheat; also a Nice beauish, silly Fellow, is called a meer Prig. Priggs, c. the Ninth Rank of Canting Rogues, Thieves. Priggers, c. Thieves. Prigging, c. Riding; also Lying with a Wo∣man. Prigstar, c. a Rival in Love. Priggish, c. Thievish. Prig-napper, c. a Horse-Stealer; also a Thief∣taker. Priggers of the Cacklers. c. Poultry-Stealers. Priggers of Prancers, c. the Sixth Order of the Canting Crew, Horse-Stealers, who carry a Bridle in their Pockets, a small Pad Saddle in their Breeches. Primero, an old Ger∣man Game at Cards. Prim, a silly empty starcht Fellow. Princock, a pert, for∣ward Fellow. Princes-metal, a mixt Métal, betwixt Brass and Copper, and of a mixt Colour between both, not so Pale as the one, nor fo Red as the other, the late Invention of Prince Rupert. Prince Prig, c. a King of the Gypsies; also a Top-Thief, or Recei∣ver General. Prinking, nicely Dress∣ing. Prinkt up, set up on the Cupboards-head in their best Cloaths, or in State. Stiff-starched. Mistress Princum-Pran∣cum, such a one. Print, the Treading of a Fox. To set in Print, with Mouth skrew'd up and Neck Stretcht out.
Prisme, a Triangular Crystal-Glass or Fools Paradise, that by refrac∣tion reflects imaginary Blew, Red, and Yellow Colours upon all Ob∣jects seen through it; al∣so any Saw-dust. Prittle-Prattle, idle impertinent Chat. Proclamations, his Head is full of Proclamations, much taken up to little Purpose. Prog, c. Meat. Rum Prog, c. nice Eating. The Cull tipt us Rum Prog, c. the Gentleman Treat∣ed us very High. Projectors, Busybodies in new Inventions and Difcoveries, Virtuoso's of Fortune, or Traders in unsuccesful if not im∣practicable Whimms, who are alwaies Digging where there is no more to be found. Proling, Hunting or Searching about in quest of a Wench, or any Game. Property, a meer Tool, or Implement, to serve a Turn, a Cat's foot; al∣so a natural Qu ality or Talent, and the highest right a Man can have to any thing, Liberty and Property, two Inestima∣ble Jewells. To change the Property, or give it another turn, with a new Dress. or the Dis∣guise of a Wig and a false Beard. Proud Bitch, desirous of Copulation. Prying Fellow, that is very curious to enquire into other Men's Secrets and Affairs. Provender, c. he from whom any Money is taken on the Highway. P U Puke, to Spue. Pug, Pugnasty, a meer Pug, a nasty Slut, a sor∣ry Jade, of a Woman; also a Monkey. Puling, Sickly.
Pummel, the Hilt, Han∣dle, or round Knob of a Sword, or Saddle; also to Beat I Pummel'd hisSides for him, I Beat him soundly. Pump, to wheedle Se∣crets out of any one; also to drench, Bailives, Serjeants, Pick-pockets, &c. Pumpt dry, not a Word left to say. Pun, to Play with Words and Sounds. Punch, Brandy and Water, with Limes or Lemon-juice; also a thick short Man. Punch Nag, a short, thick, fat, squat, strong Horse Punch-houses, Bawdy-houses. Punchable, old passa∣ble Money, Anno 1695. Punk, a little Whore. Puny Child, weak lit∣tle Puny Stomack. Puny Judge, the Junior or Youngest. Pure, c. a Mistress. Purest▪pure, c. a Top-Mistress, or Fine Wo∣man. Pupil-mongers, Tutors at the Universities, that have many Pupils, and make a Penny of them. Puritans, Puritanical, those of the precise Cut, strait-laced Precisians, whining (as Osborn saies) for a Sanctity God never yet trusted out of Heaven. Purl, Worm-wood in∣fus'd in Ale. Purl-Royal, Canary with a dash of Worm∣wood. Pursenets, c. Goods taken upon Trust by young Unthrifts at tre∣ble the Value; also a little Purse. Purse-proud, haughty because Rich. Pursy, Foggy, Fat. Pushers, Canary-birds new Flown that cannot Feed themselves. Pushing-School, a Fenc∣ing School; also a Baw∣dy-house. At a Push, at a pinch or strait. At Push of Pike, at Defiance. Push-pinn, Childrens Play. To Push on one's Fortune, to advance, or run it up. Put. A Country-Put, a silly, shallow-pated Fel∣low. Put to it, Beset.
Q Quacking-cheat, c. a Duck. Quack, an Empirick, or meer pretender to Physic. Quaffing, Quaff off, ca∣rousing, to carouse. Quag, Quagmire, mar∣shy moorish Ground. Quailing of the Stomack, beginning to be qual∣mish or uneasy. Quail-pipe, a Woman's Tongue; also a Device to take the Birds of that Name, which are fine Food, the French es∣teem'd the best; tho' both those and the Eng∣lish are of a Currish Nature, and will beat themselves against the Cage, sides and top, being with difficulty brought to Feed: Wheat is usually given them, but Hempseed is a great deal better. Quaint, curious, neat; also strange Quaking-cheat, c. a Calf or a Sheep. Qualified, Accomplisht, Statesman, Soldier, Scho∣lar. Qualifications, Accom∣plishments that render any of them Compleat; also Conditions. Qually-Wines, Turbu∣lent and Foul. Qualm, a Stomack-Fit; also Calmness, and the Cry of Ravens. Qualmish, Crop-sick, queasy Stomackt. Quarrel-picker, a Gla∣zier; also a contentious Fellow, a Trouble Com∣pany. Quarron, c. a Body. Quarte, Nails of the Sword-Hand quite up. Quarting upon the streight Line, keeping the Head and Shoulders very much back from the Adversary's Sword, when one thrusts▪ with his own. Quash, to Suppress, Annul, or Overthrow. To Quash the Indict∣ment.
Quean, a Whore, or Slut. A dirty Quean, a very Puzzel or Slut. Queasy Stomacht, Crop∣sick, Qualmish. Queen Elizabeth's Pock∣et-pistol, a Brass-Cannon of a prodigious Length at Dover-Castle. Queere, c. base, Roguish, naught. How Queerely the Cull Touts? c. how ro∣guishly the Fellow looks. Queere Birds, c. such as having got loose, re∣turn to their old Trade of Roguing and Thiev∣ing. Queere-bluffer, c. a sneaking, sharping, Cut∣throat Ale-house or Inn∣keeper. Queere-bung, c. an empty Purse. Queere-clout, c. a sor∣ry, coarse, ord'nary or old Handkerchief, not worth Nimming. Queere-cole, c. Clipt, Counterfeit, or Brass Money. Queere-cole-maker, c. a false Coyner. Queere-cole-fencer, c. a Receiver and putter off false Money. Queere-cove, c. a Rogue. Queere-cuffin, c. a Jus∣tice of Peace; also a Churl. Queere-cull, c. a Fop, or Fool, a Codshead; also a shabby poor Fel∣low. Queere-degen, c. an Iron, Steel, or Brass-hilted Sword. Queere-diver, c. a bungling Pick-pocket. Queere-doxy, c. a jilt∣ing Jade, a sorry shab∣by Wench. Queere-drawers, c. Yarn, coarse Worsted, ord'nary or old Stock∣ings. Queere-duke, c. a poor decayed Gentleman; al∣so a lean, thin, half Starv∣ed Fellow, Queere-fun, c. a bung∣ling Cheat or Trick. Queere-ken, c. an ill House, or a Prison. Queere-mort, c. a dirty Drab, a jilting Wench, a Pockey Jade.
Queere-nab, c. a Felt, Carolina, Cloth, or or∣d'nary Hat, not worth whipping off a Man's Head. Queere-kicks, c. coarse, ord'nary or old Breeches. Queere-peepers, c. old∣fashion'd, ord'nary, black-fram'd, or com∣mon Looking-glasses. Queere-prancer, c. a Founder'd Jade, an or∣d'nary low-priz'd Horse. Queere-topping, c. sor∣ry Commodes or Head∣dresses. Quibble, to Trifle, or Pun. Sir Quibble Queere, a trifling silly shatter-brain∣n'd Fellow. Quidds, c. Money. Tip the Quidds, c. can ye spend your Six∣pence. Quietists, a Numerous and considerable Sect a∣mongst the Papists, be∣ing against Oral and wholly for Mental Pary∣er, Whiggs, Popish Pre∣cisians, or Puritans. Quipps, Girds, Taunts, Jeers, &c. Quirks in Law, Law∣tricks or Subtilties. Quirks and Quillets, Tricks and Devices. Quod, c. Newgate; also any Prison, tho' for Debt. The Dab's in in the Quod, c. the poor Rogue is in Limbo. Quota, c. Snack, Share, Part, Proportion or Di∣vidend. Tip me my Quota, c. give me my Part of the Winnings, Booty, Plunder, &c. R Rabbet-suckers, c. young Unthrifts taking up Goods upon Tick at ex∣cessive rates. Rabbet, the first Year. Rabbits, Wooden Kanns to Drink out of, once, used on the Roads, now, almost laid by. Rabble, the Mob. Racket, a Noise or Bustle; also Tennis-play. What a Racket those Ramps keep? What a busel these rude Children make?
Racking of Wines, Draw∣ing them off their Lees into fresh Vessels. Rack-rent, strain'd to the utmost Value. The Knights of Cales, Gen∣tlemen of Wales, and Lairds of the North Coun∣try, a Yeoman of Kent, at Rack-rent, will buy 'em all Three. To lye at Rack and Manger, to live hard. Rag, c. a Farthing. Not a Rag left, c. I have Lost or Spent, all my Money. Ragou, a Relishing Bit, with a high Sawce. Ragamuffin, a Tatter∣demallion. Rag-water, a common sort of Strong-waters. Rake, Rake Hell, Rake∣shame, a Lewd Spark or Deboshee, one that has not yet Sowed his Wild Oats, Rakish, tending to, or leaning towards that Extravagant way, of Life. Rake, when the Hawk flies out too far from the Fowls; also so much of the Ship's Hull as overhangs both Ends of the Keel; and to Trot a Horse gently. Ràlph-Spooner, a Fool. Raillery, Drolling. To Railly, or Droll. A Rail∣leur, or Droll. Rally, to Unite or embody broken Troops. Rammish, Rank. Ramp, a Tomrig, or rude Girl. To Ramp, to Play rude Horse-Play. Rampant, uppish, over-bold, over-pert, over-lusty. A Lyon Rampant, i. e. rearing up his Fore∣feet. Rangle, when Gravel is given to a Hawk, to bring her to a Stomack. Ranging, c. intriguing, and enjoying many Wo∣men.
Rank, rammish, strong∣scented, as all the Fe∣tids, either Vegetables or Animals, as Garlick, As∣sa foetida, Polecats, Foxes, Goats, &c. And what∣ever is Stale, Corrupt, or Tainted, and Stinks with long or careless Keeping. A Rank Lie,a lewd or flat Lie. A Rank Knave, an errant base Knave. A Rank Whore, an errant Whore. Rank-rider, c. a High∣way-man; also a Jockey. Rank-wink'd, Hawk, that is a slow Fligher. Rant, to Talk Big, High, or Boast much. Ranters, Extravagants, Unthrifts, Lewd Sparks; also of the Family of Love. Rantipole, a rude wild Boy or Girl. Rap, to Swop or Ex∣change a Horse or Goods; also a Polt on the Pate, and a hard Knocking at a Door. Rapparies, Wild Irish Robbers, and Out-laws. Rapper, a swinging great Lie. Raree-show-men, poor Savoyards strolling up and down with portable Boxes of Puppet-shews at their Backs; in short, Pedlars of Puppets. Rascal, a base, vile Fellow, a Rogue. Rascal-Deer, lean, poor, ont-lying Deer. Rat, a Drunken Man or Woman taken up by the Watch, and carried by the Constable to the Counter. To smell a Rat, to suspect a Trick. Rattler, c. a Coach. Rattling-cove, c. a Coach-man. Rattling Mumpers, c. such Beggers as Ply Coaches. To Rattle, c. to move off, or be gone. We'll take Rattle, c. we must not tarry, but whip away. Rattling, the Noise of Coaches and Carts; as also of Armour, or of Hail, or Thunder. Rattle-pate, a Hot, Maggot-pated Fellow. I Rattled him, I Rated him roundly, and told him his own. Rattleth, the Noise a Goat maketh at Rutting time. Ravilliac, any Assa∣sin. Raw-head and Bloody∣bones, a Ball-begger or Scare-child.
Rayn-deer, a Beast likea Hart, but has his Head fuller of Antlers. R E Ready, c. Ready and Rhino, c. Money in Possession. Rebel-rout, the Rab∣ble, running Riot. Reaking, smoking or piping-hot, as Pies out of the Oven, Iron out of the Forge, or Blood from a warm Wound. Hence perhaps the Reck, or Reaking, i.▪ e. Smoak of the Clouds. I'll Reak my Spite on him, I'll be Revenged on him. Rear the Boar, Dislodge him. Rebus's, Words or Sentences that are the same backwards as for∣wards. Recheat, a Lesson blown on the Horn. Recorder, a musical Instrument; also a Law-Officer or Magistrate in Cities and Corporations, their Mouth, or Spokes∣man. Recreant, a Poltron, or Coward, one that eats his Words, or un∣saies what he said. Recruits, c. Money (Expected.) Have you rais'd the Recruits, c. is the Money come in? Red-fustian, Clarret or red Port-Wine. Red-letter-man, a Ro∣man-catholic. Red-rag, a Tongue. Your Red-rag will never lie still, your Tongue will ne're be quiet. Red-shank, c. a Duck. Refugies, French and Vaudois Protestants, for∣ced to quit their own and fly into others Coun∣tries to have the Excer∣cise of their Religion.
Refreshed, either as the Air is with Winds, when it Blows a Fresh Gale; or artificially with the motion of Fanns, or opening the Windows to Fann a close Room; or as Wines are with Snow and Ice; or by casting a new Gloss, on what is worn out, Wi∣thered,or Decayed, in Bodies Artificial, as Em∣broidery by Burnishing, or of Pictures by Var∣nishing, &c. Rellif, Copulation of Hares. Remember Parson Mal∣ham, (Norfolk) Pray Drink about Sir. Regraters, Fore-stallers in Markets. Repartee, a sudden smart Reply. Republican, a Com∣mon-wealths-man. Reserve, a Store or Hoard to have recourse to, upon a Push or par∣ticular Exigence; a Nest-Egg. Respost, having given a Thrust, to Receive one from the Adversary, before he has recover'd his Body. Resty, Heàd-strong, Wayword, Unruly, Mas∣terless. Retailers, Parcel-tra∣ders or Dealers, petty Merchants, Hucksters, Chandlers, Pedlars, &c. In Retail, in Parcel or small Sum, oppos'd to what goes in Tale or Sum at Large. Retainers, a Great Man's Followers or Ser∣vants, attending him (heretofore) in Blew Coats and Badges, which were the Ancient Live∣ries, tho' little more re∣mains of it at present, save what is left among the Water-men. Hence the Word Retinue, or Train of Attendance. Revers'd, c. a Man set (by Bullies) on his Head, and his Money turn'd out of his Bree∣ches. Reward, what is given the Hounds, or Beagles by the Hands of the Hunts-man or others, af∣ter they have finished their Chase, by the Death of what they pursu'd. R H Rhino, c. ready Mo∣ney.
Rhinocerical, c. full ofMoney. The Cull is Rhi∣nocerical, c. the Fop is full of Money. R I Rib, or Ribroasting, a Dry-basting. Ribbin, c. Money. The Ribbin runs thick, c. his Breeches are well lined with Money. The Ribbin runs thin. c. he has but little Cash about him. Richess, (of Marterns) a Company. Rich face, a Red-face. Ridg-cully, c. a Gold∣smith. Riff-raff, the Rab∣ble or Scum of the Peo∣ple, Tagrag and Long∣tail. Ridge, or row of Hills, extended in a Line. Ridicule, to Railly or turn any thing to a Jest. To turn it all to Ridicule. to make a Mock of it. Rigging, c. Cloaths. I'll Unrig the Bloss, c. I will Strip the Wench. Rum Rigging, c. fine Cloaths. The Cull has Rum Rigging, let's Ding him, and Mill him, and Pike, c. the Man has very good Cloths, let us Knock him Down, Rob him, and Scour off. Rill, a Rivulet, or small River. Ring, c. Money ex∣torted by Rogues on the High-way, or by Gen∣tlemen Beggers. A Ring, a Concourse of People for Wrestling, Cudgel-playing, &c. A Ring of Hills, a round Circle of Hills. Ring-walks, the Dew∣rounds made by Hunts∣men, when they go drawing in their Springs at Hart-Hunting. Ripe, ready, come to maturity. Matters are not Ripe, not ready, or come to Perfection. Riveted, or Rooted Customs, or Habits; inveterate or confirmed Diseases▪ R O
Roam, to wanderfar and wide from Home. Roberds-men, c. the third (old) Rank of the Canting Crew, mighty Thieves, like Robin-hood. Rochester-portion, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave. Roe. A Fair Roe-buck, the fifth Year; a Roe∣buck of the first Head, the fourth Year; a He∣muse, the third Year; a Gyrle, the second Year; a Kid, the first Year; a Roe Beddeth, Lodgeth; a Roe Belloweth, maketh a Noise at Rutting time. Roger, c. a Portman∣tle, a Goose; also a Man's Yard. Rogues, c. the fourth Order of Canters. A Rogue in Grain, a very great Rogue. A Great-be-rogue, a sturdy swing∣ing Rogue. Romance, a feigned pleasant History. To Romance, to Lie pleasant∣ly, to Stretch in Dis∣course, Romboyles, c. Watch and Ward. Romboyl'd, c. sought after with a Warrant. Romer, a drinking Glass; also wider. Rook, c. a Cheat, a Knave. To Rook, c. to Cheat or play the Knave. Rope. Upon the High∣ropes, Cock-a-hoop. Give him Rope enough and he'll Hang himself, he'll De∣coy himself within his own Destiny. Rosy-gills, c. Sanguine or fresh-colour'd. Rost-meat-cloths, Holi∣day-cloths. You cannot fare well, but you must cry Rost-meat, you can't meet with good Chear, but you must tell Tales. To give one Rost-meat, and Beat him with the Spit, to do one a Curtesy, and Twit or Upbraid him with it. To rule the Rost, to be Master, or Para∣mount. Roasted, Arrested. I'll Roast the Dab, I will Arrest the Rascal.
Rot-gut, very small or thin Beer. Rovers, Pirates, Wan∣derers, Vagabonds. To Shoot at Rovers, at Ran∣dom. To Rove about, to wander idly up and down. Rough, Unpolisht, Un∣mannerly, Uncouth. To lie Rough, in one's Clothes all Night. Round-dealing, Plain, Honest Dealing. Round-summ, a Lusty-Summ. Round-heads, the Par∣liamentarian Party in the great Rebellion, that begun 1641. Rout, (of Wolves) a Company. Rouse, (the Buck) Dislodge him. Rawland-for-an-Oliver, to give as good as he brought. Roysters, c. rude, Roar∣ing Rogues. R U Rub, c. to Run away. A Rub, an Impediment, Obstacle, Hinderance, Stop, or Difficulty. Rub on, to Live indiffe∣rently. Rub'd off, c. Broke, and run away. Rub through the World, to Live Tolleraly well in it. Rubbers, Two (and sometimes Three) Games to make up; also a Ren∣counter with drawn Sword, and Reflections made upon any one. Rub-rub, us'd on Greens when the Bowl Flees too fast, to have it forbear, if Words wou'd do it. Rub-up, or refresh the Memory. Rub-up, or Scower Armour, &c. Rubs us to the Whit, c. sends us to Newgate. Ruby-face, very red. Ruck, a Bumble, or Heap. Rud, a small Fish with a forked Tail, between which and the Roach, there is much about the same difference, as be∣tween the Herring and the Pilchard.
Ruff, an old-fashioned double Band; also a no∣ted Bird, and a Fish, Pope, like a small Pearch, and when the Hawk hits the Prey, and yet not Trusses it. Ruffin, c. the Devil; also a Justice of Peace, and also an Assasin. Rufflers, c. the first Rank of Canters; also notorious Rogues. To Ruffle, to disorder any thing. Ruff-mans, c. the Woods or Bushes. Ruff-peck, c. Bacon. As the Ruffin nab the Cuffin queere, and let the Harmanbeck Trime with his Kinchins about his Col∣quarron, c. let the Devil take Justice, and let the Constable Hang with his Children abouthis Neck. Ruffter-hood, a plain and easy Leather-hood worn by a Hawk, when first drawn. Rug. It's all Rug, c. the Game is secured. Rum, c. gallant, Fine, Rich, best or excellent; also a West-Indian Drink stronger than Brandy, drawn from Dreggs of Sugar for the most part, yet some∣times from Fruits, and Rows of Fish; best when old, much us'd in Punch. Rumly, c. bravely, cleaverly, delicately, &c. Rum-booze, c. Wine; also very good or strong Drink. Rum-boozing-Welts, c. bunches of Grapes. Rum-beck, c. any Justice of the Peace. Rum-bob, c. a young Prentice; also a sharp, sly Trick, and a pretty short Wig. Rum-bite, c. a cleaver Cheat, a neat Trick. Rum-bleating-cheat, c. a very fat Weather. Rum-blower, c. a very Handsom Mistress, kept by a particular Man. Rum-bluffer, c. a jolly Host, Inn-keeper, or Victualler.
Rum-bughar, c. a veryPretty and Valuable Dog. Rum-bung, c. a full Purse. Rum-bubber, c. a clea∣ver or dextrous Fellow at Stealing Silver-Tan∣kards (formerly) from Publick Houses. Rum-cod, c. a good Purse of Gold, or round Summ of Money. Rum-cove, c. a great Rogue. Rum-cul, c. a rich Fool, that can be easily Bit, or Cheated by any body; also one that is very generous and kind to a Mistress, and as Rum-chub, c. which is (among the Butchers) one that is easily per∣swaded to believe what they say of the Good∣ness, and also to give them an extraod'nary Price for their Meat, a very ignorant Market∣man or Woman, that Laies out a great deal of Money with, and is Bit by them. Rum clout c. a Silk, fine Cambrick, or Holland Handkerchief. Rum-cole, c. new Mo∣ney, or Medals, curi∣ously Coyn'd. Rum-dropper, c. a Vint∣ner. Rum-duke, c. a jolly handsom Man. Rum-dutchess, c. a jol∣ly handsom Woman. Rum-dukes, c. the bol∣dest or stoutest Fellows (lately) amongst the Alsatians, Minters, Sa∣voyards, &c. Sent for to remove and guard the Goods of such Bank∣rupts as intended to take Sanctuary in those Pla∣ces. Rum-doxy, c. a Beauti∣ful Woman, or light Lady. Rum-degen, c. a Sil∣ver-hilted or inlaid Sword. Rum-dell, c. as Rumdoxy. Rum-diver, c. an com∣pleat, or cleaver Pick∣pocket. Rum-drawers, c. Silk Stockings, or very fine Worsted Hose.
Rum-dubber, c. an ex∣perienc'd or expert Pick∣er of Locks. Rumford-Lyon, a Calf. Rum-fun, c. a cleaver Cheat, or sharp Trick. Rum-file, c. as Rum-diver. Rum-gutlers, c. Ca∣nary-Wine. Rum-glymmar, c. King or Chief of the Link∣boies. Rum-ghelt, c. as Rum-cole. Rum-hopper, c. a Draw∣er. Rum-hopper, tip us presently a Boozing-cheat of Rum-gutlers, c. Draw∣er fill us presently a Bot∣tle of the best Canary. Rum-kicks, c. Silver or Gold Brocade Bree∣ches, or very rich with Gold or Silver Galoon. Rum-mawn'd, c. one that Counterfeits him∣self a Fool. Rum-mort, c. a Queen, or great Lady. Rum-nab, c. a Bea∣ver, or very good Hat. Rum-ned, c. a very sil∣ly Fellow. Rum-nantz, c. true French Brandy. Rum-pad, c. the High∣way. Rum-padders, c. the better sort of Highway∣men, well Mounted and Armed. Rum-peepers, c. a Silver Looking-glass. Rump-and-Kidney M-en, c. Fidlers that Play at Feasts, Fairs, Weddings, &c. And Live chiefly on the Remnants, of Victuals. Rumbling, the roll∣ing of Thunder, moti∣on of a Wheel-barrow, or the noise in the Gutts. Rum prancer, c. a ve∣ry beautiful Horse. Rum-quidds, c. a great Booty, or large Snack. Rum-ruff-peck, c. West∣phalia-Ham. Rum-squeeze, c. much Wine or good Liquor given among the Fid∣lers. Rum-snitch, c. a good fillip on the Nose.
Rum-tol, c. as Rum-degen,the newest Cant of the two. Rum-tilter, c. as Rumtol. Rum-topping, c. a rich commode or Head∣dress. Rum-ville, c. London. Rum-wiper, c. as Rum-clout. Run-ryot, to turn Spark, and run out of all; also when Hounds run at a whole Herd of Deer. Running-stationers, Hawkers, or those that cry News and Books a∣bout the Streets. Runt, a little, short, truss Man or Beast. Runts, Canary-Birds above three Years old. Runner, c. as Budge; also a Galley, or nim∣ble Vessel, to make quick Voyages, as also to escape Privateers, Pirates, &c. Rup, a filthy Boil, or Swelling on the Rump of Poultry, Corrupting the whole Body, Cured with Salt and Water. Rustic, a clownish Country Fellow. Rustygutts an old blunt Fellow. Rutt, Copulation (of Deer.) S Sack, c. a Pocket. Dive into his Sack, c. to Pick his Pocket. Sails, Hawk's Wings; also Windmill-wings. How you Sail about? How you Santer about? Salamander, a Bomb∣vessel; also a certain Creature (said) to Live in the Fire, and a Stone (lately) found in Pensyl∣vania full of Cotton, which will not (as a modern Author affirms) consume in the Fire; and a red-hot Iron to light Tobacco with. Sales-men, Brokers who sell Cattel for the Graziers to the Butchers, before, and at the Beast-Market; also Sellers of ready-made Cloaths. Salesman's-dog, the same as Barker.
Sally, a fit of Passion, or Humor. Salmon, c. the Beg∣gers Sacrament or Oath. Salt, Lecherous, Proud. To come after with Salt and Spoons, of one that is none of the Hastings. Salt-cel, a Rope's end used to Drub the Boies and Sailors on baord of Ship. Salvages, Barbarous People, Inhabiting near the Sea-Coasts in the Maritim Counties, who make a Prey of what the Sea has (in Pity) spared, Living upon the Spoil of Ship∣wrecks. Samlets, so called the Spring following after they are Spawn'd, and tho' then but a little big∣ger than a Minnow, will (as Authors say) grow to be a Salmon, in as short a time as a Goslin will to be a Goose. Sandy-pate, one red∣hair'd. Sap-pate, a Fool. Saunter, to loiter Idly, a Term borrowed from those Religious Coun∣terfeits, who under the colour of Pilgrimages, to the Holy Land, us'd to get many Charities, crying still, Sainct terre, Sainct terre, having no∣thing but the Holy Land in their Mouths, tho' they stay'd alwaies at Home. Saucy, impudent, bold. More sauce than Pig. Your Sauce-Pan runs over, you are exceeding bold. Sawny, a Fool. He's a meer Sawny, he is ve∣ry soft, tho' (in Scotch) it is only for Alexan∣der. S C Scab, a sorry Wench, or Scoundril-Fellow. Scamper, c. to run a∣way, or Scowre off, ei∣ther from Justice, as Thieves, Debtors, Cri∣minals, that are pursued▪ or from ill fortune, as Soldiers that are repulst or worsted.
Scandalous, c. a Peri∣wig. Scandal-proof, a thorough pac'd Alsati∣an, or Minter, one har∣den'd or past Shame. Shift the Scene, call a new Cause, or change the Discourse. School-butter, a Whip∣ping. I Shcool'd him, I chid him severely. School of Venus, c. a Bawdy-house. Sconce, to build a large Sconce, to run deep upon Tick, or Trust. Scotsh-hobby, a little sorry, scrubbed, low Horse of that Country. Scotch-mist, a sober▪ soaking Rain. Scoundrel, a Hedge-bird or sorry Scab. Scoure, c. to wear. To Scoure the Cramp-rings, c. to wear Bolts. Scout, c. a Watch. Scowre, c. to run a∣way or scamper. Let us Scowre, or we shall be Bo∣ned, c. let us run away or we shall be Taken. Scowrers, c. Drunk∣ards, beating the Watch, breaking Windows, clearing the Streets, &c. Scrip, c. a shred or scrap of Paper. As the Cully did freely blot the Scrip, and tipt me 40 Hogs, c. one enter'd in∣to Bond with me for 40 Shillings. Scrub, a Ragamuffin. Scrubado, the Itch. Scrape-all, a Money-Scrivener; also a mise∣rable Wretch, or grip∣ing Fellow. Screw, to Screw one up, to exact upon one, or Squeeze one in a Bar∣gain or Reckoning. Scud, the course or motion of the Clouds, in Fleeting. Scud-away, to Sail, Ride, or Run very fast. Scumm, the Riff-Raff, or Tagrag and Long∣tail. Rake Hell and Skim the Devil. Scut, the Tail of a Hare or Coney. Scuttle, to run away; also a square hole to go down through the Deck.
Sealer, c. one that gives Bonds and Judg∣ments for Goods and Money. Season of Beasts, a Hart or Buck begins at the end of Fencer-Month, 15 Days after Midsum∣er-day, and lasteth till Holyrood-day. The Fox till Christmass, and lasteth till the Annunti∣ation of the blessed Vir∣gin. The Hinde or Doe at Holyrood-day, till Candlemass. The Roe∣buck at Easter, till Mi∣chaelmas. The Roe at Michaelmas till Candle∣mass. The Hare at Michaelmas, till the end of February. The Wolf from Christmas, till the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin. The Boar at Christmass, and continues to the Purifi∣cation of our Lady. Second-sighted, such as (they say) can, and do see Spirits, Appariti∣ons, &c. Secret, let into the Se∣cret, c. when one is drawn in at Horse-rac∣ing, Cock-fighting, Bowl∣ing, and other Sports or Games, and Bit. Seeling, when a Hawk first taken, is so blinded with a Thred run through the Eye-lids, that she Seeth not, or very little, the better to make her endure the Hood; also a sudden healing forced by the motion of the Sea or Wind. Seraglio, a Bawdy-house; also the Great Turk's Palace. Seraglietto, a lowsy, sorry Bawdy-house, a meer Dog-hole. Setters, or Setting-dogs, they that draw in Bubbles, for old Game∣sters to Rook; also a Sergeant's Yeoman, or Bailiff's Follower, or Se∣cond, and an Excize-Officer▪ to prevent the Brewers defrauding the King. Sewet, Deer's Grease.
S H Shabby, in poor, sor∣ry Rigging. Shabberoon, a Raga∣muffin. Shab'd-off, sneakt, or slid away. Shaftsbury, a Gallon∣pot full of Wine, with a Cock. Shag-bag, a poor, shabby Fellow. Shallow-pate, a foolish, silly, empty Fellow. Sham, c. a Cheat, or Trick. Cut a Sham, c. to play a Rogue's Trick. Shamble-Legg'd, one that goes wide, and shuffles his Feet about. Shake your Shambles, haste, begon. Shameless, a bold for∣ward Blade. Shanks, Leggs. There's Shanks! there's ill Leggs. Shanker, a little Scab or Pox on the Nut or or Glans of the Yard. Shappeau, c. or Shap∣po, c. for Chappeau, a Hat, the newest Cant, Nab▪ being very old, and grown too common▪ Shapes, said (often) to an ill-made▪ Man. Show your Shapes, turn about, march off, be gone. Great in more Shapes, great in more Professi∣ons, or Capacities. Great in all Shapes, great in all the Branches of any one, or more Professions: As, great in all the Parts or Branches of the Law; (an universal Lawyer) Great in all the Parts or Branches of Learning. (an universal Scholar) Shark, c. a Sharper; also a Large voracious Fish. Sharper, c. a Cheat, one that Lives by his Witts. Sharp, subtil, ready, quick or nimble-witted, forward, of lively Ap∣prehension; also Poor and Needy. Sharpers-tools, c. false Dice. Sharp-set, very Hun∣gry.
Shaver, a CunningShaver, a subtil, smart Fellow. He Shaves close, he gripes, squeezes, or extorts very severely. Shavings, c. the Clip∣pings of Money. She is with Cub, when the Fox hath Young ones in her. She▪napper, c. a Wo∣man Thief-catcher; al∣so a Cock, (he) or Hen (she) Bawd, a Procu∣ress and Debaucher of young Virgins; a Mai∣den-head-jobber. Sheep-biter, a poor, sorry, sneaking, ill-lookt Fellow. Sheepish, (Fellow) bashful, peaking. Sheep's-head, a Fool, a Block-head. Sheep-shearers, c. Cheats. Shie, coy, squeamish, cold, or averse. Shock, a Brunt. To stand the Shock, to bear the brunt. Shocking, what is of∣fensive, grating, griev∣ous. Shop, c. a prison. Shopt, c. imprison'd. Shop-lift, c. one that Steals under pretence of Cheap'ning. Shoe-makers-stocks, pincht with strait Shoes. No Man knows where the Shoe pinches but he that wears it, or another's Cross like him that bears it. Who goes worse Shod than the Shoe-maker's Wife? One Shoe will not fit all Feet, Men are not all of a Size, nor all Conveniences of a Last. To throw an old Shoe af∣ter one, or wish them good Luck in their Bu∣siness. Short-pots, false, cheating Potts used at Ale-houses, and Brandy-shops. Shot, Shotlings, large, lean Piggs bought to fat∣ten. To Pay one's Shot, to Pay one's Club or Proportion. Shot 'twixt Wind and Water, Clapt, or Poxt. Shoulder-clapper, c. a Sergeant or Bailiff. Shoulder-sham, c. a Partner to a File.
Shove the Tumbler, c. to be Whipt at the Cart's Tail. Shred, a Tailer. Shrieketh, the Noise a Badger makes at Rut∣ting Time. Shrouds, burying Cloths, (now) Woollen, (an∣ciently) Linnen; also Steps or Ladders (on board of Ship) to go up to the Topps. Shuffler, a Bird like, but not so big as a Duck, having a broader Bill. Shuffling-Fellow, a slip∣pery, shifting, Fellow. Shurk, c. a Sharper. S I Sice, c. Six-pence. Sickrel, a puny, sickly Creature. Siege, a Stool to set upon; also used by Phy∣sicians to their Patients. How many Sieges have you had? i. e. How many Stools have you had? Upon taking a Purge &c. Simkin, a Fool. Simon, c. Six-pence. Simples, Follies; also Plants or Physical Herbs. He must be cut of the Sim∣ples, Care must be taken to cure him of his Fol∣ly. Simpleton, a silly Crea∣ture, or Tony. Single, the Tail of a Hart, Buck or other Deer. Singler, or Sanglier, a wild Boar after the 4th Year. Single-ten, a very fool∣ish, silly Fellow; also Nails of that size. Sir John, the Country-Vicar or Parson. Sir Timothy, one that Treats every Body, and Pays the Reckonings every where. Six and eight-pence, c. the usual Fee given, to carry back the Body of the Executed Malefactor, to give it Christian Bu∣rial. S K
Skew, c. a Begger'sWooden Dish. To look a Skew, or on one side. Skew-fisted, awkward, ungainly. Skin-flint, a griping, sharping, close-fisted Fel∣low. Skinker, that fills the Glass or Cup. Who Skinks? Who pours out the Liquor. Skipper, c. a Barn; also a Dutch Master of a Ship or Vessel. Skip-jacks, c. young∣sters that Ride the Horses for Sale. Skip-kennel, a Foot-boy, or Laquais. S L Slam, c. a Trick; al∣so a Game entirely lost without getting one on that side. Slat, c. a Sheet. Slate, c. a half Crown. Sleeping House, with∣out Shop, Ware-house, or Cellar, only for a private Family. Sleeveless-errand, such as Fools are sent on, the first of April. Sleeveless-story, a Tale of a Tub, or of a Cock and a Bull. To laugh in one's Sleeves, inwardly slyly. Slice, when a Hawk Muteth a great distance from her. Slippery Trick, or Fel∣low, deceitful, as having two properties of Ice, smooth and slippery. Slot, the footing of a Hart. Slough. a deep miry Hole. Slubber'd over, Work slightly wrought, or hud∣dled up in haste. Slubber-degullion, a slovenly, dirty, nasty Fellow. Slug, a drone, or dull Tool; also a Bullet, beat into another Shape. Slur, c. a Cheat at Dice; also a slight Scan∣dal or Affront. Sly-boots, a seeming Silly, but subtil Fellow. S M. Smack, a Tang, or ill Taste.
Smacking-cove, c. a Coachman. Smart-money, given by the King, when a Man in Land or Sea-Service has a Leg Shot or Cut off, or is disa∣bled. Smart, witty, sharp; also pain. Smatterer, one half∣learned. A Smattering. a slight Tincture in any Skill or Learning. Smeller, c. a Nose, Smelling-cheat, c. a Nose-gay; also an Or∣chard or Garden. Smelts, c half Guineas. Tip me a Smelt, c. Pri∣thee lend me half a Gui∣nea. Smirk, a finical, spruce Fellow. To Smirk▪ to look pleasantly. Smiter, c. an Arm. Smash, c. to kick down Stairs. The Chub∣bs, toute the Blosses, they Smash, and make them brush, c. the Sharpers catch their Mistresses at the Tavern, making merry without them, Kick them down Stairs, and force them to rub off. Smock fac'd, fair Snout. Smoke, to Smoke or Smell a Design. It is Smok't, c. it is made Public, all have notice. Smoke him, Smoke him a∣gain, to affront a Stran∣ger at his coming in. Smoker, a Vessel to Blind the Enemies, to make way for the Ma∣chine to Play; also a Tobacconist. Smoky, c. Jealous. No Smoke but there is some Fire as no eeds but there is some Water, of a thing that will out, because Smoke is a sign of one, and Reeds or Rushes of the other. Smug, a Black-smith; also neat and spruce. Smuglers, c. those that Cheat the King of his Customs by private Im∣ports and Exports. Smutty, Bawdy. S N
Snack, c. share orpart, to go Snacks, c. to go halves or share and share alike. Tip me my Snack, or else I'll Whid∣dle, c. Give me my share, or I'll tell. Snaffle, c. a Highway∣man that has got Booty. Snaggs, large Teeth; also Snails. Snappish, (a Man) peevish, quarrelsom; (a Dog) apt to Bite. Snapt, Taken, Caught. Sneak, c. goes upon the Sneak at Munns, c. he privately gets into Hou∣ses or Shops at Night, and Steals undiscover'd. A Sneaking Budge, c. one that Robbs alone. Sneaker, (of Punch) a small Bowl. Sneaking, sheepish, or mean-spirited. Snearing, flickering, fleering. Snickering, Laughing in his Sleeve or privately. Snilch, c. to Eye or See any Body. The Cull Snilches, c. the man Eyes you or Sees you. Snitch, c. Snitchel, c. a Filip on the Nose. Snite, c. to Wipe, or Flap. Snite his Snitch, c. Wipe his Nose, or give him a good Flap on the Face. Sniting, a Hawk's Sneezing. Sniveling-Fellow, a Whining Fellow. Snow-broth, Snow∣water. Snub, to Check, or Rebuke. Snuff, Pet; also To∣bacco taken in Snush. Snuffle, to Speak through the Nose from a Cold or worse. Snudge, c. one that lurks under a Bed, to watch an opportunity to Rob the House. S O Sock, c. a Pocket; also to Beat. Not a Rag in my Sock, c. I han't a Farthing in my Pocket. I'll Sock ye, c. I'll Drub ye tightly. Socket-money, Demand∣ed and Spent upon Marriage.
Soft, Foolish. Sohoe, Seehoc, said aloud at the starting a Hare. Soker, a Toper, or Fuddle-cap. An old Soker, a true Pitcher∣man. To set Soking, to ply the Pot. Soldier's-bottle, a large one. Solomon, c. the Mass. Son of Apollo, a Scholar. Mars, Soldier. Venus, a Lover of Women. Mercury, a Wit. Parclement, a Lawyer. Sooterkin, a By-word upon the Dutch Women, from a Maggot, or Fancy, that their using Stoves so much, Breeds a kind of Animal in their Wombs, like a Mouse, which at their Delivery skips out. Soreth, the Footings of a Hare in the open Field. Sorrel-pate, red Hair'd. Sorter, (at the Post Office) that puts or Digests the Letters into Order or Method. Soul-driver, a Parson. He is a Soul, or loves Bran∣dy. Of a Noble Soul, ve∣ry generous. A Narrow-Soul'd Fellow, a poor∣spirited, or stingy Fel∣low. Souldiers-Mawn'd, c. a Counterfeit Sore or Wound in the Left Arm: Sounder, a Company of Swine, or wild-Boars. Soupe, Broth, Por∣ridge. Souse. Not a Souse, not a Penny. (French Mo∣ney) Sow's-baby, a Pig. Sowse-crown, a Fool. Sow-child, a Female Child. He has the wrong Sow by the Ear, or is in a wrong Box. Sowre, Crabbed, Surly, Ill-conditioned. Soyl, when any Deer is hard Hunted, and be∣takes himself to Swim∣ming in any River.
S P Spangles, c. ends of Gold or Silver. Spanish-gout, the Pox. Spanish-money, fair Words and Compli∣ments. Spark, a spruce, trim, gay Fellow. A lewd Spark, a Man of the Town, or Debauchee. Sparring-blows, the first Strokes to try the goodness of young Cocks Heels; also those in a Battel before the Cocks come to Mouth it. Sparrow-mouth'd, a Mouth o Heavenly wide, as Sir P. Sidney calls it. Speckt-wiper, c. a co∣lour'd Handkerchief. Spider-catcher, a Spin∣dle for a Man. Spider's-web, the sub∣tilties of Logic, which (as Aristo the Chiote said) tho' artificial to sight, were yet of no Use. Spill, a small Reward or gift of Money. Spindle-shankt, very small-legg'd. Spirit-away, as Kid∣nap. Spiritual-flesh-broker, a Parson. Spitter, a red Male Hart of a Year old. Splenetic, Melancho∣lic. Split-fig, a Grocer. Splitter-of-Causes, a Lawyer. Split my windpipe, a foolish kind of a Curse among the Beaux. Spraints, the Excre∣ments of an Otter. Spring a Partridge, c. People drawn in, to be Bit. To spring Partridge's, to raise them. A Springe, a Snare, or Nooze to catch Hares, as a Ginn is a Snare or Nooze to catch Birds. Spunge, to drink at others Cost. Spunging∣house, a By-prison. A Spunging Fellow, one that lives upon the rest and Pays nothing.
S Q Squab, a very fat, truss Person, a new Hatcht Chick; also a Couch. Squinte-suego, one that Squints very much. Squeek, c. to discover, or impeach; also to cry out. They Squeek beef upon us, c. cry out High∣way-men or Thieves after us. The Cull Squeek's, c. the Rogue Peaches. Squeeker, c. a Barboy; also a Bastard, or any other child. Stifle the Squeeker, c. to Murder the Child and throw it into a House of Office. Squawl, to throw a wry; also to cry a loud. Squeemish, nice. Squeeze, to gripe, or skrew hard. Squeezing of Wax, be∣ing Bound for any Body; also sealing of Writings. Squire of Alsatia, a Man of Fortune, drawn in, cheated, and ruin'd by a pack of poor, lowsy, spunging, bold Fellows that liv'd (formerly) in White-Fryers. The Squire, a Sir Timothy Treat-all; also a Sap-pate. Squirish, foolish; also one that pretends to Pay all Reckomings, and is not strong enough in the Pocket. A fat Squire, a rich Fool. S T Stag, Staggard, see Hart. Stallion, c. a Whore-Master; also a Stone-Horse kept to cover Mares. Stall-whimper, c. a Bastard. Stalling, c. making or or∣daining. Stalling-ken, c. a Bro∣ker's-Shop, or any House that receives stolen-Goods. Stale Jest, old, dull. Maid, at her last Prayers. Stam-flesh, c. to Cant. Stammel, a brawny, lusty, strapping Wench. Stamps, c. Legs.
Stampers, c. Shoes; also Carriers. Starched, affected, proud, stiff. Start, (Drink) Brew∣ers emptying several Bar∣rels into a great Tub, and thence conveying it through a Leather-pipe down the Cellar into the Butts. Starter, c. a Question▪ I am no Starter, I shan't flinch, or cry to go Home. Start the Hare, put her up. Statues, either Images in Brass or Stone, or Men without motion. Steenkirk, a Muslin∣neckcloath carelesly put on, first, at the Battel of Steenkirk, afterwards a Fashion for both Sexes. Steppony, a Decoction of Raisins of the Sun, and Lemons in Conduit∣water, sweetned with Sugar and Bottled up. Stern, the Tail of a Wolf; also the hind part of a Ship. Stick▪flamms, c. a pair of Gloves. Stickle-bag, a very small prickly Fish, with∣out Scales, a choice Bait for a Trout. A great Stick∣ler, a zealous Man in the Cause or Interest he espouses. It Sticks in his Stomack, he resents it. Stiff, Sti▪ffrump, proud, stately. Sting bum, a Niggard. Stingo, humming, strong Liquor. Stingy, covetuos, close∣sisted, sneaking. Stitch, a Tayler. Stitch-back, very strong Ale. Stock-jobbing, a sharp, cunning, cheating Trade of Buying and Selling Shares of Stock in East-India, Guinea and other Companies; also in the Bank, Exchequer▪ &c. Stock-drawers, c. Stock∣ings. Stone Dead, quite. Doublet, a Prison▪
Stop-hole Abbey, c. the Nick-name of the chief Rendezvouz of the Can∣ting Crew of Gypsies, Beg∣gers, Cheats, Thieves, &c.Stop my Vitals, a silly Curse in use among the Beaux. Stoter, c. a great Blow. Stoter him, c. or tip him a Stoter, c. settle him, give him a swing∣ing Blow. Stout, very strong, Malt-Drink. Stow, c. you have said enough. Stow you bene Cove, c. hold your Peace good Fellow. Stow your Whidds and Plant'em; for the Cove of the Ken can cant 'em, Take care what you say, for the Man of the House un∣derstands you; also to hoard Treasure, or lay up Corn in Granaries or Drink in Cellars. Hence Stoward, or Steward. Strain-hard, to ly heartily. Strait-lac'd, precise, squeemish, puritanical, nice. Straping, c. lying with a Wench. Strapping-Lass, a swing∣ing two-handed Woman. Stress of weather, foul weather at Sea. At a Stress, at a pinch. Stretching, hanging. He'll Stretch for it, he'll be Hang'd. He Stretcht hard, told a whisking Ly. Stretcher, the piece of Wood that lies cross the Boat, where on the Wa∣ter-man rests his Feet. Strike, c. to Beg, to Rob; also to borrow Money. Strike all the Cheats, c. Rob all you meet. Strike the Cull, c. Beg of that Gentleman. Strike the Cly, c. get that Fellow's Money from him. He has Struck the Quidds, c. he has got the Cole from him. He Strikes every Body, c. he bor∣rows Money every where, he runs in every one's Debt. A Strike, (of Corn) a Bushel.
Strip, c. to Rob or Gut a House, to unrig any Body, or to Bite them of their Money. Strip the Ken, c. to Gut the House. Strip the Table, c. to Winn all the Money onthe Place. Stripts, poor, Naked. We have Stript the Cull, c. We have got all the Fool's Money. The Cove's Stript, c. the Rogue has not a Jack left to help himself. Strommel, c. Straw. Strowlers, c. Vaga∣bonds, Itinerants, Men of no settled Abode, of a Precarious Life, Wan∣derers of Fortune, such, as, Gypsies, Beggers, Ped∣lers, Hawkers, Moun∣tebanks, Fidlers, Coun∣try-Players, Rope-dan∣cers, Juglers, Tumblers, showers of Tricks, and Raree-show-men. Strowling-morts, c. pre∣tending to be Widows, sometimes Travel the Countries, making Laces upon Ewes, Beggers∣tape, &c. Are light Fin∣ger'd, Subtil, Hypocriti∣cal, Cruel, and often dan∣gerous to meet, especi∣ally when a Ruffler is with them. Study, a Closet of Books. In a brown Study, mus∣ing, pensive, careful. Strum, c. a Periwig. Rum-strum, c. a long Wig; also a handsom Wench, or Strumpet. Stuff, Nonsense, idle, ridiculous, impertinent Talk. Stuling-ken, c. as Stal∣ling-ken, c. Stum, the Flower of fermenting Wine, used by Vintners, when their Wine is down or flat, to make it Drink up and brisk; also when they Brew, to make their mixtures, (by putting them into a new Fer∣ment) all of one Taste. Stumm'd Wines are very unwholesom, and may be discover'd, by a white Froth round the sides of the Glass. Stubble-it, c. hold your Tongue. Sturdy-beggers, c. the fifth and last of the most ancient Order of Canters. S U Sub-beau, or Demibeau, a wou'd be-fine.
Sub▪bois, Maples, Birch, Sallow▪ and Willow. Suck, c. Wine or strong Drink. This is rum Suck, c. it is excellent Tipple. We'll go and Suck out Facas, but if they toute us, we'll take rattle and brush, c. let's go to Drink and be merry, but if we be Smelt, by the People of the House, we must Scower off. He loves to Suck his Face, he delights in Drink∣ing. Suckey, c. drunkish, maudlin, half Seas o'er. Suit and Cloak, good store of Brandy or any agreable Liquor, let down Gutter-lane. Sun-burnt, having ma∣ny (Male) Children. Sunny-bank, a good, rousing Winter-Fire. Superstitious-Pies, Min∣c'd, or Christmas-Pies, so Nick-nam'd by the Puritans, or Precisians, tho' they can Eat 'em; but affecting to be singu∣lar, make them a Month or six Weeks before Christmas, or the Feast of Christ. Supernaculam, not so much as a Drop left to be poured upon the Thumb-nail, so cleaver∣ly was the Liquor tipt off. Supouch, c. an Hostess or Landlady. Surtout, a loose, great, or riding Coat. Sutler, c. he that Pock∣ets up, Gloves, Knives, Handkerchiefs▪ Snuff and Tobacco-boxes, and all the lesser Moveables; also a Scullion or Huck∣ster, one that follows an Army, to sell Meat, Drink, &c. S W Swadlers, c. the tenth Order of the Canting Tribe. To Swaddle, to Beat lustily with, a Cane or Cable's end. I'll Swad∣dle your Hide, I'll bang your Back. Swag, c. a Shop. Rum Swag, c. full of rich Goods. Swagger, to vapour or bounce. Swallow, (Falsities for Truths) to believe them.
Sweets, the Dreggs of Sugar▪ used by Vintners, to allay the undue fer∣menting or fretting of their Wine. Sweetners, c. Guinea-Droppers, Cheats, Sharp∣ers. To Sweeten, c. to decoy, draw in, and Bite. To be Sweet upon, c. to coakse, wheedle, en∣tice or allure. Swig-men, c. the 13th Rank of the Canting Crew, carrying small Habberdashery-Wares about, pretending to sell them, to colour their Roguery. A hearty Swig, a lusty Draught. To Swig it off, to Drink it all up. Swill-belly, a great Drinker. Swimmer, a Counter∣feit (old) Coyn. Swinging Chap, a very great one. Lye. Fellow, I Swing'd him off, I lay'd on and beat him well-favoredly. He is Swing'd off, damnably Clapt. Swinish, (fellow) ra∣king, greedy, gluttonous, covetous. Swabbers, the Ace of Hearts, Knave of Clubs, Ace and Duce of Trumps; also the Sorriest Sea-Men put to Wash and clean the Ship. Swop, to barter or Truck. T Tackle, c. a Mistress; also good Cloths. The Cull has tipt his Tackle Rum-rigging, c. or, has Tipt his Bloss Rum-tackle, c. the keeping Coxcomb has given his Mistress very fine Cloths. Taffy, a Welshman or David. Taffy's Day, the first of March. Tables, a Game. Turn the Tables, make it your own Case. Take the Culls in, c. Seize the Men, in order to Rob them.
Take-time, never to thrust but with advan∣tage. Very taking, accep∣table,agreeable, or be∣coming. It Takes well, or, the Town Takes it, the Play pleas'd, or was acted with Applause, or the Book Sells well. No doubt but it will Take, no question but it will sell. Talent, the same with Capacity, Genius, Incli∣nation or Ability; also 375l. in Silver, and 4500l. in Gold. His Talent does not lye that way, he has no Genius for it, or his Head does not lean to it. Tale-tellers, a sort of Servants in use with the great Men in Ireland, to Lull them a sleep with Tales and Stories of a Cock and a Bull, &c. I tell you my Tale, and my Tales-man, or Author. Tall-boy, a Pottle or two Quart-pot full of Wine. Talons, or Pounces, a Bird's Claws, as Fangs are Beast's Claws. Tally-men, Brokers that let out Cloths at mode∣rate Rates to wear per Week, Month, or Year. Tame-fellow, tractable, easy, manageable. Tamper, to practise up∣on one. Tant, Tantest, Mast of a Ship or Man, Tall, Tallest. Tantivy-boies, high-Flyers, or High-flown Church-men, in oppo∣sition, to the moderate Church-men; or Lati∣tudinarians a lower sort of Flyers, like Batts, between Church-men and Dissenters. Taplash, Wretched, sorry Drink, or Hog∣wash. Tappeth, see, Beateth. Tariff, a Book of Rates or Customs; also ano∣ther of the Current Coin. Tarnish, to Fade. Tar, Tarpaulin, a Sea∣man; also a piece of Canvas (tarr'd) laid over the Hatches to keep out Wet. Tar-terms, proper Sea-Phrases, or Words. Tart-dame, sharp, quick.
Tartar, a sharper. To catch a Tartar, in stead of catching, to be catcht in a Trap. Tatter-de-mallion, c. a ragged, tatter'd Begger, sometimes half Naked, with design to move Charity, having better Cloths at Home. In Tat∣ters, in Raggs. Tatter'd and Torn, rent and torn. Tattler, c. an Alarm, or Striking Watch, or (indeed) any. Tatts, c. false Dice. Tat-monger, c. a Sharp∣er, or Cheat, using fase Dice. Tatling Fellow, or Wo∣man, prating, imper∣tinent. Taunts, Girds, Quips, or Jeers. To Taunt, to Jeer or Flout. Taudry, garish, gawdy, with Lace or mismatch∣ed and staring Colours: A Term borrow'd from those times when they Trickt and Bedeckt the Shrines and Altars of the Saints, as being at vye with each other upon that occasion. The Vo∣taries of St. Audrey (an Isle of Ely Saint) exceed∣ing all the rest in the Dress and Equipage of her Altar, it grew into a Nay-word, upon any thing very Gawdy, that it was all Taudry, as much as to say all St. Au∣drey. Tayle, c. a Sword. Tayle-drawers, c. Sword∣stealers. He drew the Cull's Tayle rumly, c. he whipt away the Gentle∣man's Sword cleverly. T E Teague-land, Ireland. Teague-landers, Irish∣men. Tears of the Tankard, Drops of the good Li∣quor that fall beside. Tegg, see Doe. Temperade, an East-Indian-dish, now in use in England, being a Fowl Fricasied, with high Sauce, Blancht Almonds and Rice.
Temperament, an Ex∣pedient or Medium; al∣soa due proportion of the four Humors. Temple-pickling, the Pum∣ping of Bailives, Bumms, Setters, Pick-pockets, &c. Tender-parnel, a very nicely Educated crea∣ture, apt to catch Cold upon the least blast of Wind. Terce, the Nails of the Sword-hand quite down. Tercel-gentle, c. a Knight or Gentleman of a good Estate; also any rich Man. Terra-firma, an Estate in Land; also a Conti∣nent. Has the Cull any Terra Firma? Has the Fool any Land? That That or There, to Hare. T H Thwack, to Beat with a Stick or Cudgel. The Dragon upon St. George, c. the Woman uppermost. Thief-takers, who make a Trade of help∣ing People (for a gratu∣ity) to their lost Goods and sometimes for Inte∣rest or Envy snap∣ing the Rogues them∣selves; being usually in fee with them, and ac∣quainted with their Haunts. Thorn-back, an old Maid; also a well known Fish, said to be exceed∣ing Provocative. Thorough-cough, farting at the same time. Thorough-passage, in at one Ear, and out at t'other. Thorough-stitch, over Shoes, over Boots. The Three-legged-stool▪ Tyburn. Three-threads, half com∣mon Ale, and the rest Stout or Double Beer. Threpps, c. Three-pence. Thrumms, c. Three-pence. Tip me Thrumms, c. Lend me Three-pence.
Thummikins, a Pu∣nishment (in Scotland) by hard Squeezing or Press∣ing of the Thumbs to ex∣tort Confession, which Stretches them prodi∣giously and is very pain∣ful. In Camps, and onboard of Ships, lighted Matches are clapt be∣tween the Fingers to the same intent. T I Tib, a young Lass. Tib▪ of the Buttery, c. a Goose. Tickrum, c. a Licence. to run a tick, to go on the Score, or a trust. Tickle-pitcher, a Toss∣pot, or Pot-companion. Tiffing, c. lying with a Wench. Tilter, a Sword, to tilt, to fight with Rapier, or pushing Swords, run a tilt, a swift Pursuit, also Drink made to run fa∣ster. Tint for tant, hit for hit, and dash for dash. Tip, c. to give or lend; also Drink and a draught. Tip-your Lour, or Cole or I'll Mill ye, c. give me your Money or I'll kill ye. Tip the Culls a Sock, for they are sawcy, c. Knock down the Men for resisting. Tip the Cole to Adam Tiler, c. give your Pick-pocket Mo∣ney presently to your running Comrade. Tip the Mish, c. give me the Shirt. Tip me a Hog, c. lend me a Shilling. Tip it all off, Drink it all off at a Draught. Don't spoil his Tip, don't baulk his Draught. A Tub of good Tip, (for Tipple) a Cask of strong Drink▪ To Tip off, to Dye. Tipler, a Fuddle-cap or Toss-pot. Tipsy, a'most Drunk. Tiring, Dressing; also when a Leg or Pinion of a Pullet, Pigeon, &c. is given to a Hawk to pluck at. Tiring-room, a Dressing-Room. A Tire∣woman, one that teaches to Dress in the Hair, when in Fashion, and when out, to cut the Hair, and Dress the Head. Tit-bit, a fine Snack, or choice Morsel. Tit-tat, the aiming of Children to go at first. Tittle-tattle, foolish, idle, impertinent Talk. Titter, to Laugh at a Feather.
Titter-totter, who is up∣on the Reel, at every jog, or Blast of Wind. T O Toge, c. a Coat. Togemans, c. a Gown or Cloak. I have Bit the Togemans, c. I have Stole the Cloak. 'Tis a Rum∣togemans, 'tis a good Camlet-Cloak, Let's-nim it, c. let's whip it off. Tokens, the Plague, also Presents from one to another, and Far∣things. Not a Token left, not one Farthing remain∣ing. Tom-fool's-token, Mo∣ney. Tol. Toledo, c. a Sword. Bite the Tol, c. to Steal the Sword. A Rum-tol, c. a Silver∣hilted Sword. A Queer∣tol, c. a Brass or Steel∣hilted or ord'nary Sword. Tom-boy, a Ramp, or Tomrig. Tom of Bedlam, c. the same as Abram-man. Tom-conney, a very silly Fellow. Tom rig, a Ramp. Tom-thumb, a Dwarf or diminitive Fellow. Come by Tom Long the Carrier, of what is very late, or long a coming. Tongue-pad, a smooth, Glib-tongued, insinuat∣ing Fellow. Tony, a silly Fellow, or Ninny. A meer Tony, or Simpleton. Tool, an Implement fit for any Turn, the Creature of any Cause or Faction; a meer Pro∣perty, or Cat's Foot. Top, c. to Cheat, or Trick any one; also to Insult. What do you Top upon me? c. do you stick a little Wax to the Dice to keep them together, to get the Chance, you wou'd have? He thought to have to Topt upon me▪ c. he design'd to have Put upon me, Sharpt me, Bullied me, or Af∣fronted me. Tope, to Drink. An old Toper, a staunch Drunkard. To Tope it about, or Dust it about, to Drink briskly about.
Top-diver, a Lover of Women. An old Top-di∣ver, one that has Lov'd Old-hat in his time. Top-heavy, Drunk. Topping-fellow, who has reacht the Pitch and greatest Eminence in any Art; the Master, and the Cock of his Pro∣fession. Topping-cheat, c. the Gallows. Topping-cove, c. the Hangman. Torch-cul, the same as Bum-fodder. Torcoth, a Fish having a red Belly, found on∣in the Pool Sinperis, in Carnarvanshire. Tories, Zealous Stick∣lers for the Prerogative and Rights of the Crown, in behalf of the Mo∣narchy; also Irish-thieves, or Rapparies. Tost, to name or be∣gin a new Health. Who Tosts now? Who Chris∣tens the Health? An old Tost, a pert pleasant old Fellow. Totty-headed, Giddy-headed, Hare-brain'd. Tout, c. to look out Sharp, to be upon one's Guard. Who Touts? c. who looks out sharp? Tout the Culls, c. Eye those Folks which way they take. Do you Bulk and I'll File, c. if you'll jo∣stle him, I will Pick his Pocket. Touting-ken, c. a Ta∣vern or Ale-house Bar. Tourn, Copulation of Roes. Tower-hill-play, a slap on the Face and a kick on the Breech. Town-bull, one that rides all the Women he meets. Tower, a Woman's false Hair on their Fore∣heads. Towring Thoughts, Ambitious Aspiring. To Tower, to sore on High. They have been round the Tower with it, c. that Piece of Money has been Clipt. T R Trace, the Footing of a Hare in the Snow. Track, c. to go.
Track up the Dancers, c. whip up the Stairs. Tract, the footing of a Boar. Train, a Hawk's or Peacock's Tail; also Attendants or Retinue. Trajoning, when a Roe crosses and doubles. Tansnear, c. to come up with any body. Translators, Sellers of old Shoes and Boots, between Shoe-makers and Coblers; also that turn or Translate one Language into another▪ Transmogrify, to alter, or new vamp. Tranter, the same as Crocker. Trapan, c. he that draws in or wheedles a Cull, and Bites him. Tra∣pan'd, c. Sharpt, ensnar'd. Trapes, a dangling Slattern. Trassing, when the Hawk raiseth any Fowl aloft, and soaring with it, at length descendeth with it to the Ground. Tree the Martern, Dis∣lodge him. Treewins, c. Three-pence. Trigry-mate, an idle She-Companion. Trib, c. a Prison. He is in Trib, for Tribulation, c. he is layd by the Heels, or in a great deal of Trouble. Trim, Dress. in a sad Trim, Dirty, Undrest. A Trim-Lad, a spruce, neat, well trickt Man. Trimmer, a moderate Man, betwixt Whig and Tory, between Preroga∣tive and Property. To Trim, to hold fair with both sides. Trim the Boat, poise it. Trim of▪ the Ship, that way she goes best. Trimming, c. Cheating People of their Money. Trine, c. to Hang; al∣so Tyburn. Trining, c. Hanging. Trinkets, Porringers, and also any little odd thing, Toies and Trifles. Tringum-Trangum, a Whim, or Maggor.
Tripolin, Chalk, nick∣nam'd and us'd by the French Perfumers as A∣labasteris by the English. Trip, a short Voyage or Journey; also an Error of the Tongue, or Pen, a stumble, a false step, a miscarriage, or a Bastard. Troateth, see Growneth Trotters, Feet, usually Sheeps. Shake your Trot∣ters, troop off, be gone An old Trot, a sorry base old Woman. A dog Trot, a pretty Pace. Troll-away, bowl a∣way, or trundle away. Troll-about, saunter, loiter, wander about. Trolly-lolly, coarse Lace once much in fashion, now worn only by the meaner sort. Trollop. A great Trol∣lop, a lusty coarse Ramp or Tomrig. Trooper, c. a half Crown. Trounc'd, troubled, Cast in Law, Punisht. I'll Trounce the Rogue, I'll hamper him. Truck, to swop or barter. Trug, a dirty Puzzel, an ord'nary sorry Wo∣man; also the third part of a Bushel, and a Tray for Milk. Trull, c. a Whore; also a Tinker's travelling Wife or Wench, and to trundle. Trumpery, old Ware, old Stuff, as old Hatts, Boots, Shoes, &c. Trash and Trumpery. For want of good Company, welcome Trumpery. Trundlers, c. Pease. Trunk, c. a Nose; also the body of a Tree, or Man, without Head, Arms or Leggs. How fares your old Trunk? c. Does your Nose stand fast? Trusty-Trojan, or Trusty-Trout, a sure Friend or Confident. T U Tuck't, Hang'd.
Tumbler, c. a Cart. To shove the Tumbler, c. to be Whipt at the Cart's Tail; also one that Decoys, or draws others into Play; and one that shows Tricks with and without a Hoop; a low Silver Cup to Drink outof, and a Coney Dog. Tup, Copulation of Ram and Eve. Venison out of Tup▪park Mutton. Turk, any cruel hard∣hearted Man. Turky-Merchants, dri∣vers of Turkies. Turkish-shore, Lambeth, Southwark and Roder∣hith-side of the Water. Turkish Treatment, very sharp or ill dealing in Business. Turn-coat, he that quits one and embraces an∣other Party. Turnep-pate, White or Fair-hair'd. T W Twang, a smack or ill Taste. Tweak, in a Tweak, in a heavy taking, much∣vext, or very angry. Twelver, c. a Shilling. Twist, half Tea, half Coffee; also a Bough, and to Eat. To Twist lus∣tily, to Feed likea Farmer. Twit, to hit in the Teeth. Twitter, to Laugh much with little Noise; also to Tremble. V Vagaries, wild Ram∣bles, extravagant Frolicks. Vagrant, a wandring Rogue, a strolling Vaga∣bond. Vain, Fond. Vain-glorious, or Osten∣tatious Man, one that Pis∣ses more than he Drinks. Valet, a Servant. Vamp, c. to Pawn any thing; also a Sock. I'll Vamp and tip you the Cole, c. I'll Pawn my Cloths, but I'll raise the Money for you. To Vamp, to new Dress, Licker, Refresh, or Rub up old Hatts Boots▪ Shoes, &c. Vampers, c. Stockings. Varlets, Rogues, Ras∣cals, &c. now tho' for∣merly Yeomans Servants. Vaudois, Inhabitants of the Vallies in Piedmont, Subject to the Duke of Savoy, fam'd for their frequent Rencounters with and Defeating of French Parties, intercept∣ing their Provisions, &c.
Vault, an arched Cel∣lar, and House of Office. She goes to the Vault, when a Hare (which is very seldom) takes the Ground like a Coney. Vaulting-School, c. a Bawdy-house; also an Academy where Vault∣ing, and other Manly Exercises are Taught. Vauntlay, Hounds or Beagles set in readiness, expecting the Chace to come by, and then cast off before the rest come in. V E Velvet, c. a Tongue. Tip the Velvet, c. to Tongue a Woman. Venary, or Venery, Hun∣ting or Chasing Beasts and Birds of Venery, as, the Hart, the Hind, the Hare, Boar and Wolf, the Phea∣sant, the Partridge, &c. Venison, whatsoever Beast of the Forest is for the food of Man. Vent, the fundament of Poultry and Fish; also a Bung-hole in a Vessel. Vent the Otter, see Otter. Vessels, several Pipes and Conveyances in the body, of the Blood, Seed, Serum, or Urine, as the Bloud-vessels, Lymphae∣ducts, Spermatick Ves∣sels, Urinary Vessels, &c. Also Kitchin-Utensils, as Pots, Pans, &c. And of other Offices, as Brew∣ing, Washing Churning Vessels, &c. V I View, the Treading of a Buck or Fallow Deer. Vinegar, c. a Cloak. Virago, a masculine Woman, or a great two∣handed Female. Virtuoso, an experi∣mental Philosopher, a Trader in new Inven∣tions and Discoveries, a Projecter in Philoso∣phy. U N Unharbour the Hart, see Hart.
Unitarians, a numerous Sect holding one Godwithout plurality or dis∣tinction of Persons. Unkennel the Fox, Dis∣lodge him. Unrig'd, Stript, Un∣drest, and Ships that are laid up. Unrig the Drab, c. to pull all the Whore's Cloths off. Untwisted, Undone, Ruin'd. Unwasht-bawdry, Rant, errant fulsom Bawdry. Uphils, high Dice. V O Vouchers, c. that put off False Money for Sham-coyners; also one that Warrants Gagers or under Officers Accompts, either at the Excize-Office, or else where. U P Uppish, rampant, crow∣ing, full of Money. He is very Uppish, well lined in the Fob; also brisk. Upright-men, c. the second Rank of the Canting Tribes, having sole right to the first night's Lodging with the Dells. Go Upright, said by Taylers and Shoe∣makers, to their Ser∣vants, when any Mo∣ney is given to make them Drink and signi∣fies, bring it all out in Drink, tho' the Donor intended less and expects Change or some return of Money. Upstarts, new rais'd to Honour. U R Urchin, a little sorry Fellow; also a Hedge∣hog. Urines, Netts to catch Hawks. Urinal of the Planets, Ireland, with us, because of its frequent and great Rains, as Heidelberg, and Cologn in Germany, have the same Name upon the same Account; also a Chamber-pot, or Glass. U T Utopia, Fairy-Land, a new Atlantis, or Isle of Pines.
W Waddle, to go like a Duck. Wag. Waggish, Arch, Gamesom, Pleasant. Wag-Tail, a light Wo∣man. Wallowish, a malkish, ill Taste. Wap, c. to Lie with a Man. If she won't wap for a Winne, let her trin'e for a Make, c. If she won't Lie with a Man for a Penny, let her Hang for a Half-penny. Mort wap-apace, c. a Woman of Experience, or very expert at the Sport. Wapper-eyed, that has Sore or running Eyes. Warm, welllined or flush in the Pocket. Warming-pan, an old fashion'd large Watch. A Scotch Warming-pan, a She-bed-fellow. Warren, c. he that is Security for Goods taken up, on Credit, by Ex∣travagant young Gen∣tlemen; also a Boarding-school and a Bawdy-house. Wash, After-wort; also Paint for Faces. Waspish, peevish. Water-Pad, c. one that Robbs Ships in the Thames. Wattles, Ears; also Sheep-folds. W E Weak, Silly, half-witted. Welsh-Camp, a Field betwixt Lambs-Conduit and Grays Inn-lane, where the Mob got to gether in great numbers, doing great mischief. Welsh-fiddle, the Itch. Westminster-Wedding, a Whore and a Rogue Married together. Wet-Quaker, a Drunk∣ard of that Sect. W H Wheadle, c. a Sharper. To cut a Wheadle, c. to Decoy, by Fawning and Insinuation. Wheel-band in the Nick, regular Drinking over the left Thumb.
When we enter'd the Ken, we loapt up the Dan∣cers, and Fagotted all there, c. when we got into the House, we whipt up Stairs and Bound all the People there. Wheatgear, a Bird smaller than a Dottrel, choice Peck. Whether-go-ye, a Wife. Whet, a Draught or Sup to encourage the Appetite. Whet-stones-park, a Lane betwixt Holborn and Lin∣colns-Inn-fields, fam'd for a Nest of Wenches, now de-park'd. Whids, c. Words. Whiddle, c. to tell, or discover. He Whiddles, c. he Peaches. He Whid∣dles the whole Scrap, c. he discovers all he knows. The Cull has Whiddled, because we wou'd n't tip him a Snack, c. the Dog has discover'd, because we did n't give him a share. They Whiddle beef, and we must Brush, c. they cry out Thieves, we are Pursued, and must Fly. Whiddler, c. a Peacher (or rather Impeacher) of his Gang. Whiggs, the Republicans or Common-wealths-men, under the Name of Patriots, and Lovers of Property; originally the Field-conventiclers in the West of Scotland. Whiggish, Factious, Se∣ditious, Restless, Uneasy. Whig-land, Scotland. Whip-shire, Yorkshire. Whipster, a sharp, or subtil Fellow. Whip off, c. to Steal, to Drink cleaverly, to Snatch, and to run away. Whipt through the Lungs, run through the Body with a Sword. Whipt in at the Glaze, c. got in at the Window. Whim, a Maggot. Whimsical, Maggotish. Whimper, a low, or small Cry. What a Whim∣pering you keep? Whindle, a low or feigned Crying. Whineth, see Otter. To Whine, to cry squeeking∣ly, as at Conventicles.
Whinyard, a Sword. Whipper-snapper, a very small but sprightly Boy. Whip-Jacks, c. the tenth Order of the Can∣ting Crew; Counterfeit Mariners Begging with false Passes, pretending Shipwrecks, great Losses at Sea, &c. narrow es∣capes; telling dismal Stories, having learnt Tar-terms on purpose, but are meer Cheats. Whirlegigs, Testicles. Whisk, a little incon∣siderable, impertinent Fellow. Whisker, a great Lie. Whiskins, c. shallow, brown Bowls to Drink out off. Whistle, a derisory Term for the Throat. Wet your Whistle, to Li∣quor your Troat. Whit, c. Newgate. As five Rum-padders, are Rub'd in the Dark-man's out of the Whit, and are pik'd in to the Deuseaville, c. five Highway-men in the Night broke Newgate, and are gone into the Countrey. White-liver'd, Cow∣ardly; also Pale Visag'd. White-wool, c. Silver. White-chappel-portion, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave. Whow-ball, a Milk∣maid. Whur, the rising or fluttering of Partridge or Pheasant. W I Wicket, c. a Casement, also a little Door. As toute through the Wicket, and see where a Cully pikes with his Gentry-mort, whose Munns are the Rum∣mest I ever touted before c. look through the Case∣ment and see where the Man walks with a Gen∣tle-woman, whose Face is the fairest, I have ever seen. Wicher-Cully, c. a Sil∣ver-smith. Wide, when the Biass of the Bowl holds not enough.
Widows-Weeds, Mour∣ning Cloths. A Grass-Widow, one that pre∣tendsto have been Mar∣ried, but never was, yet has Children. Whores-kitling, a Bastard. Whore-son, a Bastard. Wild-boar, the fourth Year, at which Age or a little before he leaveth the Sounder, and is cal∣led a Singler, or Sanglier, Hogsteer, the third Year; Hog, the second Year; Pig of the Sounder, the first Year. A Boar couch∣eth, Lodgeth; Rear the Boar, Dislodge him. A Boar freemeth, maketh a noise at rutting Time. Wild-Rogues, c. the fifth Order of Canters, such as are train'd up from Children to Nim Buttons off Coats, to creep in at Cellar and Shop-Win∣dows, and to slip in at Doors behind People; also that have been whipt, Burnt in the First and often in Prison for Roguery. Wiles, Engins to take Deer; also Tricks In∣trigues. Wily, cunning, crafty, intriguing. Willing-Tit, a little Horse that Travels chear∣fully. Willow, c. Poor, and of no Reputation. Wind-fall, a great For∣tune fallen unexpectedly by the Death of a Fri∣end, or Wood fell by high Winds, &c. Wind-mills in the Head, empty Projects He'll go as near the Wind as ano∣ther, live as thrifty and wary as any one. Win, c. a Penny. To Win, c. to Steal. Won, c. Stolen. The Cull has won a couple of Rumglim∣sticks, c. the Rogue has Stole a pair of Silver-Candlesticks. Windy-fellow, without Sense or Reason. Wink, c. a Signal or Intimation. He tipt the Wink, c. he gave the Sign or Signal.
Wipe, c. a Blow; also a Reflection. He tipt him a rum Wipe, c. he gave him a swinging Blow. I gave him a Wipe, I spoke something that cut him,or gaul'd him. He Wipt his Nose, c. he gull'd him. Wiper, c. a Handker∣chief. Nim the Wiper c. to Steal the Handker∣chief. Wiper-drawer, c. a Hand∣kerchief Stealer. He drew a broad, narrow, cam, or Speckt Wiper, c. he Pickt-pockets of a broad, or narrow, Ghenting, Cam∣brick, or Colour'd Hand∣kerchief. Wire-draw, c. a Fetch or Trick to wheedle in Bubbles; also to screw, over-reach, or deal hard with. Wire-drawn, c. so serv'd, or treated. Wise Man of Gotham, a Fool. Witcher, c. Silver. Witcher-bubber, c. a Sil∣ver-bowl. The Cull is pik'd with the Witcher-bub∣ber, c. the Rogue is mar∣ched off with the Silver-Bowl. Witcher-tilter, c. a Sil∣ver-hilted Sword. He has bit, or drawn the Wit∣cher-tilter, c. he has Stole the Silver-hilted Sword. Within the Sword, from the Sword to the Right Hand. Without the Sword, all the Man's Body above the Sword. The Witt, c. Newgate. W O Woman of the Town, a Lewd, common Pros∣titute. Womble te-cropt, see Crop∣sick. Wooden-ruff, c. a Pillo∣ry, the Stocks at the o∣ther end. Hudibras. He wore the Wooden-ruff, c. he stood in the Pillory. Wood-pecker, c. a By∣stander that bets; also a bird of that Name. In a Wood, at a loss. Wooly-crown, a Fool. Your Wits are a Wool-ga∣thering, are in a Wild goose∣chace. Word-pecker, one that play's with Words. Worm'd out of, Rookt, Cheated, Trickt.
Wreath, the Tail of a Boar; also a Torce be∣tweenthe Mantle and the Crest. X Xantippe, a Scold; also the froward Wife of So∣crates. Y Yarmouth-Capon, a Red Herring. Yarmouth-Coach, a sor∣ry low Cart to ride on, drawn by one Horse. Yarmouth-Pie, made of Herrings, highly Spic'd, and Presented by the City of Norwich, (upon the forfeiture of their Charter) annually to the King. Yarum, c. Milk. Y E Yea and Nay-Men, Quakers. Yearn, when Beagles bark and cry at their Game. Yellow, Jealous. Yellow-boy, c. Piece of Gold of any Coin. Yeomam of the Mouth, an Officer belonging to his Majestie's Pantry. Y O Yoak'd Married. Yorkshire-Tike, a York∣shire manner of Man. Z Zany, a Mountebank's Merry-Andrew, or Jes∣ter, to distinguish him from a Lord's Fool. Zuche, a wither'd or dry Stock or Stub of a Tree. FINIS.
