F1156 R15469 12255760 57442
A Flattering ELEGIE Vpon the death of King Charles: The cleane contrary way. With a Parallell something significant. Printed in the Yeare 1649.
A flattering ELEGIE, &c. VVEre all the flatt'ry in the world in me, Yet (Royall soule) I could not flatter thee: Celestiall joyes thy blessed spirit includes In full fruition of Beatitudes. Immortall Martyr'd Monarch, to thy Hearse I dedicate my poore unpollish'd Verse: I flattering flatter not, but I commend Those Villaines that procur'd thy glorious end: Those holy men that vow'd to quell Oppressors, And make thee greater then thy Predecessors: I flatter none but such, and still I pray They may be blest the cleane contrary way. 'Tis wonder how these Atheists dare to frame Their prayers to God; or call upon his name, When they believe there is no God at all; But that (by nature) all things stand or fall: For to know God is trust in him alone, And to believe Gods word and God are one: And as sure as his Word and he are true, So sure damnation is the Rebels due: Rom. 13. Their Humiliations and Hypocrisie Can never expiate their perjury: Their feigned Fasts and seeming penitence Were mockeries of Gods high omnipotence: Daies of Thanks giving were in use no further, But to praise God for their committing murther; Or when they had done mischiefe to the King, Then would they give God thanks, and Bells should ring: Some good those wicked Imps of Hell have done, We may choose our Religion all, or none; Or any that will please our fancies well; We may be Pagan, Jew, Turke, Infidell; Or the Religion of a Horse or Mule, (Where God commands not, where no King doth rule)
We may be Protestants againe (they say) Prvided that we will no King obey: Let's never strive more to be Christians then, Since Godlesse Villaines are held best of men. England was sick of too much ease and wealth; The Divell was sick too, and to gaine his health, He tooke from's Doctor and Apothecary A Vomit, Clister, and Suppositary: The Physick would not worke, which griev'd him more; His Grips and pangs made him make Hell to roar. At last to England he a journey makes And turn'd our happy Kingdome to his Jakes: His damned Physick here wrought up and downe, In Church, Court Countrey, City, Village, Towne. Here (from his Hellish throat) he spawl'd and spew'd Of Sectaries a cursed Multitude, Presbyters, Independents, Agitators, Thieves, Murderers, rude Rebels, and false Traytors, And from his gut beneath he vented out An ill look't vermine with a fiery snowt, Who as he squirted from's infernall Breech, It scalded him and made his Divelship screech. A mighty blackfac'd worme he eke did void, And those two have our happinesse destroy'd. And thus the Divels excrements did vent A cursed Army, and a Parliament. Thus did this vomit, and this purge defile, With putrifaction, this most famous Ile: That stinking stuffe, bred Frogs, Toads, Caterpillers; (The worst of vermine, Traytors and King-killers) The noy some favour of these fowle contagions Flew into every Kingdome, Lands and Regions; That now our names and fames stinke every where, And will not soone be sweet againe I fear. Thus have they begger'd Englands common weale, And all good men may either beg or steale,
Or starve; chuse which of all those three: Or hazard Newgate and the Tryple tree, Whilst they surprize the goods of any mans, And ride in pompe in Coaches and Sedans. Like Sea and Hell are their insatiate Mawes, They have devour'd Church, Kingdome, King and Lawes: Of Sequestrations, foure score thousand, odde, And (if they could) they would Sequester God. All the Kings jewels, Scepter, and his Crowne, Lands and all goods which Kings have held their owne; All the Revenues they have swallowed clear, (Worth fifteen hundred thousand pounds a year) All Forrests, and Kings woods, all Churches lands, They 've grip'd into their Avaricious hands, All plundrings, Contributions, and Excise, Free Loanes, forc'd Loanes, Taxes and penalties; Pole moneys, weekly meales and Subsidies, 50. All these cannot their greedy guts suffice. An hundred millions they 've near spent and lost, And not one penny of it of their cost: Yet still they owe some millions of arreares: With great ingagements more as it appeares The Publique Faith is now so faithlesse found, Lenders would take five shillings in the pound; And maney for arreares right glad would be, For every twenty shillings to have three. But there are cheaper waies to pay arrears, To starve or hang 'em up all reckoning clears; Death quits all scores, let them be long delay'd, And they 'le be kil'd, or hang'd, and then all's payd. For wealth, and pride, and power, their soules they've sold, And never will be fill'd with bloud and gold: Thus they imagine mischief every day, Pray'd for and blest the clean contrary way. The year full sixteen hundred and two score, King CHARLES from Scotland came, and never more
Was flattry us'd with great magnificence, The City London entertain'd their Prince, Mark how the cursed Jews Hosanna cry'd When Christ into Hierusalem did ride; With boughs they deckt their doors, and in their street They threw their garments, trampled under feet: These flattring duties then those Jews did shew, To whom both heaven and earth obedience owe; Yet few dayes after their malitious strife, Did crucifie our glorious Lord of life. Much like to this was Londons fading flame Of love, when royall CHARLES from Scotland came, They rang the Bels, and Bonefires were consum'd; Thousands were sick with Healths, and th' aire perfum'd, With Cannons thundring roar and chimneis reake; Yea all that heart could think or tongue could speak: By flattring Loyalty was then exprest With th' entertainment of a mighty Feast. This did brave London do, yet pray but note, In three dayes after they would cut his throat; For thousands of them did like fiends conjoyn, To spend their lives, their souls, their goods, and coyne, And many a Thimble, Bodkin, and a Ring, They offered up to sacrifice their King: Oh faithlesse trust! accurs'd with flattry varnisht, Like to a rotten Sepulchre new garnisht: And as the City hath this mischief bought, For which the Parliament our ruines brought; So a seditious Army base and scurvy Hath turn'd the Parliament quite topsie turvy: So Parliament and City dare not act, Except great TOM and NOL approve the fact. Some wonders do but last a nine daies space; But this is not our murdred Soveraignes case, For God (whose dreadfull voice is more then thunder) Will make King CHARLES his bloud ten ages wonder:
So wise, so just, so mercifull, so good, So happy, (had he well been understood) That we had all been happy, had we bin So blest as not to kill him with our sin. As sure as man dies when he ath lost his head, So with one blow three Kingdomes are struck dead: The ignorant accus'd JEVVES SANHEDRIM Were not so guilty of selfe-knowing sin. Great PONTIUS PILATE on's Tribunall Throne, To judge the High eternall THREE in ONE, He did not know what then our Saviour was, Yet did corrupt unwilling censure passe: He was a Heathen and from him was hid Such knowledge that he knew not what he did: He was not brib'd with thousands, gold, or gaine, As BRAD SHAVV was to judge his SOVERAIGNE: PILATE had full authority and power From great TIBERIUS, Romes high Emperour: But our usurping President did know His power was false and that himselfe did owe (With all his fellow Knaves) obedience To him that stood arraign'd by false pretence: You knew, but would not know; then here's your lot, Depart from me for now I know you not. But yet when Heavens just Judge shall all decide Those Jewes before you shall be justified; You sinn'd against your consciences, you knew Your King (the best of Kings) was in your view: He unto whom you plighted had your troaths By Protestation, Covenant and Oaths Of true Allegiance and Supremacy, And that you'd make him great most gloriously. You knew the King was innocent and right, You knew your cursed hearts were full of spight: You knew your malice 'gainst his life conspir'd, You knew false witnesses suborn'd and hir'd:
You knew that BRADSHAVV and COOKE (INCUBUS) Were Villaines, both the sons of CERBERUS. You knew not one amongst your damned Crew Was friend unto the King this you all knew: You knew that by the Laws it plain appeares That every man, should be try'd by his Peeres; For in my life I never yet have heard it, But common men, had common Juries Verdict: Peeres try'd by Peeres, but no Record yet brings But Kings should be a Jury unto Kings: This is the thing that all our lives enslaves, That Tapsters, Drawers, Firkin men (proud knaves) Were by a foisting Parliament appoynted To judge and doome to death the Lords Anoynted. You knew the accursed wealth you 'aue rak'd and pull'd From three rich Kingdomes basely cheated, gull'd: And you did feare if CHARLES should once more Raigne, You should restore your theevish gaines againe. You knew your guilt of such transcendency, You durst not trust offended Majesty: For which we know, your want of wit and grace Have glorified him in a better place. For this black deed, I'le tell what will ensue, Three Kingdomes spoyle, damnation unto you: All Christendome will hold you most abhorr'd For murdering of your gracious Soveraigne Lord: In any Countrey where this crime is knowne, An English man dares not his Country owne. Turkes, Pagans Heathens, Jewes, and rugged Tartars, In all wars willgive English men no quarters: As you accurs'd have liv'd, accursed dye, Or else repent, or damne perpetually. FINIS.
