F2257 12068380 53433
portrait of John Fryer JOHANNES FRYER M. D. Societatis Regiae Lond. Socius.
A NEW ACCOUNT OF East-India and Persia, IN EIGHT LETTERS. BEING Nine Years Travels, Begun 1672. And Finished 1681. Containing Observations made of the Moral, Natural, and Artificial Estate of Those Countries: Namely, Of their Government, Religion, Laws, Customs. Of the Soil, Climates, Seasons, Health, Diseases. Of the Animals, Vegeta∣bles, Minerals, Jewels. Of their Housing, Cloathing, Manufactures, Trades, Commodities. And of the Coins, Weights, and Measures, used in the Prin∣cipal Places of Trade in those Parts. By JOHN FRYER, M. D. Cantabrig. And Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY. Illustrated with Maps, Figures, and Vseful Tables. LONDON▪ Printed by R. R. for RI. CHISWELL, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXCVIII.
TO THE High, Potent, and Noble PRINCE, John Holles, Duke of Newcastle, MARQUIS, AND EARL of CLARE, Baron Houghton of Houghton, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Nottingham, AND Custos Rotulorum for the said County and Town of NOTTINGHAM. These Nine Years Travels, out of the profoundest Respect, are most humbly Dedicated, BY JOHN FRYER.
THE PREFACE. WHAT prompted me, after so many Years Silence, to expose this Piece to the World, was not so much the Old Topick, Importunity of some, as the Impertinencies of others; there being more than Four hun∣dred Queries now by me, to which I was pressed for Answers, and wherein I found a necessity, if I declined this Work, to appear from other Hands in Print. This then was the first and chief Cause; resting all that while content, that many Foreigners had their Memoirs translated, whereby I thought my self excused this Task; most of whom, I had either seen or heard of be∣yond Sea, but never had read any of their Works, nor knew of their Intentions to declare themselves to the World: Finding therefore on my Return, that they had been before-hand with me, I did believe it almost impossible, so many writing on the same Subject, should not in many, and the most material Points especially, if they followed Truth, relate the same things; which made me still desist, supposing it a lost Labour. But at last, considering those Travellers before me had few of them been in those Parts where I had been, or at least not dwelt so long there, I venture to offer some Novelties, either pas∣sed over by them, or else not so thoroughly observed. And indeed, this being the first of this kind I know of, wrote by our own Countrymen, since the Ingenious Sir Thomas Herbert, I hope it may find the more favourable Acceptance; since it bears no other Design than the Good of my Country, setting before them the True State of their Trade in East-India and Persia.
The reclaiming of Atheists, by leading them first to behold the Beauty, Order, and admirable Disposition of the Universe, and then to see if they can so far abuse their Reason, to deny the Author; which if they should, the Indians, how barbarous soever esteemed by them, are to be preferred before them for Men of Sense; who out of the very Principles of Nature, keep to that Law written on their Minds, That there is a God to be ador'd; and rather than be without, will frame to them∣selves one of their own creating; which Depravity of theirs while Atheists deride, they admonish them of as great an Error in owning none. And lastly, To inform those busy Translators, That the In∣dustry of our own Nation is not fallen beneath that of France, whose Language and Manners we so servilely affect, as to think nothing Excellent or Alamode, which has not a French Dress; but that it still is in the Power of the English to retrieve their former Renown both by Pen and Sword: Tam Marti quam Mercurio. Nor will any Englishman accuse me of Self-Confidence or Arrogance, when it is a Justice only intended my Country against its Decriers; nor in the least to undervalue the Authors or the Books translated, but to whet our Endeavours to equalize, if not outdo them. As to the Method I have taken, it is unconfin'd (it being the Privilege of a Traveller) not bounded with the narrow Terms of an Historian, nor loosely extravagant, like Poetical Fictions, but suited both to Time and Place, and agreeable to the Nature of the Relation: And herein I have followed Bus∣bequius; which though it may make some Unevenness in the Stile, as where the Ruggedness of the Ways interpose, or the Subject-matter is varied, it must happen, yet the Warp quite through is most of the same Thread; which being the Clue to so many and intricate Meanders, trodden by a few, I am the more pardonable when I slip: Though I do declare my desire is, To shew my Diligence in collecting, and Sincerity in compiling what may make the Road more easy to the next Adventurers, and sa∣tisfy the present Enquirers.
A List of the Ships, Names of the Comman∣ders, Number of Passengers, Soldiers, Sea∣men, Tuns and Guns. Ships Comman. Pas. Sol. Seam. Tun Gun Squadrons London Capt. Bass 03 14 120 500 40 Admiral Massenberg C. Westlock 09 10 100 560 44   Bombaim C. Erwin 03 08 083 400 40   Unity C. Craft 02 08 076 350 34   President C. Hyde 03 16 120 500 42 Vice-Ad∣miral Ann C. Brown 04 12 097 550 36   East-India Merchant C. Cooly 03 10 090 400 36   Sampson C. Erning 03 12 100 460 40 Rere-Ad∣miral Caesar C. Andrews 03 03 130 560 46   Antilope C. Golsberg 03 12 094 460 36   Qui mare fluctisonum sulcat, curvisque Carinis Admovet externas vaga per commercia Gentes, Non ignota illi Divina potentia, nec quae Monstrat in immenso miracula saepe profundo. Geo. Buchanan, Psal. cvii.
THE CONTENTS. LETTER I. CHAP. I. Treats of Embarking, and Passage till past St. Iago. THE Proem. Taking Ship at Gravesend, and falling down to the Buoy in the Nore. Number of our Ships, with Letters of Mart. War with Holland. The reason of going over the Flatts. Stay at the Downs. The Massenberg disabled. Leaving the Lizzard, we met with Ships from Cales. We cross the Bay of Biscay to the Main Atlantick. Why this Sea is always troubled. The St. Helens Fleet stand for the Madera. Little Credit to be given to the Log-board. Hercules-Pillar. We drop our Compani∣ons by degrees. The Island of Madera the largest in the Atlantick Ocean. The Advantage of understanding the Trade-Winds and Azimuth. The Meteor Castor and Pollux. The St. Helens Fleet overtake us. We cross the Tropic of Cancer. A Guinea Ship took leave of us last. We draw near the Sun. Flying Fishes, and their Pursuers. Sharks and Pilot-Fishes. The Men of War out-sail us. The Island Beunavista. Cape-Verd Islands, Nine in Number. Isle of Maio. Arriving at St. Ia∣go. Found three Anchors slipped in the Bay. The Natives accost us with their Wares. A stately Garden. Of the Coco-Tree. Other Fruits. Their Militia. Their Asses sure-footed. Their manner of En∣tertainment. A Rural Chappel. The Na∣ture of the Island; and Inhabitants. Del Fogo. CHAP. II. Passage to Johanna, and Relation of that Island. NEcessity of knowing the Trade-Winds, by a Proof. Met the Tor∣nadoes near the Coast of Guinea. Crossed the Line. Outsailed the North-star. Rai∣sed the Crociers and Magellanian Clouds. A North Sun makes Noon, as a South Sun did before. The Calenture rages in the Fleet. Extent of the Atlantick. The Tro∣pic of Capricorn. The Course of the Sun through the Zodiac, Cause of the Seasons. Sea-Fishes for Food. The Dolphin. Stone-Bass. Gales from the West to reach the Cape. The Current of the Sea against the Wind. Cape-Birds. Winter at the Cape. Separated from the Fleet for two days. Soundings off the Cape Good Hope. Spoke with some English Ships homeward bound. Doubled Cape d' Angullis to gain St. Lawrence. The Eastern Sea. A Whale. We follow the Sun. Lost sight of St. Law∣rence. Arrival at Johanna. Care of the Sick. Situation of the Island. The Inland inaccessible. The Circuit. A Tree fourteen Fathom round the Body. Best Water, next Thames-Water. Their Town and Buildings. Two Mosques. The King's Court. Their Nobles. Their Priests. We Present them. Vassals to the Arabs. Vil∣lages. A pleasant Grove. The Hills fruit∣ful. Temper of the Inhabitants. Their Vessels for Sea. Active at climbing. Slaves, how known. Skill'd in Letters and Astro∣logy. Ape Printing. Their Speech. Reli∣gion. Women. Their Children troubled with the Navel-Rupture. Their way of killing Fowls, &c. Their Diet. Corn. Want Asses, Mules, and Horses. Fowls for Game. A Budgee. Their Hate to the Mohelians. We are called aboard to set sail.
CHAP. III. Declares our Course from Johanna, to our landing at Mechlapatan. WE repass the Equinoctial Line. The North-Star is raised again. The Maldivae Islands. Near Ceilon. A couple of Whales. A Fright occasioned by a Mi∣stake in the Night. Sight of Ceilon. Ceilon has the best Breed of Elephants. The Ter∣henoes. Three Country Junks. Catamarans. Sanderaslapatan on the Main. Resolved to sight the Flemmings. Put to Sea again, on Advice from the Agent. Saw a French Man of War. Dismissed the Junks. Met the Freshes caused by the Rains. Having quartered the World, anchor at Mechla∣patan. CHAP. IV. Takes up our Stay at Mechlapatan, to our landing at Fort St. George. THE Treasure set ashore. The Boat∣men described. Peons to wait on us. Landing at Mechlapatan. The Fort and Town. Their Custom-house Keys. Pub∣lick Structures. The Bridges. They Story of this Place, and Kingdom of Gulconda. At first governed by their Tribes. How alter'd. Their King a Chias-Moor. All Noblemens Estates fall to the King. The barbarous Custom of poysoning among the Eastern Monarchs. Gulconda the Me∣tropolis gives Name to the Kingdom. The Prime Ministers are Eunuchs. Their Wealth, how rais'd. The Army, how paid. The Bigness of the Kingdom. The Governor of Mechlapatan. The Persians Favourites at Court. Their Port and Grandeur. The East-India Company's Factors. Their manner of living. The Populousness of the Gentues. Their At∣tire. The Gravity and Pride of the Moors. Their Jealousy. Strictness towards their Women. Contrary Freedom among the Gentues. Their fearful Disposition. Their Complexion. Execution in Cases Capi∣tal. The Post, and nature thereof. No Law-Disputes long depending. Their Re∣ligions. Their Doctors of Divinity, and their Tenets. Their Ceremonies. They marry young. Their Speech. The Maho∣metans bury, the Gentues burn their Dead. Christian Strangers. Coin current, and Commodities. Beasts wild and tame. Their hanging Coaches, and those that carry them. Beasts for War and Food. Reptiles. Fowls. Fishes. Corn. Fruits. The Water and Air bad. Rain causes In∣sects. The Air better up the Country. Twelve of the King's Elephants. Our repair aboard Ship, and coming to Fort St. George. The Massenberg given over for lost, we found here. CHAP. V. Gives a true Narrative of the Eng∣lish, French, and Dutch, on the Coast of Coromandel, conti∣nuing till we double the Cape for the Coast of Malabar. WE went ashore in a Mussoola. Rowed by St. Thomas. Landed at Fort St. George. The Fort described. Neat Dwellings. The Portugal Chappel. The English Masters of the Place. Sir William Langham Agent. Diligence of the Friars. Number of English and Portugal. The City of Maderas. Visited a Pagod. The English Tombs. What Pawn is. Nature of the People and Country. A Chamelion. Our Ships return to Mechlapatan. The grow∣ing Power of the French at Sea. Twenty Sail of French, under a Viceroy. Sixteen arrive at Surat. War with Holland. The French take Trincomalai from the Dutch: St. Thomas from the Moors. Fortify it. The Dutch come against it. The Vice∣roy brings his Ship in by a Stratagem. The French sally out upon the Moors. The Dutch appear again. History of St. Tho∣mas. St. Thomas Christians. King of Gul∣conda weak at Sea. A Festival of the Gentues. Triblitore. Antilopes. The Queen of the South. We fight the Hollanders, and lose three Ships. The Bombaim and Lon∣don disabled Antilope sunk. President and Sampson taken. Dutch Forces march to raise the Siege of St. Thomas. The Wealth and Power of the Flemmings. Their Po∣licy. Our seven Ships dispatched to the Malabar Coast. The Monsoons on both Coasts. The Heats tempered by Art. The Rains more intermitting on the
Coasts of Coromandel. The cause of the Monsoons enquired into. The Tail of the Elephant. Water-Snakes. The difference on the Malabar Coast. A Rejoinder of the Seasons. Small Birds drove to Sea. Land-lock'd betwixt Ceilon and the Cape. Strange colour'd Fishes. The Mountain Gates. Tutticary, our danger here. Cape Comeri. CHAP. VI. Views the Malabar and Canatick Coasts, up to Bombaim. A Dark Night enlightned by Fish. The Dutch grasp all the Spice-Trade. How far 'tis possible. Cochin. We left the bad Weather, but not the Dutch Practices. Went ashore at Tanore. Their Wares. Their Houses mean. Their Nation di∣stinguished. The Nairoes. The Husband∣men. Their Men, how clad. Their Wo∣men. Manners and Religion. Hospitals for Cows. St. Thomas Christians. Coins current. The Pepper. Blackamore Pul∣len. Intensely cold a-nights. Latitude of Tanore. Calicut. The Portugal Fort overflowed. The Story of Calicut. Its condition since the Portugals left it. Coins. The right Ascent of the Sun to the Me∣ridian. Malabar Coast harbours Pyrates. Phalapatan. The King. Crocodiles in the River. Cutticony. Its Prospect. The Gentiles loth to resign it to the English. The Fort. Unsafe travelling without a Nairo. Naughtiness of their Women. Coins. We left Malabar Coast. Onor the first Land we touched on the Canatick Coast. The Protector of Canora went aboard our Fleet at Mirja. His obstreporous Musick. Our Lading. Carwar in the hands of Seva. The People partly Moors, partly Gentues. Goa. The Portugal Armado. Light-Houses. Rajapour. Choul. Bombaim. LETTER II. CHAP. I. Mentions the Island, and its Pos∣sessors. THE Islands of Saler No 7. The Situati∣on. The Bay makes the most com∣modious Port in India. From whence the Island is called Bombaim. What Im∣port it is to the English. The Portugals loth to part with it. The English Fleet go to Swally. Thence to Anjediva. The Portugals brought to yield up Bombaim. Mortality of the English at Anjediva. The remaining English take Possession of the Island. The Fort rased. A Governor sent out by the King. The Government transferred to the East-India Company. The old Soldiers stomach the Yoke of the Company's Servants. Governors for the Company. Strength of the Island. The Fort ill contrived. The Town. Fresh-water Springs scarce. Woods of Cocoes. Portugal Churches. Salt-Pans. Maijm. Salvesong. Malabar-Hill. Bigness of the Island. A mixt People. English Govern∣ment. Power and State of the Presi∣dent. An unhealthy Climate. English Women no good Nurses. The Air agree∣able to the Country People. Few return home. What Credit it bears with its Neighbours. CHAP. II. A Survey of the Island Canorein, near Bombaim. THE Superior of the Jesuits compli∣mented. Their Convents serve for Castles. A fine Prospect on the Water. A Journy of Pleasure, and Civility of the Jesuits. Delightful Aldeas. Magnaana a Country-Seat. The City of Canorein for∣merly an Heathen Fane. Reported to be dug out of the Rocks by Alexander. Ta∣naw the chief Place. Mein a great Town. Happiness of the Soil. CHAP. III. A Visit to Baçein, a Portugal Ci∣ty in India: Our Return by Ele∣phanto, &c. with Observations on the Island Bombaim. THE Capitaneos of the Portugals alter∣nate. A Message to Baçein. The City is round. Six Churches within the Walls. The Dwellings of the Fidalgoes. The Devastations made by the Arabs about Baçein. The ground of their Quarrel.
The Arabs care not to engage the Portu∣gals. Their last Efforts. Elephanto ano∣ther Idolatrous Temple cut out of the so∣lid Rock. The Heats. The Mogul's Fleet winter at Bombaim. The Ingenuity of the Toddy-Bird. The Brab-Tree. The Rains set in. CHAP. IV. Narrative of an Embassy to Seva Gi, and Journey to Rairee, the Court of the Raja. HOW the Subidar is treated. Proceed on their Journey. Seva Gi gone a Pilgrimage. Officiousness of the Chief Minister of State: Who procured a Pass up to the Castle. Rairee a strong Hill. The Engish have Audience of Seva Gi. What Presents were made. Rajah Seva Gi weighed in Gold. Grants the Request of the English. The Ambassador sum∣mon'd to the Coronation. The Rajah marries a Fourth Wife. No Nation eat Flesh like the English. CHAP. V. Our Passage to Swally, and Relati∣on of the English Presidency at Surat. ARrival at Swally. The Sands full of Fleas and Banyans. The Banyans pay Money to keep a Mart. Travel to Surat. The Coaches and Guards. The English Factory. Full of Noise. The Four Chief Offices. The Company's Servants and their Salaries. The Under-Factories modell'd by this. The Presi∣dency. The Advantage of being of the Council. The Baseness of the Banyans. Number of Persons in the Factory. State of the President. All places in India sub∣ject to the Presidency, with their Com∣modities. The Investments set on foot in the Rains. The Trade managed by a Company better than a Free Trade. Their Freemen greater Slaves than their Ser∣vants. The Charges of the English Com∣pany not so great as the Hollanders. Their Charter put in force. The Course of the Presidents. The English defended themselves against Seva Gi with Honour. The ill Success of the first Adventurers imputed to want of Government, and War with Portugal. The Company en∣rich this Port. The Diamond-Trade bet∣ter in the hands of the Company's Ser∣vants, than in theirs. LETTER III. CHAP. I. Animadversions on the City and Peo∣ple of Surat. THE Rudeness of the Devotes: And Seamen. The Buildings. The Hea∣then Rites more suppressed here than in Gulconda. Moguls and Chias disagree. Sects of the Moguls. Their Diet. Way of Entertainment. Their Attire is rich. The Women wear Jewels. Strict Observers of the Hours of Prayer. Great Revel∣lers at Circumcisions and Marriages. Quick in Labour. Great Lamentations when any dye. The Duty of their Priests. The Xeriff their High-Priest. Extrava∣gancies of their Fakiers. They make eve∣ry place their home, and all their own. How clad. The Governor not able to quell them. The Villany of the Gover∣nor's Servants, and Tragical Event. Some exemplary Punishments. Delinquents of another nature. The Crime of growing rich. The Sheriff. The chief Customer. The Mint. Markets. The Castle built by Timurlan. The Wall and Gates. Num∣ber of Soldiers. Their Mosques. Cara∣vans. Stables. The Governor quarrels with the Dutch. CHAP. II. Shews the Tombs, Outwalks, Cere∣monies, and Austerities of the Gentiles; with the Ships and Ri∣ver about Surat. THE Rashpoot takes Toll with the Mogul. Dutch and Armenian Tombs. The English Burial-place. The French Tomb. The Burftaes or Heathen Wan∣derers. Pulparra, an Heathen Seminary. Two Pagods of excellent Lome. The burning of their Dead. They carry them
to Pulparra. The Postures and Severities of the Heathen Fakiers. Paunch Augy, or the Penance of Five Fires. Whether it be an Imposture? A Devote that had not sat down in sixteen Years. A great Tank. Gardens. Grottoes. The Cotton-Tree. Bang. Alluh. No great Variety of Flowers. The sensible Plant, and Ar∣bor de Rais. Milk-Bushes. Sugar-Canes and Tobacco. The River commodious for Ships. The Dutch learn the Natives nothing. Their Navy. The Young King of Batam. His Story. Their Junks and Seamen. CHAP. III. Of their Solemnities, Sports, and Pastimes; Marriages; of the Parsies; their Strength by Land and Sea; their abundant Wealth, and fitness for Trade. THeir New-Moons. Ramazan, or Lent. Grandeur of their Gover∣nor and Great Men. The Moors Aede. Their mourning for Hosseen Gosseen. The Emperor a great Zealot for his Religion. How they behave themselves in Eclypses. Ceremonies in Marriage. Dually of the Heathens. The Women have a time of Freedom. Feast of Flies. Hospitable to Dogs. Their Exercise or Recreation. Hunting. Buffolaes and Rams set to fight. The Master-piece of the Banyans. Education of Youth. The Sloth of the Moor a Whet to the Banyan. All the World brings Treasure to India. The Bassa of Bussorah. Their Jewellers may be improved. The City kept nastily. The Diseases. Remedies outward and inward. The Country Physician. The several Tribes how known. The English have the respect of their Ombrahs. Rarities in the English House. Venomous Creatures. The Surat Governor forced to comply with the Dutch. The Parsies. Worship the Sun. They expose their Dead to Ra∣venous Fowls. Their way of living. Large Milk-white Oxen. A Buffola. The Marshes breed Cattel. The Growth of this place. The Colum-Bird. Wine and Strumpets set the Soldiers and Seamen by the Ears. Four Arab Ships. Left Surat and Sdly. Mahmud Emir Caun, Son of , Governor of the Province. CHAP. IV. Brings me with a New Deputy-Governor from Surat to Bom∣baim, and sends me to the Mo∣gul's General at Jeneah. CAptain Shaxton sent home. A Sea-Tortoise taken. The Fable of its having three Hearts, confuted. The Flesh restorative. Take Boat for Duccan. Land∣ing and Reception at Gulean. Set forward for Intwally. The Countrey all burnt and destroyed. Thence to Moorbar. For∣ced to keep Watch. The Guides lead us about. Come to Dehir, a garison'd Town of Seva Gi's, at the foot of the Gaot. Awaked a Fakier, drunk with Bang. Seva Gi's Horses kept here. His Forts all about. State of the Havaldar. Got clear of Dehir. A troublesome Passage over the Gaot. The Monkeys affrighted. Flurries from the Hill carry Men and Oxen down the Precipice. The height of the Moun∣tains. Alteration of Air on the Hills. Oppa-Gaot a starveling Town. We force our way. Our Escape to Aumbegaun; and Hardship of the Coolies. Our Entrance into Jeneah. CHAP. V. Introduces me to the Nabob's Pre∣sence: My Business with him: A Prospect of the Country, &c. THE Caun receives me publickly. Sycophants encouraged. Several manner of Addresses. The Castle not strong. Good Days consulted. Admit∣ted the Womens Quarters. What hapned while I was in the Haram. Scandal thrown upon the Women. Their Dress is Rich. A Conference about the Affairs of the English. Mischief done by Thun∣der. The Governor's Brother on the Hill descends for Cure. A Strumpet's Bene∣faction. The Emperor's Palace. The Fields no sooner sowed than set a-fire. Dungeness another Heathen Fane. The re∣quest of the Governor on the Hill, for my Ascent. The Hill inaccessible, but by Seven Gates. easted by the Governor's
Order. None appear before Great Men without a Present. How strange our Arms and Apparel seem to them. Per∣mitted the Freedom of the Castle. A bold Attempt of Seva Gi's Men. Grana∣ries for Stores now, formerly Religious Cells. A Rajah slain, the occasion of a barbarous Funeral. Took leave of the Governor. This Gurr puts a stop to Seva Gi this way. Jeneah Gur the Birth-place of Seva Gi. The Moors touch'd with the Superstition of the Gentues. Of the Lus∣carry or Army. Its Appearance. The Discipline. The Commanders richly ac∣coutred. I take my leave of the Caun. False Musters the practice of India. The Government and Commodities. Return∣ed by Nunny Gaot. No Army likely to pass this way. Glistering Flies about a Tree scare the Coolies. Their Reflections on the Miseries of the People. Prodigi∣ous great Frogs. The Nure-Tree. Cruelty to their Beasts. Inhumanity to their Sick. The Moor-men Priests follow Trades. A pragmatical Portugueze hindred our em∣barking. A Bombaim Shebar carries us to Bombaim. What Europe Ships I found in the Road. The Conclusion. LETTER IV. CHAP. I. Concerning our shipping for Car∣war; of the Factory there; the unsettled Condition of the Place; and our coming to Goa. THE President goes to Surat: I to Carwar. Seva Gi's Naval Power. His Arms have conquered all round Car∣war. The Ground our House stands on, granted by the King. Seva Gi governs by Brachmins. The hard usage of Seva Gi's Subjects. Distractions of the Kingdom of Visiapour. Their miserable Condition be∣twixt the Desy and Seva Gi. Take Barge for Goa, whose Passes are well guarded. The Gallantry of the Portugals, and ne∣glect of their Carracks. CHAP. II. Takes a View of Goa; makes a Voyage to Vingula; engages with the Malabars; and returns us to Carwar. THE Archbishop's See. The Provost of the Jesuits. The College of the Dominicans the Seat of the Inquisitor. St. Roch. Domo of Bon Jesu. Why the Jesuits are called Paulistines. The Convent of St. Austin. Several Seminaries. The Franciscans. The Carmelites. The Spittal. Sancta Monacha, a Nunnery. The Thea∣tini in the Virge of the Palace. Going to Vingula we engage a Malabar. They ca∣ress us ashore at Vingula. Monuments for Women burnt alive with their dead Hus∣bands. Return from Vingula to Goa. The King's Yards viewed. The Industry of the Portugal Ancestry. A well-weigh'd choice of an Harbour. Old Goa. Sancto Pilar the Seat of the Capuchins. The way betwixt Old Goa and New Goa. Their Prisons and Executions. Seva Gi a bad Neighbour. The Power of the Viceroy and Archbishop. The outward Port of the Fidalgoes. The Clergy how respected. The Women and Children. The finest Manchet. How the Outguards inform the City. Return'd to Carwar. CHAP. III. A Pilgrimage to Gocourn; where was a great Gentile Solemnity; a cursory Discourse of the bor∣dering Princes. A Nchola Castle supplied with Brass Guns from a Portugal Shipwreck. The Country properly Canatick. Peace makes people chearful. Our coming to Gocourn discovered. It is an University. The Tomasia the Brachmins Harvest. The Jattery or Washing. A Vow performed. Jougies or Devotes. A Solemn Processi∣on of their Duels or Heroes. The Foun∣ders unknown. Their Divines under no Vow of Coelibacy. A Brachmin can hardly attone the Violation of his Cast.
The Cast of Dowlies. Of Mirja. An huge Snake. The Story of Canora. The best Pepper comes from Sunda. The Nose-cutting Raja of Saranpatan. Raja Mada∣ree. The Irresolution of the Duccances emboldens Seva Gi. His wild Excursions. The Protector of Visiapour breaks the Measures of the Confederates. Bullul Caun beats the Mogul's Army. CHAP. IV. Of the King and Kingdom of Vi∣siapour; their Policy and Go∣vernment. Hobsy Cofferies pre∣ferred. The present Protector, and other Members of Duccan. The Life, Exploits, and Expedi∣tions of Seva Gi. The Wealth, Strength, and Powers of each, with respect to the Great Mogul as Supreme. THE Conspiracy of Ramras his Fa∣vourites. They make themselves Kings: Are curbed by the Mogul. On the Fall of Nishamshaw, the Rajahs desert. How it comes to pass the Mogul has made no further progress in his Conquests. The Government of Duccan. The Duccances are Princes born. Cowis Caun the Protector murder'd at a Treat by Bullul Caun. The Succession of the Kings of Visiapour. Bul∣lul Caun keeps the King and Kingdom in possession. The Members of Visiapour. The Mountains in all Conquests the last that stand out. Seva Gi raises himself on the Ruins of the other Lords. The King of Visiapour jealous of Seva Gi. Seva's Treachery in slaying Abdul Caun. Where∣upon follows the Discomfiture of the Ar∣my, and taking Panalla. Another Royal Army broke by Perfidy. Seva has Raja∣pour surrender'd by a false Pharmond. Syddy Jore trick'd out of his Life by Bul∣lul Caun. The King of Visiapour dies. Se∣va's Soldiers hardy. The King not Ab∣solute. The Duccanees of a restless Tem∣per. The difference between the Hilly People and those of the plain Country. The Cities, Marts, and Ports. CHAP. V. Shews the Pleasure and Product of the Woods. The People bewitch'd to Idolatry. The Sottishness of the Atheist. I am sent for to Bombaim: After some Endea∣vours to get thither, forced to winter at Carwar, and then re∣turn to Surat. DIversions. A Tyger kill'd and dis∣sected. Two Bones found in the Shoulders, immersed in the Flesh. The Customs of the Ombrahs on any great Action. Monkies the common Repast of the Tygers. Apes anatomized. Bam∣boes. Cassia Fistula. The Thamarind-Tree. The Indian Oak. Nux Vomica. A Feast of Priapus. The Dregs of the People use Charms, or think they do so. Their Sa∣crifice for the Fields. Whether these Wretches do work by the Devil or no. The sublime Wit as much in the Wrong as the depressed. No Evasion for the Atheist. I am sent for to Bombaim. All Butchers Flesh forbidden at Goa in the Heats, but Pork. Mangoes good to cleanse the Blood. Cheruses. Ananas. I winter at Carwar. Bad a final Adieu to Carwar, and come again to Goa. Jews feed on Hogs-flesh, for fear of the Inquisition. Left Goa on St. Xaverius his Eve. In danger of being shipwreck'd at Bombaim. Return to Surat. CHAP. VI. Is a summary Rehearsal of the whole. THE business of Alexander and King Porus suspicious. The Name of I∣dia doubtful from what beginning. India produces three Harvests in some places. Sunday observed by the Indians. How they count the Hours. Their Years di∣vided into Three Seasons. The Mountains▪ Rivers. The Country rich in Increase. The Desarts. Mines. Wild Beasts. For Game. Fowls of Prey. Fish. Insects. Their Men of Learning. Their Notion of God. The
Conceit of Transmigration forcible to Merits. They Write on Leafs. The Muttanies and Jougies. Jugglers, &c. A Crocus-colour'd Coat intimates a Re∣solution to dye or be Conqueror. Opium eaten in quantity. Whether the Banyan be a Jew. Distinguished by their several painting their Forhead, and Cuts of their Beard. The Ombrahs. Petty Ombrahs. The Artillery. Their Pride and Luxury. The reason of the Licentiousness of the Fa∣kiers. The Portugals might have conquer'd India, had not the English interrupted them: Whereupon the Dutch fell upon them. The English not much valued. The Parsies expose their Dead to the Fowls of the Air. The Women of the same Spe∣cies with others, the Position of their Veins being the same. Few crooked or deformed. The Cause of their Blackness left in suspense. Their Houses built for Conveniency. They live to a good Age, by care of their Diet, and Cleanliness. Their Washers and other Craftsmen work well for little Money. The World Peo∣pled after the Flood from Scythia. CHAP. VII. The last Observable is the Weights, Coins, and Precious Stones; a Collection whereof follows: RUpees. Mamoodees. Pice. Maund. Sear. Candy. Coved. Tuss. Tolla. Mass. Valls. Gudianus. Ruttees. Tanks. Cruzado. Dollar. Chequeen. Duckra. Juttals. Pagods. Carrack. Miscallis. Vas∣sael. Mangore. Larees. Zerephins. Rues. Tuccas. Guzz. St. Thomas. Venetian. Cruza. Tango. Vinteen. Rees. Bahar. Kintal. Arabel. Rottola. Mark. Pipa. Almoodas. Cannales. Gunny. Raies. Bugerooks. Mooras. Parras. Addalins. Matts. Fanams. Couries. Miam. Foues. Ticul. Cuttee. Hobb. Pecul. Bunda. Ganton. Quoin. Cappans. Cash. Tale. Buncal. Dupper. Tares. Roue. Royal of Eight. Tominians. Barilloes. Areba. Pi∣co. Teen. Quaedreen. Abassees. Fluce. Parrow. Sarhee. Ebraim. Caveer. Muc∣kee. Mertigat. Faresola. Vachin. Mar∣bat. Catla. Ambergreece. Diamond. Ruby. Saphir. Emerald. Topaz. Hya∣cinth. Amethist. Garnet. Chrysolite. Tur∣kois. Agat. Splen. Jasper. Lapis Lazuli. Opal. Vermilion. Clystropie. Cornelian. Onyx. Bezoar. LETTER V. CHAP. I. Of our crossing the Sea to the Per∣sian Gulph: Arrival at Gom∣broon, and stay there. THE Scipio African sent to drive a Trade in Persia, not to guard the Gulph. Few Christian Ships without Fryars. Diu bravely defended against the Turkish Forces. Pyrates infest all the In∣dian Seas. The Tropic Birds. The Cuttle-fish. Cape Rosulgaot a Promontory in Arabia Felix. The Imaum is Caliph. Breach of Faith the Loss of Muschat. We enter the Straits of the Persian Gulph. Wafted ashore at Gombroon. The Structures. Half the Custom belongs to the English. The Chief Customer obliged to secure the Roads. The English free of all Imposts. The Hollanders absolute in the Spice-Trade. The English Trade more in Shew than Reality. The French have nothing to do. The Scipio dispatch'd for India. Excessive Heats. The manner of recei∣ving a Message from the Emperor. Plen∣ty of Food. Their Water. It rains but twice a Year, and then not long. The Winds. The Inland stifling hot. Lo∣custs come in Armies. The Earth ac∣curst for Adam. The Caun of Bunder sent a Present of Apples candied in Snow, in the midst of the Heats. Worms breed in their Bodies: How they must be treat∣ed. Poultry dye suddenly. CHAP. II. Our setting forth from Gombroon, and leaving Lhor. THE Ceremony of our Departure. Band Ally a Caravan Seraw. Our manner of travelling, and how provided. Shotters are Footmen. Of the Palm-Tree. Hell-gate. Getche a Village on Wheels. A great Bridge. Courestan. Men and Beasts destroyed by the Heats. Goorba∣zergum, the Merchants Grave. Jehun. Tangedelon. Cormoot. Sham Zangee. Lhor. Brimstone the most refined here. The
Bezoar-stone, its Name: How bred: Its Trial. Assa Foetida. The Civility of the Persians ends in Covetousness. CHAP. III. We measure the utmost Bounds of the Province of Lhor and Ge∣rom, to the City of Siras. POkutal. Bury. A Peor or Prophet's Tomb. Bonaru: What shift they make for Water. Mousar the utmost Ex∣tent of the Province of Lhor. Chawtalk. Manna. Mastich. The Bitter Almond. Gerom. The strongest Wine and best Dates here. The Cause of their Blind∣ness. This is Mr. Herbert's Kirjoth Gerom. Wheat. Liquorice. Theft punished with immuring. Monstrous Persian Rams. Po∣lium. Caifer bounds Gerom, and the Growth of Palms. Firaw. Mussaferry. Bobba-Hodge. Udgewally. Our Entry into Siras. The Wines of Siras generous: The Peo∣ple good Companions. CHAP. IV. Of Siras, and the Ancient Persepo∣lis; and our journeying quite through Persia. SIras the chief City in Persia. Their Gardens. The Cypress-Trees the biggest in the Universe. The Nightin∣gal. The Vinyards. Glass made here. No Fortification. The Caun imprisoned. The Kindred of Mahomet Disturbers of their Societies Their Houses. Their Temples. The Caun's Palace. We take our Leave at the Armenian Burying-place. Repositories for Snow. Ice and Tobacco used by the Vulgar. Zergoon. The Ri∣ver Araxes, now Bindimire: Why called Bindimire. We suspect the Rhadars to be Robbers at Meergoscoon. Persepolis, now Chulminor. Storks build on the Pillars of Rustam the Prince of the Gabers. Uncer∣tain whether it be Persepolis. The Straits where Artibazanes repulsed Alexander. Maijm. O▪ Joan. The Sweet Almond. Pistacia-Nut. The Cappar-Shrub. The Pine. The Peach. The Pomgranat. Ass∣pass once governed by an Englishman. Cus∣cuzar. The Mountains capped with Snow. Degurdu. A Ditch at Esduchos parts Persia from Parthia. CHAP. V. Our Progress into Parthia, Entrance into Spahaun, and Reception there. OLD Castles turned into Dove-Cotes. The Tragical Fall of Imaum Cooly Caun. Moxutebeggy. Comeshaw. The Su∣perstition of the Persians. Dove-Cotes for Salt-petre. Mayar. Mirge. Met by the Citizens. A Prospect of Ispahaun. A stately Bridge. Covered Buzzars. The Midan or Hypodrom. The Royal Mosque, and Throne over the Palace-Gate. A Clock-house. The Exchange, and Eng∣lish House. The distance of Ispahaun from Gombroon. A Pillar of Skulls. Romish Fryars. Jews are Druggists. Fruiterers. Silk Buzzars. The Armenians subtle Deal∣ers. Woollen Cloth as cheap as in Eng∣land. That and Tin come to a bad Mar∣ket. The Caravans of the City. Balneos. Coffee-houses. Necromancers. CHAP. VI. Carries us to Jelfa; where is treated of the Gabers, the Armenians, Georgians, and Europe Arti∣zans. SIX thousand Families of Armenians in Jelfa. The Gabers are the Old Persi∣ans: How degenerated. Their Impure Feasts. Their Women are Comedians. The Armenians have a Civil Governor of their own. They are under Protection of the Empress. Their being forbid Co∣leons, the cause of Apostacy. They re∣strain their Women. Their Temper. Thir∣teen Parish-Churches; a Cathedral and Convents. St. Bartholomew and St. Tha∣daeus first preach'd the Gospel in Armenia. St. Gregory the first Patriarch. False Do∣ctrine spread among them. They sepa∣rate from the Greek Church. The Ace∣phali Sectarians. The Georgians depart from the Armenians. The Succession of their Patriarchs. Their Tenents. The Patriarchs install'd with Pomp. The Vor∣tebeds
or Monasticks. The Archbishop. Their Clergy marry. Their Baptism. Matri∣mony. Purification. The Feasts and Fasts ordained by their Church. Their Fune∣rals. The Burial of Self-murderers. Their Antiquity. The Georgians of a different Temper from the Armenians. The way of Salute. Nunneries at Jelfa. CHAP. VII. Gives us a Sight of the Palace, and Rarities there. Our Entertain∣ment by the French Artizans in the Emperor's Service. The Di∣versions of the Place; and its Product: And the Close of the Year, with its Seasons. THE grea Garden at the end of the Charbag. Wild Beasts for the Emperor's Diversion. The Rhinoceros not the Indian Onager. The Abassin Ass mistaken for the Sabean. The Flower of Ispahaun meet a-nights in the Walk belonging to the Palace. The French Artizans divert us. River-Fishes. The Hedghog. Water-Fowl. Muscovia-Hawks. Greyhounds. No Woods or Forests about Spahaun. An Eclypse of the Sun. The Suburbs. A Third Bridge. We were two days in compassing Spahaun. Change of Weather. Catalogue of Plants growing at Spahaun. Sharp Winters here. Use of Stoves in Persia. A pure Air with∣out Soil. The Death of the President. The Agent succeeds at Surat. Artifices of the Dutch. CHAP. VIII. Brings us to Gombroon in the midst of Winter. The Caun's Pranks there. The Hot Baths at Ge∣noe. The Aequinox and Sea∣sons attending. Some Parallel betwixt this Coast and the Indian. A New Agent arrives. VAllies filled with Snow. We defend our selves with Furs. At Chuld∣star a Camel mad with Lust. Obedah a Town of Vinyards. Conacaraw and De∣hid. Conacurgu and Mushat. The cold Weather makes our Indian Servants use∣less. We begin to lose the Winter. The Air grows thick. Our English Mastiffs master their Lions. We returned to Gom∣broon. The English President affronted by the Caun. The Banyans fly his Tyranny. Going to Asseen, we visit the Hot Baths of Genoe. Their Virtues. Two Hospi∣tals built at the Charge of two Banyans. All Waters partake of the Conditions of the Earth through which they pass. Mi∣neral Waters. Their differences. The Medical Benefits of these Baths. Noe-Rose. The Air moist. Indian Plants grow here. The Portugal Fleet, and our new Agent arrive. CHAP. IX. We go up in the Spring with our New Agent to Ispahaun. Two Irish Greyhounds sent as a Present to the Emperor. We leave the Agent there, and return in the Fall. THE hasty Removal of the Agent the Cause of his Sickness, and his Followers. A notable Robbery. Diary Fevers. Colocynthis. The Tarantula. Pains in the Joints, and putrid Fevers, occa∣sion'd as well by the Water as Air. Drinking in Ice a destructive Custom. The Agent leaves Siras. I fall sick. On my Recovery I set forward for Spahaun. Polygore and Aubgurrum. Imaum Zadah. Want of Rain. Heste Behest, Paradise upon Earth. Murmuring against the Go∣vernment. The King's Steward restored to Favour. The Physician hanged. Irish Greyhounds a Present for the Emperor. Colums the Forerunner of the Winter. Crows of several Colours. Monuments of Robbers. The Air as well as Food the Cause of Birds keeping one place. The Old and New Moon visible in twelve hours time in hot Countries to the North. The Years centre in our Winter.
CHAP. X. A Voyage to Congo for Pearl: A Discourse of their Generation. Departure from Persia, and Re∣turn to India. WE come to Congo. A Dearth in the Wa∣ter as well as on Land. We come again to Bunder Abassee. The Pearl. The Adul∣teration. Its Names. The kinds of Pearl. Cheripo, or Seed-Pearl. Chanquo, or Mo∣ther of Pearl. Scallop: Its Properties. Its Dignity and Value. The Prices and Sizes. We undergo difficulties in our passage back to India, through Negli∣gence of the Pilots. The Present State of PERSIA. CHAP. XI. Gives the various Names; Situati∣on, &c. ITS Names, Situation, and Bounds. Temper of the Air. High Moun∣tains. Their Four-footed Beasts: Wild-Fowl: Fishes. The Valleys made fruit∣ful by the Snow from the Hills. Plants. Tobacco. Manufactories. Persian Pearls the best. Gombroon Earthen Ware the best, next to the China. Lapis Lazuli. Tu∣tiae. Manatae. Bole. Marble. Naptha. Mi∣nerals. Rivers. Springs. Little Rain. Showers of Sand. Dew turn'd to Manna. Cities. Houses. Spahaun proposed as a Pa∣tern of their Politicks. Shaw Abas well advised in the choice of it for the Im∣perial City. The Cauns. Etimundoulet, or Chancellor. A Janiseen Deputy-Caun. The Droger. The Calenture. The Cadi, or Cazy. Spahaun the chief Empory. The Citizens humbled. Courtiers and Soldi∣ers great. Their Caravans. No Priority at Church, Bath, or Caravan. The Ge∣labdars not so esteemed in Persia, as the Caphala Bashee in Tury. Their Temples, Colleges, Hummums, or Balneo's. The Coffee-houses. CHAP. XII. Of the present Inhabitants, &c. THE present Persians Scythians. Jews here ever since the Captivity. On the Death of the Emperor, the new one causes his Brothers and near Relations Eyes to be put out. Nobles by Birth among the Persians. The Government Hierarchical: Whereon is grounded the Emperor's Security. His Wealth. His Course of Life. His Name and Genea∣logy. The Suffees introduced, from whom Spahaun is called Suffahaun. Oppositions made by the Turkish Sect. The English sack Ormus by Surprize. Articles of A∣greement between the English and the Persians. Vengeance pursues the Enter∣prizers. Shaw Abas kills his Son Mirza. The present Emperor given up to De∣bauchery. The way of receiving Am∣bassadors. The Procession of the Serag∣lio, or Haram. The Cruelty of the Black Eunuchs. The Cavalry. Their Arms, and manner of fighting. The Suffees Church-Militants. Their Order created to check the Saieds. Their Habit, and the Persians Standard White and Red. Their Privileges. Other Knights. The Watchmen. The Navy. CHAP. XIII. Of their Book-men and Books. Of their Religion, and Religious Worship. Of their Notions in Philosophy: Of Heaven and Hell. Their Astronomers, Physicians, and Lawyers. A Learned Clerk rare. The School-Language. Their Books written with a Pen, not printed. Pens made of Reeds. Education of Youth. Preposte∣rous way of learning. Emulation in gaining Disciples. Logick. Their Phy∣sicks: Metaphysicks. Books in esteem. Mahomet's Revelations: Assisted by Ser∣gius the Monk. His blasphemous Opini∣ons. Friday his Sabbath. Polygamy. The Mufti: His Revenue: His Authority. The Talman, or Mullah. Their Funerals
more pompous than the Turkish Sects are. Their Tribes clarified by Pilgrimage. Their Names given by the Parents. No Garb to distinguish their Clerks. How they are maintained. Their Limners. Hi∣storians. Alchymy. Mathematicks. Ne∣cromancy. Astrologers. Astronomy. A Pithonissa. Several sorts of Daemons. Lon∣gitude and Latitude. Dialling. Musick. Medicks. Anatomy rejected. The Suf∣fees Death required of his Physician. Their Prescripts. What Purges approved. What Authors in esteem. They are unskil∣ful in Chyrurgery. Endemial Diseases. Large quantities of Opium eaten at a time. Their Lawyers. The Cadi. A Corrupt Judge. Lex Talionis. Drubbing on the Soles of the Feet. They buy their Wives. Are often divorced. All Con∣tracts made before the Cadi. Usury for∣bid by Mahomet: Yet his Disciples are cruel Extortioners. The Cheik. The Codre. Guilty of Bribery and Injustice. Their Paradise. Their Hell. The Progress of their Religion. The Souls of Men su∣perior to Brutes: Cannot embrace a Car∣nal Religion, but an Holy, Pure, and Spiritual; which is no where to be found but in Christianity. Success no Argu∣ment. CHAP. XIV. The Appellations of the Warrior and Scholar; of the Merchant, Me∣chanicks, and Villains. Of their Garb, Civility of Manners, Fa∣cetiousness, Revellings, Sports, Weddings, Cleansings, and Bu∣rials. Of their Women; and License of Curtezans. The Eu∣nuchs, &c. THE Merchant. Cheats in all Pro∣fessions, make the Brokers necessa∣ry. The Villany of a Droger. The Persian in his City Dress. The Drover. The Herdsman. The Husbandman. The Dervises. Vinedressers. Slaves made of the Old Persians. The Eunuchs. The Old Women. Their Women. Their Excel∣lencies. The Mark of a Whore. Curti∣zans: Their Children provided for. Ly∣ings in and Purifyings. Widows reckon∣ed Mutes. Sodomy. Addicted to Plea∣sure. Corruptness of the Courtiers. Wo∣men made use of to Complain. The Per∣sian places Felicity in Prosperity. Their Recreations and Exercises. They Hunt a long time together. How Treated on their Return. Immoderate in their Feast∣ing. Their Religious Feasts. Foot-Ra∣cing. Their Valour, whence it proceeds. Their Urbanity. The Custom of car∣rying Aves. Their Virtues. Vices. How far beholden to Constitution of Body and Air. Their Diet. Cabob. Pulloe. Dum∣poke. Stews. Cookoo Challow. No good Confections. Sherbets. The Persians Spit as much as other Folks. Their happiness of Body. Commutative Justice. LETTER VI CHAP. I. Takes notice of Broach: The Change of Governors at Surat. Intestine Broils of the Empire. Rencounter of the English; and Portentous Accidents of this Year. THE Author sent for to Broach. Diffe∣rent Modes of Travelling in India from that of Persia. Their Chariots for Tra∣velling. Bereaw. Uncliseer. Broach City. What Profit to the Mogul. Rama Jessinsin defies the Emperor. The Confederates make Disturbance. Morad Beck made Governor of Surat. Great Inundati∣ons by the Rains. The Mogul prepares to Chastise the Pagans. The Return of the Juddah Fleet. Seva Seizes Henry Kenry. The Barbarians Relieve it. Their Fleet drove into Tull. The Eldest Son of the Mogul brings an Army to Bram∣pore. Two Portents.
LETTER VII. CHAP. I. Continues the General Occurrences, with Remarks. THE Syddy and Seva left to contend for Henry Kenry. The English Re∣proach'd. The Mogul inflicts a Double Poll. Seva Gi Dies. Heats about Suc∣cession. The Mogul's Eldest Son sent to the Post. Withdraws his Army. An Example on Treason. The Mogul's Se∣cretary's Reasons to dissuade the Empe∣ror from his Persecuting the Heathens. A Drought feared. The First Interloper. A Comet. LETTER VIII. CHAP. I. Concludes with my Return to Eng∣land. WE set Sail for England. A Young Man lost over-board. We Sail on the back side of St. Lawrence. We weather the Cape of Good Hope. Land at St. He∣lena. The Story of the Island and Island∣ers. Of Ascension, and Catching of Tor∣toises. Foolish Birds. Isle of St. Tho∣mas. A bold Act of an Algier Slave. The Azores. England. We Land at Folk∣stone near Dover.
By reason of the distance of the Author, These Errors have escaped the Press; which the Reader is desired to amend, before he read the Book. ERRATA. P. L.   4 6 R. Querps. r. Aequator. 11 40 R. Querps. r. Aequator. 14 12 for Southern r. Northern. 19 36 for of r. off. 20 2 dele but.   5 for Cheeks r. Checks or Chocks. 21 49 for sent r. lent. 27 39 for Caff r. Cast. 29 36 for Stores r. Keyes. 31 8 for Tapon r. Capon. 32 24 for Bung r. Bang.   26 for Solarium r. Solanum. 35 18 after day insert and. 37 23 for Fire-Guns r. five Guns.   34 for braces r. braves. 41 4 for Tops r. Topes. 42 24 for mounting r. moating. 46 30 r. despised their kindness.   46 for now r. no. 57 15 for Musteres r. Mustezos. 65 38 d. of. 68 3 for being r. bringing. 78 28 for Banda r. Danda. 80 14 for Nayne r. Nan Gi. 85 10 after Company add seldom. 86 19 for Carnear r. Carwar. 98 50 for Pomarium r. Pomrium. 100 10 for Decay r. Deroy. 102 16 for it r. them. 104 15 for Lecgues r. Lecques.   42 for viro r. viru.   51 for both r. all. 105 5 for Amarillis r. Amaranthus.   4 for Manna r. Mamma. 109 25 for Cophers r. Caiphirs. 111 17 for Noize r. noise. 115 6 for Bundes r. Bunders. 117 22 for thither r. hither. 119 M. for Columbin r. Colums. 120 6 for infect r. infest. 125 10 for left r. least.   50 d. trending. 129 46 for they r. he. 34 33 for of r. off. 136 39 for present r. I presened. 137 14 for grave r. brave. 138 41 after 7000 add Horse. 152 2 for power r. powder.   4 for We r. they.   5 r. We discharged.   41 for aptasse r. ptasse. 153 41 for Caves r. Coves. 154 17 for Pover r. Pove.   27 r. celebrated.   43 for Lap-fraternity r. Lay fraternity. 157 26 for or r. on. 159 32 r. . 162 13 before by me. 163 23 for on r. one. 33 for nor r. and.   45 for Rabay r. Rabg. 165 28 r. Bagnagur. 173 50 for forced r. fained. 187 5 r. every one of which.   8 for New Colla r. Mew Colla. 193 43 for Hoards r. hords. 195 2 for Burrore r. Burrow. 197 21 r. Ordained them. 218 43 r. Singanian. 219 5 for Buccaneers r. Racanners. 220 38 r. nor Wood nor Timber. 227 12 r. Three Persian Miles or Parasangs.   25 r. Sisyphus's. 230 35 for Se r. Ser. 231 16 for Bees r. Beetles. 232 30 d. yet. 240 23 for Marble r. Marle.   34 for Carousan r. Caravan Ser Raw. 248 19 d. there. 258 23 for ut r. autem. 277 49 r. held by one. 291 21 for lac'd r. laid. 295 33 for Stores r. Stoves. 296 47 for Molagans r. Molaians. 297 1 r. not without some reasonable reflections that the   2 neighbouring Batavians were Accessories, having   3 a jealousy of the English— 298 24 for piled r. Pyla.   25 for perilously r. perishingly. 301 15 for Collation r. colation. 303 27 for Nitrous r. nidorous. 305 37 for Marble r. Marle. 313 26 for clear r. chear. 332 1 for generally r. generically.   3 for Microcosm r. Macrocosm.   7 for Marble r. Marle.   21 r. is falsly imputed. 338 49 for Ganizeen r. Janizeen. 341 3 d. slenderly provided. 350 27 for Tangrolope and r. Trangrlopex.   30 r. Haalam who was. 354 50 r. one Whire Plume. 355 19 for Astroque r. Oestroque. 359 33 for Taterdars r. Taberdars. 376 47 for Bashed r. Bashee. 385 24 for Press r. stress.   50 for lighty r. lightly. 388 15 for Coges r. Cogy. 391 39 for Golabdar r. Gelabdar.   30 for domum r. domo. 397 38 for Buy-Shoes r. Bugshoes. 398 20 for Gogdans r. Yogdans. 404 49 for Musilage r. Mucilage. 405 14 for Taylets r. Taglets. 412 5 for Semla r. Jemla. 413 3 for 10000 r. one hundred thousand. 420 6 for Gladock 1. Haddck.   26 for Changos r. Chaugs. 421 40 for d'Aguthas r. Anguillis.   43 for Agutha r. rather of Anguillis, or the Snake.
A NEW ACCOUNT OF India and Persia: In Eight LETTERS. LETTER I. Containing a Twelve Month's Voyage through Divers Climates. CHAP. I. Treats of Embarking and Passage 'till past St. Iago. SIR, FOR your singular Favour,The Proem. in seeing me Aboard-ship (which might reasonably be sup∣posed the last kind Office to a departing Friend, considering the various Chances of so long a Voyage, as well as the Uncertainty of my Return) I must keep to that Promise, whereby you obliged me to give you an ac∣count not only of my Being, but of what Occurrences were worth my Animadversion. You may remember,Taking Ship at Gravesend, and falling down to the Buoy in the Nore. It was the 9th of December, in the Year of our Lord 1672. when by virtue of an Order from the Honourable East-India Company, I being received on Board the Ʋnity, we took of each other a long Farewel; the Ship then breaking Ground from Graves-End, to fall down to the Buoy in the Nore. The London,Number of Ships, with Letters of Mart. War with the Hollanders. our Admiral, lay expecting our whole East-India Fleet there, which were Ten in Number; to whom his Majesty, Charles II. was pleased to grant Letters of Mart: Which impowered them to wear the King's Jack, Ancient and Pennant, and to act as Men of War (the English and French at this time being at open De∣fiance against the Dutch.)
When they were altogether,Letter I. their Commands were to go over the Flats;The reason of going over the Fats. which, notwithstanding the Hazard to Ships of their Burthen, was thought securer now than to venture about the King's Channel, where they might be exposed to the Attempts of the Hol∣landers: By which means, together with the unsteadiness of the Weather, it was the day after Christmas before we arrived at the Downs; where rode a rich and numerous Fleet of Merchants, with their respective Convoys, designed for their several Places of Traffick, when the Wind should present. Here,Stay at the Downs. as we ended the Old Year, so we began the New with a desire of prosecuting our intended Voyage: But a South-West Wind prevented our Course, and held us there Three Weeks; when an East Wind made a general delivery and a clear Downs. Being at Sea, we made easy Sail, that our Ships might have the liberty that Night to single themselves from the Crowd of the other Ships; notwithstanding which Proviso, we had a shrewd Suspicion; for Night hastening on (and in such a swarm of Vessels of greater bulk, not so readily manageable as smaller) we beheld three Lights out of the Poop of a goodly Ship, the same unfortunate signs our Directions bound us to take notice of; which made us conclude the Damage on our side, as indeed it proved by the next Morning-song; for having cast our Eyes abroad to look what Ships we had in company, running over a great many (that had shrowded them∣selves under our Protection and of Six Men of War more, Captain Munday Commander in chief (whereof Two were Fireships) sent for to meet the East India Fleet at Sancta Helena, for their better Defence homeward-bound, and to prevent their falling into the Ene∣mies Hands, who had lately possessed themselves of that Island) we at length missed the Massenberg,The Massenberg disabled. on whom (it seems) a small Pink falling foul, had carried away her Head and Boltsprit, and 'tis to be feared has disabled her this Voyage; we saw her afterwards make for Portsmouth. Off the Land's End we met with Four English Merchant Ships,Leaving the Lizzard, we met with Ships from Cales. Two French Men of War their Convoys, laden from Cales, bound for London. In Four ys, from the Downs, we were losing England on our Backs, reckoning the Lizzard the most extreme part South to bear North and By East 14 Leagues; from whence hereafter we were to fetch our Meridian Distance: It lies in the Latitude of 50 deg. 10 min. North. Thus relinquishing the British Seas,We cross the Bay of Biscay to the Main Atlantick. we make our selves Possessors of the Western Ocean for a while: 'Till following our Compass more South, we contend with the troublous Wind and tempestuous Waves for some part of the Bay of Biscay, whose Mountain Seas we are to cut through to the Main Atlantick.Why this Sea is always troubled. What makes these Seas in such a constant Turmoil is imputed to the falling in of the whole Force of the Western Ocean into this Sinus without any Impediment, 'till it re∣coil against its Shores; so that in the calmest Season here are always high swelling Billows. About the Latitude of 41 the Men of War,The St. Helens Fleet stand for the Madera. that came out with us, determining to make the Madera Island, went away more Easterly, and the next day were out of sight.
Two days after we espied one Sail to the Leeward under a main Course,Chap. I. steering very doubtfully; after she had had her full view of us, she made from us too nimble for us to follow; we supposed her to be either an Algerine Pirate, or a Dutch Privateer. We still directed our Course South, and in Twenty four Hours ran One hundred and seventeen Miles by our Log-board for some days together,Little credit to be given to the Log board in respect of the Ships way. the Wea∣ther not allowing us to observe with the Quadrant; but as soon as we could take the Sun's Altitude, we found our selves to be in the Latitude of 36 deg. 2 min. North, Longitude 7 deg. 26 min. West, an hundred Mles in four Days more than we judged our selves to be; which sufficiently proves the little credit to be given to the for∣mer way of reckoning. The following day maintaining the same Course, we past by the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar,Hercules's Pil∣lar. one of Hercules's Pillars, the farthest Point South of all Europe. Here we began to drop the rest of our Company,We lost our Companions by degrees. some striking East for the Streights, others West for the Canaries, Virginia, &c. At Noon our Admiral fired a Gun, and hoisted his Ancient, whereby we understood he saw Land, which we thought to be Porto Porto, bearing off us East. An hour more being hardly run, we in like manner made the Madera Island,The Island of Madera, the largest in the Atlantick Oce∣an. the largest of the whole Atlantick, being South-East some twelve Leagues, too great a di∣stance to take a perfect Landschap, it being only discernible to be Land, and confirmed to be so by this days Observation, which was 33 deg. 17 min. to the Northward of the Equator, in Latitude and Longitude from the Lizzard as before, we having neither raised nor depressed it. Where the Trade-winds begin to offer themselves, the Mariner relaxes his anxious care of Sailing, and is at more lei∣sure to Repose; he not being so often called upon to shift his Course, or hand his Sails; which has yet this inconvenience, giving him leave now to fall into those Distempers Idleness contracts, viz. the Scurvy, and other ill Habits; unless rouzed by an Active Com∣mander, either to Sports, or more useful Employments: Although the perfect knowledge of these Trade-winds (which are more con∣stant within the Tropicks) are of such importance as to make our Modern Navigators perform that in six Months, which took up the Pains and Travels of as many Years from the first Discoverers, they keeping all along the Shore, whereupon they became not only liable to unaccountable Changes,The advan∣tage of under∣standing the Trade-winds and the Azi∣muth. as they met with Land briezes, Head-lands, or Contrary Winds; but were many times disappointed either to go on, or return, by the several Accidents they encountered thereupon; which these more experienced and bold Adventurers by standing off to Sea, and study of their Compass by a more accu∣rate Computation of their Way by the Quadrant and Azimuth, and a strict enquiry of the commencing and terminating of these Winds, avoid. In this short space we have almost out-ran the Northern Winter's Blasts, and begin to be sensible of a more vigorous Clime, whose temperate Warmth adds Spirits to our frozen Limbs: Yet in this forward Spring (for such it seemed to us) we cannot escape some Lashes of that cold Nemesis; for Night being come, she sends a Storm of Rain and Hal with an high and bleak Wind, in which
appeared the Sailors Deities, Castor and Pollux, or the same it may be gave light to those Fables, they boding fair Weather to Seamen, though never seen but in Storms,The Meteor Castor and Pol∣lux. looking like a Candle in a dark Lanthorn, of which there were divers here and there above the Sails and Shrowds, being the ignes fatui of the Watery Element; by the Portugals christned Querpo Santos, the Bodies of Saints, which by them are esteemed Ominous. But I think I am not too positive in relating them to be a Meteor-like substance exhaled in the Day, and at Night (for except then, they shew not themselves) kindled by the violent Motion of the Air, fixing themselves to those parts of the Ship that are most attractive: For I can witness they usually spent themselves at the Spindles of the Top-mast-heads, or about the Iron-hoops of the Yard arms, and if any went towards them, they shifted always to some Part of the like Nature. The succeeding Morning had not long withdrawn this black Vail, and brought us tidings of a more serene Day, when we beheld our Frigots that had left us,The St. Helen's Fleet over∣take us. busking after us with all the winged speed they could, and about Noon they gained us, keeping on the same Course as we, but missed of their design of touching at the Ma∣dera's. Being blessed with a prosperous Gale, in fifteen Days from Eng∣land we were to the Southward of the Tropical Circle of Cancer,We cross the Tropick of Cancer. which lies in 23 deg. and ½ North, and passeth through Barbary, In∣dia, China, and Nova Hispania; we making at Twelve at Noon, Latitude 22 deg. 16 min. North, Longitude 8 deg. West, when we must be 1 deg. 14 min. South of the Tropick. A Guinea Merchant-man bound for the River Gamboa kept us Company hither,A Guinea Ship took leave of us last. but his Voyage requiring a more Easterly Course, was the last Merchant Ship took leave of us. We holding on still South, the frequent Noise of Thunder, the sultry Rains,We draw near the Sun. quiet Seas in respect of what we had before, were assured tokens of our drawing nigher to that Fountain of Heat, the Sun. By reason whereof it was familiar to behold, the sportful Fishes greedy of their Prey raise whole Flocks of that Scaly Nation. For those whom Nature has placed in the vast Deep, defenceless of themselves, and innocent to others of a more powerful Greatness, so as many times they become their Prey, she has not altogether left them unprovided; either out of her abhorrency of Idleness, re∣solving every thing should labour for its Belly, or else out of a pe∣culiar respect towards every individual Species for their Preserva∣tion as well as Production;Flying Fishes and their Pur∣fuers. furnishing these with Fins of larger size and double use for swifter conveying them under Water, as also for soaring into the Air when they are too closely pursued. Of these sort we saw good store flying from Bonetos and Albecores, who were hunting them. Some of these flying Fish (for no other Name they have as I can learn) were so put to it, that after often dip∣ping their fishy Wings in the briny Water (without which genuine Artifice they could not use them) chose rather to make our Ship their Sanctuary, than to yield themselves to the Jaws of their devouring Adversaries: By which means you have their more exact Description, they being as large as a River Perch bedeckt with Silver-spangled Scales, and long Fins as before.
Not many days after, two of the lesser Off-spring of the great Leviathan, (the Weather being calm, these sort of them else not visible, being of no swift motion) came sailing after us; our Men as eager of them as they of their Prey, hastned their Engines for to take them; which no sooner in the Water, but each of them guided by some half a dozen delicately coloured little Fishes, which for their own safeguard perform the Office of Pilots, (they never offering to satisfy their Hunger on them) who lead them to the Baits; when they turning their Bellies up, seize upon them on their Backs, hook themselves in the Toils, beating the Sea into a Breach, and not without a great many Hands are drawn over the sides of the Ship; which seen by the poor silly little Fishes (as conscious of their Error) they swim to and again, and hardly for∣sake the Ship; but being within Board, the Ship's Company armed with Hatchets presently divide the Spoil.Sharks and Pi∣lot-Fishes. They are not scaly, and therefore imagined to be a kind of Whale, being finned like them, with a great Fin on their Backs near their Tails, (which dried is used instead of a Slate) of a darkish grey Colour on their Backs, lighter on their Sides, and white under their Bellies; their Snout on the same Plain with their Mouths, but their Mouth within that a great way; the cause why they turn their Bellies when they take their Prey. The Mouth of one of them extended, is two Spans wide, armed within with three Tire of sharp pointed Teeth on both Jaws, so piercing that Needles exceed them not, and of such strength that a Leg or an Arm, Bone and all, is but an easy Morsel; wherefore called Sharks by the Seamen, on whom they are bold enough to fasten, and dismember if not shunned when they wash themselves: They are of a rank smell, and not good to eat but by stout Stomachs; of Length they are ten, sometimes fourteen Feet. By this time we had got into 17 deg. 19 min. North Latitude, Longitude 9 deg. 10 min. West, when our Men of War thinking to birth themselves before us at St. Iago, (where our Ships were permitted to refresh,The Men of War out-sail us. being otherwise tied up by Charter-party not to put in any where unless for absolute necessity) made all the Sail on head they could. Our Commanders were well enough content with their proffer, knowing the danger of a many Ships going in there together: The day ensuing plying to the West,The Island Beunavista. we discovered Beunovista bearing full West ten Leagues, but at Noon were within two Leagues of it. It is one of the Islands of the Gorgades or Cape Verde,One of the Cape Verde Islands. They are Nine in all. because situate over against that Promontory on the Land of Negros. They are said to be Nine in Number. Beunovista, quasi good sight, it deserving that Appellation from four Hills, which raising themselves to an Eminency above their Fellows, yield a fair Pro∣spect at a distance; but approaching nigher it is not unlike the crawling of a Snake, it's various Hills and Vallies fluctuating as it were, seem to borrow that riggling Shape, the two remotest Moun∣tains figuring her Crown and Head.
The View of Beunovista.The View of Beunovista. The succeeding day,The Isle of Maijo. South-East of us, we saw the Isle of Maijo, another of the Gorgades, plentiful in nothing more than Salt, whi∣ther our Traders in that Commodity often send Ships to fetch it, which is brought down to them in Barrows blowed by the Wind, they having Sails fitted for that purpose. The View of the Isle of Maijo. In two and twenty days from the Lizzard,The View of Isle of Maijo. early in the Morning we were close under St. Iago, another Island of the same Knot; whose interwoven barren Mountains are as impossibly exprest as Stonehing numbred.Arriving at St. Iago, we mist the Men of War. Towards the South-West they are very high and burnt; but steering to loof about the Bay, we found it empty, and the Men of War missing; for all that we came to an Anchor about ten a Clock in the Forenoon in the Bay of St. Iago. The View of the Bay of St. Iago. The Ground was covered with Corral of all sorts,The View of the Bay of St. Iago. under which it was Sandy of a duskish Colour. Having discovered three Buoys, our Commander sent his Boat to seize on one,Found three great Anchors slipped in the Bay. which proved to be the Mark to a special good Anchor of 2400 weight, with a Cable seven Inches Diameter; the rest of the Fleet shared the other two. The Bay the Ships rode in was smooth Water, the Wind coming from the Shore; in Figure a Semicircle, in which it might contain four Miles, the weathermost Point bearing South-West, and half a Point West, the other Point to which was an Islet, East and by South, and South.
a. Represents ye young Plant as it appears firstabove ground Spring-ing from ye Nut under ground b. Shews ye shape of ye Tree wth that of its branches new ye tp the un∣der & more ripe being fallen off & leaving the Signes of their rects n ye bark of the Stock c. The shape of ye Branchs wth their stemms & feet as they grow from ye Tree, extending sometimes from ye foot to ye tip to near 5 ½ yards in length fringed or feathered on both sides with long narrow leaves d. The Purse or Sheath containing ye branch of flowers e. The branch of Flowers wch▪ when fallen leaves ye young nutts f. One of the branches grown more ripe g. One of those Nutts full ripe. h. The Coco Nutt shell intire, ye outward Pill or husk being fallen off i. The Roots & blade peircing through ye holes of ye Shell k. The Kernell of ye Nut half ye Shell being taken off l. Represents ye intire tree of an older & longer standing m. Represents ye manner how they fasten a gourd to collect ye liquor
Of the Island of St. Iago, one of the Cape Verde Islands. IN the Afternoon I went ashore, which was near two Miles from the Ship, where was a convenient watering place, which emp∣tied its fresh Current into the Salt Sea; the Beach was sandy, and easy going ashore.The Natives accost us with their Wares. Here met us whole Troops of the Natives with their several Wares, some offering us Cocoes, others Oranges and Limes; some brought Jackanaps's, such green Ones as are com∣monly seen in England to be sold; and all at the price of a cleanly Rag▪ or a Bunch of Ribbons. Before us in a Valley was a most stately Grove of Cocoes andA stately Grove. Oranges (through which ran the Stream our Men filled their Casks with Water) surrounded with a Wall. The first of which Trees, so much celebrated for its usefulness, deserves as much for the pleasure it affords the Sight. It grows with an upright, tall, and slender Body, the Bark of an Ash colour, lori∣cated; not sending any Branches forth till it come to its chiefest Summit, where it spreads its shady Branches with some resemblance to our Osmond Royal Fern,Of the Cocoe Tree, its beauty and usefulness. but more like the Palm; and under these protects its weighty Fruit; which hang very thick round about the Tree, to which it yields but one Stalk, but that fit to support its ponde∣rousness; every Moon produces a fresh Harvest both of Fruit and Boughs; the first being gathered, the others being thrust off when sapless by the young ones: If the Juicy ones be wounded, there distills an heady Liquor, which they preserve in Earthen Pots fitted to re∣ceive it, but that spoils their bearing Nuts. Next to the Stalk it be∣stows a Calix, not differing (only in bigness, and that it is smoother) from that of our Acorn; from which proceeds the Rind of a lighter Green, under which a fibrous substance presents its self, which might supply them with Utensils, for Roaps and Sails; beneath which ap∣pears a spacious brown Shell, proper for many Necessaries, big enough for a Drinking Cup, a Ladle, and many more; serving them for the chief part of their Housholdstuff: Enclosed in this is a deli∣cious Meat, white in Colour, cloathed with a pithy matter, as our Hasle-nuts, and not inferiour to them in Taste; this they chuse for their ordinary Nourishment. Nor does it afford them a less grateful emulsion, contained in the Nut to the quantity of a Pint, or Pint and half; in colour like Whey, and of that consistency, but in re∣lish far excelling. When the Meat of the Nut grows rancid, they express an Oyl serviceable for their Lamps. Thus abundantly has Providence furnished them from this one Root. The figure of the Fruit, take it intire, is oval, and as big as the largest Melons. On the other Fruits it's needless to insist,Other Fruits less common. as Oranges, and the like, being planted nearer home, and therefore not such strangers. Having observed enough here, we entred a Door which gave us admittance to a Court in the same Valley, whose party Wall made of Mud and Stone, separated it from the Grove.
Here lay at the Foot of the ascending Mountain, in a careless po∣sture, one Company of their Militia, raised on this occasion, having rested their Arms,Their Militia well appoint∣ed. as Muskets, and Pikes, with their Colours of White Silk, with a Green Cross athwart, and the Arms of Portugal in the midst of it, against the Wall, but Breast high; which could not have held up the Pikes, had not some adjoining Trees contribu∣ted to their aid. They saluted us with the civility of the Hat, and Congeed to the ground; those of them that walked about, had Javelins in their hands, and long Swords tied to their Backs. Labouring to reach the top of the Mountain,Their Asses as sure footed as Goats. which was very steep, some we met on foot, others mounted on Asses, with Jacka∣naps's behind them, passed us with no small Grandure and Ceremony of the Cap; and which was wonderful, to see them ride these Crea∣tures over Precipices, only Goats and they could clamber on. At last gaining the highest part, another Wall accosted us, over which a Gate, and upon that a Cross. On the left hand, as soon as we were in, was either a Prison, or a Guard-house. Not many Paces from it, on the same side, a Row of Houses, one Story high, thatcht with the Branches of the Cocoe, and Windows with wooden Shut∣ters, but no Casements, built with Mud and Stone, as all their Build∣ings were which I saw; the insides visible enough, for the biggest of them had not four yards Front, and half that, for the greater state, was taken up by the Door: Their Furniture is answerable to the splen∣dour of their Habitations;Their manner of living and Entertain∣ment. but because we will not refuse the Cour∣tesy of their Entertainment, see in what a manner they present us with their Viands. They invite us with an Hubble-bubble (so called from the noise it makes) a long Reed as brown as a Nut with use, inserted the Body of a Cocoe-shell filled with Water, and a nasty Bole just pressing the Water, they ram Tobacco into it uncut, out of which we may suck as long as we please, but for any thing else they tell us as the Poet did, Vina mihi non sunt Gazetica, Chia, Falerna, Quaeque Sereptano palmite missa bibas. Their common Drink being only Water; and their Food as plain, being only the Fruits of the Earth. But to keep on our way, which here we found easy and plain; on the Right stood another Cross, propped with a four-square Pillar raised on steps,A Rural Chappel near the Corps de Guard. and half a Stone's cast from it, a Chappel, not proud enough to brag of any great elegancy for its Architecture (being but the Rural Seat of one of their Black Padres.) Not much beyond it the Corps de Guard, from whence they supplied their Sentinels, which were placed in a Military Order here and there: Nearer the Water-side, on the brow of the Precipice which overloo'k the Haven, in a well-appointed place, were planted half a dozen small Pieces of Ordnance, which spake Thanks for our respect paid when we came to an Anchor; not far from hence another Guard and House regarding the Main, which gave notice to the rest of what Vessels they saw at Sea.
And now we began to think of returning, when we met with some had happen'd to see the glory of the Day; who told us, our Ad∣miral had sent to the Deputy-Governour, residing here, to be certi∣fied about the Anchors; who first claimed those Anchors of our Emissaries with the Majesty essential to that Nation he represented (being a White Portugal) for his Master,News of the St. Helen Fleet surprizing the Dutch in this Bay. being slipped in Port; and then informed them, that they were left there the Afternoon before we came in, by Three great Holland Men of War, who were separated by foulness of Weather, from the Squadron of Admiral Eversdon, who was sent to vex the English Plantations at Virginia: Who at the sight of our Men of War, had put to Sea in great confu∣sion, leaving some of their Crews behind them, who went off in their Shallops, but could not reach their Ships; keeping therefore the Shore on board, they put in at St. Iago Town, where they now re∣main: From whence this Morn by fresh Advice he was assured only six Ships were seen to ply to windward; which must be our Fleet striving to regain the Island, which is difficult by reason of the Trade∣winds,The Cause of our sudden departure. it being beside their Commission to pursue them. Thus being alarm'd to our Ships, that Night we weighed. In the dusk of the Evening came into this Bay a Sattee of Portugal, laden from Madera with Wine, some of which we purchased, but restored not the Anchors. The Country without is rocky and mountainous, the Island but small; what Towns it has of note, our small stay would not permit the Enquiry:The Nature of the Island, It is said to be pleasant within the Country; well wa∣tered, and furnished with all things necessary for the life of Man; discovered for the King of Portugal, Anno 1440. Well peopled by the Portugals, and a Colony of their Plantation from Ginea. In respect of the Heavenly Bodies, it lies in North Latitude, 15 deg. 25 min. Longitude from the Lizzard 12 deg. 10 min. West, the length of Days altering very little. The People are of a comely Black, their Hair frizled, Tall of sta∣ture, cunning and Thievish; they staring one in the Face, and in the mean time cut a Knot from the Shoulder, or steal an Handker∣chief out of the Pocket. Their Speech is broken Portugal, as also is their Habit, imitating therein the Portugals; though few of them so well clad as to hide their Nakedness so, but that either Leggs, Shoulders and Back may be seen, and in some all. If they get an old Hat with a Bunch of Ribbons, two White Sleeves, a Waistband, or a Coat slasht to hang back to shew their Sleeves, or an old Pair of Long Breeches to their Buttocks; an unsizeable Sword to their Backs, a Javelin in their Hands, without either Hose or Shooes (as if cut out for Sir John Falstaff's Hu∣mour) they shall have them strut,And Inhabi∣tants. and look as big as the greatest Don in Portugal. The Women are not so handsome as the Men, Blubber-lipp'd, more corpulent, and shorter; notorious also for their Levity. Their Head geer a Clout rowled up like our Water-bearers; their Backs, and Breasts (which were large, and hanging down) bare, as also to their Wasts, from whence a thin Cloath, in fashion of a Petticoat, down to their Feet, which are bare likewise. Some of the best of them adorn'd with Bracelets about their Arms and Necks, false
Jewels in their Ears, with a kind of Vail from their Head to their Knees, with a Close-bodied Coat with Hanging-sleeves. By Religion they are Christians of the Romish Church. Their Governour is from Portugal. Nothing more observable in this little time, but that at Night on Shipboard,De'l Fogo. we had the sight of De'l Fogo's Flames; it being an Island of Fire, the Smoak of which is also apparent at Noon-day; which is of the same Batch with the rest, we seeing only these Four Islands of the Nine belonging to the Gorgades. CHAP. II. Contains our Passage from St. Iago to Johanna, and Rela∣tion of that Island. THUS forsaking these African Islands, and being forsaken of all but our own Fleet, with a brisk Gale we gave our Ships head to the Eastward of the South; whereby we came nearer to the Coast of Africa; the Northern Monsoons (if I may so say, being the Name imposed by the first Observers, i. e. Motiones) lasting hi∣ther; they (springing from the pressure of the Winter's Snow, Clouds or Vapours lodged on the Artic Mountains,A proof of the necessity of knowing the Trade∣winds. and now beginning to be dissolved) leave us to struggle with those moving with the Sun, between the Tropicks East and West, as those without do North and South, mostly or collaterally to those Cadinal Points. And therefore we are forced to steer more Easterly, either to fetch a Wind to cross the Aequator, or gain a Side-wind from the constant ones to carry us to Brasil. For which cause those Ships bound for St. Helen's from Europe, must come into the Latitude of 28 deg. South, and some∣times to the Cape of good Hope, before they can bend their Course thither, though in a direct Line it would cut off three quarters of the way. When we were in four degrees of the Line, and Longitude from St. Iago 7 deg. 22 min. East, (renewing thence our Meridian) we became subject to the most parching Heat of the Torrid Zone; whose Effects were so much the more outragious, by as much as the Winds shrank upon us from off the Coast of Ginea (which we drew nigh to) and had left us at a stand, the usual Treatment hereabouts, imputed to the scarcity of Mountains on that vast Tract of ground: Insomuch,Near the Coast of Ginea met the Tornados. that we lay wholly at the mercy of the two unruly Ele∣ments, Fire and Water; the one assailing us with flashy Lightnings, and horrid Noises, breaking forth the Airy Region; the other pour∣ing on us whole Streams of unwholsome and dangerous Flouds, when they fall in Spouts, (which are frequent here:) Nay the kindest and the softest downfal on our Bodies is productive of Vermin, such as Flies, and Maggots, if our Cloaths be not quickly dried and shifted; (these Seasons the Seamen term the Tornados.) But above all, when these had played their parts, the scorching Sun making towards us with his fiery Face made us almost breath∣less:
In this remediless Condition we lay,Chap. II. till Heaven pitying our lan∣guishing under this burning Fever, dispatched to our Relief an East South East Wind, which leading us West and by South, brought us to the South of the Equinoctial Line,Crossed the Line. depressing our Longitude to 5 deg. 55 min. East. And now we were to the Northward of the Sun four degrees, with whom circling a little East, in nine days time we were in a Perpendicular, whereby our Quadrants became of small use, we not being able to make an Observation for their want of Shade, but by an Astrolabe at Night:Out-sailed the North-Star. The Sun passing over our Heads, and we being to the Southward of the Line, the first fair Wind made us out-sail the Northern Polar Star, it not being to be seen in this Horizon. Steering now by the Crosiers,Raised the Crosiers and Magellanian Clouds. a South Constellation, taking its Name from the Similitude of that Pastoral Staff; as also supplied by the Magellanian Clouds, in number Two, (averred to be such by those that use this way continually) fixed as the North Star; but to me they seem no other than a Galaxia, caused by the Reflection of the Stars. Being to the Southward of the Sun's Declination,A North Sun makes Noon as a South Sun did before. The Calen∣ture rages in the Fleet. it is obvious to note, a North Sun makes the same time of Day a South Sun does on the contrary side. An Epidemical Distemper, by the Sea-Chyrurgions termed a Calenture (a malignant Fever with a Frenzy, so that if not watch∣ed, they leap into the Sea) raging in the Fleet, many were thrown over-board. Where the Atlantick (washing the Shores all along from the Streights of Gibraltar) mixes with the Aethiopick Ocean,Extent of the Atlantick and Use of the Azimuth to correct the Common Chart. there the Meridian Compass varies very much, so that the Wind being at South-East and by East, lays out a South and by West way, but cor∣rected by the Magnetick Azimuth (which gives the Sun's Ampli∣tude) it differs two Points and an half, which with Leeway allow'd, makes a South-West Course, which we held on till we were on the Coasts of Brasil, when we were at distance enough to take the Alti∣tude of the Sun, which made 14 deg. 40 m. South Latitude, Longi∣tude 2 deg. 24 min. East. Being between Brasil and several Islands, as Trinidado, Isl. de Picos, Sancta Maria, &c. we met with Winds carried us to the South of the Tropick of Capricorn,The Tropick of Capricorn. which crosseth Aethiopia Inferior, and the midst of Peruviana. Before we leave this Ecliptick Circle, we must observe at the Aequator, the Sun becomes twice Perpendicular; at each Tropick but once; beyond them never; because hence may naturally be collected all the Seasons of the whole Year; unless some accidental Cause, as the Interposition of Mountains, Headlands, Lakes, or such like intervene. But in his Solar Progress Through the twelve Signs, the Sun always carries Rain along with him, its Heat otherwise could not be endured; for which reason, the first Contriver and Former of all things,The Course of the Sun through the Zodiack, the cause of the Seasons of the Year. has ordained the wet Season a Winter to those inhabit here, and to them as dreadful as our cold Seasons to us (which we shall evidence more experimentally when we come to live among them): On this account is it, that under the Line two Winters and two Summers
alternately succeed, but not above three quarters of that length as the one at each Tropick, they continuing four Months together; to wit, four Months Winter, as many Summer, and the other four Months moderate or cold Weather; though nearer the Line, the Rule holds not good as to the cool Weather, for that cause more frequently visited with Wet than the Sunshine. Our Men at length tired with salt Provisions, began to be stu∣dious for fresh; Necessity having taught them an Invention, by counterfeiting those formerly mentioned Flying fish,Certain Sea∣fishes for Food. with a white Rag stuffed to hide the Hook, and Feathers pricked in instead of Fins, to catch their Enemies at their own game, and so they did; providing for themselves and us too, Bonetos and Albicores; the latter bigger than the former, in length two Feet, in thickness one, of a brave shining Colour, with spiked Fins; but the other preferred by the Palate, bearing the make of our Jacks; both of them a good Repast at Sea, where it is denied to be curious in our choice. The Dolphin is extolled beyond these,The Dolphin. which they strike with a Fisgig: They are swift and strait when they swim, and for Compo∣sure surpass all others in neatness, as well as for variety of Colours, for which it seems to vie with the Rain-bow, or Juno's darling Bird, the Peacock. There is another Fish they call a Stone-Bass,The Stone-Bass which eats better than it looks, it being of a Colour sandy, but has a Relish equal to our Soles. Hitherto having kept mostly a South-West Course, furthered in it by Gales from the Coast of Ginea, we are now to expect Westerly Winds to carry us to Cabo da boa esperança;Gales from the West to reach the Cape. near the Latitude of 30 deg. South we had a promising Fresco, but somewhat dulled by too frequent Calms, yet here not so vexatious as before, we going retrograde with the Sun. It is observable here,The Current of the Sea a∣gainst the Wind. that the Sea had a contrary Course with the Wind, presumed to proceed from its blowing so long in one Quar∣ter; and now not altered so long as to be powerful enough to turn the Current of the Waters. Gaining upon the East with a slow pace, we met with those fea∣thered Harbingers of the Cape,Cape-Birds. as Pintado Birds, Mangofaleudos, Albetrosses; the first remarkable for their painted Spots of black and white; the last in that they have great Bodies, yet not pro∣portionable to their Wings, which mete out twice their length. Three Months being near consumed, we were at last accompa∣nied with long lookt for Western Blasts, and now we fly afore the Wind: But by the way take notice a South-West Wind becomes as bleak here, as a North-East in England. So that all the Seasons of the Year being undergone in this time, we may begin to calculate our Ephemeris afresh; and as a fit Platform, Easter Holy-days bring with them such Weather as is essential to Christide. But bidding Adieu to these Fancies, the Wind that till now seemed to dally, proves in good earnest, and begins a frowning April, driving the trembling Sea on heaps, and on them piling more, till the swelling Surges menace the lowering Skies, leaving a Hollow where they borrowed their Gigantine vastness, as if they were
intended to exenterate the Treasures of the Deep. At top of which 'twas dreadful to behold the angry Surface of the foaming Billows,Winter Storms and Tempests attend us to the Cape. descending down beneath no less uncomfortable, when the Vans of the next Ships (though groveling with a neighbouring Wave) could not be discerned. This tossing Condition lasted long, and was taken kindly too, as long as we spooned before the Sea, and kept from running foul of one the other; but when a Fret of Wind rowled the Waves athwart our Quarters, it made our Ship shake, proving the sound∣ness of her Sides, where had she given way never so little, we must have sunk without Bail or Mainprize. Still the Tempest encreases, and brings with it Gusts of Rain and dismal darksome Weather, whereby we were separated from the rest of our Fleet: For all, we put our Lights abroad as did they, yet in the badness of the Night we lost them, and were left alone to shift with the boisterous Winds. At last the Morn appears,We and the Caesar separa∣ted from the Fleet for two Days. but with the Symptoms of a blowing Day. She had not wafted many Hours, but on the advantage of a rising Wave, we spied a Sail to Leeward with her Fore-top-mast by the Board, which at Noon we knew to be the Caesar crowding under all its Sails. In this Encounter we shipped many a perilous Sea, (not with∣out being well-drenched our selves): Such was the force of this Nights Storm, that our Boat, and some of our Men, were not without difficulty restrained from being carried over-board. In this pickle we reeled out this Day, and out-stretching the Caesar, we made what Sail we durst, and by the next Light had sight of our Fleet, who shortning Sail, we came up with them, to whom we declared the misfortune of the Caesar, and that it bore South-West; wherefore they lay by, (the Wind slackning) and in half an hour we saw the Hull, and presently after it made up our Company compleat again. Near the middle of this Month we could have made that known Cape, the Cape of Good Hope,Had Sound∣ings off the Cape of Good Hope. being in the Latitude of 36 deg. 14 min. South, and Longitude from St. Iago 37 deg. 19 min. East. But the Dutch having some Forts there, it was thought no good Policy; wherefore veering to the South, the Cape bore East-North-East, some thirty Leagues off us; for heaving our Dipsy-lead we were in soundings eighty Fathom depth, which the Pilots note to be in that distance. Here we made two Sail to Leeward, and one to Windward, who directed her Course with us; but the Wind from the Shore coming East, they Tacked, and she passed without speaking to her: But the Leeward-most came up boldly to us and the Ann (we be∣ing the nearest and ready to receive them);Spoke with some English Ships home∣ward bound. but making them En∣lish built by their Galleries, we only shewed them our Colours (which they answered by St. George's Cross) and fired a Gun; when they brought to, and we bearing up, our Commander went Aboard one of them, the Johanna, a Ship of 700 Tuns laden from Bantam, who told us, That five more were in Company with them from the Coasts, but dispersed by Tempests; the other Ship was the Bernardiston; that which escaped us, the Rebecca.
They also inform'd us, The French had worsted the Flemmings in India, taken and demolished a Fort on the Island Ceilon; and that they had beat the Moors out of St. Thomas: That on our side never a Ship was lost, as they heard. So likewise giving them an Account of what we knew, with some Instructions communicated on both sides, we left them to take their Course, which served them for St. Hellens, the Antartick Monsoons favouring them directly thi∣ther, and the Squadron under Captain Munday, if they have raised the South Latitude of 28. may be there a little before to expect them. We kept on South-East, till we had doubled the most Southern Promontory of the Cape, Cape de Angullis, (which Course would lead us to Bantam) when bending to the North, we held on till we came betwixt St.Doubled Cape de Angullis to gain St. Law∣rence. Lawrence or Madigascar, and the Main, reckoned one of the four biggest Islands in the World, viz. Sumatra, Java, St. Lawrence and Britannia. The most traded Empories here, are St. Augustine on the Island, and Mosambique on the Main; frequent∣ed by the Portugals for Elephants Teeth, Gold, Camphire, and Ambergreece. Why we creep in between this Island and the Main, Is to borrow from the Land-briezes assistance against the general stated Winds settled for these Months between the Cape and this Island. The Sea here takes the Name of Oceanus Orientalis,The Eastern-Sea. beginning from the Cape till it joyn with the Indian, Red, and Arabian Seas. Here it was we had a notable Fish stretched its self along our sides for the space of an hour: Some called it a Grampos; but those that pretended skill, would have it a young Whale: It might be in length forty Feet and upward, bolting out of the Water with a great Surf; the Mouth large, but not responsible to so large a Body, the Form whereof was a Pyramid inverted, the Basis of which from Gill to Gill near five Feet in breadth, the Conus termi∣nating with a narrow Snout; where his Mouth opening, he suckt in a huge quantity of Water, and with that same eddy his Prey, which he retains within his Jaws, but spouts the Water out with the same spurting noise our Engines make, and as immense an heighth from an hole in his Neck, opening after the fashion of a Mouth or Slit; at the performance of which Action it contracts its self into an Orbicular Figure, and again dilates its self in its Diastole: The Back is of a dark Gray without Scales,A Whale. sixteen Feet over, leaping as other Fishes, but in a more Majestick manner, moving but slowly, whereby we had the sight of his Head and Neck first, (all one Rock, and as impenetrable, it being proof against the Prongs of the sharpest Harping-Iron); his whisking Tail last, near which a ridge of Fins, the true mark of Distinction for a Whale: The extreme part of his Tail extended is very broad and finny, which is the Rudder to this great Leviathan, wherewith, and two Fins more proceeding one from each side, he guides himself through his watery Territories. May had now began,We follow the Sun. when making after that glorious Charioteer, the Sun, we were once more spirited with milder Weather; the Mariners casting off their wet Cloaths, cared not for any more than would slightly cover them.
We being in sight of five Small Islands off St. Lawrence, for fear of the Tides driving them on shore,Lost sight of S. Lawrence. some of our Ships anchored; by which lingring we lost two of our Companions for two days; but we steering something West, and lying by a-nights to prevent falling on St. Christophers and Juan de Novo, both Low Lands, they had time to reach us: Being becalmed, it was the middle of the Month before we lost sight of St. Lawrence. The day after we had Meoty on our Larboard Bow, bearing North-East 20 Miles, High Land. The View of Meoty. At Night we had sight of Mohelia,The View of Meoty. Johanna, and Meoty to∣gether. The View of Mohelia. The View of Mohelia. The View of Johanna. The View of Johanna. The watering place bore S. S. E. from the Shore. The Peak or 3 Cables one mile and a half high. The History of Jehanna. THE Morning following we came under the Westward part of Johanna,Arrival at Johanna. where opposed us a lofty Ridge of Mountains, one of which advanceth its aspiring Head up to the towring Clouds: Over against which lies the Island called Mohelia, at the same di∣stance Calice is from Dover; the better Island of the Two, though not so big, nor quite so Mountainous; it being more plentifully,
as 'tis said, stored with Provisions; but not furnished with so safe an Harbour for Ships as Johanna: The only difficulty here being the Weathering the Point, in which, notwithstanding several Ships have been driven off to Sea, not being able to recover the Island again, the Winds descending in desperate Gusts drive them into the Trade∣winds, which here commence again. But our Ships were blest with better success, and came all safe to Anchor under a Lee-shore, which sufficiently protected them from the Winds by the highth of the Mountains. A Blessing not to be passed by without a grateful Com∣memoration, when half the Fleet were disabled by Distempers ac∣quired by Salt Meats, and a long Voyage without Refreshments; and must have suffered too for want of Water, had not they met with a seasonable Recruit. The first care then was to send the Sick Men ashore,Care of the Sick. which it is incredible to relate how strangely they revived in so short a time, by feeding on Oranges and Fresh Limes, and the very smell of the Earth; for those that were carried from the Ships in Cradles, and looked upon as desperate, in a days time could take up their Beds and walk; only minding to fetch them anights, that the Misty Vapours might not hinder the kind Operation begun on their tainted Mass of Blood, by these Specifick Medicines of Nature's own preparing. We had Leisure now joined to Security of the Dutch,Situation of the Island. for that no Ships from India can readily return this way into Europe at this time of the Year; and the Hollanders, after having touched at the Cape, usually go first to Batavia, before they coast India; which gave us free leave to dedicate our selves to all the Pleasure this Place could afford; which for its Excellencies may deserve to be called Happy, as well as any the Ancients bestowed the Name of For∣tunate, Macaria or Foelix on. It lies in 12 deg. South Latitude, Lon∣gitude 62 deg. 4 min. It is one of the Islands of Africa, though lying in the Eastern Sea; yet because the Coasts of Africa extend themselves to the Line on this North side of the Cape, we must take these Adjacent Isles in the same Account: On the South-East lies Meoty, North-West Mohelia, and North-East Comero, all Four Co∣lonies of the Moors or Arabians, or at least in subjection to them. But to return to Johanna;The Inland inaccessible. the innermost part we suppose to be fruitful, by what the Verge of it declares; for to be satisfied in that Point would be hardly worth the while, the Mountains requiring more pains to conquer than would quit cost, they being altogether inaccessible, or their Passages unknown to us. The Relation therefore to be expected,The Circuit. must be of that lies lowest and nearest the Sea. The Circuit I imagine to be almost an 100 Miles, all along which, it is variously cast into Hills, and furrowed into Vales; as it Nature had plowed them on purpose for encrease. The outwat Coat of which is embroidered with Thamarind Palmetto (from the Tree distills a Wine intoxicating, and an Oil medicinable, externally applied to Bruises, Strains, &c.) It yields also some store of Pine Apples, Ananas, growing on Shrubs like Arti∣chokes.Among other Trees, there is one 14 Fa∣thom round. But above all, there is a Tree famed for being 14 Fathom compass, it resembles most a small Ivy Leaf; the Body seems to be many smaller incorporated into one huge one, of no other use than to be admired, Hederâ formosior albâ, unless in opposition to the
Heathen, who adore it, they throw the Dead Bodies of their Slaves under it, when Justice is executed on them, to expose them for Ter∣rour to others, many Bones of Humane Bodies lying there at this time. There is also a Gourd esteemed of them more for the large Shell than Meat; it will hold a Pailful, in Figure like a Man's Head, and therefore called a Calabash. Rivers they have not many,Their Rivulets the best Wa∣ter next the Thames Water. but Rivulets good store; and of such Water, that next our Thames, it is the best, which is justly prefer∣red, (I mean our Thames Water) because it bears a Body beyond others, and therefore kept till the last to be spent, always reserving a stock thereof to serve them home; for though it stink like Pud∣dle-water when opened first, and have a Scum on it like Oil (which the Coopers affirm they are as cautious to strike with their Adds on the Cask for fear of taking fire, as of Brandy it self) yet let it stand unbunged on the Deck twenty four hours, it recovers its goodness, and is the only Water they rely on in an East-India Voyage, and therefore they are careful to save it till the last. Towns some few they are Masters of, but for Sumptuous Fabricks none will be found here. Their Chiefest Town bears the Name of the Island,Their Town and Buildings. which is seated along the Strand, under an high Hill; on one side refreshed with a gentle gliding Stream; on the other side recreated with a fine Plain, prodigal of its Fertility. The Town it self is to look on, an heap of Ruins, nothing remaining but the Marks of former Industry (pro∣bably the Portugals) here being left Walls of an huge thickness, composed of Stone, and cemented with Lime: To every House a Portal, but miserably defaced with Age; the Planks of their Doors sewed together, their Buildings not exceeding one Story; against these, Laziness has suggested them to lean their Flaggy Mansions: Flags especially in their Villages (by them called Cajans, being Co-Coe-tree Branches) upheld with some few Sticks, supplying both Sides and Covering to their Cottages. They commonly order their Model so, as to make a Quadrangle with only one Entrance, all the rest being closed outwards without any Windows; in which every House of Note on the Right-hand has a shady Contrivance, like the Walks to our Tennis-Courts, but not so long; on the upper end of which sits the Master of the Family on a Bed of Rattans, a kind of Cane: Here he, with the Steward of his House, are observed by his Slaves (who stand aloof) to spend the heat of the day. Among these,Two Mosques. but at some remoteness from any of their Dwel∣lings, are two Mosques, or places for Devotion, built after the manner of our Churches (but for Magnificence much like their other Structures) with Isles and Naves walled up to the very top; within them only a place left for entrance at the West end. They are de∣cently Matted on the Floor, though not hung so much as with a Cobweb on the Walls; which they keep (and in that to be com∣mended) very clean. In the Piatzos (for such their Porches had) stands on the Right-hand a square Stone Cistern, full of Water; and the whole without any Doors always open. The Nobler of the Two has at the West-end a round Tower, not very high; to this like∣wise belongs a more spacious Yard, filled with Tombs reared Man's heighth, covering them with a falling Ledge atop, leaving open a
Port-hole at the North-end, where the Head lies, for a Lamp: To inrich them, they are bestuck with China Ware of good value. Having given you the Description thus far,The King's Court. I must crave leave for my Error, in not giving it the Style of Regal before now: For it proves to be the Seat of one of their Kings, which I had almost forgot, had not my greedy Eye espied a House more eminently seated, and more decently covered than the rest, but the Materials not much different; only they have allotted him a little more Air to breath forth his swelling Title, King of Johannah Town. Where∣fore after a small Enquiry, it was manifest it was the Palace Royal; nor did I much doubt it, after we had gained admission; where did sit the King in state, at the upper end of such a Place as before was taken notice of, on a Cott, or Bed, strewed with a Quilt. On a Bench at each Elbow were placed two of his Nobles by him: We being introduced, instead of Kissing his Majesty's Hand, he took us one after another most graciously by the Fist, and by the Mouth of his Interpreter pronounced us heartily welcome, and bad us take our Seats according to our Qualities; which, after we had put our Hats on, we did; and the Interpreter with great Respect took his on the Floor crouching in the midst of us. In this manner, without shew of dread or fear of being misconstrued, we talked freely of matters re∣lating to both our States; as he first examining if we had any Gun∣powder or Compass-Glasses to spare him? We seconded his Demands with what regarded Provisions for our Voyage; for which License our Captains are obliged to make him Presents of Scarlet-cloth, and other Europe Rarities, that they may unmolested buy the Bullocks, Cows, Goats and Hens of his Subjects. Both being at length out of Discourse, or not very well understanding one another, he speaking Arabick, we as good English as we could; we had liberty in this in∣terval to survey the Gorgeousness of his Attire. On his Head he wore a large White Turbat, and had as good a White Shirt on his Back; from his Girdle half way his Legs, a Blue Silk Vest fringed with Purple, without Shooes or Stockins to his Feet, which he often pulling up into his Cott or Couch, would smilingly cross them, and with his Nails claw off the Dirt. By him lay a Purple Silk Robe, attended with a Black-guard of some a Dozen Slaves; compared with whom he looked great, and was a comely well Limb'd Person, though a Woolly-pated Coffery. His Nobles (because we are not to meet with many of them) pray take them in their best Liveries.Their Nobles. On their Crowns they wear Caps of Arabian Needle-work intermixed with divers Colours; which notwithstanding no bigger than Skull-caps, they move not to the best Man in the Company; it being their Custom only to Salam, giving a bow with their Hands across their Breasts: Their Bodies clad in White also; about their Loins Cloth of Arabia, Chec∣quered as our Barbers Aprons, but not so good (pace tantorum vi∣rorum) over all a thin Robe; both King and Princes encourage their Beards to their full growth. Their Priests,Their Priests. one of which attended, are habited in fashion not much different, had not the Colour inclined to Black; and on their Heads a Leather Coif lined with Fur.
When we took our leaves, we Presented him and his Peers with a few Brass Rings with False Stones,We Present them. with which they seemed to be well pleased. What Towns they have of Note we could not learn;They are Vas∣sals to the Arabs. but Towns they have, if not Cities, within the Country. And certain it is, their Chief Governour is an Arabian Lord. This Johanna Town is about Three quarters of a Mile in length, and may contain Two hundred Houses; their Streets being no broader than our Allies. Villages are very thick,Villages. A pleasant Grove. and Cottages disperst in every place. Every Valley makes a delightful Grove, one of which exceeding all the rest, was cooled with two dainty Currents, decked with a continual Spring, charming the Senses with the real Sweets of any the most exquisitely feigned Paradises; to see Limes grow on Shrubs, Leafed and Thorned like our Crabs, Oranges, (of which there is a pleasing sort, though small, not giving place to our China ones) tempting the Sight from a more exalted, and less suspicious Tree. Over which the lofty Cocoes with unparallel'd straitness stretch forth their Boughs, disposed in Ranks, as if ordered by the Skilful∣lest Planter. Lower than these, but with a Leaf far broader, stands the Curi∣ous Plantan, loading its tender Body with a Fruit, whose Clusters emulate the Grapes of Canaan, which burthened two Mens Shoulders; below which, an odoriferous Plant seizes the Smell; and winding through its subtile Meanders, revives the Faculties of the Brain: Here the flourishing Papaw (in Taste like our Melons, and as big, but growing on a Tree leafed like our Fig-tree), Citrons, Limons, and many more, contend to indulge the Taste; the warbling Birds the Ear; and all things, as if that general Curse were exempted, strive to gratify the Life of Man. Neither has Nature so played the Wanton here,The Hills are fruitful as well as the Vallies. as to be unmind∣ful of the Ascending Hills, which in other places by chance are pro∣ductive, but here they abound, and liberally bestow on the humble Valleys: Notwithstanding the Clime it is situate under, bears the reproach of that uninhabitable Zone; yet that Aspersion is blown off by those admirably tempered Breizes off the Mountains. The Inhabitants are black,Temper of the Inhabi∣tants. though not so black as at St. Iago, as well Limb'd, and as well Featur'd; neither so tall, nor so proud as they, but more honest: Whether out of fear of Punishment, or na∣tural Integrity, may be left to conjecture: For our Fleet lying as now at an Anchor, some years passed, they filched some slight things from the English; as likewise some Sailers from them; the Grievances on both sides known, and the Parties detected. Our Commanders had their Men slashed publickly on Shore, when they cut the Throats of theirs. To proceed; They are like the Country they live in, innocent; for as the one produces nothing hurtful, so they have always had the Character of being harmless. They are courteous to Strangers, but above all to the English; punctual in their Words, and as ready to tax for breach of Promise: Lazy above measure, despising all Mechanical Arts; and in them Necessity compels them to employing their Priests; as in building Boats, making Mats. Yet in one thing
to be wondred at, for making Old Iron, which they covet mightily, into Knives, or Tools, as sharp as Raisors; in other things rude∣ly imitating, but not deserving the name of Artists. The while we were there, they had a great Vessel on the Stocks; Stocks like the Checks to our Long Boats; the Keel of it was a whole Tree, no otherwise fitted than it grew, only the Branches lopped off. To it, for Stem and Stern, were fastened two others, shorter; on both sides Planks sewed to the main Timbers, with the Thread of the Cocoe-nut, each Hole stopped with Pitch. Thus had they raised it to the capacity of Thirty Tuns: When it will be finished, at the rate they work, will be hard to guess. They are Owners of several small Provoes,Their Vessels for Sea. of the same make, and Canooses, cut out of one intire piece of Wood; poised with Booms to keep them from over-setting; in these they paddle with broad Sticks, not row as we with Oars. They are very active at Climbing,Active at Climbing. Running like Jackanapes up their Cocoe-nut Trees, which they do by twisting a Band to keep close their Feet, as they raise their Bodies by their Arms grasped about the Trees. They are not solicitous for much to cover them, only a Clout to hide their shame, trust with a String round about their Waists, in which they stick their Knives, in a readiness to cut down their Food from the Trees. Their Slaves have a dejected Countenance,Slaves how known. distinguished by bore∣ing their Ears: They sit on Stones, or low Seats, their Arms folded like Monkies. However,Skilled in Let∣ters and Astro∣logy. they are not so abject, but that they have the use of Letters, and some science in Astrology, by what I can testify: For walking the Country, and almost tired, I stept into an House, where I saw a Man writing with a Pen made of a Cane, in the bottom of a Bowl besmeared over with black; considering a-while, at length I observed he made Arabian Characters, and aimed to draw a Scheme, which when he had done, he poured Water upon, and stirring it round with his Finger, wiped it out again, and as he did this, mut∣tered seriously to himself, doing so thrice. I watched what he intend∣ed, and found that a Woman lay sick there, and this Charm was her Physick. Besides this,Ape-Printing. I have it on report from some that saw their Schools for Education of their Youth, where they teach them to write, and by Bundles of Characters tied together to Ape Printing. What they make their Impression on, I cannot inform you; but Paper is no despicable Commodity among them. That Arabick is their Speech,Their Speech: is without contradiction; with what purity I am no competent Judge. The Religion among them is Mahometism;Religion. their Priests not so much exercised in Learning, as the Labour of their Hands. Their Women are fat and short,Women. not so big Breasted as those at St. Iago, better clad than the Men, wearing a course Sheet about them from their Breasts below their Knees; about their Heads they wear an Hairlace, or somewhat instead of it, not to tie their Hair up, which is short enough; but it may be, as our Dames in England, to keep the Wrinkles out of their Foreheads: In their Ears Mock-Jewels;
about their Necks and Wrists trifling Bracelets of Beads, Glass, or Wire of Brass; about the small of their Legs Brass Chains, and on their Fingers Rings of the same Metal. Seemingly fearful of a White Man, as are their Children, who are much troubled with the Navel-Rupture (Hernia umbilicalis),Their Chil∣dren troubled with the Na∣vel Rupture. either from the Windiness of their Food, or Ignorance of their Midwives in cutting the Navel-string, when they design to make the Boys good measure; which succeeds in these, for their Penis is of the larger shape. The Wives are very obsequious to their Husbands, seldom stirring abroad, doing the Drudgeries of the House. They dress Fowls very well,Their way of killing Fowls, &c. but kill them very barbarously, pul∣ling first their Feathers off to the Wings, then by degrees raise the Skin, after which Torture they as slowly cut their Throats, till they have finished a short Litany, which is the Priest's Office, if at hand; otherwise the Good Man of the House says Grace; they butchering their Goats in as Jewish a manner. Their usual Diet is the Fruits of the Earth,Their Diet. not caring much for Flesh, though they have great store of Pullen, Goats, and Kine; which last but small, and not very good Meat, their Fat cleaving to the roof of the mouth; not so big as our Welsh Beasts, yet have this peculiar, a Bunch of Fat betwixt their Shoulders, which eaten tastes like Marrow. Their Pasture,Their Corn. for want of Agriculture, rather Reeds than Grass; they have Rice in the Low-lands, and a Pease called Garavance: On the Sand near the Sea grows semper vivum maximum, from whose Juice comes Aloes, the best from Succotra: Here grows Cow-Itch in abundance, and all sorts of Saunders, which the Seamen cut for firing to bring aboard.Want of Asses, Mules, and Horses. Destitute of Asses, Mules, and Horses, but that want compensated by a richer Commodity, Ambergreece, for which the Arabian is the greatest Merchant and Sharer. Fowls for Game they have several,Fowls for Game. the best of which is the Guinney Hen, Turtle Doves; Crows with white Breasts, Buzzards, and Bats bodied like and near as big as a Weasel, with large Wings wove upon strong Gristles. They have a sort of a Jackanape they call a Budgee,A Budgee. the hand∣somest I ever saw. Honey and Mullasses they have good store. Having thus taken a Survey of them,Their invete∣rate Hate to the Mohelians. one would think Ambition banished hence, and that Discord should have little countenance from Subjects so alike contemptible. Such is the growth of that Seed, that no Ground comes amiss to it: Here, where neither Care nor Toil is burthensome, are they vexed with continual War by their opposite Neighbour the Mohelian, whom formerly they used to engage on Planks at Sea, casting Stones and Darts; since, by a better Instinct, they have provided themselves of securer Vessels, and as at this time devising greater, they adventure with better force, and in shrewder Battels, beginning to enquire after Swords and Guns, with the first of which the English do supply them: For which, and a former Courtesy of a Vessel sent them to land some Men on the Enemies Coasts, proceeds their more than ordinary love for the English.
How these behave themselves in War, or with what Discipline, is not in me to tell: Some Marks of their Valour many of them bear about them, as the Badges of their greatest Honour, who have their Limbs distorted, or Flesh beaten in. What the ground of these Feuds are, we cannot learn; unless the bad Influence of some malignant Planet, or else that Make-bate of the world, whose great∣est business is Contention, should insinuate it into them. The Ara∣bian Lords of each do strive to reconcile them; which if they do for a time, it breaks out again in open War: And probable it is, that these Animosities have rendred them liable to the Subjection they are now in; whose very Islands else, with an united Force of Stones and Arms to bear them, were able to defend them. Four days being spent in this sweet Wilderness,We are called aboard to set sail. our Admiral by firing a Gun, and loosing his Fore-top-sail, summoned us aboard. CHAP. III. Declares our Course from Johanna, to our landing at Mechlapatan. A Fresh Gale and a fair Wind soon set us once more to the Nor∣ward of the Equinoctial,We repass the Equinoctial Line. accompanied with soaking Showers, Thunder, and Cloudy Weather, which with the continuance of the Winds did us a kindness; for following the heels of the Sun, we were got within Twelve Degrees of him, when we sailed into the Indian Sea, East North-East, the Maldive Islands being South-East, the Red Sea West North-West, and the Arabian North by West, with∣out labouring under that irresistible Heat we did before; by reason of which adjunct Heat, the Rains however became intemperate; not but that they mitigated the Heat in actu, tho as to its effects, it proved more virulent, impregnating the Air with a diseased Consti∣tution, whereupon we had many hung down their Heads. About the third Degree of North-Latitude we lost sight of the Magellanian Clouds and the Crociers,The North-Star is raised again. and raised our Northern Polar Director. Having 8 deg.The Maldivae Islands. 53 min. North Latitude, we left the Sun to run his Race to the North; and steering East to raise our Longitude, we fell into a Channel between the Maldivae (a Concatenation of Islands from the Equator hither, and here only parted by this Chan∣nel, the rest of them lying scatteredly to the 10th deg. of North La∣titude) which makes us lye by a-nights, (signified by One Light out of the Main-Top of our Admiral (which he always carries at Night), and another out of the middle Lanthorn on the Poop, an∣swered by all the rest with one at the same place), for fear of fal∣ling foul of them, the Weather continuing wet, dark, and tem∣pestuous. After which we shaped our Course East South-East,Near Ceilon. when the Ad∣miral fired a Gun, spreading St. George's Flag in the Mizen-shrowds for a Consultation, knowing we began to draw near Ceilon, an Island
in the East-India,Chap. III. divided from Cape Cory by Ptlomy, Comory by our Modern Authors, by a narrow, swift, and unnavigable Current, where the Flemings have nested themselves in the Portugals Castles at Co∣lumbo, Point de Gaul, and elsewhere; so that if at all, we are to meet with them hereabouts, they commonly having a Fleet of Ships in these Seas: We out of necessity are forced to make this Land, and were it peaceable Times should sail all along in sight of it, till we came upon the Coast of Cormandel. Wherefore our Commander returning on board, after assigning every one his Post, to be ready on any surprize, he found a Chear∣fulness in all to obey him. Here two Whales,A Couple of Whales. A Fright oc∣casioned by a mistake in the Night. bigger than the former, shewed themselves. In the dead of the night a lamentable Outcry was caused by some of our Men on the Forecastle, who looking out thought they had seen a Rock, with which these Seas abound, whereupon they cried out, A Breach, a Breach; which made the Mates leap out of their Cabins with the same grisly Look as if going to give up their last Accounts: Here was Doomsday in its right Colours, Distraction, Horror, and Amazement had seized on all, one commanding this, another acting quite contrary; the Breach surrounding us, every one expected the fatal stroke, when the Ship should be dashed in pieces. In this Pa∣nick Fear, had any had so much heart as to have ventured a Compo∣sition for his empty Noddle by looking over-board, he might have discovered the Jig: For at length it was evident that only a Chorus of Porpoises had taken the Sea in their Dance; which Morris once over, the Seas were quiet, and our Men left to repose themselves with a shorter Nap than they thought themselves like to have. Five days after our Summer Solstice we had soundings 14 Fathom, and at break of day had sight of Ceilon, when we altered our Course to East North-East; it bore from us North by West 12 Leagues, the out-Land low, but rarely enriched with Woods of Cinamon, from whence only it is brought. The View of Ceilon. This is the first Shore presented its self in India:The View of Ceilon. The Inland hath a Prospect over the Sea: It lies in North Latitude 6 deg. 3 min. and Longitude from Johanna 37 deg. 10 min. East. This is the Island where (if true) the Elephants are bred,Ceilon has the best Breed of Elephants. who, transported, exact Homage from all Elephants of other places, and they withal, by prostrating (as it were) their Necks between their Feet, submissively acknowledge it. At Nights we stood off to Sea to escape the insidious Rocks,The Terrhenoes. a-days we made for the Land, to gain the Land Breizes, which are not felt far off at Sea, by reason of the Constancy of the Trade-Winds: They begin about Midnight, and hold till Noon, and are by the Por∣tugals named Terrhenoes; more North they are more strong, and hardly give way to the Sea-Breizes, which sometimes succeed the others twelve hours, but not always on this Coast.
Two Days passed after we made Land, we discovered three Coun∣try Junks a-head, and coming up with them we commanded their Skippers on board;Three Coun∣try Junks. examining their Cockets, they produced Eng∣lish Passes, the Masters of two of them being Portugals, the other a Moor, from whom was taken a Packet of Dutch Letters: Their Crew were all Moors (by which Word hereafter must be meant those of the Mahometan Faith), apparell'd all in white, on their Heads white Scull-caps, their Complexions tawny: Their Junks had three Masts, wearing an East-India strip'd Ancient, and might con∣tain an 100 Tuns apiece. They managed their Sails but aukwardly, and are unskilful in Maritime Affairs; wherefore in any long Voyage they employ Eu∣ropeans to navigate their Vessels. Coasting along,Cattamarans are Logs tied together, to waft off their Goods. some Cattamarans (Logs lashed to that advantage that they waft off all their Goods, only having a Sail in the midst, and Paddles to guide them) made after us, but our Ships having fresh way, we were unwilling to tarry for them; besides, at that in∣stant we espied under the Shore a mighty Vessel, with her Yards and Top-masts lower'd; but they continuing to follow us, the Anne lay by for one of them, who affirmed that a Fleet of 24 Sail of Bata∣vians were passed to retake St. Thomas▪ from the French. The East-India Merchant and Antelope by this were up with Vessel under shore, who proved to be a great Junk of the Moors: Overagainst where she rode, a fair Pagod or Temple of the Gentus, beleaguer'd with a Grove of Trees (excepting that it was open towards the Sea) cast a Lustre bright and splendid, the Sun reverberating against its refulgent Spire, which was crowned with a Globe white as Alabaster, of the same tincture with the whole. Nearer the Point we descried a Town,Sandraslapa∣tan on the Main. in which a Castle over∣awing it, and upon the highest Pinacle Dutch Colours, which high Noon gave us to be Sandraslapatan, a Factory of theirs, our Staff having as much as together with the Sun's declination made 11 deg. 50 min. North Latitude, but 10 Leagues to the South of Fort St. George, where our Commanders were to touch first, according to their Charter-Party. Whereupon we put abroad our Jacks,Resolved to fight the Fle∣mings. Ancients, and Penants, and running out all our Guns, it was unanimously consented to fight our way through the Flemish East-Indians, had we not seen a Mussoola hailing our Admiral, which came off with Advice from the Agent: This Afternoon therefore we lay by, the Admiral calling a Council aboard him; and at night our Mercury was waited on towards the Shore by the Bombaim: All this while we lay in sight of Sandrasla∣patan, whose Soil is Fat and Opulent, like their Netherlands. The View of Sandraslapatan. The Water here ran smooth and discoloured:The View of Sandraslapa∣tan. Till once again committing our selves to the Sea,Put to Sea a∣gain, on Ad∣vice from the Agent. we ploughed deeper Water, North-East, of a Caerulean dye.
The next day we saw a French Man of War, and he us, but would not trust us.Saw a French Man of War. We knew him to be French by our Intelligencer, who laid us out his Station, where he had encountred five Batavians, and discomfited them. This Day's observation made 30 m.Dismissed the Junks. to the North of Fort St. George. We were beating now against the Wind (which blows fiercely from the Shore) and a strong Current, which had set us 14 deg. 20 min. North in three days time, when the Junks we compelled with us hi∣ther, had the liberty to make the best of their way for the Bay of Bengala; for which the Winds served them well enough, though full in our Teeth, who laboured for the Land. However,Met the Freshes caused by the Rains. in four days time we met with the Freshes off the Shore caused by the Upland Rains: The Sea despising to defile its purer Azure with their Muddy Green. The same Antipathy was held be∣twixt the lively Fishes and their slimy Brood, they intermixing with such unfriendly Concord; for playing in whole Shoals about the Edges, they would not exceed the Limits the jarring Torrents had won upon each other. So the fierce Tigris in his swift Career ne∣glects the scorned Arethusa, and she with the like disdain retaliates his unkindness, neither Stream mixing either Fish or Water. Thus quartering this Sublunary Globe,Having quar∣tered the World, we Anchor at Mechlapatan. out of Europe into Africa, from thence cruising on the Coast of Brasil upon the American Seas, till joining with the Ethiopick, we double the Cape of good Hope into Africa again, at last we came in sight of the Asian Shores; and the latter end of June we cast Anchor in Mechlapatan Road; which was composed of Shoals and Deeps, where we found three Portugal Ships riding. Our Fleet expressed their joy by the roaring of the wide-mouth'd Cannon, and the sounding of the shriller Trumpets; which the Eng∣lish Factory, welcomed by displaying their Flag (being allowed no Ordnance, but what they privily plant for their own security) as being under the Tutelage of the Natives, as also are the Portugals and Flemmings (who each have here their Staples) so in like man∣ner all they have any Commerce with: No Act of Hostility, ei∣ther on Shore, or in the Road, being tollerated without leave first obtained; those on Shore being the Pledges forfeited on the breach of Peace. Mechlapatan. Dierepoint.Bar Town. The firm Land was plain and nothing elevated beyond the Trees, unless Edifices of the European erection.
CHAP. IV. Takes up our stay at Mechlapatan, to our Landing at Fort St. George. THE next Morning the Second of the Factory (the Chief) being at Fort St. George,The Treasure set on Shore. visited the Admiral, and ordered the Treasure to be set on Shore. That if the empty Hollander should be so hardy as to face us, their small hopes of Plunder might abate their Courage; which otherwise might tempt them to attack us with the greater vi∣gour. The Boat-men that came for it were of a Sun-burnt Black,The Boatmen described. with long black Hair, tied up in a Clout of Calicut Lawn, girt about the Middle with a Sash, in their Ears Rings of Gold; those that were bare-headed, were shorn all to one Lock, which carelesly twisted up (some have foolishly conceited) to be left for Perimel (one of their Prophets) to hold fast by when he should haul them to Heaven; but more truly to preserve them from the Plica Polo∣nica, which attends long Hair not cleanly kept, and to which these People are incident. Among these,Peons, or Ser∣vants to wait on us. some more modish than the rest, as going in a Garb more Civil, Coiling Calicut about their Heads, Turbat fashion, on their Bodies light Vests, underneath long loose Breeches, and swadled about the Waist with a Sash; offered their Service for a small Pension, to execute our Affairs on Shore, or wait on us Aboard. These spake English, and acquainted us, how the French had set fire to four Vessels of the Moors, and made Prize of four more, as they were in this Road not two Months ago; that they had con∣strained some Dutch Factories to run on score to supply their wants with Victuals, and other Necessaries; whose Credit, by these Emergencies, and their Cash failing, begins to sink: Money be∣ing here not only the Nerves and Sinews, but the Life it self of Trade. Being sent for on Shore by the desire of the Factory,Landing at Mechlapatan. by one of the Country Boats, I was landed at Mechlapatan: These Boats are as large as one of our Ware-Barges, and almost of that Mould, sailing with one Sail like them, but padling with Paddles instead of Spreads, and carry a great Burthen with little trouble; outliving either Ship or English Skiff over the Bar. Which by the rapid motion of the Waves driving the Sands into an Head, makes a noise as deafning as the Cataracts of Nile, and not seldom as difficult a Downfal. Over this the Land shuts us up on both sides, and the stiller Waters con∣tentedly do part their Streams to embrace the Town. Near which a Fort or Blockade (if it merit to be called so) made of Dirt,The Fort and Town. hides half a score great Guns; under the command of which several Moors Junks ride at Anchor. A Bow-shot from whence the Town it self, environed with a Mud Wall, entrenched with a stink∣ing
Moras,Chap. IV. and at some time Moated with the Sea, creates a spa∣cious Prospect; it is of Form oblong. Their Bank Solls,Their Cu∣stom-House Keys. Their Private Dwellings. or Custom-House Keys, where they land, are Two; but mean, and shut only with ordinary Gates at Night. The High-streets are broad, set forth with high and lofty Build∣ings, the Materials Wood and Plaister, beautified without with fold∣ing Windows, made of Wood, and lattised with Rattans, entring into Balconies shaded by large Sheds covered with Tiles: Within a Square Court, to which a stately Gatehouse makes a Passage, in the middle whereof a Tank vaulted, with a flat Roof above, and on it Terras Walks are framed, the one to wash in, in the heat of the day; the other to take the Air in the cool of the day; the whole Fabrick intire within its self, covered atop Taber-like. The poorer, of which multitudes are interspersed, both in their High-streets and Allies, are thatched, cast round as Bee Hives, and walled with Mud; which in the Summers drought often take fire, and lay the taller equal with the ground. For publick Structures their principal Streets present sundry Mosques,Publick Stru∣ctures. one Custom-house, one Court of Judicature, and that but mean. For Places of resort there are three Buzzars, or Market-places, crowded both with People and Commodities. On the North-East a Wooden Bridge,The Bridges. half a Mile long, leading to the Bar Town; on the North-West one, a Mile Long, tending to the English Garden, and up the Country. Each of which have a Gate-house, and a strong Watch at the beginning, next the Town: Both these are laid over a Sandy Marsh, where Droves of People are always thronging. The present Incumbents are the Moors, Persians, Gentiles; So∣journers Armenians, (who maintain their Correspondence over Land) Portugals, Dutch and English; and some few French. For the Story of it,The Story of this Place, and the Kingdom of Gulconda. and with it of the Kingdom; the Gentues, the Portugal Idiom for Gentiles, are the Aborigines, who enjoyed their freedom, till the Moors or Scythian Tartars (whether mediately from Persia, or immediately from that overflow of Tamerlane into these Parts, is not material, since they both pretend to the same Ex∣tract, and that will be fitter declared in another place) undermi∣ning them, took advantage of their Civil Commotions. For one Caff or Tribe (by the Chief of which they were ruled) clashing with another, overturned all; which that we may the better un∣derstand, These Tribes were distinguished by their Occupations,At first go∣verned by their Tribes. espousing therefore Vocations as well as Kindred; and thereby, as one was a more honourable Calling than the other, so they stood upon their Nobility in that Imployment, never marrying out of it. As the Head were the Brachmines, the Ancient Gymnosophists; out of whom branched their Priests, Physicians, and their Learned Men. Next in esteem were the Rashwaws, Rashpoots, or Souldiers. But the most insolent were the Artificers;How altered. as the Engravers, Re∣finers, Goldsmiths, Carpenters, and the like; who behaved them∣selves not only disrespectfully to their Superiours, but tyrannically to
those of a viler Rank; as the Husbandmen and Labourers. Whereupon they jointly conspired their Ruin, and with that their own Slavery; ta∣king the Moors to their assistance, who not only reduced the Usurpers to Composition, which was, That they should be accounted the Off∣scum of the People, and as base as the Holencores (whom they ac∣count so, because they Defile themselves by eating any thing, and do all servile Offices) and not be permitted to ride in a Palenkeen at their Festivals or Nuptials, but on Horseback, which they count an high Disgrace; but they also took the Power into their own hand; which though Despotical, the Gentus endure, rather than endeavour the re∣covery of their former Liberty, and to subvert it from a Monarchy into an Aristocracy. Their King reigning is a Moor, raised to the Throne from the lowest ebb of Fortune. For it being in the breast of the Regent to appoint his Successor,Their King a Chias Moor. his Predecessor, on defect of his own Children, raised him; by the practice of Siegmanjaffa, his Chief Eunuch (who are made in this Kingdom the prime Ministers of State) partly to strengthen his own Interest by ingratiating with the Heir Apparent, and partly out of gratitude to the Young man's Father, a Great Man, and of the Bloud-Royal, who, when alive, was the promoter of Siegmanjaffa: This same Prince of the Chias, or Sophian Extract, was raked out of the Embers of Oblivion. Where you must note,All Noble∣mens Estates fall to the King at their Deaths. That though his Father expired a Blazing Comet in the Court, yet at the death of any Nobleman, his Wealth falls all into the King's hands; whereby this poor Gentleman for a long time lived an obscure and miserable Life, no one taking his word for the Victuals he put into his Belly: But upon the old King's importunity for one to sway the Scepter after him of his own Line, Siegmanjaffa urged him; and placed him poor and lean as he was, where the King might see him, but not he the King. At first the King rejected him, as having no promising look; still Siegmanjaffa interceded, and desired his Lord to allow him like a Gentleman, and see to what use he would expend his Money: Which condescended to, a Brachmin (who are become the Farmers of the King's Rents) was dispatched to offer him the Loan of Mo∣ney, which he willingly accepted of, and therewith put himself into an handsome Equipage, both for Apparel and Attendants (which specious Shews recommend here more than profoundness of parts) and withal Fed and Whored (which is a great point of Manhood) as well as the best of them. Wherefore after a short time he was again brought into the King's Presence, who now began to have some hopes of him; and therefore to try him farther, he gave him a con∣stant supply of Money; and bad Siegmanjaffa put him on some lau∣dable Enterprize in his Army, of which Siegmanjaffa was General; which he undertook with much Alacrity, and behaved himself with that Gallantry, that at length the Old King sent him a Tipstaff with a Royal Robe, requiring him to come to Court in one of the King's own Palenkeens: At which he was dismay'd, Saying he should never return to his House again. However, by Siegmanjaffa's encouragement he apparelled him∣self, and rode on the King's Palenkeen: His Jealousy was grounded
on a barbarous Custom of the Eastern Monarchs, who when any Subject becomes suspected, send them alike honourable Presents with those in Favour,The barba∣rous Custom of Poysoning among the Eastern Mo∣narchs. which in their receit only shall testify to the World the King's Displeasure, though they whom they are designed for, live not to know the cause, being poysoned by them before they can plead for themselves. But he was assured no ill Intentions were to∣wards him when speaking with the King face to face, he declared him his Successor to the Crown, which not long after he was esta∣blished in by the Death of his Master. His Residence is at Gulconda,Gulconda is the Metropolis, and gives Name to the Kingdom. The Prime Minister an Eunuch. The Wealth how raised. the Metropolis, and bearing the Name of the Kingdom, fifteen days journey West from hence. Under him Siegmanjaffa orders the whole Realm, amassing great Treasures (though he himself pays Homage to the Great Mogul) exacting every Man's Estate when he pleases, mulcting them at his own Will, squeezing the common People to perfect Penury: Be∣sides the Reversions of Great Mens Estates, he has large Revenues from his Diamond Mines, which he lets out yearly to those bid most. His Expences are inconsiderable,The Army how paid. his Subjects in their distinct Pro∣vinces maintaining his Soldiers, of whom he has a standing Army of an Hundred thousand Horse and Foot, when all together; besides Two hundred Elephants in continual readiness, which are provided for by the Farmers of his Revenues. All that he consumes is on his Voluptuousness, with which he is swallowed up. The Kingdom of Gulconda extends from 10 deg.The bigness of the King∣dom. North Latitude, to 19 deg. ½ along the Coasts of Coromandel, and up into the Coun∣try Three hundred Course (which is a Mile and a quarter) though in some places thinly inhabited. The next in Dignity to Siegmanjaffa,The Governor of Mechlapa∣tan. is the Governor of Mechla patan, an Eunuch also, and a Slave to Siegmanjaffa, who came through the Town. while we were here, waited on by a Noble Train, besides Soldiers and Followers; having an Elephant led before his Palenkeen, which none presume to do, unless the King honour them therewith; nor to ride on any but Females, unless of the Royal Family, who may only mount a Male to ride in State through their Cities. His Substitute here is a Chias Moor, who takes charge of the Stores every Night. Over the Gentues they keep a strict hand, entrusting them with no Place of Concern, using them as Mechanicks and Servitors, to few of them attributing the Title of Merchants; though in this Town of Moors and Persians there are many Owners of good Trading Vessels. The Persians have planted themselves here through the Intercourse of Traffick as well as Arms,The Persians Favourites at Court. being all of them at their first coming, low in Condition; but inspired by the Court-Favour, and making one of their own Nation always their Executors, they arrive to Pre∣ferment. Nor are any of these so exempted when they grow too rich, to be deplumated by the same hand. Their way of living is truly Noble,Their Port and Grandeur. having a Retinue which be∣speaks their Greatness as they rise in Fortune or the King's Grace.
Magnaque est Comitum aemulatio quibus primus ad Principem locus, & Principum cui acerrimi & plurimi Comites. Haec dignitas, hae vi∣res, magno semper electorum juvenum globo circumdari; in pace decus, in bello praeidium. Each contending to have the most numerous and handsomest Fellows for Attendance; their Pride at home, and abroad their Safeguard. However,The East-India Company Fa∣ctors. for the English Honour be it spoke, none of them sur∣pass the Grandeur of our East-India Company, who not only com∣mand, but oblige their utmost Respect; none of their Servants shew∣ing themselves in Publick without a Company answerable to theirs, and exceeding them in Civility of Garb and Manners. When the Chief made his Entry at his Return from the Fort, it was very Pom∣pous, all the Merchants of Esteem going to meet him with loud Indian Musick and Led-Horses: Before his Palenkeen an Horse of State, and two St. George's Banners, with English Trumpeters; after him the Factors on Horseback, and lusty Fellows running by their sides with Arundells, (which are broad Umbrelloes held over their heads,) Soldiers and Spear-men Two hundred at least, and after these a Row of Palenkeens belonging to English and other Merchants. At Meals their Domesticks wait on them with Obeisance suitable to great Potentates,Their man∣ner of living. enclosing their Tables, which are strewed libe∣rally with Dainties served up in Plate of China; Nam nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus, says Juvenal, which crack when poysoned; which whether true or false (since it is so much practised in this Coun∣try by way of Revenge) is but a necessary Caution by all means to avoid. They fan the Air with Peacocks Tails set in huge Silver Handles, and chiefly now, because the busy Flies would cover the Table, were they not beaten off. Abroad shading their heads with broad Tar∣gets held over their heads; washing and rubbing them in their Tanks; wanting in no Office may render them acceptable to their Masters. But not to detract from the Inhabitants,The Pom∣pousness of the Gentues. their Solemnities are ve∣ry Courtly, commonly performed by Night with the noise of Drum, Shawm, and Fife; especially at their Weddings, when the meanest (excepting those protested against) of the Gentues must not be denied his Week's Jollity in a Palenkeen, and a Guard of Targets, Swords, and Javelins, and others bearing the Ensigns denoting the Honour of their Tribe. If any of the subjected Tribes (as they count them) assume the Honour (though the Governor connive) they fall together by the ears, and drag him shamefully by the Hair of the Head to the place he first set forth. They are array'd in White Vests,Their Attire. girt with Sashes, small Turbats on their Heads, long Breeches to their Heels; the Gentues barefoot mostly; The Moors and Persians shod with Sandals, and over their Shoulders a Silk Mantle of what colour they fancy. The English keep their fashion, though cloathed in white: The Armenians like the Inhabitants. The Moors are very grave and haughty in their demeanor,The Gravity and Pride of the Moors. not vouchsafing to return an Answer by a Slave, but by a Deubash, who is the Interpreter. Their chiefest Delight and Pride is to be seen
smoking Tobacco cross-legg'd in a great Chair at their doors, out of a long Brass Pipe adapted to a large Crystal Hubble-bubble, fixed in a Brass Frame, their Menial Servants surrounding them. All of this Robe's way of Salute is by lifting their Hand to their Head, except the Armenians, who move their Turbats as we our Hats. The Moors are by Nature plagued with Jealousy,Their Jealou∣sy. cloistring their Wives up, and sequestring them the sight of any besides the Tapon that watches them. When they go abroad, they are carried in close Palenkeens, which if a Man offer to unvail it is present death; the meanest of them not permitting their Women to stir out uncovered; of whom they are allowed as many as they can keep. Their Matches are contrived by their Parents when young;Strictness to∣wards their Women. at Seven Years the Son being taken from the Mother, the Sister from the Brother, and not a Father, though Fourscore and ten, suffered the Interview of his Daughter; every Dwelling having Apartments allotted for this Confinement. The Gentues observe not that strictness,Contrary Freedom a∣mong the Gen∣tues. both Sexes enjoying the open Air. Their Women are manacled with Chains of Silver (or Fetters rather) and hung with Ear-rings of Gold and Jewels, their Noses stretch'd with weighty Jewels, on their Toes Rings of Gold, about their Waste a painted Clout, over their Shoulders they cast a Mantle; their Hair tied behind their Head (which both in Men and Women is naturally very long); a-top a Coronet of Gold beset with Stones; compleatly bodied, and so flexible, that they are excellent Dancers, and good at Feats of Activity: I having seen them hold Nine Gilded Balls in play with their Hands and Feet, and the Muscles of their Arms and Legs, a long time together without let∣ting them fall: They are clearer complexion'd than the Men. As for their dealing in the World,Their Crafti∣ness and Skill in staining Calicuts. they are well skill'd, and will arithmetize the nicest Fractions without the help of Pen or Ink; much given to Traffick, and intelligent in the way of Merchandize, if not fraudulent; having an accomplishment in the Art of Staining Calicuts here beyond any other place in the East-Indies (for that they are upon washing rather clearer and livelier than at first, and this is it that makes this Port so much frequented) which is paint∣ed with the Pencil by little Children as well as elder grown, they stretching the Pieces on the ground, and sitting upon them, run them over with a dexterity and exactness peculiar to themselves. They are all of them of Disposition timerous,Their fearful disposition. so that Twenty four English-Men armed kept the Bank-Solls against them on a late Demur; and thereupon at the coming in of our Ships they were all packing up to be gone, notwithstanding 200000 Souls receive here their daily Sustenance: And as Tyrannous when they get the uppermost; an instance whereof the Occasion of this Demur pre∣sents: For our Factory protecting one of the English Nation from their Fury, who too incautiously had to deal with some of their Wo∣men, they set a De-Roy on the Factory (which is a Prohibition in the King's Name for any one to have any thing to do with them till that be taken off) whereby they were debarred Wood and Water, and all other Necessaries, till they had their Revenge on the Aggres∣sor, which terminated not till Death had expiated the Fact: For ha∣ving
intrapped him by deluding Speeches into their merciless Power, they cut him in pieces before the Factory Gate: Whereupon the English drew out some Field-Pieces, and scowred the Streets, when they fled and left the Bank-Solls to their possession, which were not resigned till the De-Roy was taken off, which was not done till within a little of our Arrival; when the thing being fresh, and thinking us not only able by such a Fleet to demand Satisfaction, but resolved so to do, they were all shifting for themselves: According to the true nature of Cowards, who when Peril is far from them, strike all with Lightning; but when it appears on equal terms, pre∣sently discover the wonted Paleness of an unsound Virtue. Of Complexion the Gentues are blacker than the Moors, the Moors than the Persians. Their executing of Justice in Capital Cases is sudden, in Cases Capital. either cut∣ting them in pieces (which for Murder is always begun by the next Relation, who must be both Prosecutor and Executioner, and then seconded by the Rabble) or Impaling them on Stakes. The punishing of their Great Ones, because not in force in our Western Empires, may deserve to be mentioned. Upon an Offence they are sent by the King's Order,The Post, and Nature there∣of. and commit∣ted to a place called the Post (from the Punishment inflicted), where the Master of the Post is acquainted with the heinousness of the Crime; which being understood, he heightens by a Drink, which at first they refuse, made of Bung (the Juice of the intoxicating sort of Hemp), and being mingled with Dutry (the deadliest sort of Solaium, or Nightshade) named Post, after a Week's taking, they crave more than ever they nauseated. Ad illorum vicem qui de∣gustato Sardonum graminum succo feruntur in morte ridere; making them foolishly mad. Then are they brought into the Inner Lodg∣ings of the House, in which Folding Doors open upon delicious Gar∣dens, where Apes and Cats, Dogs and Monkeys are their Attendants, with whom they maintain their Dialogues, exercising over them their Humour of an Assassin, Usurper, Miser, or what their Genius led them to, whilst themselves. After this manner are they impri∣son'd during the King's Pleasure, or he order their Cure, to restore them to their Senses again; which otherwise, after their Spirits are tired by a restless Appetite of doing, and in the mean time have not a suitable recruit, they linger by a lasting Leanness into the Shades, which alive they represented. As for their Law-Disputes,No Law-Di∣sputes long depending. Their Religi∣ons. they are soon ended; the Governor hearing, and the Cadi or Judge determining every Morning. Religions of all Inventions are licens'd. The Moors are Mahome∣tans of the Arabian Sect: The Persians as much deluded by Mortis Ali or Hali, accused therefore of Heresy by the Moors. The Na∣tives are Idolaters worshiping many Penates or Houshold-Gods, yea, the Devil too for fear: Yet they acknowledge but One Supreme God; and the various Representations or Shapes adored, are but so many different Attributes. After every day's Devotion they dawb their Forheads with Paint, and as Principles of Zeal, abominate eat∣ing with any, unless of their own Cast, when they strip and wash themselves before Meals.
They have a due command of their Appetite both as to Time and the Matter they feed on, to wit, Roots, Herbs, Rice, and Cutchery, all manner of Fruits, but nothing that has had Life, or likely to pro∣duce Vital Heat, as Eggs, which they will not eat; but they will drink Milk and boil'd Butter, which they call Ghe. For their Easements both Men and Women keep a set hour, and go with every one a purifying Pot in their hand (for to take up Wa∣ter to wash after their occasions) to some Publick Tank or Pond; the Men apart from the Women; neither of them concerned for Passengers, keeping their back-sides towards them till they have done their Business. Among them all it is common to make water sitting, as when they evacuate the other way; and it is a shame for any one to be seen to do otherwise, they sarcastically saying, Such a one pisses like a Dog (which is held unclean) standing. Their Doctors of Divinity are the Brachmins,Their Doctors of Divinity, and their Te∣nets. who instruct them in their Law, to preserve all Creatures that are beneficial, and teach them the old Pythagorean , Transmigration of Souls out of one body into another; as a Tyrant into a Tygre, a Cove∣tous Man or Cruel into a Boar, a fearful Man into an Hare, and so on: If they see a Tree twined about with another (as most Bind-Weeds will), they tell you that in this life, when Human, the Soul got into that Tree was a Debtor to the other, and therefore it is held fast by the other. The Soul of a Good Man is believed to depart into a Cow, wherefore 'tis Sacrilege with them to kill a Cow or a Calf; but highly piacular to shoot a Kite, dedicated to the Brach∣mins, for which Money will hardly pacify. Their Religious Worship consists most in washing and purifyings;Their Cere∣monies. more of which hereafter. They marry very young,They marry young. not knowing their Wives though till at riper years they come to consummate their Hymeneal Rites. Their Language they call generally Gentu:Their Speech. They write on the Leaf of a Cocoe with a sharp Iron Instrument. The peculiar Name of their Speech is Telinga.The Telinga Character. The Mahometans bury their dead;The Mahome∣tans bury, the Gentus burn their dead. the Gentues burn them; and in the Husband's Flames the Wife offers her self a Sacrifice to his Manes, or else she shaves and turns Whore for a Livelihood, none of her Friends looking upon her; hers, not her Husband's Acquaintance, thrusting her upon it; to which end they give her Dutry; when half mad she throws her self into the Fire, and they ready with great Logs keep her in his Funeral Pile.
The Armenians are settled here on account of Trade (whose Hi∣story is reserved for a fitter place); they are Christians of a separate Communion.Christian Strangers. The Portugals, of the Romish Church. The English, of the Orthodox Episcopacy. The Dutch, most Calvinists. The Coin current here is a Pagod,Coin current, and the Com∣modities. 8 s.; Dollar, 4 s. 6 d.; Rupee, 2 s. 3 d.; Cash, 1 d. ½; a Cash ¼. Staple Commodities are Calicuts white and painted, Palempores, Carpets, Tea; Diamonds of both Rocks, the Old and New; Escre∣tores, and other Knick-knacks for Ladies, because far-fetch'd and dear-bought. Beasts they have,Beasts wild and tame. Wild Lions, Leopards, Bears, Boars, Tygers, Antelopes, Spotted Deer. For Service, Oxen, Buffola's, Camels, Asses which they use for burthen, to carry Packs, Water in great Leathern Sacks about the Town for every Family, and any other Slavery: But their Horses, which are small and hot-mettled, they put to no such drudgery, but use them with all the kindness and fair speeches imaginable. With these (without disparagement to that Image God has stamp'd on that Enchiridion of his Handywork,Their hang∣ing Coaches, and those that carry them. Man) we might recite the Coolies, Duties, and Palenkeen Boys; by the very Hea∣thens esteemed a degenerate Offspring of the Holencores; and in earnest (excepting the Shape) they come nigh to Brutes. These are the Machines they journey by: On the Shoulders of the Coolies they load their Provant, and what Moveables necessary. The Du∣ties march like Furies, with their lighted Mussals in their hands (they are Pots filled with Oyl in an Iron Hoop, like our Beacons, and set on fire by stinking Rags). Ambling after these a great pace, the Palenkeen-Boys support them; four of them, two at each end of a Bambo, which is a long hollow Cane, thick, light, and strong, arched in the middle (which is done in Cases while it is growing), where hangs the Palenkeen, as big as an ordinary Couch, broad enough to tumble in; cieled with Silk, and Bosses pendent to raise withal, and others at each Corner, as our Coaches have; un∣derneath it is laced with strong broad Girts, over which a Quilt, Skin of a Tyger, or Hide to lye upon, and round Pillows of Silk or Velvet, to bolster their Heads. At every Angle turn'd Staves, and overspreading it a Scarlet Coverlet of London Cloath. A Set of these Rascals, who are eight, in a Week's time with this Load shall run down their choicest Horses; and bait them gene∣rously shall stage it a Month together. For War,Beasts for War and Food. Elephants: For to eat, Sheep, poor, fleeced rather with Hair than Wool, their Aspect bewraying as much Goat as Sheep: Goats; Hogs low and black, unclean to the Mahometans: Cows, sacred to the Gentues, as Serapis to the Egyptians; Conies, Hares. Reptiles,Reptiles. Snakes, Serpents, the Amphisbena and other kinds; all which they pretend to charm, carrying them up and down in Baskets to get Money of the People, as well as Strangers; when they strike up on a Reed run through a Cocoa-Shell, which makes a noise some∣thing like our Bag-Pipes, and the subtle Creatures will listen to the Musick, and observe a Motion correspondent to the Tune; a Gene∣ration
of Vipers that well deserve to be stiled so, knowing when the Charmer charms wisely. Fowls of all sort belonging to India are plenty,Fowls. but chiefly tame Geese. Fishes in abundance,Fishes. from whence the Town derives its Etymo∣logy, Mechlapatan signifying the Fish-Town. For Corn,Corn. they have Rice the Staff of the Land, some Wheat. Fruits to variety.Fruits. The Water they drink they dig for;The Water and Air bad. not that they are without Rivers, but they are brackish. It lies in 15 deg. North Lat. 40 min. From the Lizzard 96 deg. East. By reason of the Multitude of Peo∣ple and ill Site it is unhealthy; though it agree with the Natives, who live to a good Old Age. The English for that cause, only at the time of shipping, remove to Medapollon, where they have a wholsome Seat Forty Miles more North. Rain they have none from November to May,Rain when it comes causes Insects. all which time the Land Breezes (which blow one half the day off the Sea, but faint∣ly the other) torment them with a suffocating Heat; so that the Birds of the Air as they fly, often drop down dead, the Wind co∣ming as hot as the Steam from an Oven, by the reflecting of the Sun upon the Sands, which are huried about the Marshes. When they feel themselves freest from Sickness, though all Perspiration through the Pores by Sweat is dried up: From the beginning of May they are refreshed with cooling Showers, which at length with the overflowing Sea cause an Inu dation; in which space, the Air growing foggy, Empyema's and Fluxes are rifest; and Swarms of Ants, Muskeetoes, Flies, and stinking Chints, Cimices, &c. breed and infest them: This Season we experimented; which though moderately warm, yet our Bodies broke out into small fiery Pimples (a sign of a prevailing Crasis) augmented by Muskeetoe-Bites, and Chinces rai∣sing Blisters on us. To arm themselves against this Plague, those that live here have fine Calicut-Lawn thrown over their Beds, which though white as Snow when put on, shall be in an hour besmear'd all over, which might be tolerable, did not their daring Buzzes continually alarm, and sometimes more sensibly provoke, though cloath'd with long Breeches to their Toes, and Mufflers on their Hands and Face, and a Servant to keep them from them with a Fan, without which there is no sleeping. Notwithstanding these provisions, yet there is another Insect more disturbing than these, and not to be escaped but by this Device, and that is the Ant, which creeps up to all their Quarters, and between their Beds, if the Bed-Posts were not set in Pans of Water to hin∣der their Progress. Chinces stick among the Cotton, and in rotten Posts, whose bitings wheal most sadly, and if they strive to take a Revenge for that abuse, and chance to squeeze them, they leave a stink enough to choak them. The Air so bad here,The Air bet∣ter up in the Countrey. that it agrees with few new Comers; removing Three Miles up the Countrey it is an infallible Cure for the Diseases of this place, provided it be done in time:
Where the English have a Garden for Divertisement; where also is a Burial-place graced with Monuments both of Antique and Mo∣dern Workmanship. Half a Mile beyond,Twelve of the King's E∣lephants. a Dozen of the King's Elephants are stabled. When we came they were feeding out of their Houses on Sugar-Canes fresh gathered and administred by their Keepers: Alighting from our Palenkeens, they loosed one which was Fourteen Feet high, and the Black clawing his Poll with an Iron Engine, he stooped down for him to get up, and being upon his Back guided him as he listed. His Body is a Symetrical Deformity (if I may so say); the Hanches and Quarters clapt together seem so many heaps; his Neck short, flapping Ears like Scates, little-Eye'd, a broad Face, from which drops his Proboscis or Trunk, thrusting it out, or shriveling it in, as he chuses; through its Hollow he sucks his Liquor, and with two Fingers, as it were, reaches the Fodder, shaking off the dirt against his Thigh, or Vermin, such as Mice, which he abhors, he brings it under to his Mouth, from whence proceed two huge Tusks of Ivory for Defence, not Mastication, for which he is supplied with∣in with others; his Tail is curt: He shuffles an end a great Pace, moving all the Joints of his Legs, though the Motion of his Hinder-Legs imitate Human Progression, having a Patella or Knee-Pan afore, not articulated behind as other four-footed Beasts are. When he stands, his Legs appear so many Columns scollop'd at bottom, being flat-hoof'd. The She's have their Paps under their Bowels afore, as Laurentius truly relates. Their Modesty in ingendring has given matter for dispute, though doubtless they perform it after the manner of other Beasts. They are of a Mouse-Colour. With their Trunks they strike a violent Blow, and are taught to sling Iron Links, to the destruction of their Enemies. That they draw their weighty Cannon is certain; but that they engage with smaller on their Back, I am no Eye-Witness. After a Month's Stay here,Our Repair a∣board Ship, and coming to Fort St. George. a Patamar (a Foot-Post) from Fort St. George, made us sensible of the Dutch being gone from thence to Ceilon: The Treasure was reshipped, and we in less than a Week, through contrary Monsoons and Ill Weather (the Sun being in his Zenith, and encountring the Dog-Star over our heads) arrived there. When sliding by four French Men of War at Anchor under St. Tho∣mas (of whom the Admiral the Brittoon was a Ship of 1200 Tuns, 68 Brass Guns; the second had 50 Brass Guns; the other two were less; and the Platform of the City mounted with Brass Pieces, that slung their Shot an incredible way), we against all probability found the Massenberg there,The Massen∣berg given o∣ver for lost, we found here having ventured alone, and but the day before us came into the Road under our Fort; there also rode two Portugal Junks. The Colours the Fort shewed us, was St. George's Flag; it bore from us one League West, Low-Land: St. Thomas one League and an half South-West, High-Land behind it; North Lat. 12 deg. 30 min. Long. from the Lizard 96 deg. East.
CHAP. V. Gives a true Narrative of the English,Chap. V. French and Dutch on the Coast of Coromandel, continuing till we double the Cape for the Coast of Malabar. I Went ashore in a Mussoola, a Boat wherein ten Men paddle, the two aftermost of whom are the Steers-men, using their Paddles instead of a Rudder: The Boat is not strengthned with Knee-Timber, as ours are; the bended Planks are sowed together with Rope-yarn of the Cocoe, and calked with Dammar, (a sort of Rosin taken out of the Sea) so artificially, that it yields to every Ambitious Surf, other∣wise we could not get ashore, the Bar knocking in pieces all that are inflexible: Moving towards the Shore, we left St. Thomas, which lies but Three Miles to the South of Maderas,Went ashore in a Boat cal∣led a Mussoola. and Fort St. George; in the midway Maderas River in great Rains opens its Mouth into the Sea; having first saluted the Banks of Fort St. George on the West: Towards the Sea the Sand is cast up into a Rampire, from whence the fluid Artillery discharges it self upon us, and we on the Shoulders of the Blacks must force our way through it. Though we landed wet, the Sand was scalding hot, which made me recollect my steps,Rowed by St. Thomas. and hasten to the Fort. As it looked on the Water, it appeared a Place of good force. The Outwork is walled with Stone a good heighth, thick enough to blunt a Cannon-bullet, kept by half a dozen Ordnance at each side the Water-gate, besides an Halfmoon of Fire-Guns. At both Points are mounted twelve Guns eying the Sea, Maderas, and St. Thomas; under these in a Line stand Pallisadoes, reaching from the Wall to the Sea; and hedge in at least a Mile of ground.Landed, are well wetted at Fort St. George. On the South side they have cut a Ditch a sufficient depth and breadth to prevent scaling the Wall, which is a quarter of a Mile in length afore it meets with a third Point or Ba∣stion, facing St. Thomas, and the adjacent Fields; who suffer a De∣luge when the Rains descend the Hills. From this Point to the Fourth, where are lodged a Dozen Guns more that grin upon Ma∣deras, runs no Wall, but what the Inhabitants compile for their Gardens and Houses planted all along the River parallel with that, that braces the Sea. From the first Point a Curtain is drawn with a Parapet; beneath it are two Gates, and Sally Ports to each for to enter Maderas; over the Gates five Guns run out their Muzzels, and two more within them on the Ground. Over all these the Fort it self lifts up its Four Turrets,The Fort de∣scribed. every Point of which is loaded with Ten Guns alike: On the South-East Point is fixed the Standard; the Forms of the Bastions are Square, send∣ing forth Curtains fringed with Battlements from one to the other; in whose Interstitiums whole Culverin are traversed. The Gover∣nor's House in the middle overlooks all, slanting diagonally with the Court. Entring the Garrison at the Out-gate towards the Sea, a Path of broad polished Stones spreads the way to pass the Second
Guard into the Fort at an humble Gate; opposite to this, one more stately fronts the High-street; on both sides thereof is a Court of Guard, from whence, for every day's Duty, are taken Two hundred Men: There being in pay for the Honourable East India Company of English and Portuguez 700. reckoning the Montrosses and Gun∣ners. The Streets are sweet and clean,Neat Dwel∣lings. ranked with fine Mansions, of no extraordininary Height (because a Garrison-Town) though Beauty, which they conciliate, by the Battlements and Tarras Walks on every House, and Rows of Trees before their Doors, whose Italian Porticos make no ordinary conveyance into their Houses, built with Brick and Stone. Edifices of common note are none,The Portugals have a Chap∣pel. except a small Chappel the Portugals are admitted to say Mass in. Take the Town in its exact proportion, and it is Oblong. The true Possessors of it are the English,The English Masters of that Place. instated therein by one of their Naiks, or Prince of the Gentues, 90 years ago, 40 years before their total subjection to the Moors; who likewise have since ratified it by a Patent from Gulconda, only paying 7000 Pagods yearly for Royalties and Customs, that raises the Mony fourfold to the Company;Sir William Langham Agent. whose Agent here is Sir William Langham, a Gentle∣man of Indefatigable Industry and Worth. He is Superintendent over all the Factories on the Coast of Coromandel, as far as the Bay of Bengala, and up Huygly River (which is one of the Falls of Ganges) Viz. Fort St. George alias Maderas, Pettipolee, Mechlapatan, Gun∣dore, Medapllon, Balisore, Bengala, Huygly, Castle Buzzar, Pattanaw. He has his Mint, and Privilege of Coining; the Country Stamp is only a Fanam, which is 3 d. of Gold; and their Cash, twenty of which go to a Fanam. Moreover he has his Justiciaries; to give Sentence, but not on Life and Death to the King's Liege People of England; though over the rest they may. His Personal Guard con∣sists of 3 or 400 Blacks; besides a Band of 1500 Men ready on Sum∣mons: He never goes abroad without Fifes, Drums, Trumpets, and a Flag with two Balls in a Red Field; accompanied with his Council and Factors on Horseback, with their Ladies in Palenkeens. The English here are Protestants,Diligence of the Fryers. the Portugals Papists, who have their several Orders of Fryers; who, to give them their due, com∣pass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, many of the Natives being brought in by them. The number of English here may amount to Three hundred;Number of English and Portugals. of Portuguez as many Thousand, who made Fort St. George their Re∣fuge, when they were routed from St. Thomas by the Moors about ten years past, and have ever since lived under protection of the English. Thus have you the Limits and Condition of the English Town: Let us now pass the Pale to the Heathen Town, only parted by a wide Parrade, which is used for a Buzzar, or Mercate-place.
Maderas THEN divides it self into divers Long Streets,City of Made∣ras. and they are checquered by as many transverse. It enjoys some Choultries for Places of Justice;Visited a Pa∣god, or Hea∣then Temple. one Exchange, one Pagod, contained in a square Stone-wall; wherein are a number of Chappels (if they may be comprehended under that Classis most of them resembling ra∣ther Monuments for the Dead, than Places of Devotion for the Li∣ving) one for every Tribe; not under one Roof, but distinctly se∣parate, though altogether, they bear the name of one intire Pagoda. The Work is inimitably durable, the biggest closed up with Arches continually shut, as where is supposed to be hid their Mammon of Unrighteousness, (they burying their Estates here when they dye, by the persuasion of their Priests, towards their viaticum for another State) admitting neither Light nor Air, more than what the Lamps, always burning, are by open Funnels above suffered to ventilate: By which Custom they seem to keep alive that Opinion of Plato, in such a Revolution to return into the World again, after their Trans∣migration, according to the Merits of their former living. Those of a minuter dimension were open, supported by slender straight and round Pillars, plain and uniform up to the top, where some Hiero∣glyphical Portraicture lends its assistance to the Roof, flat, with Stones laid along like Planks upon our Rafters. On the Walls of good Sculpture were obscene Images, where Aretine might have furnished his Fancy for his Bawdy Postures: The Floor is stoned, they are of no great altitude; stinking most egregiously of the Oyl they waste in their Lamps, and besmear their Beastly Gods with: Their outsides shew Workmanship and Cost enough, wrought round with monstrous Effigies; so that oleum & operam perdere, Pains and Cost to no purpose, may not improperly be applied to them. Their Gates are commonly the highest of the Work, the others concluding in shorter Piles. Near the outside of the Town the English Golgotha,The English Tombs. or Place of Sculls, presents variety of Tombs, Walks and Sepulchres; which latter, as they stand in a Line, are an open Cloyster; but succinctly and precisely a Quadragone with Hemispherical Aparti∣tions; on each side adorned with Battlements to the abutment of every Angle, who bear up a Coronal Arch, on whose Vertex a Globe is rivited by an Iron Wedge sprouting into a Branch; paved under∣neath with a great Black Stone, whereon is engraved the Name of the Party interred. The Buildings of less note are Low and Decent; the Town is walled with Mud, and Bulwarks for Watch-places for the English Peons; only on that side the Sea washes it, and the Fort meets it. On the North are two great Gates of Brick, and one on the West, where they wade over the River to the Washermens Town. Its Map renders it a Trapezium by an Oblique Stroke of the River on that Corner, and another next the Sea, thus.
The Figure of Maderas.The Figure of Maderas. Without the Town grows their Rice, which is nourished by the letting in of the Water to drown it:The English Gardens. Round about it is bestrewed with Gardens of the English; where, besides Gourds of all sorts for Stews and Pottage, Herbs for Sallad, and some few Flowers, as Jas∣samin, for beauty and delight; flourish pleasant Tops of Plantains, Cocoes, Guiavas, a kind of Pear, Jawks, a Coat of Armour over it like an Hedg-hog's, guards its weighty Fruit, Oval without for the length of a Span, within in fashion like Squils parted, Mangos, the delight of India, a Plum, Pomegranets, Bonanoes, which are a sort of Plantain, though less, yet much more grateful, Beetle; which last must not be slipt by in silence: It rises out of the Ground to twelve or fourteen Feet heighth, the Body of it green and slender, jointed like a Cane, the Boughs flaggy and spreading, under whose Arms it brings forth from its pregnant Womb (which bursts when her Month is come) a Cluster of Green Nuts, like Wallnuts in Green Shells, but different in the Fruit; which is hard when dried, and looks like a Nutmeg. The Natives chew it with Chinam (Lime of calcined Oyster-Shells) and Arach,What Pawn is. a Convolvulus with a Leaf like the largest Ivy, for to preserve their Teeth, and correct an unsavoury Breath: If swallowed, it inebriates as much as Tobacco. Thus mixed, it is the only Indian Entertainment, called Pawn. These Plants set in a Row, make a Grove that might delude the Fanatick Multitude into an Opinion of their being sacred; and were not the Mouth of that Grand Impostor Hermetically sealed up, where Christianity is spread, these would still continue, as it is my Fancy they were of old, and may still be the Laboratories of his Fal∣lacious Oracles: For they masquing the face of Day, beget a so∣lemn reverence, and melancholy habit in them that resort to them; by representing the more inticing Place of Zeal, a Cathedral, with all its Pillars and Pillasters, Walks and Choirs; and so contrived, that whatever way you turn, you have an even Prospect. But not to run too far out of Maderas before I give you an Ac∣count of the People;Nature of the People and know they are of the same Nation with Metch∣lapatan, have the same unbelieving Faith, and under the same Bon∣dage with the Moors, were not that alleviated by the Power of the English, who command as far as their Guns reach: To them there∣fore they pay Toll, even of Cow-dung (which is their chiefest Fire∣ing) a Prerogative the Dutch could never obtain in this Kingdom, and by this means acquire great Estates without fear of being mo∣lested. Their only Merchants being Gentues, forty Moors having
a. The Areca or Betele nul. b, the first sproul∣ing of it. c, the same grown bigger forming at length the tree, dd, whose under branches fallen leave the joynts bare, whilst young ones still srout at the op e e; each branch hath a sheath, f. incompassing a joynl of ye brunk. g. is a purse or husk containing the branches os flowers, which fallen leave young nutts, h h, w.•h increase as, i i, and ripen to y form of k, whose tomen∣tose husk taken off▪ leaves the Areca nut, a, covered with a thin▪ shell. l l, shews the nut cut asunder. m m, the Bamboos as groiving together n n, part of one drown larger. o o, One joynt yet much larger to shew the leaf p, and how the branches grow out of ye joynt. q q, a branch of the Mango tree. shewing the leaf r r. the flower s s. the fruit t t, and the inside of it, u u, when slit. z▪ the marking nutt yielding,• black oyle.
hardly Cohabitation with them, though of the Natives 30000 are employed in this their Monopoly. The Country is Sandy,The Country. yet plentiful in Provisions; in all Places Tops of Trees, among one of which, on the top of a wi∣thered Stump sate perching a Chamelion,A Chamelion. Graece , clasping with its Claws its rotten Station, filling himself with his Aerial Food, ex tali satietate facile est parare famem; a Banquet which most other Creatures else arise an hungred from: But to be confirmed in the truth of what we have only by Tradition, I caused a Black who had a Bow there, to fell him with an Earthen Pellet, which when he had, after a small time he revived, and making a Collar of Straw for his Neck, he carried him to my Lodgings, where I dieted him a Month on the same Provant. That he changes his Colours at a con∣stant time of the Day, is not to be contradicted; but whether he live by the Air alone, I will not stand to it, unless there were a Dearth of Flies in the Countrey; though for my part I never did see him eat any. In Shape he comes nearest a Newt; with his Lungs his Body does agitate its self up to its Neck; he crawls on all Four, and has a Tail longer than his Body, which all together was no more than half a Foot; he has Teeth, and those sharp, which makes me think him an Ant beel-ubian. Nine Days spent here,Our Ships re∣turn to Mech∣lapatan. our Ships set sail again for Mechlapatan, leaving us behind them. In this Interim we have leisure to say something, if not a plenary Panegyrick, Of the French Transactions in the East-Indies. Of late Years,Of the grow∣ing Power of the French at Sea. that stirring King Lewis the XIVth (who was well instructed first by Mazarine, and since having been no bad Proficient under so expert a Master) has made himself to be taken notice of in Europe by his Conquests and Attempts upon Flanders and the Low Countries by Land; and has also by his Foreign Expeditions, acquested the World's admiration, by his speedy Growth in Maritime Power. Insomuch that at his Infant Entrance upon the Watry Stage he was so audacious to join with the Belgians agnst his Royal Patron of Britain; having his Ends of those he pretended to succour, his wary Policy taught him another Lesson, that caused him to mediate a Triple Alliance. About which time enjoying full Coffers,Twenty Sail of French Ships under a Vice∣roy. he ruminated on reat Designs, as the raising an Army against Spain; to the same intent it was necessary for him to think of the continuing a Supply of Money: He therefore (omitting other ways of enriching his Ex∣chequer) put in a Stock with his Merchant-Adventurers, fitting out a Fleet of Twenty Sail of lusty Ships, to settle a Trade in India, committing them to the Charge and Conduct of a Viceroy; who coming safe about the Cape, touched at St. Lawrence, wher they did but little besides burying their Viceroy, and dispatching four Ships into Europe.
In the stead of the Viceroy deceased, the now reigning succeeded. From thence they sailed to Surat, where the Great Mogul endowed them with Immunities of Traffick.Sixteen arrive at Surat. In the mean while a second War betwixt England and Holland was fomented,War with Holland. in the which the French threw off the protecting the Dutch, and sided with his Majesty of England. When neglecting his newly hatch'd Factory at Surat (whether out of its not an∣swering his expectations, or his earnestness in prosecuting the Hol∣landers by Sea as well as by Land, may be known by those that are more intelligent in his Affairs at Home), sense of Honour, obliged his Fleet in the East-Indies to New Adventures; and want of Money, the Merchants at Surat to Trade upon the Credit of the French King. With fourteen Sail of Ships they roved on the Coasts of Malabar,The French take Trincoma∣la from the Dutch. and at last came to the Island Ceilon, setting upon the Dutch at Trin∣comalai, and forced it; but being destitute of Provisions forsook it, after the loss of abundance of their Men, and four of their Ships. From whence they passed along the Coast of Coromandel,St. Thomas from the Moors. and with Ten Sail came before St. Thomas, demanding Victuals of the Moors; but they denying, they brought their Ships to bear upon the Fort, and landing some mall Pieces they stormed it, driving the Moors to the search of new Dwellings. After they had taken it,Fortify it. they broke up their weather-beaten Vessels, and brought ashore their Ordnance, keeping their Trenches within, and mounting it with the Sea without; they still maintain it maugre all the great Armies the King of Gulconda has sent against it. Till now the 18th Month of its Siege,Dutch come against it. and the fourth year of their leaving France, the Dutch of Batavia, in revenge of the Inroads the French have made on their Countrey at home, undertaking to wa∣lay them, that no Sustenance might be brought to them by Sea, came against it with 20 Sail, 15 Men of War, great Ships, some of 72 Brass Guns apiece, well mann'd. For all that,The Viceroy by a Strata∣gem brings in his Ship. the Viceroy, who had then been gone out with four Sail, but returning alone, got betwixt them and the Fort with his single Ship in the Night: The Device this; He left his Light upon a Catamaran, so that they thought him at an Anchor without them, when the next Morn he play'd upon them from under the Fort: This Exploit, and the bruit of our Approach, made them withdraw to the Southward for esh Recruits of Men and Ammunition. Which gave the French encouragement to sally out upon the Moors (they before being beaten from their Works near the City,The French sally out upon the Moors. had de∣camped Seven Miles off St. Thomas), and with an handfull of Men pillaed and set fire to their Tents, foraging the Countrey round about, returning loaden with Spoils. Three days after our Ships departed,The Dutch appear again. the Batavians came again, and cast Anchor over-against St. Thomas with their Flags flying; in the Afternoon they received some Shot from the French Fort and the Ships that lay in the Road: The next day all but five weighed, who tarried not many days before they followed the rest to Policat, a Strong hold of theirs, but 50 Miles North of us: Where we leave them to the landing 700 Men, to join with the Moors by Land, and their Ships to wait upon ours, upon their repair for Fort St. George: And at a distance (because too near an Intrusion would but exaspe∣rate
the enraged Moors to enhanse the Price of our Curiosity) we will take a Survey Of St. Thomas. IT is a City that formerly for Riches,History of St. Thomas. Pride, and Luxury, was se∣cond to none in India; but since, by the mutability of Fortune, it has abated much of its adored Excellencies. The Sea on one side greets its Marble Walls, on the other a Chain of Hills intercepts the Violence of the inflaming Heat; one of which, called St. Thomas his Mount, is famous for his Sepulture, (in Honour of whom a Chappel is dedicated, the Head Priest of which was once the Metropolitan Bishop of India), and for a Tree called Arbor Tristis, which withers in the Day, and blossoms in the Night. About this Mount live a Cast of People,St. Thomas Christians. one of whose Legs are as big as an Elephant's; which gives occasion for the divulging it to be a Judgment on them, as the Generation of the Assassins and Mur∣therers of the Blessed Apostle St. Thomas, one of whom I saw at Fort St. George. Within the Walls seven Churches answer to as many Gates; the Rubbish of whose stupendious Heaps do justify the truth of what is predicated in relation to its pristine State. The Builders of it were the Portugals. The Confounders the Moors, who surprized them wallowing in their Wealth and Wantonness. The present Competitors are the French, who are very unlikely to keep it (not for want of Valour, but for that few and unprovided, are not able long to resist multitudes) the Moors, and thirdly, the Hollanders, whose Interests are to destroy the French in India; Which the French foreseeing, had wisely solicited a Truce with Gulconda, and had hopes of that King's complying, till the Arrival of the Dutch, when they could not be heard. For considering a Kindness extorted not so obliging as that freely offered, and his Honour at∣tainted by their Swords being still in their hands, he closed with the Hatred of the Hollanders, for their final Extirpation. Before which be accomplished, he may chance to find it an hard Task, especially had the French and hopes of Succours: For now they are 600 strong in the Fort and Ships, all stout Fellows, every Soldier fit to be a Commander. Their greatest scarcity will be of Food, with which had not the English privately befriended them, they could not have subsisted hitherto. Though the English, should they have War with France, would find them to be an Annoyance to their Trade: So that were the City again in the hands of the Moors, or even with the Ground, it were better for us. Here it may be queried,King of Gul∣conda weak at Sea. Why Gulconda being a Potent Prince, should permit Garisons to be in the hands of Aliens? To this may be answered, That this of St. Thomas was founded when the Indians were naked and unarm'd. But this satisfies not the Question, since that the Moors having conquered it, they again offered it the Portu∣gals, who slighted the Propositions, unless they would restore them their Guns which they carried away with them. The true reason then is this, That Gulconda, as all the Indian Princes are, is weak at
Sea; therefore it is a Maxim among them to commit their Strong∣holds on the Sea-Coasts to those they can call their Friends, for not only preventing Invasions at the Charge and Courage of Foreigners; but they (not being Absolute, but subject to the Authority of the Great Mogul) upon any Defeat, have these Places as sure Asylums of Retreat. Amidst these Scenes of Affairs, what next offers to our View, is odd in it self, To find an Aptness in these People to improve all Gain∣ful Arts, and not to have advanced one footstep from the false Ru∣diments either of Religion or Customs of the Old World; for they do in my mind more than imitate, pertinaciously holding their Anti∣quities of Pan, Ceres, and Flora; as may appear by this and other following Farces. Towards the latter end of August,A Festival of the Gentu. when their Corn was in the Blade, and they were expecting a plentiful Crop, the Gentues of Ma∣deras held a Feast in Memory of some of their Saints of the Devil's canonizing. Their Ceremonies were usher'd in with Tumult; in the middle of them were carried their Gods in State, garnished with the Riches of the Orient; they were cut in horrid Shapes; the reason of which, Divina assimulatio est causa diversitatis in rebus; though I should al∣low the diversity of Creatures in all Orders of the World, hath no other aim but to represent the Divinity, by whatsoever Image, yet I cannot imagine such Deformities could ever be invented for that end. Before them went the Brachmins, making a Noise with their loud Musick; after them their dancing Wenches (who always Morning and Evening tumble afore their Gods, which with some Mimical Gesture is all their Dancing) with Ephods of Silk and Gold upon their Breasts: With these in a Ring hand in hand, were the dancing Boys, all naked but a Clout about their Privities, like the Bacchanalian Youths that used to revel it with Flora's Strum∣pets through the Streets of Rome. Thus went they in Procession, till they came to a Pageant, where∣on was pictured heir Gods; from whence, over a cross Piece of Timber, hung a Cocoa Nut, which the Hinds in Yellow Caps, and Clouts about their Wastes, striving to hit with a great Club, are washed by a Shower of Water, by the Brachmins placed on purpose; after a long Trial of their Patience, they suffer one to bear it away in Triumph. All the time of their Sport, Beetle and Cocoa-Nuts are scattered among the People, for which they scramble as earnestly as if they were Medals at Coronations. On a Pageant over-against the Pagod they had a Set of Dancers handed like Puppits, to the amusing of the Mobile. Then setting open the Gates of the Pagod, they received all the unsanctified Crew, and shut them in; where how they conclude their Rites, is not to be divulged, Ignorance with them being the Mother of Devotion. At Triblitore,Triblitore. four Miles North of Maderas, is a Pagod transcend∣ing both in respect of Building and Antiquity; there being Chara∣cters, the Expounders of the Gentu Language or Holy Writ under∣stand not: To this Mother-Pagod, at certain Seasons of the Year,
long Pilgrimages are set on foot, at what time there is an innume∣rable Concourse, whereat some of the Visitants count it meritorious to be trod to death under a weighty Chariot of Iron made for the carriage of their Deities; and with themselves lay their Wives and Children to undergo the same Self-martyrdom. In one of their open Pagods or Chappels, stands a Venerable Sir at the upper end, with the Attendants of Lamps and Bats, to whom they pay a world of Worship: Who this should be, unless that Pe∣riomel, from whose Head the Brachmins, Pallas-like fable their ori∣gination, I am yet to seek. In the way hither are store of Antilopes,Antilopes. not to be taken but by a Decoy made of Green Boughs, wherein a Man hides himself, and walking with this Bush upon his Back, gains so near on them, while grazing or browzing rather on Shrubs or Bushes, as to hit one with an Arrow, when it may be run down with Dogs, the rest of the Herd shunning it: They are of a delicater shape and make than a Deer, their Horns not jagged, but turned as an Unicorn's; nor spread into Branches, but straight, and long, and tapering, rooted on the Os frontis, springing up on both sides. At the end of August one of the Portugal Junks,The Queen of the South. we found in the Road, set Sail for Achein; where is Gold, and the Island thought by some to be Solomon's Ophir; and the Queen thereof, by whom it is constantly governed, confidently reported to be the Queen of the South, Achein being on the Island Sumatra in the South Seas. The first of September only Seven of our Ten Ships returned from Mechlapatan,We fight the Hollanders, and lose three Ships. with their wounded Men and torn Hulks, who had met the Hollanders, and tried their Force; two days after they were dispatched from Mechlapatan, in Pettipolee Bay, where as soon as Day began to peep, a Thicket of Twenty Sail of our Enemies were discovered stemming the flowing Tide at an Anchor. Our Fleet might have passed them without giving Battel; but that the un∣daunted Britains scorned to fly, chusing rather to lye a Battery for them, than cowardly to flinch: Wherefore they braced their Sails to the Masts, and being to Leeward, stayed for the Wind which favoured the Hollanders; who coming up with our Fleet, made as if they would have gone by them; but were intercepted by the headmost of ours: Which perceived by the forwardest of theirs, they sent their Shallops aboard their Admiral for Orders, for vis consilii expers mole ruit suâ, Strength void of Counsel sinks with its proper weight; which was but too truly the fault of our Commanders, over-confident of their own Conduct, and lightly regarding the Authority of their Ge∣neral. When they came back again,Bombaim and London disa∣bled. they brought their Fleet up in a Body, and after the Signal given, it thundred and hailed Bullets till Night. The first that felt the warmth of the Showres, was the Bombaim; who after an hours hot dispute almost board and board with one of their biggest Ships, bore off hardly able to keep above water, and never came in again, having received 80 Shot in her Hull, and some between Wind and Water, so that in the Hold there was four Feet and an half Water; besides innumerable in her Rigging, Masts and Sails, from those that pelted at a distance.
The next Ship that behaved her self stoutly, was the Admiral's; who lost 34 of her Men by the scurvy Accidents of Powder 17 of them were slain outright. But the Three fatal Ships were the Antilope,Antilope sunk. President and Sampson taken. Captain Golsbery; the Sampson, Captain Ernnig, Reer-Admiral; and the President, Vice-Admiral Captain Hide, whose rigid Fortune saved the drooping Ho∣nour of the English, which is not less conspicuous in Adversity than in Prosperity. For having sustained the Bunt of the day, they left not off when they were penned in by the Enemy, and deserted by their Friends: For by Five in the Afternoon the London bore away to stop her Leaks, the rest were glad to follow; and left them to maintain so unequal a Fight. The Vice-Admiral was seen to blow up his Decks several times, distributing the Hollanders as Doles to the Fishes, and left not off till Night parted the Fray; so that what became of them our Ships could give us no account. Six days since this,Dutch Forces march to raise the Siege of St. Thomas. a Thousand Men under Dutch Colours, with a dozen Carriages with great Brass Pieces, marched by out of shot of our Leaguers, and fixed their Standard with the Moors in sight of St. Thomas. The next day was sent from Mechlapatan hither, the Copy of a Letter from Captain Hide, which assured us of his being alive, but wounded, his Ship as it is, at the disposal of the Dutch; as also Cap∣tain Ernnig's, though he was killed first: That Captain Golsbery sunk his, rather than it should go to Batavia; that he, and what Men could shift for themseves, were safe. It may be wondred why the French did not assist us, they being as much at odds with the Dutch as we; the reality is, they offered their Devoirs, but we must equip their Ships; for which our Com∣manders pretended lack of Orders as well as Money and Materials: Though the plain truth was, they despised kindness, thinking it be∣neath them to be beholden to them for their help. The Factories of the Hollanders on this Coast,The Wealth and Power of the Hollanders in India. are Ceilon, Jaffna∣patan, Sandraslapatan, Negapatan, Policat, Mechlapatan. The Danes have a few, the French less. In the South Sea, under the Agent of Bantam, the English have Factors at Pegu, Siam, Jambee: The Dutch have Batavia, and the Moluccos, from whence Nutmegs, worth more alone than all we have in India; they being as powerful for Men, Riches and Shipping in Batavia, as in Europe; which is grounded on a different Principle from our East India Company, who are for the present Profit, not future Emolument. These,Their Policy in securing. as they gain ground, secure it by vast Expences, raising Forts, and maintaining Souldiers: Ours are for raising Auctions, and retrenching Charges; bidding the next Age grow rich as they have done, but not affording them the means. Our Ships that were left,Our Seven Ships di∣spatched for the Malabar Coast. were now sooner repaired, than fraited with their Salt Peter and Fine Cloth; and had leave to make the best of their way for the Malabar Coast in less than a Fortnight's time, when it was determined to keep off to Sea, as well to escape the Hol∣landers, as the Violence of the Mossoons; who being upon the point of shifting their Quarters, are most dangerous near the Shore.
These Mossoons or Monsoons, are the Winds and Rains customary to all India, varying here only in respect of the Mountains. Therefore on these Coasts the South Winds blow for Eight Months,The Monsoons on both Coasts, and Observations thereon. four of which are May, June, July, August. Then the Sun is so strong, that it would be uninhabitable, did not there fall at Night those Vapours which the Sun draws up in the Day; and by decli∣ning of his exorbitant Heat, leaves them to be condensated at Night; when the Air is more gross, and the Earth is cooled either by thick Mists, or a more palpable Moisture (which you may call pouring Showres) and thereby made fertile, which otherwise would be in∣supportable and barren. That which makes this the more plausible is, That the Asiatick India intra Gangem, is a Pene Insula, and the Seas lie near round the Land. But about the Sun's retiring to his Southern Tropick,The Heats tempered by Art. the Winds take their Northern Course, the Rains do cease, and the Sea alters its Current to the South, when by the innate coldness of these Blasts the Clime becomes more habitable, unless where the Sands cause a reflection of heat, as at Mechlapatan; where they keep close all Day for three or four Months together, (though then the North Wind begins to abate its impetuosity, and the South Winds prevail) repel∣ling the Heat by a course wet Cloath, continually hanging before their Chamber-windows; which not only resists the Ambient Air, but by the afflux of Nitrous Particles from within, does cast a Chil∣ness over the Room; without which, the Walls, that for that in∣tent are plastered, would be so hot, you could not abide your Hand on them; the same way they have of cooling their Liquors, by a wet Cloth wrapped about their Gurgulets and Jars, which are Ves∣sels made of a porous kind of Earth; the best of Maecha, reasonable good from Goa, which are carried with them in this nature where∣ever they travel. Before we dismiss this Discourse,The Rains more inter∣mitting on the Coast of Coromandel. it may be noted, That the Rains on this Coast are more intermitting than on the Malabar Coast, so that they can loose hence their Ships for Persia, Maecha and Juddah, and to the South Seas in those Months they are Wind-bound on the other Coast: for having the Land-Breezes to carry them off to Sea, the Mossoons are more favourable. Concerning the Regularities of these Winds, perhaps some others may give patter Guesses than my self, who am not conceited enough to dogmatize. Among the many that be alledged,The Cause of the Massoons inquired into. I am not fond of any, though this have won a little upon my Opinion; That the Sun may be as well the reason why these Winds should observe his Annual Circum∣rotation; as that the Ebbings and Flowings of the Sea, by the Moon's meer depression of Air, should be ascribed to her Monthly Revolutions. And here one thing may be worthy our Curiosity, That after the Seasons of the Heats and Rains, the Rivers Indus and Ganges are said to swell their Banks, and thereby abundantly to encrease the Border∣ing Countries, where these Rains are less frequent: Whence, it may be, some insight may be had for the Overflows of Egypt, which has set so many Wits on the Tenterhooks, where it is reported it never
rains: But in the Countreys near the supposed Sourse of Nile, it does to Excess. But you who have greater Reading and Leisure to digest these Metaphysical Notions, will mightily oblige me to furnish me with your solider Arguments. Among which I would intreat you to consider the Variety of the Loadstone in the common Chart: For what the incomparably Inge∣nuous Des Cartes has wrote on that Subject, acquiesces only in mo∣dest Hypotheticks, not any ways informing the Understanding to a clear Apprehension; but after he has brought it through the Maze of Probabilities, he parts with it at the same Predicament it entred. Not to deviate any longer,The Tail of the Elephant. we are now winding about the South-West part of Ceilon; where we have the Tail of the Elephant full in our mouths; a Constellation by the Portugals called Rabo del Ele∣phanto, known for the breaking up of the Munsoons, which is the last Flory this Season makes, generally concluding with September, which goes out with dismal Storms. Yet so good is Providence,Water-Snakes. as to warn us here, when all is obscured, by Water-Snakes, of our too near approach to the Land; which are as sure Presages on the Indian Coasts, as the Cape-Birds are there. Here the Mountains running East and West,The diffe∣rence on the Malabar Coast. the Winds are to the East of the South, and to the West of the North; else quadrating with those on Coromandel; only here in April and May the Winds are variable, and then they hasten to leave these Coasts for Persia, the Red-Sea, and South-Seas, or those make in that are to return hither; otherwise they run an hazard of losing their Voyage, when the South to the South-East Wind is fixed, which continues to the latter end of September, or beginning of October: Then from the North to the North-West sets in again; and this Course is observed mostly on all the Indian Shores, only some few days different in the beginning and ending, which happen to the South, and in Lands commonly earlier than to the North, and break up later when they are more severe, but the Intervals are milder; the middle Months clearing up in the day time; but from the first setting to the going out towards the North, the Sun hardly shews his Face, unless a Fortnight after the Full Moon in May, and a Fortnight before the Elephanto. On the Coast of Surat from Gemini to Libra.A Rejoinder of the Seasons. This happens in the Sun's Ecliptick Road. On the Coast of Coromandel from Taurus to Scorpio. And thus much may be said in general; only the Land and Sea-Breezes in particular, on this Coast of Surat and Malabar, when the Rains are over, keep exactly Land-Breezes from Midnight to Mid∣day, and Sea-Breezes from the Noon of Day to the Noon of Night.
Making Land, we beheld it all a Flame, they burning their Stubble for Soilage,Small Birds drove to Sea. the Forerunner of the ensuing Rain; notwithstanding a King fisher flew aboard us with the flattering Coaks's of Halcyon days; but like an unskilful Augur was deservedly reproached with the Ignorance of her own Destiny, to dye in Captivity; which fatal Necessity made her elect, rather than suffer with whole Flocks of little Birds blown from the Main, who not able to stem the boiste∣rousness of the Winds, were hurried thence to perish in the Sea. And now we were begirt with Land: the Maldivae Islands lying South; Cape Comerin North and by West; the Malabar Islands West, (whose Inhabitants have no relation with those on the Coast); whence is brought great quantities of Ambergreece; Ceilon, &c. The Land our Master took for a Malabar Island proved a mistake;Land-lock'd betwixt Ceilon and the Cape. for by a strong Current we were lock'd in between the Island Ceilon, and the North East side of the Cape, within that desperate Canal we before described. Our Error was first corrected by some Fisher∣men busy at their Nets,Strange co∣lour'd Fishes. who brought aboard plenty of Fishes, all new to us, who never had seen such coloured ones, some gilded like Gold, others with Vermilion, varied by several Intermixtures. Whilst we were lost in admiration, our Mates found themselves no less at a loss in their accounts, when they understood they were drove 30 Leagues to Leeward of the Cape, by the broken Portugueze spoken by these Men, and that we could not sail much farther than Tutticaree, a Portugal Town in time of Yore, where they had a Cita∣del, and two famous Churches; and before us, which was the Lure, a Ketch of the Dutch's (which we chased for hopes of Prize) was sailing to that Port, and presently after anchored: We were then in seven Fathom Water. This is the place where they drag Pearl. All along here the Top of Gates is seen above the Clouds,The Moun∣tain Gates. the Ground beneath it Fair, Low, and Sandy. Tutticaree is now in the hands of the Dutch,Tutticarce our danger here. running the same Risco with Columbo, over-against which it lies; we being now in the very Jaws of our Enemies, might have here concluded our Voyage, had their Fleet been nigh us. The next day we were becalmed, and thereby carried into the midst of the Stream; and although in the Afternoon we had an humming Frisco, it ran with such Violence that we lost more than we gained: This Mistake cost us a Fortnights time before we could compass the Cape, besides Fears and Jealousies both of our falling into the Torrent, and our Enemies hands. The Cape lanches into the Sea with Three Points, running into a Campaign several Miles together, till it grows big with Mountains, procreating their prodigious Race 400 Leagues, severing the Coast of Coromandel and Malabar, East and West; Latitude 8 deg. 50 min. North; Longit. 96 deg. Eost.
Cape Comeri. The Taprobanum of Pliny, over-against the Pr∣montorium Cellia∣cum.Cape Comeri. CHAP. VI. Views the Malabar and Canatick Coasts up to Bombaim. TO prevent the mischief of ingulphing again by the Current,A dark Night enlighten'd by Fish. we anchored a-nights; when a Pitchy Blackness was inter∣posed betwixt us and the Skies, and not a Star to be seen: The Plebs Squammosa beneath the Surface of the Salt Ocean, gathering their little Fry (which proved to be Pilchards), either by the Repercus∣sion of the Saline Bodies of the Waves, which is frequent, or by the more apt Position of their Glittering Scales, through that Me∣dium to refract the hovering Light benighted in the Atmosphere, dispersed a Lustre as bright as Day; insomuch that a small Print might easily be read by it. Taking advantage of the Land-Breezes and the Tides,The Dutch grasp at all the Spice-Trade. we scud∣ded along the Shore, which was Woody, and well stock'd with Trees, the Ground even for many Leagues together; the Moun∣tains peeping up behind a great way in the Country. Being against Carnopoly, a Portugal Friar boarded us: It is some Miles to the North of Caulam, formerly inhabited by the Portugals, and from them taken by the Dutch, who have built a Castle there, and Lord it over the Natives, so that at Carnopoly the Dutch exact Custom for all the Goods they carry off to Sea, though there live but one Boy and two Dutchmen. The Portugals have only Five Per∣sons here. The English had also a Factory for Pepper, but they are gone both from hence and Pureat, 20 Miles more North; the Cause
we are unacquainted with,Chap. VI. but believe the Dutch will leave nothing unattempted, to engross the Spice-Trade; for none has escaped them but this of Pepper; Cinamon, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs, being wholly theirs; and by the Measures they follow, this also in time must fall into their hands. Nor indeed are Pretensions wanting,How far 'tis possible. they holding here their Right by Conquest (a fairer Claim than undermining), they boast∣ing they have in a manner subdued the Natives; which is no hard matter, since this Region of Malabar (in which general Name I reckon as far South as the Land's End, and Phalapatan North) is divided into several Petit Signiories, or Arch-Rebels against the Za∣merhin of Calicut, only paying some slight Acknowledgments of his Supremacy, as their Chief Bishop, and joining with him against the Great Mogul; else striving to supplant each other; having a Govern∣ment most like Aristocracy of any in the East, each State having a Representative, and he to act according to the Votes of the Nairos Gentry in full Assembly; which as they interfere with one anothers Interests, the weakest have always been ready to call in help: For which reason the Dutch were first permitted to rear Castles to secure the Sea-Coasts; which they have made so good use of, as to bring them under their Yoke; the Great Mogul not discouraging them in the least. Keeping on our Course we left Cochin to the Southward,Cochin. once a fa∣mous Mart of the Portugals, since wrested from them, and made impregnable by the Dutch. At this place we bad adieu to all our bad Weather,Left the Bad Weather, but not the Dutch Practices. though not to the Practices of the Dutch, who had prevented the English at Panana also; so that here neither being any Pepper, we had nothing else to do but hoist Sails for Tanore, where we touched the first of No∣vember, the Natives having hardly shaken off the fear of the Dutch: For a Boat with Sails of Mats (all their small Boats making them their Sails) came to take a Survey of us, and made towards us un∣certainly; when after several Fetches to and again, at last they were within Call of us: We saw two Sumbrero's (a Mark for some of Quality) held up in the Boat-stern, and a Man stand up and wave his Hat, which made our Master stretch his Throat to know what he was; whereupon down went the Sumbrero's held up in the Boat∣stern, the Boat cleverly tacked, and the Men tugged stoutly at their Paddles, and we as roundly sent seven Shot after them, and the Lon∣don as many; but they were more scar'd than hurt; for after we had mann'd three Boats after them, they return'd with their Labour for their Pains, the Boat getting safe from them. At Night another Boat with an Englishman came to ask what Ships we were: Whom when we answered English, he boarded us, and told us our unadvised Salutes were level'd at an English Merchant sent off by the Chief, who not∣withstanding he presented two Pistols at the Breasts of the Boatmen, could not beat out of them the suspicion they were possessed with of our being Dutch: Which shews how strangely they are awed by them; and the rather, they being solicitous Blazers of their own good For∣tune upon us, and our Defeat by them; which they had taken care to publish, to bring us into Disrepute, which commonly waits on Ill Success, before we could come to tell our own Tale.
At our arriving ashore the Natives flocked about us, and gazed upon us as if they would have stared us through;Went ashore at Tanore. amidst a Lane of whom we were ushered by a few Portugals to their Chappel, at the Door whereof stood the Padre to receive us, and through it to con∣duct us to his House. From whence I went to observe the Town,Their Wares. which is miserably poor and straggling, though in the heart of it a double Row of Cot∣tages opened their Shops of Wares, which consisted of Pepper, Tur∣merick, Ginger, Cassia Lignum, the lesser Cardamoms, Bunco, i. e. Tobacco, and Hubble-bubble Canes, the Product of this Coast, as are also Beetle-Nuts the greatest Gain from this place to Surat, to be reaped by them. Amongst whom were Shroffs, or Money-changers. On one side in a square place was their Fish-Market, through which we came into another Lane, at whose end there was a Mosque. Their Houses are little Hovels or Hogsties,Their Houses mean. the best of them scarce worthy the Name of a Booth. The English House is in the fashion with the rest, covered all over with Cajans, and seated (which they mightily affect) under Trees. The People are Tawny, not Black. Their Language Malabar. Here is a Specimen of their Character. They are subject to the Zamerhin of Calicut,Malabar Cha∣racter. who sent hither his Delegate to welcome us, and invite us to a Continuance of Trade: He gave our Fleet seven Guns, which were planted near the Water∣side; which Compliment was returned by the Fleet. The Nation is distinguished by Three Ranks.Their Nation how distin∣guished. The Priests make the first; they come abroad in several distracted Postures, sometimes all naked, plaister'd over with Ashes, their Hair plaited like an Horse's Tail; at other times appearing less barbarous, being cover∣ed, but as Stoical in their Behaviour. The second Form is that of the Nobiles,The Nairo's. who are all bred Soldiers, and therefore called Nairo's; the one part of them wearing naked Swords rampant in one hand, and a Target made of a Buffola's Hide lacquer'd and curiously painted in the other, with which they defend themselves as assuredly as with an Iron Shield; the rest of them walk with a spiked Lance barbed, as long as a Javelin, and poised at the But end with Lead; at darting of which they are very expert. The last and lowest are the Artizans and Tillers of the Earth,The Husband∣men. of which here are no great store, being ever negligent in that they reap the least Benefit by; wherefore their Vassals are commonly employed in that service, they being Drudges both to their Masters and Prince, who here as in all India is sole Proprietor of Lands; allowing the Oc∣cupiers no more than a bare Subsistence, and not that when a bad Year fills not the Publick Granaries; drubbing the poor Hinds till their
Bones rattle in their Skins, they being forced often to sell their Chil∣dren for Rice, which is the best here on this Coast of any place else in the whole World. In Habit they excel not one another;Their Men how clad. the Peer as well as Peasant, wrapping only a Lunga about his Middle, and thence reaching to his Knees. Only their Men of Honour that have deserved it from the Zamerhin, have their Wrists rounded with thick golden Bracelets, illustrated with Precious Stones. Their Women are nearer white than the Men,Their Wo∣men. of an Olive or Sallow Colour, cloathed as they on Coromandel, stretching their Ears with Gold and Gems. In Manners the Natives are slovenly enough,Manners and Religion. if not brutish. In Religion most Heathens, though the Infection of Mahometism is con∣tagious among them. They have Hospitals here for Cows;Hospitals for Cows. and are charitable to Dogs, providing for them abroad, but not suffer them to defile them with∣in Doors; being more merciful to Beasts than Men. Of Christians here are not an inconsiderable number.St. Thomas Christians. Here are also those Elephant-Legged St. Thomeans, which the unbiassed Enquirers will tell you chances to them two ways: By the Venom of a cer∣tain Snake, for which the Jangies or Pilgrims furnish them with a Factitious Stone (which we call a Snake-stone) and is a Counter∣poyson to all deadly Bites; if it stick, it attracts the Poyson; and put it into Milk, it recovers it self again, leaving its virulency there∣in, discovered by its Greenness: As also by drinking bad Water (to which, as we to the Air, they attribute all Diseases) when they tra∣vel over the Sands, and then lying down when they are hot, till the Earth at Night is in a cold sweat, which penetrating the rarified Cuticle, fixes the Humours by intercepting their free concourse on that side, not to be remedied by any Panacea of their Esculapian Sectators; it is not much unlike the Elephantiasis Arabum. Their Coins are of Gold;Coins Cur∣rent. a St. Thomas, 10 s. a Fanam, 7 and ½ of which go to a Dollar, or Petacha: These are Gold. Of Copper, a Buserook, 20 of which make a Fanam. The Country is inticing and beautiful,The Pepper. Woody in the Plain, up the Country Mountainous, where grows the Pepper: It is a Berry that is brought forth by a Bind-weed, wedded to a Tree, which it hugs as affectionately as the Ivy does the Oak; it is first Green, when dried it is black, and husked white: Long Pepper grows on a Shrub leaved and stalked like our Privet. Their other Trees and Fruits are common with the rest of India; Rice is their chief Grain. Beasts and Fowls, Tame and Wild, are not scarce. The first Blackamore Pullen I ever saw,Blackamore Pullen. were here; the outward Skin was a perfect Negro, the Bones also being as black as Jet; un∣der the Skin nothing could be whiter than the Flesh, more tender, or more grateful. After two Nights cold and disquieted Lodging on the GroundIntensely cold Anighrs. (though under covert of the English House) and an Hellish Consort of Jackalls (a kind of Fox), with the Natives singing and roaring all Night long; being drunk with Toddy, the Wine of the Cocoe: I was desirous to go Aboard; when, it being Evening, the Sea Breezes
began to drive the Waves with a great surf upon the Shore; insomuch that our Men could not carry me to the Pinnace, riding at the Grap∣ling without; wherefore hiring a Canoo, the Blacks played the Cha∣ron, and I narrowly escaped with my Life (being overset); finding by sad Experience, that Cold Nights affect even in these Hot Coun∣tries, as sensibly as under the Frozen Bear: Leaving off to wonder at the Natives quivering and quaking after Sun-set, wrapping them∣selves in a Comby, or Hair-cloath, and the better sort with Quilts, and making good Fires: For being well drenched in the Sea, the Wind blowing very high, I was almost nummed to death before I could reach the Ship. The reason of this Coolness anights is because the Rains have lately cooled the Air as well as Earth, which also may be ascribed to the Sun's Ecliptick distance, as well as the length of the Nights, which are but little longer than the Days; but chiefly to the soaking Mists bedewing the Earth after Sun-set. Tanore lies in 10 deg.Latitude of Tanore. 30 min. North Latitude. Having taken in what Bales of Pepper this Place afforded; we weighed by Two in the Morning, and by Four in the Afternoon An∣chored against that Anciently Traded Port of Calicut, in the Lati∣tude of 11 deg. 30 min. North. Of Calicut. A Shore the first House facing us was the English;Calicut. near it were placed six small Pieces, resounding our Salutes at our Entry. On the back-side lay two great Guns,The Portugal Fort over∣flowed. dismounted, of Brass, all that is extant of the Portugal Town and Castle (which ran out as far into the Sea as our Ships now ride, near four Miles) overflowed by Water; nothing remaining of it but only what is taken upon Chro∣nicle. What is also left of Calicut,The Story of Calicut. is not equivalent to what might be expected from the gleaning of so many Ages of Traffick; unless, as Antiquaries esteem, most of those things are Moth-eaten by Time, which Vermin has been plaguy pernicious here: For the City that stood upon Stilts, is tripped up, for down it is gone; and the Tem∣ple, whose Marble Pillars durst compare with those of Agrippa's in the Roman Pantheon, is Topsy-turvy. And if any one that comes after me, make you believe it to be not above Four Miles in length, and in that not an House befitting a Christian; here and there a Mosque, and Burying Places with Tanks: A good long Bazzar with Trash, and Ripe Fruit; another with Opium, and Spices of this Coast; Changers and Jewellers, unfenced and rude in Building; he tells you but the truth. Indeed it is pleasantly situated under Trees, and it is the Holy See of their Zamerhin or Pope. The Citizens are urbane,Its Condition since the Por∣tugals left it. being trained up to Commerce; but the Trade gone to Goa, along with the Portugals; who at their first ar∣rival into this Bay, found more Ships by 500 than we did, without either Chart or Compass, who most of them transported their Com∣modities to the Red Sea, along the Coasts; or to the Gulph of Per∣sia;
and thence they were carried over-land to Scanderoon, Aleppo, or Constantinople, unto the Hands of the Venetians, from whom we were served with them; and by that means they gained for them∣selves the Power and Greatness of their State. Since by the Prosperous Attempts of the Portugals about the Cape of good Hope, we are taught to bring them home at a cheaper Rate, whereby these Indian Hugsters begin to decline. For a long time the Portugals kept in with Calicut, and drew a great resort hither, as well over-land as by Sea; till the Zamerhin, not brooking them as Inmates, ruined their Fortifications, (which oc∣casioned their remove to Goa), and with them the Fame of Calicut. Their Coin admits no Copper; Silver Tarrs,Coins. 28 of which make a Fanam, passing instead thereof. They have yet a correspondence with Persia, as may appear by their Absees, a Sixteen penny piece of Silver, current among them. Their Trade in common with India is mostly for Beetle Nuts, and Cocoe Nuts, for Oyl, which latter they dunging with (Bubsho) Fish, the Land-Breezes brought a poysonous Smell on board Ship caused by their putrifying. Breaking ground hence,The right ascent of the Sun to the Meridian. the Mountains were grown to that height, that they seemed to be the Partition Walls betwixt this World and the Sphere of Fire; for the Sun was a long while after he had gilded the Canopy of Heaven, before he could drive his Steeds over those Olympick Towers with his blazing Orb: Which I take notice of, because the Sun and Stars ascend the Horizon to the Meridian directly in the Torrid Zone, and so descend; whereby there is little or no Twilight, as there is nearer the Poles, where they as∣cend and descend more obliquely. At Mangalore the Dutch have a Fort, and 6 Miles to the North the French have a Flag flying; within a League off which a Grey Rock extols its hoary Head eight Fathom above Water, navigable on all sides,Several places on the Malaber Coast Har bours for Pi∣rates. justly called by us Sacrifice Island; in remembrance of a bloody Butchery on some English by the Pirate Malabars, who are the worst Pickeroons on this Coast, going in Fleets, and are set out by the Great Men ashore; the Chief of whom lives at Durma∣patan, where we took in fuller and larger Pepper than any yet: They are stronger here in Shipping than the rest; they housing se∣veral Junks of Burthen, drawn up on the Banks of the River, not yet lanched since the Rains; which they always do when they set in, keeping them dry all the Winter with the Thatch of Cajans. Parting from hence, the Mountains above, and the Valleys below were covered with Woods, only now and then Hills of Red Earth were interspersed (which our Dawbers use for Painting) that held on their pace till we were up with Canamore, another Fortress of the Dutch: From whence they spake Defiance by spending three Shots unregarded by us. From Durmapatam,Phalapatan. five Leagues North, lies Phalapatan; where I took Boat, and sailed up the River with the Lascars, or Sea-men of the Country; of whom I shall say no more at present, than, that they are a shame to our Sailors, who can hardly ever work without horrid Oaths and hideous Cursing and Imprecations; and these Moor∣men,
on the contrary, never set their Hands to do any Labour, but that they sing a Psalm, or Prayer, and conclude at every joint Ap∣plication to it, Allah, Allah, invoking on the Name of God. On each side upon the Teaming Banks are homely Villages, a plain Dress becoming Art, the Servant, where her Mistress, Nature, is so coruscant, here being whole Armies of Trees surprisingly beautiful. Besides these Benefits for Delight, there flow no less for Profit; they improving the Commodiousness of the River (which is Sailable round to Durmapatan) by a Free Trade. Six Miles up stands Phala∣patan, of Building base; it is overgrown with the Weeds of Mahome∣tism, the Moors planting themselves here; whose King I was so lucky to see out of my Boat, my Lascars entreating me to give them leave to go ashore to provide Victuals in the Buzzar. His Meen was Patriarchical,The King. his Head gray, his Beard Snowed with Age, his Raiment white in the Eastern Mode. His Son and Heir, a Child, followed him; as he passed, the People payed him humbl Respect; he was without a Guard, it being needless where Subjects are Loyal-hearted. The River was full of Aligators,Crocodiles in the River. or Crocodiles, which lay basking in the Sun in the Mud on the River's side, whom the Natives are fearless of; conceiting the Brachmines have power to lay a Spell up∣on them, that they do no harm. Which, whether true or false, 'tis certain they a seldom do harm in the Water, as the Tigres in the Woods, over whom they fancy their Priests have the same preva∣lency. A Mile more up was Cutty-Cony,Cutty-Cony. the fair Palace, as it signifies in Malabar; but though it do in their Language, it would not make the Interpretation good in English, it agreeing but in one particular, that is, the Site. It having the advantage of an Hill, has an easy Prospect over the Water,Its prospect. as broad here as our Thamesis; and over the Verdent Meadows, which spread themselves Westward, till Hills of Cardamoms do bound the sight, running from thence North by East, while they meet with Mount Sephir (all along unchristned Gate) these are the minor Cardamoms, and the best, if not the only in the World: On the East a gravelly Forest with tall benty Grass, offers, besides its taking Look, diversity of Game; as Hares, wild Boars, Tigres, and wild Elephants, which are dreaded by Travel∣lers, they striking all down before them, Trees as well as Animals: The like Terror is conceived by the crashing noise among the Woods made by the wild Bulls; for all which, 'tis the practice of the Wood∣men to dig deep Pits, and cover them with Sads, laid over with Boughs, to entrap them in their headstrong and unwary Course. Monkeys with white Ruffs, and black shagged Bodies, looking very gravely, are brought from hence. On the South a Wood of Jamboes, Mangoes, Cocoes; on the North a Grove of Pepper. The Place is now resigned to the English,The Gentiles loth to resign it to the Eng∣lish. though the Gentiles were unwilling to desert it, it being an Arch-Brachmine's Seat, where was a small Pagod standing in the middle of the Yard well endowed, till they had robbed their Gods of their Gold and Silver; and now they are said to be dumb and sullen because of the English. But without any prejudice to Truth, we may believe the Usurers Faith
and theirs to be both under one Lock and Key; Quantum nummorum habet in arcâ, tantum habet & fidei. It is walled about by the English with Mud,The English Fort. except the two round Points towards the Land, whose Foundations and Bastions are of Stone. They have Fourteen small Guns mounted; here are twenty two Soldiers, besides Factors: The Air so salubrious, that never any English are remembred to lay their Bones here. The Fort is a Tetra∣gone from Corner to Corner. Without, besides the English, there are a select Company of Nai∣roes, who are stout, ready, and resolute for any Action: Their Wea∣pons are Bows and Arrows, with Falchions by their sides. By these the Countrey is inhabited;Unsafe travel∣ling without a Nairo. among whom if a Man fall single, salvage Beasts are more compassionate; but if you have but a Boy with you of their Cast, you may travel secure enough. Beyond the Outworks live a few Portugals Musters or Mistera∣does;Naughtiness of their Wo∣men. among whom are Stews and Brothels; the Women of this Coast being the most professedly Lewd of any; being said to in∣struct the Men to be Patients, while they act the Masculine Part in their Lascivious Twines. Sixteen Tarrs here make one Fanam;Coins. Nine Fanams one Piece of Eight; four Cash are the eighth part of one Rupee. Outstretching the Malabar Coast,Left the Mala∣bar Coast. we sailed along by Batticalai on the Canatick Coasts; and the next Morning, between two Islands we saw sculking Six Malabar Proes waiting their Booty; but making use of their Oars as well as Sails, soon outstripped us. The Day after we came to an Anchor at Onor,Onor the first Land we touched on the Canatick Shore. the Land Hilly and Barren, which I went to see; it is in 13 deg. 10 min. North. We passed to it through a narrow Bite, which expatiates into a wide Swallow, and then thrusts us up the River. On the North side a Bow and Arrow Castle overlooks it, while it runs peaceably to the Town. Where we landed, the Dutch had a House, and a new Junk lanched, with her Colours furl'd: One end of the Town stands in an hole; over a Rocky Hill stands the other part, upon which the Ca∣stle with its Stone Wall faces an Heath a great way, yet looking asquint on the Under-woods. It is built after the exact Rules of An∣cient Fortifications, with a Drawbridge, and a Mat round, now a dry Ditch, the Castle without Soldiers, falling to decay. It was built by the Portugals, seized by the Canareens by the help of the Dutch, between whom and the Portugals, the Town of poor Buildings is di∣vided: Many of the Natives have receiv'd the Christian Faith. Though those that continue in their Paganism are the most impiously Religious of any of the Indians, being too too conversant with the Devil. The Nairoes have no footing here, nor have the Moors much. They live in no diffidence of one another, nor Strangers of them, journeying among them without a Guide, in Broad Roads, not in By-Paths, as in the Nations properly called the Malabars: They have well-constituted Laws, and observe them obediently. From hence we came to Mirja in the same Dominions.At Mirja the Protector of Canora came aboard. I went to view the Place; the Boat that carried me was Brigantine built. At the Entry into the Harbour only a Rock withstands the Washes, but on the Shore huge craggy Mountains are drawn up for a second
Onset, all of Black Stone, yet somewhat undermined by the beating of the Sea, where it works its self into a Syrtes; on the other side of which the Fragments of the Town are shelter'd. At my Land∣ing, one of their Princes was the first that welcomed me ashore, (who here as well as in Italy scorn not to be Merchants); he was seated under a shady Tree, on a Carpet spread upon the Sand, and his Retinue standing about him; he it seems was expecting the Pro∣tector of Canara (the Raja being in Minority), who came anon, with his Lords and Guards, armed with Swords and Gantlets, Partizans adorned with Bells and Feathers, as also were the Horses that carried his Luscarry or Army, with such Trappings as our finest Team-Horses in England wear. He ventured off to Sea to see our Ships;His obstrepo∣rous Musick. he was rowed by a Gang of 36, in a great deal of Pomp; his Musick was loud, and with the Kettle-drums made a Noise not unlike that our Coopers make on their Hogsheads driving home their Hoops: He went aboard two or three Ships, who entertained him with their Guns and Chears of their Men, presenting him with Scarlet Cloath. He is a Gentile, as are his Subjects. Our Lading here was Pepper,Our Lading. Salt-Petre, and Beetle-Nut for Surat. In our way from Mirja we met with a Man of War Pink, commis∣sion'd from the President for the scowring these Seas, which had 22 Guns, and seventy odd Men, the Name, The Revenge. Near Carwar is the Island Angediva, Fam'd for the Burial of some Hundreds of our Countreymen. Carwar was the Chief Port of Visiapour on this Coast,Carwar the Chief Port of Visiapour, now in the hands of Seva Gi. but a Grand Traytor to that King Seva Gi, is now Master of it, and the adjacent Countrey as far as Guzerat; having well nigh forced our Factory, and done other Outrages on us, which would ask our Fleet a longer time to require Satisfaction, if they were able, than they could stay; unless they would lose their Passage round the Cape of Good Hope, and content themselves to winter at the Mauritius, which all Ships that outstay their time are forced to. For the Sun being almost at his Southern Solstice, at his return he leaves a sharp Winter (which we proved), and adverse Winds in those Seas, they lying without the Tropick, which spurs them on for expedition. What this Seva Gi is, and the reason of his Usurped Power, a longer Duration in the Countrey must declare, who is every where named with Terror, he carrying all before him like a mighty Torrent. The Shore is Hilly, and indifferent Woody; near it Islets are scat∣tered to and again. The People partly Moors,The People partly Moors, partly Gentues. partly Gentues, under the King of Visia∣pour, who was, till this turbulent Seva Gi drove all into a Commo∣tion, a perfect Monarch, hardly paying the Mogul Tribute, when Duccan and Visiapour were united into one Kingdom. Hence it is Hilly up to Guzerat; though Gates hold on where the Coasts of Guzerat begin, and outstretches them. Fifteen Leagues to the Norward of Carwar lies Goa,Goa. the only place of consequence the Portugals retain of their first Discoveries. The City lies up the River, out of our sight on Shipboard, though we could discern the River to be thwacked with small Craft; with∣out
the Bar a great Carrack unrigg'd, and on both sides the River Magnificent Structures. The Soil Fat, Level, and fit for the Share many Miles together, the Hills keeping a wide distance from them. About two days after we passed Goa,The Portugal Armado. a Ship with a Portugal Flg at the Main To-Mast Head weathered our Admiral, and after se what we were, lay by for a Fleet of six more good Ships, one and half a dozen Proes, being their Northern Armado; they fitting out one for the South also; the one against the Arabs, the other against the Malabars. The beginning of December the North West Wind blew bitter cold upon us,. and would hardly give the Sun leave to be Master in his own home; though a Cloud in the day time, ever since the Rains cleared up, could hardly vapour betwixt him and the Earth. At Nights we had hospitable Lights shewed us from the Shore,Light-houses. to mark out the Rocks, which lye very thick along to intrap the unwary Pilot. In 17 deg.Rajapour. 20 min. North, lies Rajapore, a French Factory now, formerly English. Twenty Miles to the Northward,Choul. Choul, a Fortress of the Portu∣gals, lay fair in sight. And having the Latitude of 18 deg. 40 min. North, Bombaim opened its self; the Tide being spent, we came to an Anchor with∣out the Bay, not having our Bearings right; and December the Eighth we paid our Homage to the Union-Flag flying on the Fort of Bombaim. The BAY Is indented a vast Circumference,Bombaim. in which it is able to contain 1000 of the best Ships in Europe, in safe Harbour from Wind and Weather. As we passed up the Bay, two of the Mogul's Men of War, each 300 Tun, with bloody Colours out, rode before Kerenjau. Under the Castle, besides innumerable little Vessels, as Hoys, Ketches, and the like, lay Three Men of War, with their Top Ar∣mour out, Waste-Cloath and Penants at every Yard-Arm; to wit, The Revenge, 22 Guns: The May-boon, taken from the Dutch, 220 Tuns: The Hunter, 14 Guns. The Castle is seated towards the bottom of the Bay, command∣ing it every way from the Points and Flankiers. At Evening the next day I was sent for on Shore, and received by the Honourable Gerald Aungier, Governor both for the King and Company, and President of all the East-Indies. Thus after a plenary Anniversary, this Voyage was accomplished; and just that Day Twelvemmonth you left me Aboard Ship at Graves∣end, I set foot on Shore at Bombaim, where for this Shipping I re∣main. Yours, J. F.
map of Bombay Island 1. Mendam's Point. 2. Malabar-Hill 3. This Great  or Breach of the Sea. 4. Veru. 5. Magat-River. 6. Bas∣sein City. 8.  City and  . The Watering place.
AN HISTORICAL ACOUNT OF BOMBAIM, And the Parts Adjacent. LETTER II. CHAP. I. Mentions the Island and its Possessors. SIR, BY the Falcon (in which Ship I am now taking my Passage to Surat) I received at once the News of your good health,Chap. I. and that welcome one of Peace with Holland; the first I embrace as a Friend, the other I congratulate with all good Men. Nulla salus Bello, Pacem te poscimus omnes. I shall neither apologize for my long Letter, or sending this before you give me your Thoughts of the former; the Distance of Place shall excuse both: And I proceed where you left me last, at Bombaim, and so on till these Ships shall depart for England. BOMBAIM In East-India is one of the Islands of Salset, parted from that part of the Canarick Coast which lies nearest Duccan, 60 Leagues North of Goa,Islands of Sal∣set▪ in number seven. and as many South of Surat. These Islands are in number seven; viz Bombaim, Canorein, Trumbay, Elephanto, the Putachoes, Mun∣chumbay, and Kerenjau, with the Roc of Henry Kenry; arising as so many Mountains out of the Sea; which accords to the Fancy of the Natives, who affirm that Nereus has lost these Islets, with a great deal more of the Low-Lands, from his Trident, the Earth gaining upon the Sea: And as a Remonstrance of their Credulity, they bring for proof the vast Rocks that are many Miles up the Countrey, bestuck with Oyster-shells and other Trophies of the Sea's
having had once Dominion there,Letter II. all which they call Conchon, or the Netherlands. In whose opening Arm,Their Situati∣on. that is, from Choul Point to Bacein (two famous Cities belonging to the Portugals) some 30 Leagues distance, lye those Spots of round, still disputable to which side to incline: For at Low Water most of them are foordable to the Main, or from one to the other; and at Spring-Tides again a great part of them overflowed. Bombaim is the first that faces Choul,The Bay makes the most commo∣dious Port in India. and ventures farthest out into the Sea, making the Mouth of a spacious Bay, from whence it has its Etymology; Bombaim, quasi Boon Bay. Beyond it lies Canorein, Trumbay, Munchumbay, with their Creeks, making up the North side of the Bay: Between whom and the Main lies Elephanto, Kerenjau, Putachoes, with the great Rock or barren Islet of Henry Kenry: These, with some part of the Main, constitute the South-East side of the Bay; all which together contribute to the most notable and secure Port on the Coasts of India; Ships of the greatest as well as smaller Burthen having quiet Harbour in it; whi∣ther if they can, they chuse to betake themselves, if they happen, as oft they do, to lose their Voyages by the Monsoons. From whence these Pieces of Land receive their general Name of Salset,From whence the Island is called Bom∣baim. if it be worth Enquiry, I can only guess, either because it signifies in Canorein a Granary, as they are to the Portugals North of Goa, and sometimes to Goa it self, as at this time, when their Armado of Rice was all lost, which annually used to furnish them with Pro∣visions of Corn; or else analogically, from the fruitful Peninsula of the same Name, near which Goa its self stands: But whether this be certain or not, the reason of the Denomination of Bombaim is con∣vincing. To go on then from whence we deviated,What Import this Island is to the English. it is necessary you should be first acquainted, That after Vasquez de Gama, in the Year 1547, had laid open these Seas for Traffick to the East-Indies; the Portu∣gals to their Honour took for a while sure Footing of what they had industriously so long laboured for, and brought most of the Bor∣derers on the Sea-Coasts under their Subjection; not all India, as they have fondly reported. It suffices then, to avoid a Volume of Discourse, that Bombaim with these Islets continued still in their hands, until the Year 1661, when the Crown of Portugal parted with these, together with the Haven, to His Majesty of Great Bri∣tain, as a Portion of the Dowry of Donna Infanta Catherina, Sister to the King of Portugal, and Consort to Charles the Second, late King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. A matter of great Import to the Kingdom, had it been transferred according to Con∣tract, as well in regard to the Protection of our Ships, as for the Profit of the Soil to the English Inhabitants; but most of all for the Awe it might impose  them who are the Disturbers of our Trade here. But upon what grounds they refused to surrender,The Portugals loth to part with it. may be under∣stood, if we consider the different Interests, as well as Remoteness of the Portugueze in Europe and East-India. It is confessed they will talk big of their King, and how nearly allied to them, as if they were all Cousin-Germans at least; but for his Commands, if
contrary to their Factions, they value no more than if they were merely titular; as may appear by what follows. For notwithstand∣ing the King of England sent a Fleet of Five Royal Ships under the Command of my Lord of Malbery, to waft over a Vice-Roy for them, confirmed so by their own King, and one of their own Na∣tion; and to take possession of these Islands in the name of the King of England; yet they not only positively denied to surrender, but con∣strained the Vice-Roy to a negation; otherwise to expect never to assume that Dignity, which, by that Act they made him sensible, was more in their disposal than the King's. Whereupon Malbery examining his Commission,The English Fleet go to Swally. was vexed he was pinched, and knew not how to ease himself; wearied therefore with Delays, he retreated to Swally, and there upon the Sands set the Souldery on Shore (himself not stirring out of the Ship) Five hundred stout Men led by Sir Abraham Shipman, who was designed Generalissimo for the King of England on the Indian Shore: Where, when in Arms, and exercised after the English Training, they seem∣ed formidable to the Moors; wherefore they are entreated by the President for the English Factory at Surat, Sir George Oxendine, that they would repair Aboard; since the Jealousy of the Moors was such, that unless they did, they vowed the Factory a Sacrifice. Thus bidding adieu to Swally,Thence to Angediva. they at length arrived at Angediva, a Barren unhealthy and uninhabited Island, not far from the Main, and but 12 Leagues to the Southward of Goa. Where Malbery left them to negotiate the Right of his Master;The Portugals brought to yield up Bom∣baim. so much of which at last they were brought to grant, as enforced them to deliver up Bombaim, though they capitulated for that too; parcelling it out into little Islets, made only by the inundations of the Sea: But were glad at length when they saw Malbery resolute, to resign the whole Island, with the Bay, into the hands of the English, upon the Conditions first assented to, that the Royalties should be∣long to the King of England, but every particular Man's Estate to the Right Owner, and the Liberty of their own Ceremonies in Re∣ligion, upon their Oath of Allegiance. In the mean while Sir Abraham,Mortality of English at An∣gediva. with near 300 of his best Men, rested content without any farther Acquests, leaving their Bones at Angediva; poysoned partly by the noisomeness of the Air, the vio∣lence of the Rains, and the little defence against them; but chiefly by their own Intemperance. Mr.The Fleet with the re∣maining Eng∣lish take pos∣session of the Island. Cook being next to Sir Abraham, took up his Commission, who with those Men that were left, was admitted upon Bombaim in the Year 1664. when the Royal Fleet returned. Where at first landing they found a pretty well Seated, but ill For∣tified House, four Brass Guns being the whole Defence of the Island; unless a few Chambers housed in small Towers in convenient Places to scowre the Malabars, who heretofore have been more in∣solent than of late; adventuring not only to seize their Cattle, but depopulate whole Villages by their Outrages; either destroying them by Fire and Sword, or compelling to a worse Fate, Eternal and intolerable Slavery. About the House was a delicate Garden,The Fort rais∣ed. voiced to be the plea∣antest in India, intended rather for wanton Dalliance, Love's Artil∣lery,
than to make resistance against an invading Foe: For the Por∣tugals generally forgetting their pristine Vertue, Lust, Riot and Ra∣pine, the ensuing Consequences of a long undisturbed Peace where Wealth abounds, are the only Remarkable Reliques of their Ancient worth; their Courages being so much effeminated, that it is a won∣der to most how they keep any thing; if it were not that they have lived among mean spirited Neighbours. But to return to this Gar∣den of Eden, or Place of Terrestrial Happiness, it would put the Searchers upon as hard an Inquest, as the other has done its Poste∣rity: The Walks which before were covered with Nature's verdent awning, and lightly pressed by soft Delights, are now open to the Sun, and loaded with the hardy Cannon: The Bowers dedicated to Rest and Ease, are turned into bold Rampires for the watchful Cen∣tinel to look out on; every Tree that the Airy Choristers made their Charming Choir, trembles, and is extirpated at the rebounding Ec∣cho of the alarming Drum; and those slender Fences only designed to oppose the Sylvian Herd, are thrown down to erect others of a more War-like Force. But all this not in one day. It was sufficient at first for the English to make preparations for a growing Strength, though at present such as might offend as well as defend. Whilst things were in this posture upon some Male-administration of his Office,A Governour sent out by the King. Cook was outed, and Sir Gervis Lucas was sent over by the King; who, had he lived, would have made the Portugals perform their Compact, seizing from them the Putachos, who to stop his Mouth, were willing to comply for the Customs of Trumbay. Upon his decease Captain Gary was impowered by the King;The Govern∣ment trans∣ferred to the East-India Company. who began to act as Vice-Roy, carrying his Chair of State about with him; but his Majesty finding it expensive to bear out this Man's Pride, and in the casting up Accounts, not available to him, only to the Commanders of his Majesty's Ships, who by their own Adven∣tures made good Improvements; and the East-India Company there∣by began to be sensible that their Trade would be impaired in the vending their Commodities at home, and their Ships in India little bettered by the King's Port in India; and above all, they being lia∣ble to be Sufferers for the Hostilities committed by his Maje∣sty's Officers on the Indians (who understand no distinction between King and Company) they as freely supplicated for, what his Majesty was as willing to grant, the Island: They holding it, from that time, of his Majesty about four years after the King had possessed it, they defraying all Charges. In this Exigency on either side, the Martial as well as Civil Af∣fairs, are wholly devolved on the Merchants; and now how they will manage the Sword as well as the Quill, concernes them. The Old Soldiers are constrained to submit,The Old Sol∣diers stomach the Yoke of the Compa∣ny's Servants. or disband, which makes them stomach a hard Service under harder Masters: For be∣sides that natural Antipathy betwixt the Subtilty of the one, and Ge∣nerosity of the other; the stupendious elevation of their Servants on this new acquired Power thrown into their hands, Men, most of them of no Experience or Education, coming young hither, but what they learn from a Luxurious and Griping People, whose Go∣vernment quadrates not with a British Militia: It will not be easy to
conceive, as well from the incoherence of Dispositions, as the Lordly Government of a Servant, what Grudges or Miscarriages may be produced? For where the Soldiers and Generals have different Inte∣rests, and mutual Obligation is interrupted, the course of things must necessarily run-counter: Moreover, where they should be most eminent in Dangers and Assaults, and lead them on to bold Enter∣prizes; yet if a tenderness to Self-preservation step in between the Publick Honour and Safety, (as it always does, where that bane to Noble Actions, Covetousness, is concomitant) and which is almost essential to a Merchant, a fear of being laught at for venturing too far; the Case is desperate. For Instance, Our Ten Ships, most of them hired by Merchants, and the Commanders some of them (not to say all, for there were of them as worthy Men as any in the World) Principal Owners, were more willing to shift for themselves, than to hazard a stout and unanimous Resistance: Which had they main∣tained boldly, as they imprudently gave the first Onset (by the Hol∣landers own confession) they had gained a Victory never to be su∣stained by them, nor for our Fleet sufficiently to have been recom∣pensed; whereas for want of wise Conduct, and a joint Defence, they impressed on themselves and Nation a Blur never to be wiped off. Yet such, by the Constitution of the Company it self, is the present Misfortune, that instant Gain is preferred before Glory or a future emo∣lument; which is the reason, why they are less solicitous for setling by Power, what they must ever be forced to beg, a Trade; and com∣ply with Injuries, than command a Submission, as the Dutch do: But here also being left Tenants at will, they think it enough to leave Bu∣siness in no worse plight than they found it. And here might be considered, Whether it were not more for the Publick Welfare, should His Majesty be pleased to make it a Royal Company, or a National Concern, as the Hollanders is; than to let it be at the will of the Company under the forementioned Cir∣cumstances to impose Governours on the Island. The first of which was Sir George Oxendine,Governours for the Com∣pany. who being President, and therefore more immediatly requisite for him to reside at Surat, ordered Mr. Goodyeer, his Deputy, to govern Bombaim; but Sir George not long after finishing his days, together with his Presidency at Su∣rat, Goodyeer hastens thither in hopes to succeed, when gaping for that which included this, he is excluded of both: Upon which account there happened an Interregnum at Bombaim; whereby this Body Po∣litick grew up into an Anarchy, and set upon its weak Limbs a Quin∣tuple Head, called Commissioners, who were as followeth, viz. Mr. James Adams, Chairman, (outed in two days) Mr. Sterling, a Scotch Minister, Mr. Cotes, Captain Burgess, Lieutenant Houghton; who upon the just and happy choice of the Honourable Gerald Aun∣gier, were dissolved; and Mr. Matthew Grey nominated Deputy, till the Company sent out Captain Young, who had it not long before Mr. Philip Gyfford was put in; who deserves to be remembred for his great care in raising the Bastions, and in a manner finishing, what always was still but beginning by the rest. He ruled three Years, when the Company thinking their Work to go on too fast, gave the Charge of Deputy-Governour to Captain Shaxton, and an handsome Recruit of Soldiers; which revived the not yet extinguished Fewd be∣tween
the Merchants and the Soldiers: Whereupon Shaxton was kept from it a full year; and in that Interim, the President distasted at the Insolencies of the Mogul's Governour at Surat, and fearing a se∣cond Confusion of Government at Bombaim, together foreseeing Clouds gathering from the Netherlands, not minding so much those of the Season (the Mussoons being about to enter) insomuch, that narrowly escaping a Dangerous Voyage, he came and took the Go∣vernment himself in the Year 1671. where these three Years he has regulated Affairs with that Prudence, that whereas he found a Dis∣affected and Incongruous Council, he has now knit them into a Bond of at least seeming Friendship; and does daily study to advance the Company's Interest, and the good and safety of the People under him. To this the Hollanders are witness;Strength of the Island. for the Spring before our Fleet arrived (the same Fleet that we unfortunately engaged) the Dutch attempting to surprize the Islanders, found them and the Fort in so good a Condition, that they were glad to betake them∣selves to their Boats without any Booty, and the next day hoisted Sails (for, said they, Bombaim been as stark as de Deel) and not without good reason; for within the Fort were mounted 120 Pieces of Ordnance, and in other convenient Stands 20 more, besides 60 Field-pieces ready in their Carriages upon occasion to attend the Mi∣litia and Bandarines. To the Fort then belonged 300 English, and 400 Topazes, or Portugal Firemen: To the Militia out of Portugal musters 500 under English Leaders, all well armed: Of Bandarines (that lookt after the Woods of Cocoes) with Clubs and other Wea∣pons, 300. Besides some Thousands more would make a Shew, but not to be relied on, should it come to the push. Moreover in the Road were riding Three Men of War, the best of 30 Guns. Thus were they provided at our Arrival;The Fort ill contrived. nor were their Forces lessened by our coming. Since which a Trench out of the hard Rock the Fort is founded on, is digging to Moat it with the Sea: And they are devising Horn-works for its better security; a thing, to speak truly, of greater undertaking and expence than ever to endure ac∣complishing by the Company; and without it, it will prove a thing of ill contrivance, it being straitned for room to receive a sufficient number of Defendants, and worse supplied with Water for Store, or Granaries for Provision for a Siege. The first Modellers were to blame in not enlarging it to a Tank that stands without the Parade, which they might have done with almost the same Charges. From whence let us walk the Rounds.The Town. At distance enough lies the Town, in which confusedly live the English, Portugueze, Topazes, Gentues, Moors, Cooly Christians, most Fishermen. It is a full Mile in length, the Houses are low, and Thatched with Oleas of the Cocoe-Trees, all but a few the Portugals left, and some few the Company have built, the Custom-house and Ware∣houses are Tiled or Plastered, and instead of Glass, use Panes of Oister-shells for their Windows (which as they are cut in Squares, and polished, look gracefully enough.) There is also a reasonable handsome Buzzar. At the end of the Town looking into the Field, where Cows and Buffoloes graze, the Portugals have a pretty House and Church, with
Orchards of Indian Fruit adjoining. The English have only a Bu∣rying-Place, called Mendam's-Point, from the first Man's Name there interr'd, where are some few Tombs that make a pretty Shew at en∣tring the Haven; but neither Church or Hospital, both which are mightily to be desired. There are no Fresh Water Rivers,Fresh Water-springs scarce. or falling Streams of living Wa∣ter: The Water drank is usually Rain-water preserved in Tanks, which decaying, they are forced to dig Wells, into which it is strain∣ed, hardly leaving its brackish Taste; so that the better sort have it brought from Massegoung, where is only one fresh Spring. On the backside of the Towns of Bombaim and Maijm,Woods of Co∣coes. are Woods of Cocoes (under which inhabit the Banderines, those that prune and cultivate them), these Hortoes being the greatest Purchase and Estates on the Island, for some Miles together, till the Sea break in between them: Overagainst which, up the Bay a Mile, lies Masse∣goung, a great Fishing-Town, peculiarly notable for a Fish called Bumbelo, the Sustenance of the Poorer sort, who live on them and Batty, a course sort of Rice, and the Wine of the Cocoe, called Toddy. The Ground between this and the great Breach is well ploughed, and bears good Batty. Here the Portugals have another Church and Re∣ligious House belonging to the Franciscans. Beyond it is Parell,Portugal Churches. where they have another Church, and De∣mesnes belonging to the Jesuits; to which appertains Siam, manured by Columbeens, Husbandmen, where live the Frasses, or Porters also; each of which Tribes have a Mandadore, or Superintendent, who give an account of them to the English, and being born under the same degree of Slavery, are generally more Tyrannical than a Stran∣ger would be towards them; so that there needs no other Task∣master than one of their own Tribe, to keep them in awe by a rigid Subjection. Under these Uplands the Washes of the Sea produce a Lunary Tribute of Salt,Salt-Pans. left in Pans or Pits made on purpose at Spring-Tides for the overflowing; and when they are full, are incrustated by the heat of the Sun. In the middle, between Parell, Maijm, Sciam, and Bombaim, is an Hollow, wherein is received a Breach running at three several places, which drowns 40000 Acres of good Land, yielding nothing else but Samphire; athwart which, from Parell to Maijm, are the Ruins of a Stone Cawsey made by Pennances. At Maijm the Portugals have another compleat Church and House;Maijm. the English a pretty Custom-house and Guard-house: The Moors also a Tomb in great Veneration for a Peor, or Prophet, in∣strumental to the quenching the Flames approaching their Prophet's Tomb at Mecha (though he was here at the same time) by the Fervency of his Prayers. At Salvesong,Salvesong. the farthest part of this Inlet, the Franciscans enjoy another Church and Convent; this side is all covered with Trees of Cocoes▪ Jawks, and Mangoes; in the middle lies Verulee, where the English have a Watch. On the other side of the great Inlet,Malabar-hill. to the Sea, is a great Point abutting against Old Woman's Island, and is called Malabar-hill, a Rocky, Woody Mountain, yet sends forth long Grass. A-top of all is a Parsy Tomb lately reared; on its Declivity towards the Sea, the
Remains of a stupendious Pagod, near a Tank of Fresh Water, which the Malabars visited it mostly for. Thus have we compleated our Rounds,Bigness of the Island. being in the Circum∣ference Twenty Miles, the Length Eight, taking in Old Woman's Island, which is a little low barren Island, of no other Profit, but to keep the Company's Antelopes, and other Beasts of Delight. The People that live here are a Mixture of most of the Neigh∣bouring Countries,A mixt People. most of them Fugitives and Vagabonds, no ac∣count being here taken of them: Others perhaps invited hither (and of them a great number) by the Liberty granted them in their several Religions; which here are solemnized with Variety of Popperies (a Toleration consistent enough with the Rules of Gain), though both Moors and Portugals despise us for it; here licensed out of Policy, as the old Numidians to build up the greatest Empire in the World. Of these, one among another, may be reckoned 60000 Souls; more by 50000 than the Portugals ever could. For which Number this Island is not able to find Provisions, it being most of it a Rock above Water, and of that which is overflowed, little hopes to recover it. However, it is well supplied from abroad both with Corn and Meat at reasonable Rates; and there is more Flesh killed for the English alone here in one Month, than in Surat for a Year for all the Moors in that Populous City. The Government here now is English;English Go∣vernment. the Soldiers have Martial Law: The Freemen, Common; the chief Arbitrator whereof is the President, with his Council at Surat; under him is a Justiciary, and Court of Pleas, with a Committee for Regulation of Affairs, and presenting all Complaints. The President has a large Commission,Power and State of the President. and is Vice-Regis; he has a Council here also, and a Guard when he walks or rides abroad, ac∣companied with a Party of Horse, which are constantly kept in the Stables, either for Pleasure or Service. He has his Chaplains, Phy∣sician, Chyrurgeons, and Domesticks; his Linguist, and Mint-Master: At Meals he has his Trumpets usher in his Courses, and Soft Musick at the Table: If he move out of his Chamber, the Sil∣ver Staves wait on him; if down Stairs, the Guard receive him; if he go abroad, the Bandarines and Moors under two Standards march before him: He goes sometimes in his Coach, drawn by large Milk-White Oxen, sometimes on Horseback, other times in Palenkeens, carried by Cohors, Musslemen Porters: Always having a Sumbrero of State carried over him: And those of the English inferior to him, have a suitable Train. But for all this Gallantry,An unhealthy Climate. I reckon they walk but in Charnel∣houses, the Climate being extremely Unhealthy; at first thought to be caused by Bubsho, rotten Fish; but though that be prohibited, yet it continues as Mortal: I rather impute it to the Situation, which causes an Infecundity in the Earth, and a Putridness in the Air, what being produced seldom coming to Maturity, whereby what is eaten is undigested; whence follows Fluxes, Dropsy, Scur∣vy, Barbiers (which is an enervating the whole Body, being nei∣ther able to use Hands or Feet) Gout, Stone, Malignant and Putrid Fevers, which are Endemial Diseases: Among the worst of these, Fool Rack (Brandy made of Blubber, or Carvil, by the Portugals,
because it swims always in a Blubber, as if nothing else were in it; but touch it, and it stings like Nettles; the latter, because sailing on the Waves it bears up like a Portugal Carvil: It is, being taken, a Gelly, and distilled causes those that take it to be Fools), and Foul Women may be reckoned. To prevent the latter of which,English Wo∣men no good Nurses. and to propagate their Colony, the Company have sent out English Women; but they beget a sickly Generation; and as the Dutch well observe, those thrive better that come of an European Father and Indian Mother: Which (not to re∣flect on what Creatures are sent abroad) may be attributed to their living at large, not debarring themselves Wine and Strong Drink, which immoderately used, inflames the Blood, and spoils the Milk in these Hot Countries, as Aristotle long ago declared. The Natives abhor all heady Liquors, for which reason they prove better Nurses. Notwithstanding this Mortality to the English,The Air a∣greeable to the Country Peo∣ple. the Country Peo∣ple and naturalized Portugals live to a good Old Age, supposed to be the Reward of their Temperance; indulging themselves neither in Strong Drinks, nor devouring Flesh as we do. But I believe rather we are here, as Exotick Plants brought home to us, not agreeable to the Soil: For to the Lustier and Fresher, and oftentimes the Tem∣peratest, the Clime more unkind; but to Old Men and Women it seems to be more suitable. Happy certainly then are those,Few return home. and only those, brought hither in their Nonage, before they have a Gust of our Albion; or next to them, such as intoxicate themselves with Laethe, and remember not their former Condition: When it is expostulated, Is this the Reward of an harsh and severe Pupilage? Is this the Elysium after a tedious Waftage? For this, will any thirst, will any contend, will any for∣sake the Pleasures of his Native Soil, in his Vigorous Age, to bury himself alive here? Were it not more charitable at the first Bubbles of his Infant-Sorrows, to make the next Stream over-swell him? Or else if he must be full grown for Misery, how much more compassio∣nate were it to expose him to an open Combat with the fiercest Duel∣lists in Nature, to spend at once his Spirits, than to wait a piece∣meal'd Consumption? Yet this abroad and unknown, is the ready Choice of those to whom Poverty threatens Contempt at home: What else could urge this wretched Remedy? For these are untrodden Paths for Knowledge, little Improvement being to be expected from Barbarity. Custom and Tradition are only Venerable here; and it is Heresy to be wiser than their Forefathers; which Opinion is both bred and hatch'd by an innate Sloth; so that though we seem near∣er the Heavens, yet Bodies here are more Earthy, and the Mind wants that active Fire that always mounts, as if it were extinguish'd by its Antiparistasis: Whereby Society and Communication, the Characteristick of Man is wholly lost. What then is to be expected here, where sordid Thrift is the only Science? After which, not∣withstanding there is so general an Inquest, few there be acquire it: For in Five hundred, One hundred survive not; of that One hun∣dred, one Quarter get not Estates; of those that do, it has not been recorded above One in Ten Years has seen his Country: And in this difficulty it would hardly be worth a Sober Man's while, much less an Ingenuous Man's, who should not defile his purer Thoughts, to
be wholly taken up with such mean (not to say indirect) Contem∣plations; however, a necessary Adjunct, Wealth, may prove to buoy him up on the Surface of Repute, lest the Vulgar serve him as Aesop's Frogs did their first rever'd Deity. Thus much being premised for what concerns the Island its self,What Credit it bears with its Neigh∣bours. it remains to speak of it with relation to the Credit it bears among its Neighbours: The Dutch cast an envious Eye on it, and were it in their hands, would doubtless make it render all it is capable; and in respect of Commerce it seems to offer many Conveniences; the Ba∣nyans liking it better than Surat, living freer, and under milder Taxa∣tions, which they put the present President in some hopes of com∣plying with, could he open the way from hence up the Country: but that depending on so many Intricacies, must be not only a work of Time, but Power to bring to pass; as afterwards may fall more properly in our way to make appear. Our present Concern then is with the Portugal, Seva Gi, and the Mo∣gul: From the first is desired no more than a mutual Friendship; from the second, an Appearance only; from the last, a nearer Commerce: The first and second become necessary for Provisions for the Belly, and Building; the third for the Gross of our Trade: Wherefore Offices of Civility must be performed to each of these; but they sometimes interfering, are the occasion of Jealousies; these three being so diametrically opposite one to another: For while the Mogul brings his Fleet either to Winter or Recruit in this Bay, Seva takes Offence; on the other hand, the Mogul would soon put a stop to all Business, should he be denied: The Portugal, as in League with nei∣ther, thinks it a mean compliance in us to allow either of them Coun∣tenance, especially to furnish them with Guns and Weapons to turn upon Christians, which they wisely make an Inquisition Crime. CHAP. II. Is a Survey of the Island of Canorein near Bombaim. UPON these scores it was not long before I was employed to wait on the Father Superior of the North,The Superior of the Jesuits, a Learned Man, and a Spaniard by Nation, of the Order of the Jesuits. The President commanded his own Baloon (a Barge of State,Compliment∣ed. of Two and twenty Oars) to attend me and one of the Council, to compliment the Father on the Island of Canorein, parted from Bom∣baim by a Stream half a Mile broad: Near our Landing-place stood a College, not inferior to the Building, nor much unlike those of our Universities, belonging to the Jesuits here, more commonly called Paulistines (whose Visitor was now my Patient), who live here ve∣ry sumptuously, the greatest part of the Island being theirs. Our Entertainment was truly Noble, and becoming the Gravity of the Society. After I had done my Duty, the Fathers accompanied us to the Barge; afore the College-Gate stood a large Cross, thwack'd full of young Blacks singing Vespers: The Town is large, the Houses tiled; it is called Bandora.
At our department they gave us Seven Guns, which they have planted on the Front of their College for their own Defence,Their Con∣vents serve for Castles. besides they are fitted with good store of Small Arms: Following therein the Advice given by a Statesman to the King of Spain, about the Netherlands; That if the Society of the Loyolists were multiplied, their Convents might serve for Castles. In the middle of the River we had a pleasant Prospect on both sides;A fine Pro∣spect on the Water. on Bandora side, the College, the Town, the Church of St. Andrew a Mile beyond, and upon the Hill that pointed to the Sea, the Aquada, Blockhouse, and a Church; on the other side, the Church of Maijm, with other handsome Buildings. Curiosity led me a second time to visit the Island Canorein,A Journey of Pleasure: And Civility of the Jesuits. having obtained leave for a longer Stay; nor went I alone, some of the best Quality on the Island being led by the same desire, joining themselves with me: We carried a Train of Servants, Horses, and Palenkeens, which were ferried over before us; and we coming soon after, were met by the Fraternity, and conducted to the Fathers, who detained us till Afternoon by a stately Banquet, shewing us the Civility of the Church and College, diverting us both with Instrumental and Vocal Musick, and very good Wine. After which we were dismiss'd, and four Mile off Bandora were stopp'd by the Kindness of the Padre-Superior, whose Mandate whereever we came caused them to send his Recarders (a Term of Congratulation, as we say, Our Service) with the Presents of the best Fruits and Wines, and whatever we wanted. Here,Delightful Aldeas. not adjoining to any Town, in a sweet Air, stood a Magni∣ficent Rural Church; in the way to which, and indeed all up and down this Island, are pleasant Aldeas, or Country Seats of the Gentry; where they live like Petty Monarchs, all that is born on the Ground being theirs, holding them in a perfect state of Villainage, they being Lords Paramount. From hence,Magatana, a Country Seat. when we had baited, the same Night we travelled easily to Magatana, using our Fowling-Pieces all the way, being here presented with Rich Game, as Peacocks, Doves, and Pigeons, Chitrels, or Spotted Deer. When we came to the Town, two several Churches strove to re∣ceive us; but having some Acquaintance with the Father of the one, and not with the other, we excused our selves to the latter, and took up with our Friend. As soon as we came in, the Servitors fetch'd us warm Water to wash our Feet, which was very refreshing; it put me in mind of Lot's Courtesy to the Angels. After this, as a piece of extraordinary Civility, they shewed us the Necessary House; and it is so in a Countrey where Fluxes are so common; and for that rea∣son it is kept as neat as their Lodging Rooms, having Water to wah after you have used a clean Towel hung there for that purpose. This Night we fared very well. Next Morn before Break of Day we directed our Steps to the anciently fam'd, but now ruin'd City of Canorein; the way to it is so delightsome, I thought I had been in England; sine Arable, Pasture, and Coppices; thus we passed Five Mile to the Foor of the Hill on which the City stands, and had passed half a Mile through a thick Wood, peopled by Apes, Tygers, wild Buffolo's, and Jackalls; here were some Flocks of Parockets:
When we alighted, the Sun began to mount the Horizon over the Hills, and under our Feet, as if he had newly bathed his fiery Cour∣sers, there appeared the Mouth of a Tank, or Aqueduct, out of a Rock, whose steaming Breath was very hot, but water cold: From hence it is thought the whole City to be supplied with water; for as we ascend, we find such Places, where convenient, filled with Lim∣pid Water, not over-matched in India: If it be so, (as I know not how to contradict it) that it should have its Current upwards through the hard Rocks artificially cut, the World cannot parallel so wonderful a Water-course! From hence the Passage is uneasy and inaccessible for more than two abreast,The City of Canorein, for∣merly n Hea∣then Fane. till we come to the City, all cut out of a Rock; where is presented Vulcan's Forge, supported by two mighty Colosses, bel∣lied in the middle with two Globes. Next a Temple with a beauti∣ful Frontispiece not unlike the Portuco of St. Paul's West Gate: With∣in the Porch on each side stand Two Monstrous Giants, where two Lesser and one Great Gate give a noble Entrance; it can receive no Light but at the Doors and Windows of the Porch, whereby it looks more solemnly; the Roof is Arched, seeming to be born up by huge Pillars of the same Rock, some Round, some Square, 34 in number. The Cornish Work of Elephants, Horses, Lions; at the upper end it rounds like a Bow; near where stands a great Offertory somewhat Oval, the Body of it without Pillars, they only making a narrow Piatzo about, leaving the Nave open: It may be an 100 Feet in Length, in Height 60 Feet or more. Beyond this, by the same Mole-like Industry, was worked out a Court of Judicature (as those going to shew it will needs give Names) or Place of Audience, 50 Feet square, all bestuck with Imagery, well Engraven according to old Sculpture. On the Side, over against the Door, sate one Superintendent, to whom the Brachmin went with us, paid great Reverence, not speaking of him without a token of worship; whom he called Jougy, or the Holy Man; under this the way being made into handsome Marble Steps, are the King's Stables, not different from the Fashion of our Noblemens Stables, only at the head of every Stall seems to be a Dormitory, or Place for Devotion, with Images, which gave occasion to doubt if ever for that End; or rather made for an Heathen Seminary of Devotes, and these their Cells or Chappels, and the open Place their Common Hall or School: More aloft stood the King's Palace, large, stately and magnificent, surrounded with lesser of the Nobility. To see all,Reported to be dug out of the Rocks by Alexander. would require a Month's time; but that we might see as much as could be in our allotted time, we got upon the highest part of the Mountain, where we feasted our Eyes with innumerable Entrances of these Cony-burrows, but could not see one quarter part. Whose Labour this should be, or for what purpose, is out of memory; but this Place by the Gentiles is much adored: Some con∣tend for Alexander; and as a proof, think they have said enough, when it is received by Tradition, that a great Gap out of a solid Rock was cut by him to make this an Island: But this is contradi∣ctory to the Story delivered of Alexander, That he sailed up Indus, and encountred King Porus, of whom some little Remains may be collected, they speaking of that King by the Name of Por in Cam∣baia,
where Alexander landed with his Army;Chap. III. and followed the Course of Indus, directly contrary to this Place, that lying North-East, this South from thence; nor do we read his stay in India was so long, to atchieve such Acts as these, this Place being not the only Instance of this nature; but more probable to be an Heathen Fane, or Idolatrous Pagod, from the Superstitious Opinion they still hold of its Sacredness: Wherefore the Portugals, who are now Masters of it, strive to erace the remainders of this Herculean Work, that it may sink into the oblivion of its Founders. Returning to Magatana, we spent some days in riding about the Country, which we found every-where provided with Churches. The Chief City of this Island is Tanaw:Tanaw the Chief Place. In which are Seven Churches and Colleges, the chiefest one of the Paulistines; the Houses Tiled, but low: Here are made good Stuffs of Silk and Cotton. There is another great Town called Mein,Mein a great Town. where is a Castle and some Soldiers, towards the Sea; over-against Baçein there is another Fort and Aquada. The Portugals suffer none but Christians here:Happiness of the Soil. It has no Rivers, but only Inlets of the Sea; but good Springs from the Rocks; the Ground excellently fertile, either of it self, or by the care of the Inhabitants; that it yields as good Cabbages, Coleworts, and bet∣ter Rhadishes than ever I yet saw: Besides Garden-Fruit, here are incomparable Water-Melons, and Onions as sweet, and as well tasted as an Apple; and for the natural growth of the Soil, it is known not only to supply the adjoining Islands, but Goa also. It is more than 20 Miles in Length, and 70 in Circumference. CHAP. III. A Visit to Baçein, a Portugal City in India; our return by Elephanto, and the Putachos, with Observations on the Island Bombaim. THE several Capitaneos of the Portugals are Triennial,The Capita∣neos of the Portugals Al∣ternate. which are the Alternate Governments entailed on the Families of the Conquerors, and therefore made Circular; every one in his course having his turn to rule in some Place or other for Three Years, and upon these they can borrow or take up Mony as certain as upon their Hereditary Estates, the next Incumbent being Secu∣rity for the payment: Pursuant to this, a new Governour coming to Choul, his Honour the President sent to congratulate him; and the Admiral of the North coming to Baçein, another was sent on the same Message. Nor could the hot Months be over, before John de Mendos, of a Noble Family, sent for me to Baçein for the cure of his only Daughter, illustriously born, handsome, and on the point of
Marriage with the Admiral of the North, though not full Twelve years old. Leaving Bombaim,A Message to Baçein. at this time of the year, we could go either within or without; but the first being related to be pleasantest, I chose that way; sailing by Trumbay, where we receive Custom, we might see a comely Church and Ald: At Noon we reached Tanaw: Having gained our Passage over the Flats, we made no stay, but rowed streight to Baçein; every half Mile we were presented with fresh Prospects of delicate Country-Mansions; two of which of spe∣cial note draw the Eyes of the Beholders; one of John de Melos, three Mile off Tanaw, it standing high, curiously built, has a Tarras Descent with Walks and Gardens half a Mile, till it lead to a spacious Banquetting-house over the Water, with Stone-stairs for Landing: Beyond it a Mile, on the side of an Hill, stands Grebondel, a large neat built Town of Martin Alphonso's; and at top of all, his House, Fort and Church, of as stately Architecture as India can afford; he be∣ing the Richest Don on this side Goa. Here we are Land-locked by the Gut, which is fabled to be made by Alexander; from which we have an open passage to Baçein, it lying bare towards the Sea. BACEIN Is incircled with a round Stone-wall,The City is round. and has a Gate for every Wind; it is strong enough against the Indians, but not able to en∣dure an European Foe: There are upon the Out-walls, and in the Fort, Forty two great Guns; the Fort in the middle of the City is circular; towards the Market appears a State-house Piatzed, where the Governour convocates the Fidalgos every Morning upon consul∣tation, in which they all stand, a Chair not being permitted the Go∣vernour, though Gouty: Towards Evening they meet there to Game. Within the Walls are six Churches,Six Churches within the Walls. four Convents, two Colleges, one of the Jesuits, another of the Franciscans. It bears the Name of an Academy; the Students are instructed in the Jesuits College, but live in Town: Where is a Library, with Classes of Historians, Mo∣ralists, Expositors, and no more. It is a College of Polite Structure, in the Portuco is a Copy of Angelos, representing the Resurrection; above Stairs, as well as below, are fine square Cloisters, as all their Collegiate Churches have, on the sides whereof are their Cells; they have a spacious Refectory, and a goodly Church; three parts of the City is devoted to their use. The Fidalgos (for few Artisans are tolerated within the Walls) have stately Dwellings,The Dwel∣lings of the Fidagos. graced with covered Balconies, and large Windows two Stories high, with Panes of Oister shell, which is their usual Glazing among them in India, or else Latised. They shew their Greatness by their number of Sumbreeroes and Cofferies, whereby it is dangerous to walk late for fear of falling into the Hands of those Pilfering Abusive Rascals. None but Christians lodge within the City, the Banyans repairing to the Suburbs upon Tattoo. The City is a Mile and half round; it stands on an Island, separated by a small Channel from the Main, as far off the Island Canorein, as Canorein from Bombaim, and parted after the like nature.
The Land about it plain, and fruitful of Sugar-Canes, Rice, and other Grain; a great part of which has lately been destroyed by the Arabs of Muschat,The Devasta∣tions made by the Arabs about Baçein. who put them to a sore fright in Baçein: and this is done often, setting fire to their Villages, and carrying away their Fidalgos Prisoners, together with their Wives and Families, butcher∣ing the Padres, and robbing the Churches without resistance, con∣ceived on a deadly Feud, partly out of revenge of the Portugal Cruelties at Muschat; but chiefly out of detestation of each other's Religion; insomuch that Quarter is denied on either side: But that on this Pretence. The Portugals striving to pos∣sess themselves of Muschat,The ground of their Quar∣rels. were put to such stress, that had not their Armado come to their relief, they must have desisted their Enterprize: Upon the arrival whereof the new Recruits gained so much on the Arab Governour, that he yielded up the otherwise invincible Fort of Muschat; where the Portugals acting all nefarious Outrages, contrary to their Promise, the Arabs re-armed themselves with Courage and fresh Succors, and at length beat them from hence to Ormus in the Gulf of Persia; from whence also they were routed by the help of the English (we then being at war with them); the first blow to their Greatness in these Parts. To check these Incursions of the Arabs,The Arabs care not to engage the Portugals. the Portugals every Year are at the charge of a lusty Squadron in these Seas, which were those we met on the Coast returning from thence; who were no sooner gone, than the Arabs sent their Fleet to do this Mischief here; which now 'tis done, they are again in quest of them, but they fly as of∣ten as these pursue. And if such be the gasping Strength of the Portugals,Their last Ef∣forts. to terrify the Potentest Enemies to Christianity in these Parts, what was their flou∣rishing Estate? Whence it may easily be supposed before now all had bowed to the Cross, which yet bend under Heathenism or Mahome∣tism, had they not been prevented by unhappy Pretenders, that (I fear) too much preferred Merchandize and private Pieques, before the welfare of Religion: For it is morally probable, that had not the Dutch and we interrupted them, all might have been Christian in these parts of the World. Having in a Week's time compleated my Business,Eliphanto, ano∣ther Idola∣trous Temple cut out of a solid Rock. returning the same way, we steered by the South side of the Bay, purposely to touch at Eliphanto, so called from a monstrous Elephant cut out of the main Rock, bearing a Young one on its Back; not far from it the Effigies of an Horse stuck up to the Belly in the Earth in the Val∣ley; from thence we clambred up the highest Mountain on the Island, on whose Summit was a miraculous Piece hewed out of solid Stone: It is supported with Forty two Corinthian Pillars, being a Square, open on all sides but towards the East; where stands a Statue with three Heads, crowned with strange Hieroglyphicks: At the North side in an high Portuco stands an Altar, guarded by Giants, and im∣mured by a Square Wall; all along, the Walls are loaded with huge Giants, some with eight hands, making their vanquished Knights stoop for mercy. Before this is a Tank full of water, and beyond that ano∣ther Place with Images. This seems to be of later date than that of Canorein, though defaced by the Portugals, who have this Island also;
but no Defence upon it, nor any thing else of Note; it may be Ten Miles round, inhabited by the Povo, or Poor: From hence we sailed to the Putachoes, a Garden of Melons (Putacho being a Melon) were there not wild Rats that hinder their Growth, and so to Bom∣baim. The Weather now was grown excessive hot,The Heats. the Earth beginning to gape for Thirst, the Sun being in its Zenith with us; the South Winds are set in strong, and the Toddy-Trees ferment their Wine over the Vessels, the Prodromi of the ensuing Rains; which make their first shew at the first Full Moon in May, and continue a Fort∣night, in which space it is unhealthy; till after a Fortnight's fair Weather they set in for altogether. This Season makes the Syddy retreat hither with his Fleet, who from a Lord of Duccan is promoted to be the Mogul's Admiral;The Mogul's Fleet winter at Bombaim. or truer, driven to distress by Seva Gi, undertakes this Employment, in confidence to recover his own Dominion on the Sea-Coast, whilst the Mogul's General at Land is to stop his Proceedings on that side: But Seva Gi possessed of his Country, and bidding for his strong Castle at Dan de Rajapour Bay, which he has been to defend this Summer, derides his Attempts, and is preparing to be install'd Mau Raja, or Arch Raja, at his Court at Rairee; for which an Embassy to keep all right must be dispatch'd. In the mean while Nature affords us a pleasant Spectacle for this Season,The Ingenui∣ty of the Toddy Bird. as well as Matter for Admiration; whereby I know not why we should deny Reason wholly to Animals; unless it be, Man ha∣ving so much, they seem comparatively to have none: For here is a Bird (having its Name from the Tree it chuses for its Sanctuary, the Toddy-Tree) that is not only exquisitely curious in the artificial Composure of its Nest with Hay, but furnished with Devices and Stratagems to secure its self and young ones from its deadly Enemy the Squirrel; as likewise from the Injury of the Weather; which being unable to oppose, it eludes with this Artifice, contriving the Nest like a Steeple-hive, with winding Meanders; before which hangs a Penthouse for the Rain to pass, tying it by so slender a Thread to the Bough of the Tree, that the Squirrel dare not venture his Bo∣dy, though his Mouth water at the Eggs and Prey within; yet it is strong enough to bear the hanging habitation of the Ingenious Con∣triver, free from all the Assaults of its Antagonist, and all the Acci∣dents of Gusts and Storms: Hundreds of these Pendulous Nests may be seen on these Trees. Here is another Tree called Brabb,The Brabb-Tree. bodied like a Cocoe, but the Leaves grow round like a Peacock's Tail set upright, of the same substance with the Cocoe, only varying in figure; the Fruit of this is less than the Cocoe, and filled with a Gelly; the Wine from this is preferred new, before the other; there is a Tuft at top, cut off and boil'd eats like Colliflowers; on which Tree these Birds build also. And now the Rains are set in,The Rains set in. all Hostilities and Commerce cease, and every one provides for this time, as the laborious Ant for the Winter, here being no stirring out to Sea, or travelling in the Coun∣try; the best Pastime now being good Fellowship. Thus lies this place afloat, and the Rains and Thunder are violent enough to con∣vince the incredulous of a possibility of a General Deluge. This
holds with little intermission till St. Francis's Moon,Chap. IV. the first Full Moon in August; when our Europe Ships, if they save their Passage about the Cape, venture to make in here, by the directions of the yellow Bellies of the formerly mentioned Water-Snakes, who are a warning to them of adventuring too near the Shore, till this open Weather appear. After this Full Moon,The Heathens make an Of∣fering to the Sea. the Banyans, assisted by their Brachmins, go in Procession to the Sea-shore, and offer Cocoe-Nuts to Neptune, that he would restore them their Mare Pacificum; when they make Pre∣parations to go to Sea, and about their Business of Trade. By this opportunity our Ambassadors crossed an Arm of the Sea, and returning from Seva Gi, delivered the President this following Account; which I the rather insert, because the manner of dealing with these Princes and Great Men may be the better understood by this formal Address. CHAP. IV. A Narrative of an Embassy to Seva Gi, and Journey to Rairee, the Court of the Rajah. THE Ambassador having received Instructions, and got all things ready for his Journey, embark'd on a Bombaim Shebar (together with two English Factors, who were appointed by the Honourable the President to accompany him); and about Nine a Clock at Night arrived at Choul, a Portugal City on the Main, into which he could not enter, the Gates being shut up, and Watch set; so that they passed this Night in the Suburbs, in a small Church called St. Sebastians; and the next day about Three in the After∣noon receiving Advice that Seva Gi was returned to Rairee from Chiblone, departed thence to Upper Choul, a Town belonging to the Rajah, about two Miles distant from the Portugal City; and was in former time a great Mart of all sorts of Duccan Commodities; but now totally ruined by the late Wars betwixt the Mogul and Seva Gi, whose Arms have plundered and laid it waste. The Subidar of this Town being a Person of Quality,How the Subi∣dar is created. who com∣mands the Countries opposite to Bombaim, as Magatan, Penn, and Tull, he thought good to give him a Visit, and to present him with a couple of Pamerins; and the rather, because he understood by the Linguist Naran Sinaij, he had some Aversion to our Nation, and might hinder our Proceedings at Court; from which he was willing to take him off by all fair means: He received the Visit kindly, and promised all Courtesy that lay in his Power to perform; and after some immaterial Discourse they returned to their Tents. The Day following they took Boat,Proceed on their Journey. and sailed up Choul River, to a Town called Esthemy, six Leagues distance from Choul, where they staid till next day; and set forth about six in the Morn from Esthemy, and about Sun-set pitched their Tent in a Plain, six Miles short of Nishampore, where they stayed about an hour to refresh their Coolies,
and then set forward for Nishampore, and at Nine passing by Ni∣shampore, arrived next Morning at Gongouly, a little Villag situated on the Bank of a pleasant Rivulet; from whence in a fair Day may be discerned the Castle of Rairee: The day after they proceeded on their Journy to Rairee, and about Nine of the Clock in the Evening came to Puncharra, a Town at the Foot of the Hill, where they un∣derstood that Seva Gi was departed thence to Purtaabgur, to visit the Shrine of Bowany, a Pagod of great esteem with him, and celebrated some Ceremonies there in order to his Coronation; having carried with him several Presents, and among the rest a Lumbrico of pure Gold, weighing about one Maund and a quarter, which is Forty two Pounds, which he hath dedicated to the said Pagod. In the interim,Seva Gi gone a Pilgrimage. understanding they could not be admitted into the Castle till Seva Gi's return, they pitched their Tent inthe Plain; and in order to their more speedy dispatch, make their Business known to their Procurator Narun Gi Pundit (whose reception was very kind) and delivered him his Honour's Letters; shewing him the several Presents they brought for the Rajah, and Ministers of State; of which he highly approved, and promised them to help them to the Rajah's presence, as soon as conveniently he could after his return from Pil∣grimage to Purtaabgur: And bad them rest content, that his Endea∣vours should be totally employed in the Honourable Company's In∣terest, and procuring them a speedy dispatch: for which having ren∣dered him Thanks, he presented him with the Articles which they brought for the Rajah to sign, translated into Moratty Language; which he said he would peruse, and then give his judgment of them. He then took occasion to discourse with him concerning the Conclu∣sion of a Peace betwixt the Rajah and the Syddy of Banda Rajapore; urging many Arguments to create in him a belief it would be for the Rajah's advantage, but he would not be persuaded it was for his Ma∣ser's Interest to raise a Siege which had cost him so much Blood and Treasure; especially now he hath such hopes of gaining the Place: And therefore told them, it would be in vain to move it to the Rajah, who was resolved to take in the Castle, let it cost him what it will: And to that effect was daily sending down more Ordnance, Ammu∣nition, Men and Money. Our Ambassador replied, The President had no other Design in making this motion, than that of a good Neighbour; having ob∣served the Miseries each Party endured, and the general obstruction of Trade, occasioned by the War; but since he desired him to desist mentioning it to the Rajah, he should not trouble him therewith; but what was more consistent with our own and his Interest; which was the encouraging Trade and Merchandise in his Country, and opening the ways to Baligaot, that Merchants might with safety bring down their Goods to Port; which would be much to the Rajah's Profit, and encrease of his Treasury: And this he recommended to his Pru∣dence to persuade the Rajah thereto; who being a Soldier from his Infancy, its possible minded not such concerns. To which he answered,The Offici∣ousns of a Chief Mini∣ster of State to the English. That he doubted not but it would be ef∣fected in a short time; for that the King of Visiapour, who is Owner of those Countries (from whence most sorts of Wares come) being weary of Wars with his Master, had sent several Embassies to con∣conclude
a peace with him; which he thought would be made up in two or three Months, and then the Ways would be free, and the Merchants have Egress and Regress as formerly. That the Rajah, after his Coronation, would act more like a Prince, by taking care of his Subjects, and endeavouring the advancement of Commerce in his Dominions; which he could not attend before, being in perpe∣tual War with the Great Mgul, and King of Visiapour. This is the Substance of his Discourse with Narun Gi Pundit, who seemed to him to be a Man of Prudence and Esteem with his Master: So after a lit∣tle sitting he took his leave of him, having first presented him with a Diamond Ring, for which he expressed a liking; and his Eldest Son a Couple of Pamerins, which are fine Mantles. They continuing under their Tent,Who procu∣red their pass up to the Ca∣stle. found it very hot and incom∣modious; wherefore they were glad when they heard the Rajah was returned from Purtaabgur, when the Ambassadour sollicited Narun Gi Pundit to procure his leave to pass up the Hill into Rairee Castle: The next day they receiv'd order to ascend the Hill into the Castle, the Rajah having appointed an House for them; which they did; leaving Puncharra about Three in the Afternoon, they arrived at the top of that strong Mountain, forsaking the humble Clouds about Sun-set. It is fortified by Nature more than Art,Rairce a strong Hill. being of very difficult access, there being but one Avenue to it, which is guarded by two narrow Gates, and fortified by a strong Wall exceeding high, and Bastions thereto: All the other part of the Mountain is a direct Pre∣cipice; so that it's impregnable, except the Treachery of some in it betray it. On the Mountain are many strong Buildings, as the Ra∣jah's Court, and Houses of other Ministers, to the number of about 300. It is in length about two Miles and an half, but no pleasant Trees, or any sort of Grain grows thereon. Their House was about a Mile from the Rajah's Palace, into which they retired with no lit∣tle content. Four days after their ascent,The English have Audi∣ence of Seva Gi. by the sollicitation of Narun Gi Pun∣dit, the Rajah gave them Audience, though busily imployed by ma∣ny other great Affairs, relating to his Coronation and Marriage. Our Ambassador presented him, and his Son Samba Gi Rajah, with the Particulars appointed for them; which they took well satisfied with them; and the Rajah assured them we might trade securely in all his Countries without the least apprehension of Ill from him, for that the Peace was concluded. Our Ambassadour replied, that was our Intent; and to that intent the President had sent him to this Court to procure the same Articles and Privileges we enjoyed in Indostan and Persia, where we traded. He answered, it is well, and referred our Business to Moro Pundit his Peshua, or Chancellour, to examine our Articles, and give an account what they were. He and his Son withdrew into their private Apartments, to consult with the Brach∣mines about the Ceremonies preparatory to his Enstalment; which chiefly consisted in Abstinence and Purifying; till which be over, he will hear no farther of Business. They likewise departed to their Lodgings. A day or two after our Ambassador went to Narun Gi Pundit,What Pre∣sents were made. and took his Advice concerning the presenting of the rest; who told him
he might go in Person to Moro Pundit, but to the rest he should send by Naran Sinaij what was intended for them: Declaring likewise if he would have his Work speedily effected, and without any impedi∣ment, that it was necessary to be at some more charge to present Offi∣cers with Pamerins, who were not in their List of Presents; to which he assented, considering the time of the Year was so far spent, and that if he should be forced to stay the whole Rains out at Rairee, the Honourable Company's Charges would be greater than the Additio∣nal Presents: He answered that two Pamerins were not enough for Moro Pundit, that we must present him with four; and Peta Gi Pun∣dit Vocanovice, or Publick Intelligencer, with the Diamond Ring, valued at 125 Rupees. The Dehir, or Persian Escrivan, with Four Pamerins. Sam Gi Nayne, Keeper of the Seal, with Four. Ab Gi Pundit Four. And then he should not doubt of a speedy Conclusion; otherwise they would raise Objections on purpose to impede the Negotiation. For every Officer in Court expected something according to their De∣gree and Charge. About this time the Rajah,Rajah, Seva Gi weighed in Gold. according to the Hindu Custom, was weighed in Gold, and poised about 16000 Pagods, which Money, together with an 100000 more is to be distributed among the Brach∣mines after the day he is enthroned, who in great numbers flock hi∣ther from all parts of his Territories. Being earnest to press on his Errand he came for,Grants the Request of the English. the Ambassador sent to Narun Gi Pundit to know what was transacted in the Articles; but was returned for Answer, The Rajah stopt his Ears to all Af∣fairs, declaring he had granted all the Demands, except those two Articles, expressing, Our Money shall go current in his Dominions, and his on Bombaim; and that he shall restore whatever Wrecks may happen on his Coasts belonging to the English, and Inhabitants of Bombaim: The first he accounted unnecessary to be inserted, because he forbids not the passing of any manner of Coins; nor on the other side, can he force his Subjects to take those Monies whereby they shall be Losers; but if our Coin be as fine an Allay, and as weighty as the Mogul's, and other Princes, he will not prohibit it. To the other he says, that it is against the Laws of Conchon to restore any Ships, Vessels, or Goods, that are driven ashore by Tempest, or otherwise; and that should he grant us that Privilege, the French, Dutch, and other Merchants, would claim the same Right; which he could not grant without breaking a Custom has lasted many Ages: The rest of our Desires he willingly conceded, embracing with much satisfaction our Friendship, promising to himself and Country much Happiness by our Settlement and Trade: Notwithstanding Narun Gi Pundit did not altogether despair of obtaining our Wrecks, because we enjoyed the same Privilege in the Mogul, and Duccan Country. Near a Month after they had been here,The Ambas∣sador sum∣moned to the Coronation. Narun Gi Pundit sent word, That to Morrow about Seven or Eight in the Morning, the Rajah Seva Gi intended to ascend his Throne; and he would take it kindly if they came to congratulate him thereon; that it was neces∣sary to present him with some small thing, it not being the Custom
of the Eastern Parts to appear before a Prince empty-handed. The Ambassador sent him word, according to his Advice he would wait on the Rajah at the prescribed time. According next Morning he and his Retinue went to Court,Accordingly he attends. and found the Rajah seated on a Magnificent Throne, and all his No∣bles waiting on him in Rich Attire; his Son Samba Gi Rajah, Peshuah, Mora Pundit, and a Brachmin of great Eminence, seated on an Ascent under the Throne; the rest, as well Officers of the Army as others, standing with great Respect. The English made their Obeisance at a di∣stance, and Narun Sinai held up the Diamond Ring that was to be pre∣sented him: He presently took notice of it, and ordered their coming nearer, even to the Foot of the Throne, where being Vested, they were desired to retire; which they did not so soon, but they took notice on each side of the Throne there hung (according to the Moors manner) on heads of Gilded Launces many Emblems of Dominion and Government; as on the Right-hand were two great Fishes Heads of Gold, with very large Teeth; on the Left, several Horses Tails, a Pair of Gold Scales on a very high Launce's head, equally poized, an Emblem of Justice; and as they returned, at the Palace Gate stood two small Elephants on each side, and two fair Horses with Gold Trappings, Bridles, and Rich Furniture; which made them ad∣mire how they brought them up the Hill, the Passage being both difficult and hazardous. Two days after this,The Rajah maries a fourth Wife. Seva Gi signs the Articles. the Rajah was married to a Fourth Wife, without State; and doth every day bestow Alms on the Brachmins. Some days after, Narun Gi Pundit sent word the Rajah had signed their Articles, all but that about Money. Then the rest of the Mi∣nisters of State signed them, and they went to receive them of Na∣run Gi Pundit, who delivered them to the Ambassador with Expressi∣ons of great Kindness for our Nation, and offered on all occasions to be serviceable to the English at the Court of the Rajah. I will only add one Passage during the Stay of our Ambassador at Rairee:No Nation eat more Flesh than the English. The Diet of this sort of People admits not of great Variety or Cost, their delightfullest Food being only Cutchery, a sort of Pulse and Rice mixed together, and boiled in Butter, with which they grow Fat: But such Victuals could not be long pleasing to our Merchants, who had been used to feed on good Flesh: It was there∣fore signified to the Rajah, That Meat should be provided for them; and to that end a Butcher that served those few Moors that were there, that were able to go to the Charge of Meat, was ordered to supply them with what Goat they should expend (nothing else here being to be gotten for them), which he did accordingly, to the con∣sumption of half a Goat a Day, which he found very profitable for him, and thereupon was taken with a Curiosity to visit his new Customers; to whom, when he came, it was told them, The ho∣nest Butcher had made an Adventure up the Hill, though very old, to have the sight of his good Masters, who had taken off of his hands more Flesh in that time they had been there, than he had sold in some Years before; so rare a thing is it to eat Flesh among them; for the Gentiles eat none, and the Moors and Portugals eat it well
stew'd, bak'd, or made into Pottage; no Nation eating it roasted so commonly as we do: And in this point I doubt we err in these Hot Countries, where our Spirits being always upon the Flight, are not so intent on the business of Concoction; so that those things that are easiest digested, and that create that least trouble to the Stomach, we find by Experience to agree best here. CHAP. V. Our Passage to Swally, and Relation of the English Presidency at Surat. AFter the Rains were over, and the North-East Wind had brought in the Cool Season, by Command from the President I was sent to Surat. In a Week's time we turned it up, sailing by Baçein, Tarapore, Valentine's-Peak, St. John's, and Daman, the last City Northward on the Continent, belonging to the Portugueze. As also passing by Balsore (the first Town of the Moors Southward of Surat) and eight Ships riding at Surat River's Mouth, we then came to Swally Marine, where were flying the several Colours of the Three Nations, English, French, and Dutch, on Flag-Staffs erected for that purpose, who here land and ship off all Goods, without molestation. Here we were welcomed by the Deputy-President,Arrival at Swally. Mr. Matthew Grey, an Eminent Merchant, and by the rest of the Council, who took Care for my Entertainment, which here was but rude, the Place admitting of little better Tenements than Booths, stiled by the name of Choultries: Before President Andrew's time they always lodged in Tents; but since, Wooden Houses tiled with Pan-Tiles have been raised in an Inclosure allotted by the Governor. In which Com∣pound are included Warehouses, Stables, and other Out-houses, with as good a Garden as this Sandy Soil will allow; in which ours ex∣ceeds the other two, being far pleasanter seated. To this place belong two sorts of Vermin,The Sands full of Fleas and Banyans. the Fleas and Banyans; the one harbouring in the Sand, fasten upon you as you pass; where 'tis some Pastime to see what Shift the Banyan makes, being bit by them, he dare not kill them, for fear of unhousing a Soul, according to their Notion of Transmigration; but giving them a severe Pinch will put them to shift for themselves in a Nest of Cotton-Wool. The other Vermin are the Banyans themselves▪ that hang like Horse∣leeches, till they have suck'd both Sanguinen & Succum (I mean Mony) from you: As soon as you have set your Foot on Shore, they crowd in their Service, interposing between you and all Civil Respect, as if you had no other Business but to be gull'd; so that unless you have some to make your way through them, they will interrupt your going, and never leave till they have drawn out something for their Advantage. At this time of Shipping they Present the Governor
of Surat,Chap. V. to license them to keep a Mart here, which they make the Europeans pay dearly for: Yet such is their Policy, that without these, neither you nor the Natives themselves shall do any Business,The Banyans pay Money to keep a Mrt. though they are worse Brokers than Jews; if they be not the pawn of them, the Rechabites, that would drink no Wine. These generally are the Poorer sort, and set on by the Richer to Trade with the Sea∣men for the meanest things they bring; and notwithstanding they take them at their own rates, get well enough in exchange of Goods with them. They are the absolute Map of Sordidness, fareing hardly, and professing fairly, to entrap the unwary; enduring servily foul Words, Affronts and Injuries, for a future hope of Gain; ex∣pert in all the studied arts of Thriving and Insinuation; so that, Lying, Dissembling, Cheating, are their Masterpiece: Their whole desire is to have Money pass through their Fingers, to which a great part is sure to stick: For they well understand the constant turning of Cash amounts both to the Credit and Profit of him that is so occupied; which these Banyans are sensible of, otherwise they would not be so industrious to enslave themselves. Having viewed the Tombs by the Sea-side,Travel to Su∣rat. and some more con∣spicuous at the end of the Plain belonging to the English; others seated behind the Dutch Choultry, partly English, partly Dutch: Marks set to avoid, as well the Sylla and Charibdis of Damkin and Mora, two Nurseries for Stews, as to warm them of the Sands coming into the Hole where the Ships ride at Anchor very securely: We in the Company's Coaches Travelled to Surat, Ten Mile, brave Champion ground; but the Coach wherein I was, breaking, we were forced to mount the Indian Hackery, a Two-wheeled Chariot, drawn by swift little Oxen. By Sun-set we entred the Company's Barge, waiting to carry us over the River; where saluted us the dreadful Noise of the Moors Drums and Trumpets, it being custo∣mary for them to sound at the Castle every Three hours; but chiefly at Sun-rise and Sun-set: I could think of nothing but the last Trump; so that I could persuade my self there was little Musick in it; but they say Time will bring it to be agreeable to the Ears. On the other side the River, other Four wheeled Coaches expected us, and the Moors let us pass the Custom-house without Examination, having Women among us; which was no ordinary point of Civility, they otherwise being strict Examiners, unless the President cross the River, when they forbear also. The Coach where the Women were,The Coaches and Guards. was covered with Cheeks, a sort of hanging Curtain, made with Bents variously Coloured with Lacker, and Chequered with Packthred so artificially, that you may see all without, and your self within unperceived: Ours was open, and guarded by such a Troop as went to apprehend our Saviour, dressed after the same manner we find them on old Landskips, and led by the same Phanatick Lights we see there Painted. Our Reception at the English House was Courteous and Welcome, for the Heat of the Day had tired us. The House the English live in at Surat,The English Factory. is partly the King's Gift, partly hired; Built of Stone and excellent Timber, with good Car∣ving,
without Representations; very strong, for that each Floor is Half a Yard thick at least, of the best plastered Cement, which is very weighty. It is contrived after the Moor's Buildings, with up∣per and lower Galleries, or Terras-walks; a neat Oratory, a con∣venient open Place for Meals. The President has spacious Lodgings, noble Rooms for Counsel and Entertainment, pleasant Tanks, Yards, and an Hummum to Wash in; but no Gardens in the City, or very few, though without they have many, like Wildernesses, overspread with Trees. The English had a neat one, but Seva Gi's coming, destroyed it: It is known, as the other Factories are, by their seve∣ral Flags flying. Here they live (in Shipping-time) in a continual hurly-burly,Full of Noise. the Banyans presenting themselves from the hour of Ten till Noon; and then Afternoon at Four till Night, as if it were an Exchange in every Row; below stairs, the Packers and Warehouse-keepers, to∣gether with Merchants bringing and receiving Musters, make a meer Billinsgate; for if you make not a Noise, they hardly think you intent on that you are doing. Among the English,The Four Chief Offices. the Business is distributed into four Offices; the Accomptant, who is next in Dignity to the President, the general Accompts of all India, as well as this place, passing through his hands; he is Quasi Treasurer, signing all things, though the Broker keep the Cash. Next him is the Warehouse-keeper, who Registers all Europe Goods Vended, and receives all Eastern Commo∣dities Bought; under him is the Purser Marine, who gives Account of all Goods Exported and Imported, pays Seamen their Wages, pro∣vides Waggons and Porters, looks after Tackling for Ships, and Ships Stores. Last of all is the Secretary, who models all Consul∣tations, writes all Letters, carries them to the President and Council to be perused and signed; keeps the Company's Seal, which is affixed to all Passes and Commissions; records all Transacti∣ons, and sends Copies of them to the Company; though none of these, without the President's Approbation, can act or do any thing. The Affairs of India are solely under his Regulation; from him issue out all Orders, by him all Preferment is disposed; by which means the Council are biassed by his Arbitrament. The whole Mass of the Company's Servants may be compre∣hended in these Classes,The Compa∣ny's Servants. and their Sa∣laries. viz. Merchants, Factors, and Writers; some Blewcoat Boys also have been entertained under Notion of Apprentices for seven Years, which being expired, if they can get Security, they are capable of Employments. The Writers are obliged to serve Five years for 10 l. per Ann. giving in Bond of 500 l. for good Behaviour, all which time they serve under some of the fore∣mentioned Offices: After which they commence Factors, and rise to Preferment and Trust, according to Seniority or Favour, and therefore have a 1000 l. Bond exacted from them, and have their Salary augmented to 20 l. per Ann. for Three Years, then entring into new Indentures, are made Senior Factors; and lastly, Mer∣chants after Three Years more; out of whom are chose Chiefs of Factories, as Places fall, and are allowed 40 l. per Ann. during their
stay in the Company's service, besides Lodgings and Victuals at the Company's Charges. These in their several Seigniories behave themselves after the Fun∣damentals of Surat,The under Factories mo∣delled by this. and in their respective Factories live in the like Grandeur; from whence they rise successively to be of the Council in Surat, which is the great Council; and if the President do not contradict, are Sworn, and take their place accordingly, which consists of about Five in Number, besides the President, to be constantly Re∣sident. As for the Presidency,The Presiden∣cy. though the Company interpose a deserving Man, yet they keep that Power to themselves, none assuming that Dignity till confirmed by them: His Salary from the Company is 500 l. a Year; half paid here, the other half reserved to be received at home, in case of misdemeanor to make satisfaction; beside a Bond of 5000 l. Sterling of good Securities. The Accountant has 72 l. per Annum, Fifty Pound paid here, the other at home: All the rest are half paid here, half at home, ex∣cept the Writers, who have all paid here. Out of the Council are elected the Deputy-Governor of Bombaim,The advan∣tage of being at the Coun∣cil. and Agent of Persia; the first a Place of great Trust, the other of Profit; though, by the appointment from the Company, the second of India claims Bombaim, and the Secretary of Surat the Agency of Persia, which is connived at, and made subject to the Will of the President, by the Interest of those whose Lot they are; chusing ra∣ther to reside here, where Consignments compensate those Emolu∣ments; so that none of the Council, if noted in England, but makes considerably by his Place, after the rate of Five in the Hundred, Commission; and this is the Jacob's Ladder by which they ascend. It would be too mean to descend to indirect ways,The Baseness of the Banyans. which are chief∣ly managed by the Banyans, the fittest Tools for any deceitful Under∣taking; out of whom are made Broakers for the Company, and private Persons, who are allowed Two per Cent. on all Bargains, be∣sides what they squeeze secretly out of the price of things bought; which cannot be well understood for want of knowledge in their Lan∣guage; which Ignorance is safer, than to hazard being poysoned for prying too nearly into their Actions: Though the Company, to encourage Young men in their Service, maintain a Master to learn them to Write and Read the Language, and an Annuity to be annex∣ed when they gain a perfection therein, which few attempt, and fewer attain. To this Factory belongs Twenty Persons in number,Number of Persons in the Factory. reckoning Swally Marine into the Account; a Minister for Divine Service, a Chirurgion, and when the President is here, a Guard of English Sol∣diers, consisting of a double File led by a Serjeant. The present Deputy has only Forty Moor-men, and a Flag-man car∣rying St. George his Colours Swallow-tailed in Silk, fastned to a Silver Partisan; with a small Attendance of Horse with Silver Bridles, and Furniture for the Gentlemen of the House, and Coaches for Ladies and Council. The President besides these has a Noise of Trumpets,State of the President. and is car∣ried himself in a Palenkeen, an Horse of State led before him, a Mir∣chal
(a Fan of Ostriches Feathers) to keep off the Sun, as the Om∣brahs or Great Men have, none but the Emperor have a Sumbrero among the Moguls: Besides these, every one according to his Quality has his Menial Servants to wait on him in his Chamber, and follow him out. The Presidency of Surat is esteemed Superior to all in India,All Places in India subject to the Presi∣dency, with their Com∣modities. the Agency of Bantam being not long since subordinate to it, but since made independent; tho the South Sea Trade is still maintained from hence to Bantam with such Cloath as is vendible there, from thence with Dollars to China for Sugar, Tea, Porcelane, Laccared Ware, Quicksilver, Tuthinag and Copper; which with Cowreys, little Sea Shels, come from Siam and the Phillipine Islands; Gold and Ele∣phants Teeth from Sumatra, in exchange of Corn. From Persia, which is still under the Presidency, come Druggs and Carmania Wool; from Moco, Cohor, or Coffee. The Inland Factories subject to it, are Amidavad, whence is provided Silks, as Atlases wrought with Gold; Agra, where they fetch Indico, Chuperly, Course Cloath, Siring Chints, Broach Baftas, broad and Narrow; Dimities, and other fine Calicuts: Along the Coasts are Bombaim, Rajapore for Salloos; Carnear for Dun∣garees, and the weightiest Pepper: Calicut for Spice, Ambergreez, Granats, Opium, with Salt Peter, and no Cloath, though it give the name of Calicut to all in India, it being the first Port from whence they were known to be brought into Europe: All which, after the Europe Ships have unladen at Surat, they go down to fetch; and bring up time enough before the Caphalas out of the Country come in with their Wares. The Places about Surat afford variety of Calicuts,The Invest∣ment set on foot in the Rains. but not such vast quantities as are yearly exported, and moreover not so cheap; which is the reason at every place the Factors are sent to oversee the Wea∣vers, buying up the Cotton-yarn to employ them all the Rains, when they set on foot their Investments, that they may be ready against the Season for the Ships: Or else the Chief Broaker imploys Banvans in their steads, who is responsible for their Fidelity. On these Wheels moves the Traffick of the East,This Trade managed by a Company better than Free Traders. and has succeeded better than any Corporation preceeding, or open Trade licensed in the time of Oliver Cromwell; though how much more to the be∣nefit of England than a Free Commerce, may be guessed by their already being over-stocked with Europe Merchandise, which lowers the Price. What then would a Glut do, which certainly must fol∣low, but debase them more, and enhance these? But lest the New Company should be exclaimed against as too greedy Monopolizers,Their Free∣men greater Slaves than their Servants. they permit Free Traders on their Island Bombaim; when, to speak truth, they are in a far worse Condition than their Servants; being tied up without hopes of raising them∣selves: So that in earnest they find out that to be but a Trick. However, to confess on the Company's behalf,The Charges of the English Company not so great as the Hollanders. the Trade (I mean on this Coast) for some years lately passed has hardly ballanced Expences. They employing yearly Forty Sail of stout Ships to and from all Parts where they trade, out and home; Manning and main∣taining their Island Bombaim, Fort St. George, and St. Helens; be∣sides
large Sums expended to bear out the Port of their Factors; which notwithstanding by impartial Computation has been found in∣ferior to the Costs of the Hollanders, and therefore more to the pro∣fit of the English East-India Company, than theirs, in the few Years they have adventured; so that I should mightily blame them, should they prove ungrateful to His Majesty, who by his gracious Favour has united them in a Society, whereby they are Competitors, for Riches (though not Strength) with the Noted'st Company in the Universe. This was granted presently after the Happy Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign,Their Charter put in force. when Order began to dawn, and dispel the dark Chaos of Popular Community: Then was sent out a President, to put their Charter in Force, and establish a Graduation among their Servants, which before was not observed; only for Orders sake, they did nominate an Agent; the rest being independent, made no distinction. When as now, after a better Model, they commence according to their standing, and are under a Collegiate manner of Restraint. The last Agent was Agent Rivinton,The Course of the Presidents. who was abolished by the Company's sending out President Wych, who lived not much more than two years: President Andrews took his place; and he resigning, Sir George Oxendine held it till his Death; in whose time Seva Gi plunder'd Surat; but he defended himself and the Merchants so bravely, that he had a Collat or Serpaw, a Robe of Honour rom Head to Foot offered him from the Great Mogul, with an Abatement of Customs to Two and an half per Cent. granted to the Company: For which his Masters, as a Token of the high Sense they had of his Valour, presented him a Medal of Gold, with this Device: Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri. After whose Decease, the Honourable Gerald Aungier took the Chair, and encounter'd that bold Mountaineer a second time, with as great Applause; when the Governor of the Town and Province durst neither of them shew their Heads: Fluctum enim totius Barbariae ferre urbs ua non poterat. The Enemies by the help of an Europe Engineer had sprung a Mine to blow up the Castle;The English defend them∣selves with Honour a∣gainst Seva Gi a second time. The Power of the President. but being discovered, were repulsed; for though he had set Fire to the rest of the City, they retained the Castle, and the English their House. The Extent of the Presidency is larger in its Missions than Resi∣dency; in which Limits may be reckoned an hundred Company's Servants continually in the Country; besides the Annual Advenues of Ships, which during their Stay are all under the same Command: Therefore what Irregularities are committed against only the Presi∣dency or Company, in case of Non-Submission, the Persons offend∣ing are to be sent home, and dismissed their Employments for Re∣fractoriness; but if an higher Court lay hold of them in case of
Murder or any Capital Crime, then they are to be sent to Bombaim, there to have a Legal Trial, according to the Laws of England, as the President is created Governor of his Majesty's Island. The ill managing of which Penalties formerly,The ill success of the first Ad∣venturers im∣puted to want of Govern∣ment, and War with Por∣tugal. or the Invalidity to inflict them, may be the true Cause of the Unprosperousness of the Ancient Undertakers; who had this Inconveniency still attend∣ing, to wit, the incorrigible stubborness of their own Men, after they had overcome all other Difficulties, occasioned by the Grant of the East to the Portugal, and West-Indies to the Spaniard. Nevertheless this Fairy Gift was the Ground of a long and tedious Quarrel in each of the World's Ends; so that our Ships encountring with their Carracks, seldom used to part without the loss of one or both. Nay, the long-liv'd People yet at Swalley, remember a notable Skirmish betwixt the English and Portugals there, wherein they were neatly intrapp'd; an Ambuscado of ours falling upon them behind in such sort, that they were compelled between them and the Ships in the Road, to resign most of their Lives; and gave by their Falla me∣morable Name to a Point they yet call Bloody Point, for this very reason. But since these Sores are fortunately bound up in that Con∣jugal Tye betwixt our Sacred King and the Sister of Portugal, laying all foul Words and Blows aside, let us see how the Affairs stand be∣twixt them and the Dutch, who followed our Steps, and got in at the Breach we made. They made them more Work, not only beat∣ing them out of their South-Sea Trade, but possessed themselves of all their Treasures of Spice, and have ever since kept them, with all their Strong-holds, as far as Goa; they only enjoying the Gold Trade of Mosambique undisturbed; the Japanners having banished both their Commerce and Religion. Wherefore our Ships almost alone,The Compa∣ny enrich this Port. were it not for a little the French of late, lade Calicuts for Europe: The Dutch have a Factory here, that vend the Spices they bring from Batavia, and invest part of the Money in course Cloath, to be disposed among their Planters, or sold to the Malayans, and send the rest back in Rupees: So that we singly have the Credit of the Port, and are of most advantage to the Inhabitants, and fill the Custom-House with the substantialest In∣comes. But not to defraud the French of their just Commendations, whose Factory is better stor'd with Monsieurs than with Cash, they live well, borrow Money, and make a Shew: Here are French Capuchins, who have a Convent, and live in Esteem. And here I might conclude,The Diamond Trade better in the hands of the Com∣pany's Ser∣vants than in theirs. did not the Diamond Trade and other Jewels interpose; which I could wish for the Company's sake might never be struck out of their Indulgence allowed to their Servants: For it will never amount to Advantage in their hands, because the Jews, who are the chief Chapmen in England will blow upon them, unless they come to their Prices, when more than enough is offered them. But in particular hands the Case is otherwise, every one snatching at a Prize, which none is sensible of, but the private Buyer; but when they are publickly Invoiced, it will be at their own Wills to make their Bargains. Withal, in the Company's Servants hands, it not only keeps them Honest, but they grow Rich without wronging
the Company: Whereas should they retract this, not only the Jews would find others to furnish them, as the French and Dutch, with their Encomiendums; but other Monied Gentlemen in England might be tempted to set up for Interloping, who know not how bet∣ter to dispose of their Monies on any Bank, than by adventuring Large Sums, that do now to my knowledge return them in a Year and a half's time from 50 l. to 70 l. per Cent. advance, and the Factors good Gainers too; and all this while no Prejudice done either to Freight or the Company's Trade; which if they will not believe, let them experiment to their own Cost. Nor can I say more on this Sub∣ject, than both French and Dutch Jewellers coming over Land do un∣derstand, who have made good Purchase by buying Jewels here, and carrying them into Europe to be Cut and Set, and returning sell them here to the Ombrahs, among whom were Monsieur Tavernier, and now Monsieur Rezin, and Monsieur Jordan. Thus much may serve for this Year; by the next I may prepare a farther Account, if I live; for so long I will be Yours, J. F. From Surat, Jan. 15. 1674-75.
A DESCRIPTION OF SURAT, AND Journy into DUCCAN. LETTER III. CHAP. I. Animadversions on the City and People of Surat in the East-Indies. SIR, GOING out to see the City of Surat,Chap. I. I passed without any Incivility,The Rudeness of the Devotes, the better because I understood not what they said; for though we meet not with Boys so rude as in England, to run after Strangers, yet here are a sort of bold, lusty, and most an end, drunken Beggars, of the Musslemen Cast, that if they see a Christian in good Clothes, Mounted on a stately Horse, with rich Trappings, are presently upon their Puncti∣lio's with God Almighty, and interrogate him, Why he suffers him to go a Foot, and in Rags, and this Coffery (Unbeliever) to vaunt it thus? And are hardly restrained from running a Muck (which is to kill whoever they meet, till they be slain themselves) especially if they have been at Hodge, a Pilgrimage to Mecca, and thence to Juddah, where is Mahomet's Tomb; these commonly, like evil Spi∣rits, have their Habitations among the Tombs: Nor can we com∣plain only of this Libertinism, for the Rich Moormen themselves are persecuted by these Rascals. As for the rest,And Seamen. they are very respectful, unless the Seamen or Soldiers get Drunk, either with Toddy, or Bang (a pleasant intoxi∣cating Seed, mixed with Milk) then are they Monarchs, and it is
Madness to oppose them;Letter III. but leave them to themselves, and they will vent that Fury, by breathing a Vein or two with their own Swords, sometimes slashing themselves most Barbarously. The Town has very many noble lofty Houses of the Moor-Mer∣chants,The Build∣ings. flat at top, and Terassed with Plaster. There is a Parsy, Broker to the King of Bantam, has turned the outside of his Pockets on a sumptuous House, a spacious Fabrick, but ill contrived, as are many of the Banians. They, for the most part, affect not stately Buildings, living in humble Cells or Sheds. Glass is dear, and scarcely purchaseable (unless by way of Stambole, or Constantinople, from the Venetians, from whom they have some Panes of Painted Glass in Sash Windows) therefore their Windows, except some few of the highest Note, are usually folding Doors, skreened with Cheeks, or Latises, Carved in Wood, or Ising-glass, or more com∣monly Oister-shells. The greatest Commodity here is Air, which is to be admired in the Rich Banyans, how they stew themselves out of a penurious humour, crowding Three or Four Families together into an Hovel, with Goats, Cows, and Calves, all Chamber-fel∣lows, that they are almost poysoned with Vermin and Nastiness; but surely they take delight in it, for they will fresh and fasting be∣sprinkle themselves with the Stale of a Cow, as you behold a good Christian with Holy-water, or a Moorman slabber his Beard with Rose-water: Nay more, they use it as a Potion, or Philter, and bid the Devil do his worst after it; so stupid, that notwithstanding Chints, Fleas, and Muskeeto's, torment them every Minute, dare not presume to scratch where it itches, lest some Relation should be untenanted its miserable abode. The Habits and Customs of this place are reconcilable with them in the Kingdom of Gulconda,The Heathen Rites more suppressed here than in Gulconda. only the Moguls being more absolute, and of a more Puritanical Sect than the Chia's; the Heathens are suppressed in respect of their Barbarous Rites, and reduced to a more civil Garb, being more decently Clothed. The Moguls,Moguls and Chia's dis∣agree. who are Lords here, differ from them of Gulconda in point of their Caliph's Succession, he first maintaining the Sect of the Arabs, the others of the Suffean, or Persian. They have Four Expositors of the Law,Sects of the Moguls. to whom they give Cre∣dit in matter of Ceremonies, viz. Hanoffi. Shoffi. Hamaleech. Maluche. Their great scruple is about Eating together among all sorts of these Eastern Nations. All Musselmen (true Believers) as they call themselves of this Persuasion, Communicate in that point; only some Punctilio's in respect of Marriage remain yet undecided; as for an Hanoffi to offer his Daughter to a Shoffi, is a great shame; but if the other request it first, he may comply without derogation.
They are distinguished, some according to the Consanguinity they claim with Mahomet; as a Siad is a Kin to that Imposture, and therefore only assumes to himself a Green Vest and Puckery (or Turbat) none other being permitted to wear them. A Shiek is a Cousin too, at a distance, into which Relation they admit all new made Proselytes. Meer is somewhat Allied also, and Mussanne. The rest are adopted under the Name of the Province or Kingdom they are Born in, as Mogul the Race of the Tartars, and are esteemed, as the Name imports, White Men; Patan, Duccan; or Schisms they have made, as Bilhim, Jemottee, and the lowest of all is Borrah. These Eat highly of all Flesh Dumpoked,Their Diet. which is Baked with Spice in Butter; Pullow, a Stew of Rice and Butter, with Flesh, Fowl, or Fish; Fruits, Achars, or Pickles, and Sweatmeats: If they invite a Christian, they order Dishes apart, and between Meals Entertain with Coho, Tobacco, Pawn, which makes a fragrant Breath, and gives a rare Vermilion to the Lips; and as a great Compliment drown you with Rosewater, Senting themselves with Essence of Sandal and Oranges, very Costly, and exquisitely Ex∣tracted. They drink no Wine Publickly, but Privately will be good Fellows, not content with such little Glasses as we drink out of, nor Claret or Rhenish (which they call Vinegar) but Sack and Brandy out of the Bottle they will Tipple, till they are well warmed. At the First entrance into their Houses,Way of En∣tertainment. for the greater Respect, they meet at the Portal, and usher Strangers to the place of Enter∣tainment; where, out of common Courtesy, as well as Religion, (when they enter an Holy Place) they pull off their Slippers, and after the usual Salams, seat themselves in Choultries, open to some Tank of purling Water; commonly spread with Carpets, or Siturngees, and long round Cushions of Velvet to bolster their Back and Sides, which they use when they ride in their Chariots, which are made to sit Cross-legg'd on, not their Legs hanging down as ours; it be∣ing accounted among them no good breeding to let their Legs or Feet be seen whilst sitting: In their Palenkeens, Coaches, or swing∣ing Cotts, which they affect for Ease, are laid huge Bolsters of state, and Quilts of Cotton to lie at length., their Ceilings and Posts are Hung with Mechlapatan Pintado's, and adorned with other Gallantry. They go rich in Attire,Their Attire is Rich. with a Poniard, or Catarre, at their Girdle; as they are Neat in Apparel, they are Grave in their Carriage. Their Women wear the Breeches,The Women wear Jewels. but in a most servile condition; yet they have their Ornaments of Head, with Bracelets of Pearl, Ear-rings and Nose-rings, to which they hang Jewels, mostly set in Silver, because Gold is Nigess, or Unclean. They are strict observers of the Hours of Prayer,Strict obser∣vers of the Hours of Prayer. when they strip off all their Gorgeous Habiliments to their Shift, and after Washing Hands and Feet, Prostrate themselves during the time of Devotion, when Rising they Salute their Guardian-Angels according to the Opinion of the Stoicks, who allotted every one his Juno and his Genius; having made their Orisons, and Purified themselves, they return to Company as before.
They are great Revellers by Night, in the heat of the Day they sleep and dally. They circumcise the Foreskin of the Male,Great Revel∣lers at Cir∣cumcisions and which is performed by a Barber, at Eight years of Age; with Feasting, and carrying the Boy about in pomp, with Musick and great Expressions of Joy. Of the Girls they make small account, they being instructed within doors how to pray. The Cazy or Judge,Marriages. after the Match is made by the Parents, mar∣ries them; from whence doubtless our Phanaticks borrowed their Custom of Marrying by a Justice of Peace: This is also a time of Solemnity sometimes kept for several Weeks together with Illumina∣tions on their Houses, their Garments tinctured with Saffron, riding triumphantly through the Streets with Trumpets and Kettle Drums; fetching the Bride from her Kindred, and they sending Banquets, Houshold-stuff, and Slaves their Attendants, with a great Train through their Streets, which is all their Dowry: But the Cazy has a Knack beyond those Couplers of Europe, he can loose the Knot when they plead a Divorce. They have four Wives if they can maintain them, and as many other Women as they please; she that bears the first Son is reckoned the Chief. At their Labours they seldom call Midwives,Quick in La∣bour. being pretty quick that way, though there are not a few live well by that Profession; known by Tufts of Silk on their Shooes or Slippers, all other Wo∣men wearing them plain: At the end of their Quarentine, which is Forty days, after the Old Law, they enter the Hummums to Purify; and the Child, without much Ceremony, is named by the Pa∣rents. At Funerals,Great Lamen∣tation when any dye. the Mullahs or Priests, make Orations or Sermons, after a Lesson read out of the Alchoran, and lay them North and South, as we do East and West, when they are Inhumed, expecting from that Quarter the appearance of their Prophet. Upon the death of any, in the hearing of the Outcry, which is great among the Women, beating their Breasts, and crying aloud, they neither eat, nor shift their Cloaths, till the Person be interred; the Relations mourn by keeping on dirty Cloaths, and a neglect of their Apparel; neither washing nor shaving themselves: It is usual to hire People to lament, and the Widow once a Moon go to the Grave with her Ac∣quaintance to repeat the doleful Dirge, after which she bestows Hol∣way, a kind of Sacramental Wafer; and entreats their Prayers for the Soul of the Departed; and for that reason the most store of Graves are in Cross-ways, or High-roads, that the Passengers may be put in mind of that Office: They never Enshrine any in their Moschs, but in the places adjoining them; where they build Tombs, and leave Stipends for Mullahs to offer Petitions up for them. The Duty of the Mallahs,The Duty of their Priests. besides these, is to call from the Stee∣ples of their Maschs every Pore, that is, once in Three hours stop∣ping their Ears with their Fingers: Allah Eckbar, Allah Eckbar, Es∣chadu ela Hale ilallah we Eschedu, Mahmed ewesul: Cuah Fleje ala Selah heie ula Felah, Alla Eckber, Alla Eckber, La Jelah Hallah: i. e. God is Great, I profess, there is no Deity but God, and confess that Mahomet is the Prophet of God. Their Priests say Prayers five times
a-day, and expound the Alcheran once a-week, and that on Friday, which day they are not to lye with their Women, setting it apart for the Service of God. Here is a Xeriff,The Xeriff their High-Priest. who is as it were their Primate, under him the Cazys, or Judges, are the next, then the Inferior Clergy, as the Mullahs, and Scribes, or Teachers of Youth in the Arabick Tongue. With these,Extravagan∣cies of the Fakiers or Ho∣ly Men. by the favour of the present Mogul, who lived long in that Order, till he came to the Throne, must be numbred the Fakiers or Holy Men, abstracted from the World, and resigned to God, for the Word will bear that Interpretation; on this Pretence are committed sundry Extravagancies, as putting themselves on vo∣luntary Penances. Here is one that has vowed to hang by the Heels, till he get Money enough to build a Mosch to Mahmet, that he may be held a Saint. Another shall travel the Country with an Horn blowed afore him, and an Ox it may be to carry him and his Baggage, besides one to wait on him with a Peacock's Tail; whilst he rattles a great Iron Chain ettered to his Foot, as big as those Ele∣phants are Foot-locked with, some two yards in length; every Link thicker than a Man's Thumb, and a Palm in length; his shaking this speaks his Necessity, which the poor Gentiles dare not deny to relieve; for if they do, he accuses them to the Cazy, who desires no better opportunity to fleece them: For they will no stick to swear they blasphemed Mahomet, for which there is no evasion but to de∣posit, or be cut, and made a Moor. Most of these are Vagabonds,They make every place their home, and all their own. and are the Pest of the Nation they live in; some of them live in Gardens and retired Places in the Fields, in the same manner as the Seers of old, and the Children of the Pro∣phets did: Their Habit is the main thing that signalizes them more than their Virtue; they profess Poverty, but make all things their own where they come; all the heat of the Day they idle it under some shady Tree, at night they come in Troops, armed with a great Pole, a Mirchal or Peacock's Tail, and a Wallet; more like Plun∣derers than Beggers; they go into the Market, or to the Shop∣keepers, and force an Alms, none of them returning without his share: Some of them pass the bounds of a modest Request, and bawl out in the open Streets for an Hundred Rupees, and nothing less will satisfy these. They are cloathed with a ragged Mantle,How clad: which serves them also for a Matrass, for which purpose some have Lyons, Tygres or Leo∣pards Skins to lay under them: The Civilest of them wear Flesh-co∣loured Vests, somewhat like our Brick-makers Frocks, and almost of that Colour. The Merchants, as their Adventures return, are bountiful towards them, by which means some of them thrive upon it. These Field Conventiclers at the hours of Devotion beat a Drum,They are be∣come formi∣dable. from them called the Fakiers Drum; here are of these Strolers about this City enough to make an Army, that they are almost become for∣midable to the Citizens; nor is the Governour powerful enough to correct their Insolencies. For lately setting on a Nobleman of the Moors, when his Kindred came to demand Justice, they unanimously
rose in defence of the Aggressor, and rescued him from his deserved Punishment.Letter II. For all the Governor comes to his Seat attended every Morning with 300 Foot with Fire-Arms,The Governor not able to quell them. Three Elephants in their Cloathing (which is here also a principal Mark of the Greatness of these Men in place, the more Elephants they keep, they are looked on as more Honourable) Forty Horses mounted, Four and twenty Banners of State; besides a large Retinue of the Cazy's, who is always present to assist him in Law Points. Moreover he has Loud Trumpets made as big, and like our Stentoro Phonica, or speaking Trumpet, with Thundring Kettle-Drums; yet neither the Formality of this Ap∣pearance, nor regard due to his Office, is terrible enough to prevail with these to submit to resign the Caitiff, and hardly is his whole Force able to keep them from bare-faced Rebellion. But though these Outlaws (for as such they ought to be look'd on,The Villany of the Gover∣nor's Servants had a Tragi∣cal Event. while they disown all Subjection) behave themselves thus, the poor Inhabitants that work for their Bread, are under severer Re∣straints; for the Governor's Servants being upheld by as uncon∣trouled Licentiousness, on pretence of pressing the Craftsmen from their daily Labour into the Governor's Service, extort continued Fees from them, or else they are sure to be set on work, without any thing for their Pains: Which was but even now made a Publick Grievance, by the Resistance of a sturdy Patan, (who is sprung from a Warlike People, of whom it is said, They never draw their Swords, but Blood must follow): And thus it happen'd; The Patan having employ'd a Taylor at his house, one of the Governor's Men seized him for his Master's Service; but the Patan rushing in to re∣lease him, the Soldier ran a young Brother of the Patan's through, naked and unconcerned in the Scuffle; which so enraged the Patan, that forcing the Sword out of the hand of this inhuman Butcher, he kill'd him and two more that came to his Rescue; and going in∣to his house, slew his own Wife, and Sister, and a little Son of his own, that they might not fall a Sacrifice to the Governor's Rage: The wretched Taylor, animated by the Example of the Patan (tho but coolly), had murder'd his Wife had she not fled; but laying hold on his Old Father and Mother, he dispatched them; and bolt∣ing forth into the Street, set upon what Governor's Men he and the Patan could meet: Tidings whereof striking the Governor's Ears, he came with all his Power to beset the exasperated and desperate Men; but though a Thousand Men were up in Arms, and gazing upon the Patan standing with his Sword in his hand at the Entrance of the House, none durst venture to apprehend him; till his Fury abating, and Promises given by a Great Man, of Favour if he resigned; he attending to his Parley, in the mean while two Men with Guns from atop of the House discharged on him, and wounded him and the Taylor mortally, but not before they had carried this false Great Man with some of his Attendants along with them out of the World: So that these Curs set to keep the Sheep, are the first that worry them. Lest therefore all Shew of Justice should be banished, now and then, when they have not Mony to buy it off, or the Emperor be
informed, some Exemplary Punishments are inflicted: Some In∣stances whereof I shall relate. The one was of an Armenian,Some exem∣plary Punish∣ments. Chawbucked through the City for sel∣ling of Wine. The other was of a Goldsmith who had coined Copper Rupees; first they shaved his Head and Beard, as our Country men do Bayliffs when they presume to Arrest in Priviledg'd Places; then putting a Fool's Cap on his Head, they set him on an Ass, with his Face to the Tail, which is led by an Holencore, and one of their Drums is beat before him, which is an Affront of the highest degree; thus they lead him up and down the City, where the Boys and Sol∣diers treat him but scurvily, pelting him all the way he passes: Being brought back to Prison, they cut off his Hand, and let him lye du∣ring the Governor's Pleasure. The Third was of a Pack of Thieves that had infested the Roads a long time, and after some whiles Impri∣sonment the Banyans proffered Money for their Redemption; but the Great Mogul sending an Express, they were led to Execution; They were Fifteen, all of a Gang, who used to lurk under Hedges in nar∣row Lanes, and as they found opportunity, by a Device of a Weight tied to a Cotton Bowstring made of Guts, (with which they tew Cot∣ton) of some length, they used to throw it upon Passengers so, that winding it about their Necks, they pulled them from their Beasts, and dragging them upon the Ground strangled them, and possessed them∣selves of what they had: One of these was an Old Man with his two Sons, the youngest not fourteen. This being their Practice, they were sentenced, according to Lex Talionis, to be hang'd; wherefore being delivered to the Catwal, or Sheriff's Men, they led them two Miles with Ropes about their Necks to some wild Date-Trees: In their way thither they were chearful, and went singing, and smoaking Tobacco, the Banyans giving them Sweetmeats, they being as jolly as if going to a Wedding; and the Young Lad now ready to be tied up, boasted, That though he were not Fourteen Years of Age, he had killed his Fifteen Men; wherefore the Old Man, as he had been a Leader of these Two, was first made an Exam∣ple for his Villany, and then the two Striplings were advanced, as all the rest were, half a Foot from the Ground; and then cutting their Legs off that the Blood might flow from them, they left them miserable Spectacles, hanging till they dropped of their own accord. The following Delinquents being of another kind,Delinquents of another kind. we shall see how they fare: The one was of a Rich Merchant of the Moors kil∣ling his Wife, and a Child he had by her of Three Years old, upon taking her with her Paramour in Adultery; for which Crime a Pe∣cuniary Mulct excused him: The other was a Boy's sticking a So∣domitish Moor to the Heart with his own Catarre, while he attempt∣ed upon his Body; which Fact was so far from being accused as a Fault, that the Boy came off with Commendation; though there is nothing more frequently committed among them, than the unna∣tural Sin of Buggery. There is another thing above all the rest an unpardonable Offence;The Crime of growing rich. for a Banyan or Rich Broker to grow Wealthy without Protection of some Great Person; for it is so mighty a Disquiet to the Governor,
that he can never be at ease till he have seen the bottom of this Mis∣chief; which is always cured by Transfusion of Treasure out of the Banyans into the Governor's Coffers: Which makes them become humble Suiters for the Umbrage of any of Quality, to skreen them from this Violence. The next in the Executive Power is the Catwal,The Shiff. the Governor of the Night, as the other two Great Officers rule the Day; or nearer our Constitution, the Sheriff of the City: For after the Keys are carried to the Governor, it is the Catwals Business with a Guard of near Two hundred Men, to scower the Streets and Brothels of Idle Companions; to take an account of all People late out, to discover Fires and House-breakers, and to carry all lewd Persons to Prison, which is solely committed to his Charge: So that all Night long he is heard by his Drums and Trumpets, shouting and hallowing of his Crew in their Perambulation through all Parts of the City; with Lights and Flam∣beaus, with some few of his Companions in Coaches or Palenkeens: Moreover he seises all Debtors, and secures them, and has the care of Punishing and Executing all Offenders. This is a Place of great Trust,The Chief Customer. but neither so Honourable or Pro∣fitable as the Shawbunder's is; who is King of the Port, or Chief Customer, though something abated by the Mogul's too fondly in a Religious Vanity granting Immunity to the Musslemen lately, which is no small detriment. The Custom-house has a good Front, where the Chief Customer appears certain hours to chop, that is, to mark Goods outward∣bound, and clear those received in: Upon any suspicion of default he has a Black-Guard that by a Chawbuck, a great Whip, extorts Con∣fession: There is another hangs up at the daily Waiters, or Meerbar's Choultry, by the Landing-place, as a terror to make them pay Caesar his due; the Punishment, if detected, being only Corporal, not Confiscation of Goods: This Place is filled with Publicans, Waiters and Porters, who are always at the Receipt of Custom, but are a lit∣tle too tardy sometimes in the delivery of Goods, making the Mer∣chant dance attendance, till a right understanding be created be∣twixt the Shawbunder and them, which commonly follows when the Fist is mollified. Over-against the Custom-house is a stately Entrance into the Mint,The Mint. which is a large Town of Offices within it self; hither re∣pair all Shreffs or Bankers, for the proof of Silver, which in this place is the most refined, and purest from allay, in the World; as is also their Gold: Their lowest Coyn is of Copper. Between these two is a crowded Buzzar of all those who come to sell and buy Cloath; being disengaged here,Many Mar∣kets. we pass the High-Streets, with Shops on each side, not like ours in Europe, being more like Pedlers Stalls; we crossed several Buzzars, which yielded sustinence to the many Mouths we encountred. Piercing thorough the City to the Walls which are building to sur∣round it, and a Ditch accompanying it, (though but shallow, yet the Wall is high, and of good well baked Brick) at length we came in sight of the Castle, having a large Pomarium.
They say it has been standing ever since Tamberlane was here; who they give out to be its Founder:The Castle built by Tam∣berlane. It may be so, for it is old, yet bears 30 or 40 stout Pieces of Ordnance, fronts the River, and is Moated by it; to which they pass a Draw bridge, but admit no Stranger: It is Manned by 300 Luscarries or Soldiers, armed with Gun, Sword and Buckler, has a peculiar Governor independent from him of the Town or Province, being as it were confined to it, not presuming, on forfeiture of his Head, on any account to pass out of a Garden by the Bridge, it being his farthest Walk. Up and down the City are Remains of Seva Gi's Fury, the Ruins being not yet repaired; of whom they stand in hourly fear, having their Sores still fresh in their Memory: To prevent whose Rage, they are collecting an Hundred thousand Rupees till their Walls be finished, when we shall see how they will defend them; having 700 Men allotted for that Office, besides Europe Gunners at every Gate, which are Six in number, beside 36 Bastions with half a dozen great Guns apiece: Upon the top they have piled spiked Timber to annoy the Scalers. Every Gate is barbed with Iron Spikes to break the rushing in of the Elephants;The Wall and Gates. these also are under a distinct Command. The Governor of the Town has an Army of 1500 Men in pay,Number of Soldiers. with Matchlocks, Swords and Javelins; Two hundred Horse with Quivers full of Arrows at the Bow of their Saddles, Lances at their Right Stirrup, and Swords of an unweildy bulk, with Bucklers hang∣ing over their Shoulders; their Bows are curiously and strongly made with Horn, and for that reason better in Dry than Wet Weather. Among the many Moschs to and again,Their Moschs. only two are famous with long Spires by the Wall, where is a stately Dwelling for the Xeriff. They have Three other Places for Strangers called Caravan Se∣rawes,Caravans. or Inns, intended by the Donors gratis, but since perverted, and let out to Foreigners. Near the Governor's Stables were Forty Camels housed,Stables. ready for War, and half a dozen Elephants. These Stables are rather Sheds, or Booths of Hair-cloath, to re∣move on occasion, than any Building fixed for that purpose; and were it not for the manner of treating their Horses, not worth the mentioning: They have no Racks, but feed as Nature intended them, from the Ground, if they get Hay; for their Corn, it is usually Ga∣ravance, a sort of Pease which they put into an Hair Bag, and by a String (clapping their Mouths into it) fastned behind their Ears, is kept from the Ground; out of this they have their daily Allowance; beside Butter, Sugar and Jaggaree or Mulasso's made into Past, with the Meal of Garavance, which fattens all their Beasts of War, and makes them slick and fine; they cover them very warm with a kind of Felt or Flock-work, two or three double, and tye them by all their Feet stretched out at length; in which posture they always stand: When they make their Beds, they sift the Dung they make, after it is dried in the Sun, and make a soft lying for them of it; they court them with all the gentleness and kind Speeches imagi∣nable,
seldom or never speaking to, or using them harshly; every Horse has one Man wholly imployed about his Service, and pretends to no other business; so that as good Horses are chargeable to pur∣chase, they are also chargeable in keeping. The Governor about this time taking occasion to quarrel with the Dutch,The Governor quarrels with the Dutch. offering several Abuses both of Body and Purse; the Commo∣dore was resolved no longer to endure it, and therefore had sent for their Fleet, and in the mean time threatned to remove the Factory to Gogo, a Port over-against Swally; which with Diu Point makes Swally Hole: To prevent which, a Decoy was put upon all Fringi's, that we could not go out of the Gates of the City, but by especial Commission from the Governor. CHAP. II. Shews the Tombs, Outwalks, Ceremonies, and Austerities of the Gentiles, with the Ships and River about Surat. HAving obtained Leave of the Governor,The Raspoots take Toll with the Mogul. we went out of the Walls by Broach-Gate (they taking Names from the chief Pla∣ces they lead to), where, as at every Gate, stands a Chocky, or Watch to receive Toll for the Emperor; and which is a shame, a Raspoot also for the Raspoots otherwise they would infest the Villa∣ges adjacent, and drive away the Cattel; for all which it is unsafe to be far out of the Town late at Night, unless well guarded. This way was all strewed with Moor-men's Tombs, and one of especial Note of a Persian Ambassador, who returning from England with Sir Anthony Shirley, is reported to poyson himself here, rather than answer some ill Management of his Office to his Master: Not far from whence, on a small Hill on the left hand of the Road, lies Tom Coriat, our English Fakier (as they name him), together with an Armenian Christian, known by their Graves lying East and West: He was so confident of his Perfection in the Indostan Tongue, that he ventured to play the Orator in it before the Great Mogul. In his re∣turn from him he was killed with Kindness by the English Merchants, which laid his rambling Brains at Rest. From hence we passed over to the Dutch Tombs,Dutch and Ar∣menian tombs. many and hand∣some, most of them Pargetted. Adjoining to which the Armenians have a Garden, where on a Terras (Forty Yards in Length, and Five in Breadth) are reared several Monuments Coffin-Fashion, with a place to burn Incense at the Head, like the Moors, only over it a Cross: One of more Eminency had an Arch over it at the upper-end. Thence we took a Round, though the Inclosures are contiguous, to the English Tombs, short of which the Portugals have a Burial-Place. The Ground the English Dead are inhumed in,The English Burial-Place. is stocked not with so many Tombs as the Dutch; though in one of Sir George Oxendine's it excels the Proudest.
The French have a separate Place to deposit their Dead, overagainst the English, with only one single Tomb, and that a small one. In every place up and down the Fields are Tombs of Musslemen:The French Tomb The Burfta's or Heathen Wanderers. A Mile from the City, buried like Diogenes with their Heels upwards, stand a Row of Sepulchres of the Muttany, or Burfta's Pilgrims, with the Soles of their Feet imprinted on the middle; some under a Foursquare, others Round rising Tombs, by the side of a Tank, on an ascending Mount. A Mile and a half further is Pulparra,Pulparra, an Heathen Se∣minary. a Town separated for the Banyans to exercise their Funeral and Festival Rites. This is a Se∣minary of their Heathen Doctors or Brachmins, many of whom were in the River doing their Devotions, which consists in Washing and Praying. The Elder sate in a Row, where the Men and Women came down together to wash, having Lungies about their Wastes only, which before they put on, they select a Brachmin of their proper Cast to hold their Vest; which they shift so cleaverly, that the quickest Eye can discover nothing more than decent. At their coming up out of the Water they bestow their Largess of Rice or Doll (an Indian Bean) and the Brachmin his Benediction, by impressing a Mark answerable to their Casts on their Forheads; which is the way they live, purely on Benevolence. Here they have Two Pagod remaining,Two Pagods of excellent Loam. but defaced by the Moors: One of them, however, still shews a Crust of Plaster, with Images Antick enough, but of excellent durance and splendour, like Alabaster, made of a white Loam calcined, and then called Arras; which they powder and steep in Water Three or Four Years before it be fit for their purpose; the longer the better. Here are many Monuments of their misled Zeal;The Burning of their Dead. the most dread∣ful to remember, is an extraordinary one erected by the River side, where they Burn their Dead, in Honour of a Woman who Burnt her self with her dead Husband. Several Corps were Flaming in their Fu∣neral Piles; which after the Fire has satisfied its self with, they cast the Ashes up into the Air, and some upon the Water; that every Element may have a share. Some of the Devoutest desire to ex∣pire in this Water, giving in charge to their Relations to lay them up to the Chin in it at the Article of Death. Those whose Zeal transport them no farther than to die at home,They carry them to Pul∣parra. are immediately Washed by the next of Kin, and bound up in a Sheet; as many as go with him, carry him by turns on a Colt-staff; and the rest run almost naked and shaved, crying after him, Ram, Ram, making all the haste they can to Pulparra to Burn him; which Fire is often very costly, being maintain'd with Wood of Aloes; some∣times they expend some Thousands of Rupees. The Relations ex∣clude themselves all Society till the time of Mourning be over; the Women crying, O Si, O Si, beating their Breasts violently, and expostulating the reason of their Departure, as if he had not a kind Wife, loving Children, good Possessions, and the like: In the time of this Mourning they bestow largely to redeem Creatures appointed to Die, to excuse Oxen and Buffola's from Labour, feeding them at their own Charges, besides purchasing Milch Kine, and giving them
to poor People, inviting them to Funeral Feasts, with other Lar∣gesses to the Brachmins. Here are out acted all the boasted Austerities I ever heard of;The Postures and Severities of the Hea∣then Fakiers. I saw a Fakier of the Gentus, whose Nails by neglect were grown as long as my Fingers, some piercing through the Flesh. Another grave Old Man had a Turbat of his own Hair (which they all Covet) Sun-burnt towards the ends, Grey nearer the roots, Plaited like the Polonian Plica, but not so diseased, above Four Yards in Length. Others with their Arms Dislocated so, that the  of the Joints is Inverted, and the head of the Bone lies in the pit or valley of the Arm; in which Case they are defrauded of their Nourishment, and hang as useless Appendices to the Body; that unless relieved by Charity, they are helpless in all Offices to themselves. Others Fixing their Eyes upon Heaven, their Heads hanging over their Shoulders, are uncapable of removing it from the Posture they are in, being accustomed to that uninterrupted Rest, having con∣tracted and stiffned the Tendons of the Muscles and Ligaments of the Neck, that both those belonging to the Gullet, or the motion of the Head, are unserviceable; insomuch that no Aliment, not Li∣quid, can pass, and that too with much difficulty. Others by continual Abstinence bring themselves into a strange Emaciated habit of Body, that they seem only walking Skelitons. All of them go Naked (some plump young lusty Fellows) ex∣cept their Privities, and bedawb themselves over with Ashes; who with their pleited Hair about their Heads, look like so many Maega∣ra's; these wait on the others. The Ancientest of them addict them∣selves to Reading, they live Six or Eight together, as they please; lie upon the Ground or a Matt, some of them in all Seasons abide the open Air. At another time a Gentu Fakier was enjoined for Forty days to en∣dure the Purgatory of five Fires;aunth Augy, or the Pe∣nance of Five Fires. there being a great resort by rea∣son of a Festivity solemnized all that while; when I came early in the Morning (invited by the novelty and incredibility of the thing) he was Seated on a four-square Stage or Altar, with three Ascents, some Two Feet high, and as many Feet square, ready to shew: While he was in a musing posture, other Fakiers (whose Duty it is daily to salute the Sun at his Height, Rising, and Setting, with their Musick of long hollow Canes) blew them for an hour, or Ghong; after which he fell to his Mattins, which he continued till the Sun began to be warm; then rising he Blessed himself with Holy Water, and threw himself along on the lowest square, still muttering to himself on his Knees, he at length, with one Leg bowed upright between his Thighs, rises on the other, telling his Beads (which both Moormen and Gentus wear) which he had in his hands a quarter longer, and stands, like a Goose, unmoved all the time; then cast∣ing himself down, he exercised himself, as Wrastlers do here, very briskly, but guarding the position of his Leg, which he kept so fixed as if it had grown in that nature, as well when he rose as gro∣velled on the ground; acting thus a quarter more, it had the same operation as the Stork's Bill used for a Suppository, for it
brought him to a Stool; he taking his Purifying-pot in his hand, marched on one side, where he tarried not long before he returning took up his Beads he had left; and in this Interim four Fires being kindled (any of them able to roast an Ox) at each Corner of the upper and least Square, he having finished some Fopperies with his Pot, Scaevola-like with his own hands he increased the Flames by ad∣ding combustible Stuff as Incense to it; when removing from his Neck a Collar of great Wooden Beads, he made a Coronet of them for his Head; then bowing his Head in the middle of the Flames, as it were to worship, holding the other Beads in his hands, with his Head encircled between his Arms, his Face opposite to the Sun, which is the fifth Fire, he mounted his Body with his Feet bolt up∣right, and so continued standing on his Head the space of three hours very steddily, that is, from Nine till Twelve; after which he seats himself on his Breech cross-legg'd after their way of sitting, and re∣mains so without either eating or drinking all the rest of the Day, the Fires still nourished, and he sweating (being one of a good Ath∣letick Habit, and of a Middle Age) as if basted in his own Grease. This is imagined to be an Imposture;Whether it be an Imposture, but if it be, it would make a Man disbelieve his own Eyes: Others more rationally impute the Heat from the Fires to be allayed by that overpowering one of the Sun; which I cannot wholly incline to, since we daily when abroad roast our Meat by Fires made in a clear Day without any shelter: But I rather conceive Custom has inured his Body to it; for the very Mountebank Tricks declare it a Practice; and the other I think as feasible as to eat Fire, tread on Hot Irons, (which is here used), or for Cooks to thrust their hands into scalding Water without Injury. Another Devote had made a Vow not to lye down in Sixteen Years,A Devote that had not sat down in six∣teen years. but to keep on his Feet all that while; this came accompa∣nied with two others under the same Oath, the one had passed Five, the other Three Years; all Three of them had their Legs swoln as big as their Bodies, with filthy running Ulcers, exposed to view for the greater Applause: Standing, they leaned on Pillows hung in a String from the Banyan Tree, and had a Pompous Attendance of such ragged Fakiers their Admirers, with Musick, Flags, and Mir∣chals: The Eldest having undergone the compleat Term, to crown all, was intombed in the same standing Posture Nine Days without any sort of Food; and lest any Pretext of that kind might lessen his Undertaking, he caused a Bank of Earth to be heaped on the Mouth of his Cave, whereon was to be sown a certain Grain which ears in Nine Days, which accordingly being done, eared before his being taken thence. I saw him presently after his Resurrection, in great State raised on a Throne under a Canopy, before which was a Fire made in the Pit he had been, where he put his Hands, being anointed with Oyl, untouch'd by the Flames: Which whether this may dis∣cover the Cheat of both this and the other, that such an Unction may be to resist Fire, Naturalists have not agreed in; and therefore I judge this rather a Delusion, I having not been present at this Ex∣periment: But that this is none I am assured, That the Banyans gave him Divine Honours, and saluted him prostrate, offering before him Rice, and throwing Incense into the Fire: He had a Red Trident in
his hand, and is enrolled one of the Heroes or Demi-Gods in their Superstitious Kalender. From this place of Pulparra to Surat, a Row of Trees on each hand shade the way, it being constantly filled with all sorts of people either for Worship or Pleasure. The only thing of Grandeur extant of the Devotion of the Anci∣ent Heathens,A great Tank. is a great Tank without the Walls of Surat, a Mile in Circumference, walled all about with descending Stone Steps: In the middle an High Place of the Heathens: Many sumptuous Mauso∣leums are erected near its Brink, with Aqueducts to convey Water, with which were it filled, the best Ship that swims in the Sea might ride in it: It looks now more like a Circus or Gymnaseum, able enough to contain as many as such Spectacles would delight. In their great Solemnities it is usual for them to set it around, with Lamps to the Number of two or three Lecgues, which is so many Hundred thou∣sand in our Account. The Citizens by the King's Favour have good store of Gardens neighbouring Surat;Gardens. the biggest of all is the Queen's, though some Private Men have neater, where we often go to take the Air, and feast in pleasant Choultries or Summer-Houses, spread after the Moors manner with Carpets, refreshed with various Figures of the Rising Water, out of several Spouts from square Tanks Pargetted. All the time of our durance here Water is sprinkled, to mitigate the Fieriness of the Sun. Here are Grottoes descending also under Ground by huge Arches and Stone Steps shaded by Trees on each hand,Grottoes. till it come to the deep Well at bottom, from whence by Leathern Bags drawn upon Wheels by Oxen, the Water is carried up, and in Gutters streams about the Gardens. In these by the help of a Brachmin skilled in Simples,The Cotton-Tree. I have found the Silk Cotton-tree, distinguished by us from the Vulgar beneficial one, by its being a Tree, the other a Shrub; it is most like a Maple in Leaf and Branch, only the Bark is not furrowed; it brings forth between three Leaves, first a Bud or Button, then a white Flower, last of all Seed about which the Cotton grows, in three distinct Cells an∣swering the three Leaves. As also the Plant of which Bang is made;Bang. it grows as our Hemp, the Juice of whose Seed ground in a Bowl like Mustard-seed, and mixed with any other Liquor, is that they equivocate with their Pro∣phet instead of the Grape; and that which follows agrees to what Mr. Ray notes out of LOB in Ado: Lacustris aqua cui cannabis inta∣buerit tantopere viro nocet, ut epotasit praesentissimo sitientibus veneno; this with Dutry (as has been said) is the inebriating Confection of the Post. Here he discovered to me his beloved Alluh,Alluh. the Bark of a Tree, the present remedy against all manner of Fluxes. Though these People delight much in Gardens,No great Va∣riety of Flow∣ers. yet are they but rude, compared to ours of Europe; they make a noble Entrance, a Banquetting-house in the middle eying the four Quarters of the Gar∣den, beset with Trees like Wildernesses in every Quarter, or else planted with Potatoes, Yawms, Berenjaws, both hot Plants, and their
Coolers, as Pompkins, Cucumbers, Gourds, and such like; they are only divided by Gravelly Walks and Water-courses; not curiously adorned with Flowers; Bismalvas and some Wall-flowers or Stock-Gillyflowers being the height of what they aim at: Only the Culga, so famed for the Silk, in imitation of its Paint, I take it for our Ama∣rillis; and , or the Tree Mallow, which is red as Scarlet in the Morning, and at Noon faints into a pale Colour, and towards the Evening is pure white; some few Lysimachias, which besides their several sorts of Jessamins, is all the choice: Roses would grow here if they would but cultivate them. A Mile from the City grows the humble Sensitive Plant,The Sensible Plant and Ar∣bor de Rais. common in the Fields; Eastward of Surat, two Courses, i. e. a League, we pitched our Tent under a Tree, that besides its Leafs, the Branches bear its own Roots, therefore called by the Portugals, Arbor de Rais: For the Adoration the Banyans pay it, the Banyan Tree (by whom it is held as sacred as the Oak to our Old Druids); who paint it daily, and make Offerings of Rice, and pray to it: It has Leafs like an Ivy, and is the same with that at Johanna, only that was incorporated into one Body, and this by often taking Root is capable of overspread∣ing a whole Field, so that it is said there are of them able to shade an Army of 30000 Horse and Men singly; however it is possible to be so contrived, if it be lookt after, to make a Wood alone of it self. The Hedges and Lanes are chiefly set with two sorts of Bushes,Milk Bushes. called by us Milk-Trees, because of a succulent Juice like Spurge, white, and of the consistency of the best Milk; but if it comes near the Skin or Eyes it is not so benign, according to the Experience of the Famous Verulam, [Nat. Hist. Cent. 7. Exp. 39. Omnem succum lacti si∣milem ex plantis incisis acrem esse.] and my Observation here; for if by chance it stick upon any part of the Body, it frets like an Escaro∣tick; and I have seen an unruly Horse, rushing through it, both blind himself and Rider, both their Heads being swoln to an extraordinary bigness. I believe it to be a kind of Tithymal, quod tenerum lac non secus ac Manna effundit; the first sort of which has broader and jucier Leafs, and has four or five together; not jagged, but somewhat oval, a Finger's length, and half as broad; one only thick Stalk arises from the Root, and several Branches proceed from thence; they are all Green and Tender, springing up a Man's height, full of Prickles as our Carduus, of whose Milk inspissated is made Euphorbium. The other grows up into the Body of a Tree, and is Woody; above which it sends forth several tender smooth Stalks, which sprout out into Boughs seeming almost naked, because its Leafs are small, and come out at its Joints, sometimes singly; it is most like a Privet, very quick of Growth, and each of them make good Fences. The Goats despise it not, feeding, though very cautiously, on the Leafs and Branches of the latter, when the Heats have parched up the Grass and other Plants. Before we leave the pleasant Fields for the dusty stinking Town,Sugar-Canes and Tobacco. Sugar-Canes and Tobacco would deserve our Remark, which are both plentifully thriving here; had not these been already the Subject of other Pens.
The next diverting Prospect must be that of the River; it glides by the Town in swift Tides,The River commodious for their Ships. and at Spring-Tides (which it would always do, were they industrious to keep it in its Banks) it bears Ships of 1000 Tun Burthen up to Surat Walls; but they unlade first, because of the Sands, occasioned by their Sloth. They lye very thick a Mile together, and scattering down to the River's Mouth, reckon∣ing more than an Hundred Sail of good Ships, besides small Vessels: For all which they were beholden to the Poverty of some English Shipwrights, the first of whom received the deserved Reward of his Officiousness (being Scutica dignus) from the Moors, who appre∣hending him stealing Customs, Chawbucked him handsomly. The Dutch never permit the Natives to be taught any Eminent Art whereby they may become their Competitors:The Dutch teach the Na∣tives nothing. Nor is it, I think, bet∣ter Policy to instruct them in any beneficial Science, as that of Na∣vigation, no more than one would an Adversary how to use his Wea∣pons; which these, had they equal Courage to their other Advanta∣ges of Strength and Nature, might easily thereby turn the Points of their Weapons upon us. But for all these great Preparations,Their Navy. as yet they dare not venture out without Europe Passes, or Pilots; though some of their Ships carry 30 or 40 Pieces of Cannon, more for Shew than Service. Be∣sides these Merchant-Men, here are Three or Four Men of War as big as Third Rate Ships: The other are Frigats fit to Row or Sail, made with Prows instead of Beaks, more useful in Rivers and Creeks, than in the Main. The Emperor also has four great Ships in Pay al∣ways, to carry Pilgrims to Mecha on free Cost, and bring them back from Hodge, where they prove a Crew of sanctified Varlets. The Heir of Bantam is now here to take his Passage thither in one of them,The young King of Ban∣tam. with his Retinue, which are some of the Pengrims or Lords of the Country, his Unkle and others, which were about Twenty, with their Wives: He was first at Bombaim, where he was entertain∣ed like a Prince, for the Obligation the Company have to their Trade there, he having been disobedient to the King his Father, and has not yet-shewed any kindness to the English, siding rather with the Dutch Interest to undermine the Old King, and settle them in the Pepper-trade, which afterwards will not be in his Power to redeem out of their hands: Here little notice is taken of him, they all being in miserable poor Habits, and he of little Credit, being a Giddyhead, were it not for the English Captain that brought him, a Confident of the Old King's, who furnishes him with Money but sparingly, he being indiscreet in his Expences. He is of the Java Extraction, short of Stature, broad-fac'd, little Eyes, and less Beard, a mere Boy; the rest wear their Beards like the Chineses, which is compa∣ratively like a Cat's; their Heads shaved, covered only with Skull-Caps of Knit-Work, their Upper-Garments loose like a Frock: When they appear before him, they prostrate themselves along, then rising up with Respect, sit crouching on their Heels: Their Women were covered with dark Blue Sheets. The Old King had retired from the Cares of Government,His Story. and com∣mitted all to this his Son; but the Pengrims soon tired with his exor∣bitant Sway, made Intercession for the Old King's reassuming his Au∣thority;
whereupon this Voyage was framed as an Expedient to set∣tle his Mad Temper,Chap. III. being intrusted to the sober Conduct of the King's Brother. These Vessels that are for this Voyage are huge unshapen things,Their Junks, and and bear both the Name and Model of their old Junks: They return usually very Rich, and are at their Arrival adorned most abundantly with Streamers. Their way of Salutes are with Even, as ours with Odd Guns. The Seamen and Soldiers differ only in a Vowel,Seamen. the one being pronounced with an u, the other with an a; as Luscar is a Soldier; Lascar, a Seaman. The Captain is called Nucquedah, the Boatswain Tindal. CHAP. III. Of their Solemnities, Sports and Pastimes; their Marriages; of the Parseys, their Strength by Land and Sea, their abundant Wealth, and Fitness for Trade. AND now having entertained you thus far, I shall continue to you the Circumstantial or Accidental Shews, together with their Sports and Exercises. The first depends on the New Moon,Their New Moons. when, all Malice apart, the Moors embrace one another, and at the sight thereof make a Jubilee, by firing of Guns, blowing of Trumpets, Feasting and Praying ve∣ry devoutly. The next is the Day of the Week observed for the Great Mogul's Advancement to the Throne; which is not so generally kept, only by the Soldiers and Officers. But that which affects them all,Ramazan o Lent. is at the end of their Ramazan or Lent, which is always the first New Moon in November; which as it is observed with the greatest Strictness, not swallowing their Spittle all the Day of its Continuance, so is it celebrated when it concludes, with the highest Expression of Joy and Solemnity. The Governor goes in Procession,Grandeur of their Gover∣nor and Great Men. and bestows his Largess in his Passage to the Chief Place of Devotion, liberally scattering Rupees as Kings do Medals at their Coronations, waited on by all the Gal∣lants of the Town: His Son first leading a Body of Horse of the Cavalry of the City; himself beginning the first File on the Left∣hand, the place of highest Honour, it was as deep as the Street would admit, observing no Rank: After whom followed the Cazy, with Green Banners, with a Band of Foot of 100 Men; then the Cu∣stomer with his Men and Colours, both carried in Palenkeens; whom followed the Mullahs and Merchants, without any distinction, some in Coaches, others in Palenkeens, with their large Troops of Serv∣tors: Then five Elephants in Armour, with Banners supported by those that were in their Seats, capable of a dozen Sitters; they ma∣nage them by one Rider sitting near his Neck, with an Iron Instru∣ment
a Cubit in length, the Point bended downwards as long as a Finger, ascribed by Livy to the Invention of that famous Leader's Brother Asdrubal, who seeing these Creatures of great Terror to the Enemy, but if taking an heedless Course were as liable to damage Friend as Foe, found out this Remedy; delivering a Graver to their Masters with an Hammer, ordered them to strike it with their main strength on the Juncture where their Head was fastned to their Neck, if they were unruly, whereby the great Bulk fell to the Ground. Magister fabrile scalprum, cum malleo inter aures positum, ipsâ in com∣page quâ jungitur capiti cervix, quanto maximo poterat ictu adigebat, But afterwards they learned by striking on the Vertebra's of the Neck, to rule them; which Custom I see here maintained. After these came a Dozen Leopards on State-Hackeries with their Keepers, who train them up to hunting. At convenient distances the Trumpets sounded, and Camels of War with Patereroes on their Saddles, marched with a Pace laborious to the Guiders, giving them a Dis∣ease not much different from a Gonorrhea. Here nothing was seen but Banners and Streamers, nor heard but Kettle-Drums and Trum∣pets; after which followed the Governor in the middle of a Troop of Soldiers, all in Coats-of Mail and Headpieces, armed at all Points, both themselves and Horses; himself mounted on a little She-Ele∣phant, with all the Trappings and Accoutrements of State. Et ad morem antiquum quo puberes filii & jam in virili togâ, comitabantur tri∣umphantem patrem, quod etiam ex Livio appareat de Paulo loquente. Two or three Striplings (his own Children) rode smiling with him, who were very White respectively; the Governor himself being a Mogul, which is as much as Suffet in Arabic, from whence the Per∣sian Emperor is called Suffee and this, Mogul, as being derived from the same Parent; as also are all those descended from them. In this State he rode to a Place set apart for this Day's Solemnity, out of the Walls, to the Queen's Garden-Gate, before which it stands, where after Prayers he receives the Compliments of the Grandees, and returns to Feast. At this time the Walls of the City, and Towers of the Castle, wanted not their Adornments, being bestuck with bloody Ensigns, and smoking with Guns of Jubilee, as well as tooting with their Trumpets, and beating with their Drums; as the Jews on their Sabbaths, or their solemn Feast days were wont. The New Moon before the New Year (which commences at the Vernal Equinox) is the Moors Aede,The Moors Aede. when the Governor in no less Pomp than before, goes to sacrifice a Ram or He-Goat, in re∣membrance of that offered for Isaac (by them called Ishauh); the like does every one in his own House, that is able to purchase one, and sprinkle their Blood on the sides of their Doors. About this time the Moors solemnize the Exequies of Hosseen Gos∣seen,The Mourn∣ing for Hosseen Gosseen. a time of ten days Mourning for two Unfortunate Champions of theirs, who perished by Thirst in the Deserts, fighting against the Christians: Wherefore every Corner of the Street is supplied with Jars of Water; and they run up and down like Furies in quest of these two Brethren, laying about with Swords, Clubs, and Staves, crying with that earnestness upon their Names, and dancing
in such Antick Dances as resemble the Pyrrhical Saltation. Haec Ce∣lebratio non omnino dissimilis ei generi exerceri solita à juvenibus armatis Lacedemoniae cum Patris Achillis rogum celebraret; that a sober Man could make no other judgment on them, than that they were di∣stracted. This is done through the Streets, where if two Compa∣nies encounter, they seldom part without bloody Noses; which Oc∣casion being given like Esau's Intentions on the Day of his Father's Lamentation, to revenge himself on his Brother Jacob, has been the Cause why the Mogul has restrained it for the prevention of Out∣rages; but yet his Mandate is not so valid to make them forsake it here: After Sun-set they eat, and fall to singing the Psalms of Doud, or David, in the most consonant Tone I have heard. The last Day they prepare a couple of Coffins, and have a Man or two on Horseback all bestuck like our Man in the Almanack, with Arrows; these ride reeling, and ready to drop off their Horses for Faintness, till they come to the River, where they put the Coffins afloat with a loud Cry, and then returning, repeat with great Vene∣ration their Names, and after this trim their Beards, wash and shift their Cloaths, (all this while worn negligently, as Mourners) and re∣turn to their more beastly Vomit of Luxury, than this of more than Manly Fury. This Religious Bigot of an Emperor Auren Zeeb,The Emperor a great Zealot for his Reli∣gion. seeks not to sup∣press it utterly, but to reduce the Celebration, to preserve their Me∣mories by a pious Respect, suitable to the Gravity of the Moors: For, says he, hereby Opportunity is offered to the Cophers (Unbelievers) to think Musslemen favour the Lewd Worship of the Heathens; which is not only a Scandal to the Mahometan Religion, but an En∣couragement to the Enemies thereof to persist in their own, whilst such Licentiousness is connived at in that which should be set as a Pattern for them to imitate: For even at this instant he is on a Project to bring them all over to his Faith, and has already begun by two se∣veral Taxes or Polls, very severe ones, especially upon the Brachmins, making them pay a Gold Rupee an Head, and the inferior Tribes proportionable; which has made some Rajahs revolt, and here they begin to fly to the Portugal Countries, and Bombaim; though should they make a joint Resistance they are a thousand to one more than the Moguls can with an unanimous Contrivance fairly muster. On an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon,How they be∣have them∣selves in E∣clipses. the Moors are in a lamentable Plight, making a great Noise with Pots and Pans, and other noisy Instruments; not omitting their Prayers, fancying them prevalent to deliver them from their Travel. When the Heathens, instructed by their Brachmins, by a better Philosophy, declare to them the Day before the two great Luminaries are obscured by the Interposition of the Moon's, or Earth's Globe, that they may Fast, Wash, and Purify themselves for Twenty four Hours before the Eclipse happens, and all the time of its lasting; after which is past, they feast and bestow their Benevolence freely on the Brachmins, holding them for this their profound Knowledge, in mighty Admiration. And though the Jollity and Pomp of the Heathens is much al∣layed by the Puritanism and unlimited Power of the Moors, inso∣much that they are wholly forbidden to Burn their Wives with the
Husbands; yet must not the Indians be totally denied their Feasts, and chiefly that of their publick Nuptials, which comes in twice a Year; as the Atticks in their  in January and October, so these in the Months Fulgannau and Puxu, in January and March; to enjoy which times of Festivity, the Governor expects large Gratui∣ties, which they collect as every one can afford; All which times they make Processions, and appear, (especially the Children and young Folks) in rich Dresses of Gold and Silver, Mitres on their Heads, and weighty Sashes about their Middles, bedawbed and stained all over with Saffron Colour; the Married Folks riding on Horseback, Palenkeens, and Coaches, splendidly adorned, drawn by Oxen, Goats, and Elks, Painted over with Saffron, their Horns tipped with Silver; Musick, Streamers, and Banners going before them, the Women Singing Epithalamiums, the Men, following, and a great Attendance with Pageants, Mirchals, and Kitsols, giving Pawn and Coco-Nuts frankly, as they pass. The Ceremonies after Washing and Cleansing,Ceremonies in Marriage. conclude by their Sitting Two Hours Tied by the Neck, while the Priest Prays, the Woman being then Manacled with Gold or Silver Shackles about her Wrists and Ankles, a white Sheet being held over them Unvailed, a Coco Nut exchanged to confirm the Bargain, and Corn scattered upon them; all Emblems of the Matrimonial Bands, Chastity and a firm resolution to comply with one anothers Fortunes; and then dismis∣ses them, by sprinkling Water on the Married Couple, that they may Increase and Multiply. The Women are never Married more than once, the Men are under no such Obligation. The first New Moon in October,Dually of the Heathen. is the Banyans Dually, a great Day of Celebration to their Pagan Deities, when they are very kind∣hearted, presenting their Masters with Gifts, as knowing they shall be no Losers, and Entertain one another with mutual Mirth and Banquetting. The next Moon their Women flock to the Sacred Wells;The Women, have a time of Freedom. where, they say, it is not difficult to persuade them to be kind, supposing their Pollutions not to remain after their Washing in these Holy Waters. March begins with a Licentious Week of Sports and Rejoycing,Feast of Flies. wherein they are not wanting for Lascivious Discourse, nor are they to be offended at any Jest or Waggery. And to shew their Benefi∣cence at the beginning of the Rains, they Treat the Ants and Flies with Sweatmeats and Wafers, studiously setting Hony, Syrups, or any thing that may entice them to their own death, out of their way; allowing them Sugar, or any other dried Confects for their Repast, instead of them. They are constant Benefactors to the Dogs,Hospitable to Dogs. which are many, the Bitches littering in the Streets; but avoid touching them, as they would an Holencore, whom if their Garments chance to brush, they hie them home, Shift, and Wash. And now we enter upon the Agonalia,Their Exerci∣ses, or Recre∣ations. first of the Moors: They love to outdo one another in Feats of Activity, as Riding full speed, and to stop with a Jerk, or motion of the Body, their Horses be∣ing well managed; Tilting and Greeding, that is, Casting of
Darts, both for Utility and Recreation; Shooting with Bows and Arrows, which is near at hand, not far off, as we at Rovers; Running on Foot, which belongs to the Pattamars, the only Foot-posts of this Country, who Run so many Courses every Morning, or else Dance so many hours to a Tune called the Patamars Tune, when they labour as much as a Lancashire Man does at Roger of Coverly, or the Taran∣tula of their Hornpipe; these wear Feathers in their Turbats. The Wrestlers Anoint with Oil,Wrestling. and are Naked, only a Belt about their Wastes, in which they weary one another only by pure Strength and Luctation, not by Skill or Circumvention; these two last use Opium to make them perform things beyond their strength; and it is incredible to think how far these will Travel before the vir∣tue of it be worked off. Hunting of Tigers is sometimes a Pastime,Hunting. at others a Tragy-Co∣medy; for besetting a Wood where Tigers lurk, with Men and Hor∣ses, and putting a Set of their loud Musick to strike up in the middle of it; they rouze at the unaccustomed Noize, and rushing forth seize the first in their way, if not Shot or Launced, to prevent them: Wild Bulls and Buffola's are as dangerous, nor is the Boar less fierce than any of them. Antilopes are set upon by Leopards on this wise; they carry the Leo∣pards on Hackeries, both for less suspicion, and to give them the advan∣tage of their Spring; which if they lose, they follow not their Prey, be∣ing for a surprize; wherefore the Hackeries wheel about at a distance, till they come near enough to apprehend them, they feeding fearless of the Hackeries; then with three or four Leaps, after a small Chace, seize them, and easily become their Masters. The Great Men have Persian Greyhounds, which they Cloathe in Cold Weather, and some few Hawks; a Colum may be Hunted with a Greyhound, as we do Bustards, being a great Fowl and long in Rising. Buffola's animated by their Keepers,Buffola's and Rams set to Fight. fight with great fury; their Horns, being reversed, are useless; but they knock Foreheads with a force adequate to such great Engines, till they are all of a gore, and follow their blow with such vigour, that the strength of their Backs exert themselves into their Natural Parts, which they brandish as if stimulated to Venery; the stronger will hardly permit the weaker to go back to return with his force, but pressing on him, endeavours to bear him down; thus foiling one another, they are a long time before they will yield. Persian Rams set together in this manner, are not parted without a bloody Catastrophe, which are kept on purpose for the sport of their Great Men; as likewise are Elephants, who engage at the Will of their Masters. Here are no Gladiators, but at Cudgels they will play as at Back∣sword, till they warm one another. The chief Pleasure of the Gentiles,The Master∣piece of the Banyans. or Banyans, is to Cheat one another, conceiving therein the highest Felicity, though it be Cuckolding, which they are expert at. They will play at Chess, or Tables; but their utmost Fewds are determined by the dint of the Tongue, to scold lustily, and to pull one anothers Puc∣keries,
or Turbats off, being proverbially termed a Banyan Fight. Nevertheless they are implacable till a secret and sure Revenge fall upon their Adversary, either by maliciously plotting against their Life, by clancular Dealings, or Estate, by unlawful and unjust Extor∣tions: Then you shall have them with this Prayer in their Mouths, —Pulchra Laverna Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri; Noctem peccatis & fraudibus adjice nubem. Example is more than Precept,Education of Youth. and the Youth have no other Edu∣cation besides their Parents, more than some mean Pedagogue's, who teaches the Children first their Letters or Cyphers on the Ground, by writing on the Dust with their Fingers, which is their Primer; where when they are perfect, they are allowed a Board plastered over, which with Cotton they wipe out, when full, as we do from Slates or Table-Books; when they arrive to Paper, they are presumed to be their Crafts-masters, and to earn it. The Moors,The sloth of the Moors a whet to the Banyans. who are by Nature slothful, will not take pains; being proud, scorn to be taught; and jealous of the Baseness of Mankind, dare not trust their Children under tuition, for fear of Sodomy; whereby few of their Great Men or Merchants can read, but keep a Scrivan of the Gentues: On which account it is the Banyans make all Bargains, and transact all Money-business; and though you hear, see, and understand them, yet you shall be choused, they looking you in the face; for as a piece of Superstition, they must put their Hands under a Ramerin, or Mantle, when by their Fingers they instruct one another, and by that slight often contradict their Tongues: Such a subtile Generation is this, and so fitly squared a Place is Surat to ex∣ercise their Genius in. In February the Bussorah Ships,All the World brings Trea∣sure to India. and in August the Juddah Fleet from the Red Sea, each of which, beside our Europe Ships, export vast quantities of Indico, Cotton, Cotton-Yarn, and Silks; and vend them to the Caphalay, waiting on them over-land; so that returning, they are forced to ballast their Ships with Dates, Persian and Arabian Drugs; and freight with Horses from each Place: But the main is brought back in Gold, Silver and Pearl, which does in a manner center here: For though it circulates all the World over, yet here it is hoorded, Regis ad exemplum, both by King and People, he having Tanks thereof unsealed for many Ages, and the Gentiles hide it for Eternity. So that though it be not of the growth of this Country, yet the innate Thrift of the Gentiles, and the small occasion of Fo∣reign Expences, and this humour of laying up their Talent in a Nap∣kin, buries the greatest part of the Treasure of the World in India: There being a far greater urgency for Cloathing, than that of Super∣fluity; which is the Spice-Trade of the South Seas, which only pays for what it carries off here, all the rest loading their Beasts without the Money returned in their Sacks Mouths; and for all that the Hollanders return Money from hence, yet it is swallowed up again
by the Trade of the Bay, and a great deal more consumed there for their fine Cloath. This Year the Bussorah Fleet brought the Bassa of that Place hi∣ther,The Bassa of Bussorah. who is now encamped on a pleasant Green by the River's side; the Great Mogul condescending to have the Title of Sanctuary to the Distressed inserted among his other Aiery ones, as King of the World where-ever the Sun shines, being the Inscription on his Rupees in Persian Characters (the Court Langague.) Dergs hau sic casud chubadera moneir Paudshaw Aureng zeeb Allum Geir. For which sake he dispatched Five hundred Horsemen, and Three hundred Camels, to receive the Bassa, his Family and Retinue, ashore; who being Governor in Mesopotamia for the Grand Seignior, grew powerful, and was therefore suspected; which drew the Forces of the Sultan his Master upon him; but knowing the Sea open, he sues to the Mogul for Protection, who promised not only to receive him, but imploy him honourably; and as a Testimony of his sincere In∣tentions, has sent these to attend him to Court. The Trade of Jewellers is no small addition to the Profit of this Town,Their Jew∣ellers may be improved. which I shall not now specify, intending to treat of them apart, both for yours and my own satisfaction, together with a ge∣neral Collection of Coins and Weights, as time and opportunity shall make me better acquainted: In the mean time, telling you what I saw at the House of an Hindu that wrought in Coral, where was to be wondred the Tools he worked with, more than his Art, because we see it surpassed in Europe; but with far more invention of Instru∣ments: Here Hands and Feet being all the Vice, and the other Tools unshapen bits of Iron: From whence I went the same day to a Moor∣man that cuts all sorts of Stones, except Diamonds, with a certain Wheel made of Lacre and Stone ground and incorporated, only to be had at Cochin, and there the Name is known. They cut Diamonds with a Mill turned by Men, the String reach∣ing, in manner of our Cutlers Wheels, to lesser that are in a flat Press, where under Steel-wheels the Diamonds are fastned; and with its own Bort are worn into what Cut the Artist pleases: These are sold most in the Country, they coming short of the Fringies in Fancy; wherefore they are sent rough into Europe, where they are both set and cut to more advantage. A Banyan that seemingly is not worth a Gosbeek (the lowest Coin they have) shall pull out of his Puckery some thousand Pounds∣worth of these for sale; when all the Wariness in the World is re∣quired, and so I dismiss them. This City is very nasty by their want of Privies,The City kept nastily. and their ma∣king every Door a Dunghill; yet never had they any Plague, the Heats evaporating, and the Rains washing this Filth away. The Diseases reign according to the Seasons;The Diseases. the North blowing, Bodies are rendered firm, solid and active by exhausting the Serous Humours, ad Hyp. 17. Aph. Lib. 3. for which cause Dry Weather is
more healthy than Moist, it hastening Digestion, and facilitating Excretion, when no Fevers that are treacherous root themselves in a deep Putrefaction. About the Variable Months they are miserably afflicted with Coughs and Catarrhs, Tumors of the Mouth and Throat, Rheumatisms, and intermitting Fevers; Also Small Pox invades the Youth, as in all India, so here: In the extreme Heats, Cholera Morbus, Inflammations of the Eyes by Dust and the fiery Tem∣per of the Air: In the Rains, Fluxes, Apoplexies, and all Distempers of the Brain, as well as Stomach; to correct which, the Natives eat Hing, a sort of liquid Assa Foetida, whereby they smell odiously. For all Lethargick Fits they use Garlick and Ginger, given in Oyl or Butter. To Cup they use Ventosoes,Remedies out∣ward and in∣ward. without Scarifications. They have good Escaroticks and Vesicatories, made by a certain Nut, the same they chop or mark their Calicuts black with instead of Ink. They apply Cauteries most unmercifully in a Mordisheen, called so by the Portugals, being a Vomiting with a Loosness; the like is done in a Calenture. Physick here is now as in former days, open to all Pretenders; here being no Bars of Authority, or formal Graduation, Examination or Proof of their Proficiency; but every one ventures, and every one suf∣fers; and those that are most skilled, have it by Tradition, or former Ex∣perience descending in their Families; not considering either altera∣tion of Tempers or Seasons, but what succeeded well to one, they apply to all. In Fevers their Method is to prescribe Coolers, till they have ex∣tinguished the Vital Heat; and if the Patients are so robust to con∣quer the Remedies used to quench the Flame of the Acute Disease, yet are they left labouring under Chronical ones, as Dropsy, Jaun∣dice, and Ill Habits, a long while before they recover their Pri∣stine Heat. They are unskill'd in Anatomy, even those of the Moors who fol∣low the Arabians, thinking it unlawful to dissect Human Bodies; whereupon Phlebotomy is not understood, they being ignorant how the Veins lye; but they will worry themselves Martyrs to death by Leeches, clapping on an hundred at once, which they know not how to pull off, till they have filled themselves, and drop of their own accord. Chirurgery is in as bad a plight, Amputation being an horrid thing: Yet I confess it is strange to see, that what Nature will effect on such Bodies, Intemperance has not debauch'd. Pharmacy is in no better condition; Apothecaries here being no more than Perfumers or Druggists, at best; for he that has the bold∣ness to practise, makes up his own Medicines, which are generally such Draughts, that if their own Energy work not, yet the very Weight must force an Operation. They pretend to understand the Pulse, but the Urine they will not look on. I have seen a Barber undertake the Cure of a Bloody Flux, by pretending the Guts were displaced, and laying the Patient on his Back, and gently tickling his Reins, thrust on each side the Abdo∣men
with all his strength; then placing a Pot filled with dried Earth, like that of Samos, upon his Navel, he made it fast by a Ligature; and on some Bodies thus treated he had gained Credit, but this died. Prosper Alpinus mentions something like this among the Egyptians. Here they will submit to Spells and Charms, and the Advice of Old Women. Here is a Brachmin Doctor who has raised a good Fortune; they pretend to no Fees, but make them pay in their Physick; and think it Honour enough if you favour them with the Title of your Phy∣sician only. This Brachmin comes every day,The Country Physician. and feels every Man's Pulse in the Factory, and is often made use of for a Powder for Agues, which works as infallibly as the Peruvian Bark; it is a Preparation of Na∣tural Cinnaber. Midwifry is in esteem among the Rich and Lazy only; the Poorer, while they are labouring or planting, go aside as if to do their Needs, deliver themselves, wash the Child, and lay it in a Clout or Hammock, and return to work again. The Mixture of Casts or Tribes of all India are distinguished by the different Modes of their binding their Turbats;The several Tribes how known. which cannot be found out presently, there being such variety of Observation. Amidst which it is time to return,The English have the Re∣spect of their Ombras. to see what Grace we are in among this divided Multitude: Our Usage by the Pharmaund (or Charter) granted successively from their Emperors, is kind enough, but the better, because our Naval Power curbs them; otherwise they being prone to be imperious, would subjugate us, as they do all others that are harness'd with the Apron-strings of Trade: Suppo∣sing us then to bear the Face of Ministers of State, as well as the sly Visage of Mechanicks, they depose something of their Ferity, and treat with us in a more favourable Stile; giving us the Preference before others here resident, and look on us with the same Aspect as they do on their great Ombrahs. In Town there are many private Merchants that bear a Port equal to our Europe Companies, being only Vockeels or Factors for mo∣ney'd Men up the Country, that drive as great a Trade as the Com∣pany, yet dare not assume that Liberty allowed us: We fortify our Houses, have Bundes or Docks for our Vessels, to which belong Yards for Seamen, Soldiers, and Stores: To that which belongs to the Dutch is a sweet Garden, shor'd up with Timber from the in∣croaching River, with Arbors and Beds after the Europe Mode. Among the Rarities of our own House I saw an Unicorn's Horn,What Rarities in the English House. not that of the Rhinoceros, of which Cups are made and profered for Sale here, and are relied on to discover Poyson, if poured into them. —Quod Reges Indorum protinus aureis Orbibus includunt, & vina liquantia potant, Actum nec morbos tuti sentire feruntur, Nec quae inter mensas occulta hausere venena. As also two Skins of Saboean Asses, highly valued among the Eastern Princes both for their Swiftness and Beautifulness, being streaked
with a dark Grey upon a White Ground, upon the Back direct, in other Parts waving towards their length: As also Pigeons tumbling in the Air, attributed to the Indisposition of their Brain; but to me it appears a voluntary Action, they not falling at all upon it, but after three or four Turns would fly, and repeat it as often as they listed, without any interruption in their Course, and when they seem∣ed to direct themselves to any place, without any Inclination to it, as an Irregularity, but rather out of Affectation; which notwith∣standing cannot be taught any, but only those of this kind; no more than any other besides Carriers, (which were here with blubber'd Noses, and of a Brown Colour) to carry Letters: Others walked on the Ground, with their Breasts bearing out, and the Feathers of their Tails spreading like Turkies, bridling their Heads so that they were even with their Rumps; this also is a peculiar Species, and not Artificial; they propagate their own kind, and are of a pied Colour. From Siam are brought hither little Champore Cocks with ruffed Feet, well armed with Spurs, which have a strutting Gate with them, the truest mettled in the World; they are generally White, with an Eye of Yellow. Here were Milk-White Turtles from Bus∣sorah, Cockatooas and Newries from Bantam, as also a Cassawar that digests Iron. From Amidavad small Birds, who, besides that they are spotted with White and Red no bigger than Measles, the principal Chorister beginning, the rest in Consort, Fifty in a Cage, make an admirable Chorus. And also for Vermin, the strongest huge Rats, as big as our Pigs, which burrow under the Houses, and are bold enough to venture on Poultry, and make them their Prey: A Mongoose is a-kin to a Ferret: Spuirrels delicately streaked White and Black, run about the House, and on top of Terrasses. Musk-Rats of the same Colour, short∣feeted, but a Span in length, their Bodies no thicker than a Mouse; they infest the Houses and Water-Jars with their Scent; from which last all Care is taken to preserve them. Guiana, a Creature like a Cro∣codile, which Robbers use to lay hold on by their Tails when they clamber Houses. For Insects,Venomous Creatures. Centipedes, Scorpions, and vast Spiders; these lye perdue, and often set upon People unawares; for the Venom of the two former, they have Oyl made of each; the first is the worst, and often deadly; the other works off after a burning Fit of Four and twenty hours. Abroad in the Fields and Rivers are poysonous Snakes; and here was lately a Woman, as she went to fetch Water at the River, devoured by an Aligator or Crocodile, though the Brachmins pretend to Charm them that they shall do no Mischief in this their Sacred River; and this was given out to be a Judgment not otherwise to be expiated. And now the Dutch Fleet being arrived at the River's Mouth (after having demolished the City St. Thomas,The Surat Go∣vernor forced to comply with the Dutch. near Fort St. George, the French yielding on Discretion), they restored us the Prisoners taken in the Engagement, having treated them very civilly: And the Governor was forced to go from Surat to Swally (to the Dutch
Commodore, removed thither) to intreat an Agreement; the Cla∣mours of the Merchants being instant, the Bussorah Fleet was in jeopardy, which they threatned to seize; but on his Appearance, and Assurance of Satisfaction, all was salved. Lest therefore this should be judged too mean a Compliance, he paid a Visit with all his Pomp to our Deputy-President, still at Swally, though the Eu∣rope Ships were gone, others from the South-Seas being expected. Thus repassing the River after this Great Man, in order to repair aboard Ship, I beheld whole Droves of all Sexes and Ages coming to wash in the River, which is done twice a day; and the Finest Dames of the Gentues disdained not to carry Water on their heads, with sometimes two or three Earthen Pots over one another for Houshold service; the like do all the Women of the Gentiles. On this side the Water are People of another Off-spring than those we have yet mentioned;The Parseys. these be called Parseys, who were made free Denizens by the Indians before the Moors were Masters, and have continued to Inhabit where they first set Footing, not being known above Forty Miles along the Sea-coast, nor above Twenty Mile Inland. It is likely these upon the overflow of the Scythians, and their Irruption into Persia, were driven from thence as Fugitives to seek fresh Habitations; which, those furnished with Boats from the Persian Gulf, might easily escape thither; where they comply∣ing with some Propositions, as not to Kill any Beasts or living Crea∣tures, and Conform to many of the Gentue Ceremonies, were Enter∣tained and allowed to live among them. Since the Moors have Subdued the Country, they think themselves not obliged by the former Capitulation, they Feeding on both Fish and Flesh; and for that reason were in hopes of exemption from the present Poll, pretending their Law agreeable to the Moors, but that would not free them from the Tax. These drink Wine, and are of the Race of the Ancient Persians. They Worship the Sun,Worship the Sun. and keep at Nunsarry, a Delubrium, where is always a Fire (first kindled by the Sun) kept alive as the Holy Vestal Nuns were wont; they Adore all the Elements, and if at any time they go a Voyage, will not exonerate in the Sea, or on the Water, but have Jarrs on purpose; if their Houses be on fire, they quench them not with Water, rather chusing to load them with Dust or Sand. These Bury not their Dead,They expose their Dead to Ravenous Fowls. but expose them in round Tombs made on purpose, (open on top, and walled high around, in distinct Apar∣titions) to the Vultures and ravenous Fowls to Entomb them; and to that end, in the middle of this Enclosure is a Well for the Filth to drain away; the next of Kin, after the Body is put in, Watch aloof, to know what Part these Birds of Prey lay hold on, and from thence make their report of the future Bliss, or ill State of the Deceased. These are somewhat Whiter,Their manner of Living. and, I think, Nastier than the Gen∣tues; and Live, as they do, all of a Family together; as if the Fa∣ther be Living, then all the Sons that are Married, and Men grown, with their Wives and Children, house it with the Father, and have a Portion of his Stock; if he die, or be absent, the Eldest Brother
has the Respect of the Father shewn, and so successively; they all Rising up at his Appearance, and Sit not till he be Seated. These are rather Husbandmen than Merchants, not caring to stir abroad; they supply the Marine with Carts drawn by Oxen, the Ships with Wood and Water; the latter of which is excellent, drawn out of a Well at old Swally; where, and at others, the Women put me in mind of Jacob's Well, and the Custom of old for them to draw Water, which though here it is fetch'd up by Oxen, yet elsewhere the Women draw in Jarrs, or Earthen Pots. The Moors have it brought on Buffola's Backs, or else on Oxen; which here also they use, as all over India, instead of Pack-horses, their greatest Caphala's consisting of them, Horses being only for War or Pleasure, and the best of them Foreigners, and of great Prices; so that 300 l. is but an easy Rate for a good Persian or Arab. Here are brought up large gallant Milk-White Oxen with Circling Horns,Large Milk-White Oxen. artificially Modelled in Cases, which they Tip with Silver, Gold, or Brass, and make them shine like Jet; putting a Rope through their Nostrils, and an Headstal on them of London Cloath, sur∣rounding their Necks with Collars for Bells, Feeding them delicately as their Horses; and one of these fitted for a Coach, will Sell for 30 or 40 l. The other Oxen are Little, but all have a Bunch on their Neck; and how they become Oxen is on this manner; Their Religion not allowing them to Castrate them, they Bruise their Testicles, not Geld them by Cutting them off when Young; which answers the intention as fully as the other. This kind of re∣straint upon Nature is exercised on no Brutes but these, they never offering to deprive their Horses of their Stones or Tails, which they alway suffer to grow; a Bobtailed Nag, or Gelding, being as rare here, as a Crop-eared Horse, which never was seen. A Buffola is of a Dun Colour,A Buffola. and are all as big as their largest Oxen; they love to wallow in the Mire like an Hog; there are of them Wild, which are very Fierce and Mischievous, Trampling a Man to Death, or Moiling him to Pieces with their Foreheads; their Horns are carelesly turned with Knobs around, being usually so ordered, or rather disordered (for they retain no certain Form) that they lie too much over their Heads to do any harm with them. Their Flesh is reckon'd Hotter and Courser than Beef, which is the most com∣mon Sustinence of the Moors; as their Milk and boiled Butter is of the Gentues; for did they not boil their Butter, it would be Rank, but after it has passed the Fire, they keep it in Duppers the year round: On which Dr. N. G. in his Account of the Rarities of the Royal Society, has sufficiently enlarged. Here in the Marshes are brought up great store of Cattle of all sorts;The Marshes breed Cattle. and though there lie store of Aligators to and again, they are seldome known to Prey either on them or their Young; so that what stir they make of Charming them, is but a pious Fraud of the Brachmins, they being a lazy sort of Amphibious Creature, feeding on Grass as well as Fish, and I question whether ever their Appetite stand towards Flesh. The Mutton here is not much inferior to the Mutton of England, for the Pallat, though as to its Wool, there is no compare. Cows
Butter sometimes will be hard in the Cold Season, and look yellow, but they arrive not to the making of Cheese, unless it be soft Cheese, which pickled, our Seamen keep a good while, as they do their Achars. Here grow Carrots,The Growth of this Place. Turnips, Rhadishes; Cabbage rarely, though Coleworts frequently; Melons of all sorts, and Betes: Wheat as good as the world affords; Rice, Barley, Millet, and Nuchanny; Pease and Beans; Oyl-Trees, and Rape for Lamp Oyl; (only Wax-Candles for the Rich, by reason of the warmth being to be used). Herbs for Salading are Purslain, Sorrel, Lettice, Parsley, Taren∣tine, Mint, and Sog, a sort of Spinach. Here Asparagus flourish, as do Limes, Pomegranates, Geni∣tins; Grapes in abundance; but the Moors suffer no Wine to be made. Fish, Oisters, Soles, and Indian Mackerel, the River yields very good, and the Pools and Lakes store of Wild Fowl; peculiarly Brand-Geese, Colum, and Serass,The Colum∣bin. a Species of the former; in the Cold Weather they shunning the Northern rigid Blasts, come yearly hither from Mount Caucasus; what is worth taking notice of, is their Aspera Arteria, wound up in a Case on both sides their Breast∣bone in manner of a Trumpet, such as our Waits use; when it is single it is a Serass, when double a Colum, making a greater Noise than a Bittern, being heard a great while before they can be seen, flying in Armies in the Air. As we came nearer Swally,Wine and Strumpets set the Soldiers and Seamen together by the Ears. Groves of Brabb-Trees present them∣selves; from whence the Parseys draw Wine a kin to Toddy, which after the Sun is up, contracts an Eagerness with an heady Quality; so that these places are seldom free from Soldiers and Seamen of the Moors, which sometimes meeting with ours, there happen bloody Frays, especially if the Quarrel be about Strumpets, who here ply for their Fares: The like disputes are sometimes among the Euro∣peans themselves, and then they make sport for the Parseys upon the Trees, who have the diversion of the Combatants; as Boxing among the English; Snicker-Sneeing among the Dutch; ripping one anothers Bellies open with short Knives; Duelling with Rapiers among the French; Sword and Dagger among the Portugals. Coming to the Marine,Four Arab Ships. beside the Dutch Fleet and English Ships, were Four Arabs with Red Colours, like Streamers, Riding in the Hole. These are true Rovers both by Sea and Land; they are con∣stantly upon the Plunder with the Portugals, but care not to engage where nothing is to be gotten but Blows, wasting those Places that lie most open on the Sea-coast and Unguarded. These have lately fitted themselves with good stout Ships at Surat, their own Country supplying them with no Materials for Building; the non-payment whereof, according to the Contract with the Go∣vernor, at present has put a stop to their increase that way in Ship∣ping; and has kindled matter for farther alarming the Merchants: For the Governor, for his security, has seised the Imaum's Vockeel, nor intends he to enlarge him till the uttermost Gosbeek be paid.
On this Pretence they begin to interrupt the Merchants on the Seas, seising their Vessels, and furnishing themselves at cheaper Rates. Nor does their late Enterprize over the Portugals make them less formidable; so that if they be not checked by these Knights of Lisboa, they will infect this Ocean, no less than the Moors of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoly, do the Narrow Seas in the Mediterranean, especially the Gulf of Persia, in whose Mouth they are conveniently seated, and villainously inclined; in which it concerns them to omit no Dili∣gence. Having staid here since the close of the Rains,Left Surat and Swally. all the Cold Season, and beginning of the variable Winds, which are sent hither to qualify the Heats before the fall of the Rains (they blowing very high) I left the most frequented Port in India, and the only one on this Coast the Mogul has. It is a Corporation exempt from any Jurisdiction but the Empe∣ror's; though it be but the second City of the Province, and within this last Century, by the concourse of the Europeans, advanced from a Fishing Town to be so great an Empory. Ro Neal, a Mile beyond it on Swally side, was once before it, now abandoned to Seamen and Washermen: The Customers then paid half to the Portugals, who once a-year came with their Provoes and received their Levies; since this is become of more note, it is better looked after by the Mogul, than that was by the Emperor of Cambaia. It has for its Maintainance the Incomes of Thirty six Villages; over which the Governor sometimes presides, sometimes not, being in the Jaggea or Diocess of another; who fail not once a-year to send to reap the Profit, which is received by the Hands of the Desie or Farmer, who squeezes the Countryman, as much as the Governor does the Citizen: Corn being distributed among them for so much Earth as they Till, which at the time of Harvest is not carried home, before the Desie hath taken Three parts, leaving no more for their pains, and to sow the Land again, than One. The Business of the Customs, as we have already said, is ordered by the Chief Customer, who has Chockies in all Inland Parts to re∣ceive Toll, and is responsible to none, only the Emperor. To govern the Province,Mahmud Emir Caun, Son of Emir Jemla, Governor of the Province. Mahmud Emir Caun is entrusted, the Son of Emir Jemla, who established Aurenzeeb in his Throne. His Metropolis is at Amidavad, the Chief City of Guzerat: Who notwithstanding he has vast Forces, Wealth and Territories, is not able to quell the Coolies from pilfring, Seva Gi from plundring, and the Outlawed Raspoots from dispoiling, where-ever they please to descend in Companies from the Mountains, or Troops out of the Desart of Sinda: Though none of these, nor all joined together, can cope with him in a pitched Field, but only by Thievery and Surprize: Wherefore when any Caphala or Treasure passes, they hire Soldiers to guard it, otherwise they are liable to be made a Prey. Were these Difficulties removed, Surat, as if Nature had designed her both by Sea and Land the Seat of Traffick, would have nothing to hinder her from being the compleatest Mistress thereof in the
whole World:Chap. IV. If the Disposition of the People be considered, what Masters they are of this Faculty, of Buying at small, and Vending at great Rates, both Native and Exotick Wares! The sordid Penury of the Banyans that live poorly and meanly, yet worth a King's Exche∣quer; and notwithstanding the Governor often finds occasion to fleece them, yet by the quickness of Merchandise passing thorough this City, they recruit on a suddain. The commodiousness of the River serving to bring Goods in from Europe, Asia, Africa and America; the long continued Current from the Inland parts through the vast Wildernesses of huge Woods and Forests, wafts great Rafts of Timber for Shipping, and Building; and Damar for Pitch, the finest sented Bitumen (if it be not a Gum or Rosin) I ever met with. And if the King's Fleet be but ordinary, considering so great a Monarch and these Advantages, it is because he minds it not; he contenting himself in the enjoyment of the Continent, and styles the Christians Lions of the Sea; saying that God has allotted that Un∣stable Element for their Rule. They have not only Cair-Tarn made of the Cocoe for Cordage, but good Flax and Hemp; and Iron from the Mountains of the South: So that it may be concluded, for the Benefit of an Harbour, for the Dispositions of the Natives, for a convenient Supply (or more truly Abundance) of all things, for a due imployment of them; but above all, for the Commodities Exported, and the Riches Im∣ported, Surat cannot be fellowed in India. CHAP. IV. Brings me with a New Deputy-Governor from Surat to Bom∣baim, and sends me to the Mogul's General at Jeneah. THE Fourth of April 1675. arriving at Bombaim with Mr. Gyf∣ford, he was reinstated Deputy-Governor of that Island; Captain Shaxton in this interim having his Sword demanded from him by the Governor, and had been under Confinement; being bound to answer an Indictment, wherein he was accused of Abet∣ting the Mutinous Soldiers. For whose Trial,Captain Shax∣ton sent home. after a long endeavour to bring him to acknow∣ledgment, was erected a select Court of Judicature, and an Attorny ordered to impeach him, who with some borrowed Rhetorick en∣deavoured to make him appear a Second Catiline; but he cleared himself so handsomely of all Objections (being sick at that time the Stirs were, and having no reference to him, their Complaints being of another nature, as the taking Money for more than could be pas∣sed current again, and other like pretended Exactions) that they had no more to answer, than that it should be referred to the Company; before whom he must personally appear, and therefore was ordered home, but was prevented by Death at the end of his Voyage: Other∣wise
he would have made it plain, Envy had underhand worked, what she durst not attempt boldly on a Man of Honour; and for no other Reason, than that he understood himself as a Soldier, and in that point would be known. By this Man's Misfortune might have been seen the dislike that the Company's Servants bear towards any of equal poise with themselves, and not of that Rank; for thereby they count they are injured, having others put over their heads, as 'tis termed; but if by chance they convince them of their Folly, it becomes a Crime un∣pardonable: The first ground of this Quarrel being upon unnecessary Appendices to the Fort, as Pallisadoes in Mud, so contrived, that they were rather a means to take than defend it, which afterwards were all washed away by the Rains; to these some Despight being added (he being a Man sharp in his Jests, and blunt in Counsel) it never ended, till it proved as fatal as Remus's leaping over his Bro∣ther Romulus his Ditch, cast for a Trench about Old Rome. Few days had been spent afore a Sea-Tortoise was brought to the Fort,A Sea-Tortoise taken. in Length Six Feet, the content of his Hut near two Bushels, reckoning only that part with which his Back is shielded, being an huge Shell of a brown Colour; never to be made transparent as those come from the South-Seas are, nor easily to be crackt by any weight; for Experiment, I and two more got upon it, and the Tortoise un∣concerned carried us: Its Head is loricated with Scales, the Neck reaching as far as the Hut, soft and undefensible; the Fins are four, placed instead of Legs, by which it crawls as well as swims; the Belly is covered with a Breast-plate called the Callapee, soft and whitish in respect of the Back-piece or Callipet; its Tail is short and wreathed like a Serpent's; altogether it is as lovely as a Toad: It sighs like a Woman, and weeps like a Child; being taken and turned on its back, it is shiftless. I caused it to be opened,The Fable of its having three Hearts confuted. and examined its Heart, which (con∣trary to the Opinion of the Vulgar) is but One, they affirming it to be Three, grounded on this Mistake; the Auricles being larger than in other Creatures, equalling almost the Ventricles and whole Body of the Heart, which is bigger in proportion than belongs to such an Animal, being as large as an Ox's; which might be the reason of its Pusilanimity: The Veins and Arteries were filled with Currents of cold black Blood: It participates more of Flesh than Fish, of a vi∣viparous than oviparous Offspring, yet lays imperfect Eggs without a Crust (only covered with a Membrane, being most Yolk) buried by it in the Sands, to receive from the Sun's heat the perfection of their Hatching (as the Eggs of Egypt from Furnaces, or others from Dunghills): It spawns them as Fish do, in huge quantities, as much at one time as will more than fill a Seaman's Bonnet (every one being as big as an Hen's Egg) By them aboard Ship they are or∣dered like buttered Eggs of a Fowl, though nearer akin to a Ser∣pent's, hanging together as those do. For this end they come ashore, and when pursued, cast up with their Claws a Cloud of Sand to blind their Enemies; when overtaken some are so big, four men can hardly turn them.
It is supposed they feed on the Grass or Oaz on Land, or at the bottom of the Ocean; and from the Fable of the Three Hearts, springs the Conceit of its Tripartite Community, of Fish, and Flesh, and Fowl; the outward Covering being Shelly, the inner Meat Carnous, its way of preserving its kind being by Eggs, as the Feathered Fowl do: To me it seems (though the Flesh be highly extolled for the taste and colour of Veal) neither Fish, nor Flesh, nor good Red Herring. It bears the Vogue for altering the Blood;The Flesh re∣storative. wherefore good in Scur∣vies got by bad Air and Diet in long Voyages, and for the Running of the Reins by impure Copulation; for which 'tis used as an un∣doubted Cure, purging by the Genitals an Oily viscous Matter of a Yellow hew, if fed upon constantly for thirty days; restoring the decayed Vigour of the Body, and giving it a grace and lustre as ele∣gant, as Viper Wine does Consumptive Persons, or worn-out Pro∣stitutes. About this time the President put in execution a Project for the advancing the Island Bombaim; wherefore an Envoy was sent to ex∣plore the Passage through Seva Gi's Country into the Confines of Duccan; but returned with a fruitless Account, only making farther work for me. One of the Mogul's Generals over Seventeen thousand Horse, and Three thousand Foot, and Governor of Jeneah (the Chief City of that Kingdom) having occasion for one of my Function, on St. George's Day I was commanded by the Honourable Gerald Aungier, with only Oral Instructions, to embarque on a Bombaim Boat of Twelve Oars and a Steer's-man, waited on by two of the Governor's Servants, four Moor Peons, a Portuguez, my own Servants, a Brachmin for Lin∣guist, an Horse-keeper, eight Coolies to my Palenkeen, a dozen Frasses for Lumber, and one Horse. Thus equipped,Take Boat for Duccan. I left Bombaim about Three in the Afternoon, and the same Night about Nine Anchored on this side Tanaw, where in our passage were visible a great way off, on the tops of the Moun∣tains, several Fortresses of Seva Gi's, only defensible by Nature, needing no other Artillery but Stones, which they tumble down up∣on their Foes, carrying as certain destruction with them as Bullets where they alight: The next Morning, with only sending my Ser∣vant ashore to acquaint the Rendero, I quitted the Pass; and a Mile beyond the City deserted Baçein River on the left, and took our Course up a spacious Navigable River, which makes the Island of Ba∣çein, the Banks of which are low and fruitful; on both sides are placed stately Aldeas, and Dwellings of the Portugal Fidalgos; till on the Right, within a Mile or more of Gullean, they yield possession to the Neigbouring Seva Gi, at which City (the Key this way into that Rebels Country) Wind and Tide favouring us, we landed at about Nine in the Morning, and were civilly treated by the Customer in his Choultry, till the Havaldar could be acquainted of my arrival; who immediatly ordered me a great Mosch for my reception, whence I sent the Brachmin to complement him, and deliver the Presidents Letter.
Who understanding my Business, desired the favour of me to visit him,Landing and Reception at Gullean. and there should attend on me some of his Friends that were diseased; I easily condescended, thinking to procure my Dispatch with more speed; which succeeded alike, I receiving his Chitty or Pass, with two Guides to direct us through the Country. Early therefore the next Morning I left the most Glorious Ruins the Mahometans in Dan ever had occasion to deplore: For this City, once the chief Empory, excelled not only in Trade, but the general consequent, Sumptuousness, if the Reliques of the Stately Fabricks may add Credit to such a belief; which Reliques, notwithstanding the Fury of the Portugals, afterward of the Mogul, since of Seva Gi, and now lately again of the Mogul, (whose Flames were hardly extinguish∣ed at my being here, and the Governor and People on that score being prepared more for Flight than Defence at present) are still the extant Marks of its pristine Height: The remaining Buildings having many Stories of square facing Stones, and the Mosques, which are numerous, of the same, abating little of their ancient Lustre, being all watered with delicate Tanks; about which are costly Tombs with their distinct Chappels or Mosques, where formerly the Mul∣lahs had fat Pensions to pray for the departed Souls, which is main∣tained by them as efficacious; wherefore they covet Funerals in the most conspicuous Places, which the Pleasant Summer-houses hanging over here, cause these Places to be; the unemploy'd People of the Town daily wasting their time in these inviting Varieties; which is the on∣ly thing pleads for their continuance, Seva Gi as a Gentu being other∣wise inclinable to raze them; yet purposely to pervert them from the use of the Donors, and Intention of the Founders, orders them to be converted into Granaries, especially those within the City. The Houses the present Inhabitants kennel in are mean, the Peo∣ple beggarly, by reason of these Hostile Incursions. By Twelve at Noon having journey'd over Rocky,Set forward to Intwally, the Country all burnt and de∣stroyed. Barren, and Parched Ways, I came to Intwally, Three Course, or Seven Mile and an half; the Season of the Year (the Heats being now most vio∣lent) as well as the Time of the Day not permitting us any longer to endure their Extremity, I never staid for License, but shaded my self under a Wooden Mosque, the only Structure standing in the Town, it suffering the same Fate with Gullean, and was then reaking in its Ashes, the Moguls Army laying waste all in their Road, both Villages, Fodder, and Corn; and for their Cattel they drive them along with them, and take them, their Wives and Children for Slaves; so that none escape, except those that can fly fastest, or hide themselves in the Woods, which they also set on fire, to leave them destitute of those Recesses. This Gom or Town stood in a large Grove of Mangoes, on the Bank of a deep Creek, which though at this time fordable, yet I believe the Rains may swell into a Torrent. Having refreshed my self and Coolies,Thence to Moorbar. I hired an Ox, they com∣plaining they had too much Burthen, travelling more advisedly by Moonshine, (through a better Soil, and more exchange, as Arable Ground, Heaths, Forests, and Woods, some of which were on Fire two or three Miles together) from Six till Twelve, when we took up our Rest at a poor Village called Moorbar, six Course from
Intwally: This place was not able to afford us an House or Shed, but we were forced to creep into one of their Cottages, half finished, they thatching it with Bents shelving from the Ridge down to the Bottom on both sides, no bigger than a Man might carry. I kept the Coolies to their Watch,Force to keep watch. notwithstanding their hard Days labour, as well to keep Tigres and Wild Beasts from us, as Thieves and Robbers: The day following I staid here till Four in the Afternoon to avoid the Soultriness of the Weather, which I could hardly do where I was lodged, there being no Air; which caused me to remove out of the Town at Sun rise to the left of two pitiful Tanks belonging thereto; they being all here ignorant Idolaters, and Husbandmen, every one chusing his own God; no Family being without some Pan Daemon, or Incubus; which they paint with hide∣ous Forms, bedaub with stinking Oil, and offer the Fruits of the Earth to: Most Abominably Superstitious, that an ill Augury shall detain them idle a whole day, though they and their Houshold must starve, if they work not; such as an Hare crossing the Way, or a Crow on the Left hand. They have no publick Pagod, or Place of Worship, besides these Tanks, where they wash and burn their Dead, giving me a Nosegay of one of their Carkases, before I got my Break∣fast, as I lay to repose under a Tree; which made me range for Game, and disperse my Servants for Provant, being otherwise likely to go without; they living upon Batty, or Seeds of Grass, eating neither Fish nor Flesh, neither indeed have they any, unless by chance; for after my Purveyors had made diligent search, with much ado they purchased one Hen, tho several Villages were in sight, and all of them greedy enough to take Money, had they had Provi∣sions. It is all Plowed Land hereabouts, but Seva Gi commonly reaps the Harvest, leaving hardly so much to the Tillers as will keep Life and Soul together. And now going to set out,The Guides lead us about. I began by the murmurings of the Coo∣lies to understand that the Guides, being jealous of falling into the Ene∣my's hands, had a design to lead us about; (but every one besides the Cauns Peons being Strangers, and they fearful to discover themselves, we were persuaded to resign our selves to their Conduct) over Hilly, but none of the worst Ways; two or three Miles together they are all burnt, bearing nothing but withered Benty-Grass, which burning afore the Rains, benefits the Ground much; and are now out of distrust the Moguls should Forrage their Army here. Below this, we passed over a fine Meadow checquered with Pur∣ling Brooks, and three Villages, much about an equal distance one from another: And now the broken Ribs of these lofty Mountains seen so far off at Sea all along from Cape Comory, as if founded for an Ascent unto the Skies, begin to be discovered by our near approach; when Night interposing her black Vail between our Eyes and them, they became vested with a more benighted Darkness than hung over us; which served as a sable Cloud to direct us to Dehir, by Eleven a Clock at Night, nine Course from our last Stage, seated at the end of a large Plain, at the foot of that Chain of Hills supposed to cross the Taurus, trending through the Continent North and South, as that
does East and West; it is by most Geographers concluded to be Mount Sephir, here called the Gaot. We found them all in Arms,Come to De∣hir, a Garison'd Town of Seva Gi's, at the foot of the Gaot. not suffering their Women to stir out of the Town Unguarded to fetch Water, being accustomed to continual Alarms; which cautiousness obliged them to usher me into the Market-place, by a small Party which lighted on me in their Rounds; when I sent my Gulleon Peon, one of our Guides, with his Masters Chitty, or Pass, to the Governor, who received it kindly, and gave me leave to be my own Quartermaster (little Complements being expected from Soldiers). My Company,Awakes a Fakier Drunk with Bang. as well as my self, being Tired, and now stiff with a little Rest allowed them till the return of the Peon, we were not wil∣ling to be at more pains to seek for a better Inn, than what a Fakier had taken up before us; but we rouzed a Lion, who had just been lain asleep with Bang, who opened with such a Clamour, that I was afraid it would have brought all the Watch about us, had they not been in the same tune, calling on one another, as Children when the Light is out, do for fear; beating their Drums, and sounding their Trumpets (Shriller than the Moors, and more Tuneable) all Night long; by which means, and my Quarrelsome Inmate, I could compose my self to no Quiet; though for the latter, at length I thought of an Expedient, plying him with Arack till his Tongue re∣solved its self in Silence, which was much more grateful than his Bawling. The next Morning when Day had cleared our Eyesight, I saw the Idol, this Drunken Priest Adored, hard by me; it was thick and short, Carved in Stone, of a Monstrous Visage, whisking his Tail over his Head; the upper Parts to the Waste, were Painted with Red; it insulted over another ugly Creature it trod on; it was of a Sooty Colour, and Swam in streams of Oil; yet it called in a great many Devotes, who came to pay their Salams. I sent to the Havaldar,The Advan∣tage taken of a Discompo∣sed Counte∣nance, shewn anon. p. 127. Seva Gi's Hor∣ses kept here. to know when he would Pass us up the Gaot; word was brought he was not awake, having been up all Night; in the interim therefore, I Walked about the Town, which is Crowded with People, but miserably Poor, and of no Note, were it not that Seva Gi Stables his choicest Horses here, for the conveni∣ency of this Plain to supply them with Hay and Corn, which cau∣ses them to have the greater Force, and makes it the Residence of an Havaldar, who is a kind of petty General: Changing the Town for the open Fields, I was led to a Grove of Mangoes and Thamarinds, at the end of which, was a Mosque, and a great many Tombs of ex∣cellent Stone, Demolished; one of which they remember with Re∣spect, by the Name of Melech-Bury, a great Warrior; however, that which pleased me most of all, was a sudden surprize, when they brought me to the wrong side of a pretty Square Tank, or Well, with a Wall of Stone, Breast high; where expecting to find it cove∣red with Water, looking down five Fathom deep, I saw a clutter of Women, very Handsome, waiting the distilling of the Water from its dewy sides; which they catch in Jarrs, and constantly carrying it away, leave it only weeping: It is cut out of a firm Black Marble Rock up almost to the Top, with broad Steps to go down.
Now we could not only see their Forts, but hear also the Watch∣men from their Garisons aloft, some Five hundred, some more, some fewer Men,Seva Gi's Forts all about. to and again among the Hills, the main strength of this Prince consisting in these; coming back I found my troublesome Comrade very Merry, and packing up his Housholdstuff, his Bang-bowl, and Hubble Bubble, to go along with me, before I had got∣ten leave from the Havaldar, who had newly sent word he was ready to receive me. I made him not tarry long, following the Messenger, who brought me into the middle of a ragged Regiment, distinguishable from the Mogul's on that score, but more peculiarly by their Hair appearing on both Ears under their Puckeries; their Weapons are much alike, though to me they give more cause of Laughter, than Terror (considering the awkwardness of their wearing them) notwith∣standing they are the Instruments of Death. When I came before the Governor,State of the Havaldar. I found him in State, though under an Hovel; where were many Brachmins with Accompt-Books, writing at some distance; nearer, his Privy-Council, with whom he seemed to Advise: I was placed on his Left hand, and desired my Interpreter to acquaint him my Errand, withal intreating his Fa∣vour for my secure passing the Hill: He made it a piece of difficulty, and told me I must return to Bimly for Orders, to whose Havaldar he was accountable, not to him of Gulleon; which was within half a days Journy from whence I set forth. Hearing this I bore my self as sedately as I could, having been informed of the advantage they take of a disturbed Countenance; and sweetned him with his own Au∣thority being sufficient, telling him of his Master's Kindness to the English, and their Friendship towards him; which worked him to a yielding Temper; yet he scrupled my Canister, or Trunk, might be lined with Pearl, my Horse sold to the Enemy, hoping to suck some∣what out of me; I replying, What I had brought were at his liberty to search, and that I went only on an amicable account to Cure a Sick Person, and should be as ready to serve him, if required, his Fury was quite pawled; but perceiving an hungry look to hang on them all, and suspecting lest they should serve me some Dog-trick, I made a small Present, and he signing the Pass, dismissed me with a Bundle of Pawn, the usual Ceremony at Parting. Being clear,Got clear of Dehir. I could not so readily shake off my Fakier, he would march with me; when we were not gone above two Course, or three Miles, the Liquor working out by his Walking, he began to grow weary, and called out for the Horse, which I had caused the Portugueze to Mount, which he took in such dudging, seeing him∣self on Foot, and him on Horseback, that he turned Tail, and went back again to his Vomit, without bidding adieu. And now our mighty Task began to try our Feet,A trouble∣some passage over the Gaot. as well as weary our Eyes: I not caring to hazard my self longer in my Palenkeen, alighted, and though I thought it a work impossible to conquer, I put the best face on it I could, tarrying till they were all together, the better to chear them. The Coolies providing themselves with Staves, distrusted not only their own Legs, but the Ground they went on,
it having forsaken many a tall Tree around us; some holding by the mouldring Earth with half their Roots bare, others half buried in Pits they never grew in, lay expecting their quondam Neighbours downfal. The busy Apes,The Monkies afrighted. the Forlorn hope of these declining Woods, deeming no place safe where they beheld us, made strange Levaltoes with their hanging Brats from one Bough to another, Chattering an Invasion; but these saw us presently exalted beyond their Bowers, and feared us from above, as much as we to salute them below: Thus far was passable enough, when the Sun levelled himself unto our Steps, and we looked for Day beneath us. Here I made a second pause, and promised them Nectar in the Skies; this proved but a faint Cordial to the Frasses, who failed afore they got a quarter up; for whom after I had provided (the Moon assisting us with a less parching Light) I found my Hands as necessary to Clamber as my Feet, Travelling on all Four; the Stones were laid step by step, but in little order; and now so steep, that it differed little from Perpen∣dicular, only by the winding of the Mountain; and so Narrow, that Two Men could not pass abreast; where chiefly were laid Trees and Timber to make work for the Army, should they attempt this Way; which sorely increased our trouble, being the first Adventurers, beside the danger we incurred of being Assaulted from above, they not yet knowing who we were. To look down made my Brains turn round; over my Head pendulous Rocks threatned to Entomb me. We had not gone long thus,Flurries from the Hills carry Men and Ox∣en down the Precipice before the Cry came, the Ox was fallen; 'twas well he chose not the place where I was in, for the least lapse had irrecoverably whirled him to the bottom: Arguments were too weak to persuade the Coolies to go back to him to help him; I therefore proceeded to Threats, which made Two of them return to his Aid: I confess the sense of their hard Labour urged me to pity; the Anguish of which extorted Tears from some, unseasonable at this time to take notice of to them; we had only this Comfort, the Even was Calm and Serene, and we were mounted beyond the humble Mists, which we could discern fluctuating against the impe∣netrable Promontories; which may be the reason sometimes (they say) Men and Oxen are hurled down the Precipice by sudden Gusts, when they are exalted to the Clouds, and they break with too great an Impetuosity: For all this Light we seemed Obscured, the splen∣dour of the Moon being shaded by the sides of the Mountains, which appeared here all Marble. The Horse (being a Turky one) made the best shift of all, and was more forward than convenient, pelting us with great Stones his Hoofs had removed, which caused us to retard his haste, and leave him to come last. About Nine a Clock at Night the Moon shone over our Heads, more joyful at her presence, than her feignedly beloved Endimion: An hour after we came tired to the Brow, through a narrow Cavern cut out of the main Rock; here being no Guard, the noise of the Army being over, I was the second Man Trampled on the Top, half an hour after the Palenkeen came, and all the rest within two hours more: Here I was as good as my word, and distributed Arack among them,
which made them, for all their tedious Tug, run amain to the next Town Oppagaot; where early in the Morning I crowded under an Old Shed. This Gur or Hill is reckoned four Course up (every Course being a Mile and half):The heighth of the Moun∣tain. From whence is beheld the World beneath all fur∣led with Clouds, the Caerulean Ocean terminating the Horizon, the adjacent Islands bordering on the Main, the Mountains fenced with horrible Gulphs, till strange Vertigoes prejudicate Fancy, not daring longer to be made a Spectator: The bandying Eccho still persecutes with terrible repeated Sounds, meeting fresh Objects to reundulate it, though at the greater distance, being yet enclosed with Moun∣tains, which they maintain as Fortresses; and I can give no reason why they do not this Entry also, unless because it is so contrived that Ten Men may keep down Ten thousand. Here is a sensible alteration of the Air:Alteration of Air on the Hills. The Dawn of the Morning, and latter part of the Night, 'twas sharp, cold, and piercing; so that all I gathered about me would scarce keep me warm; and all the Day there were fine cool Briezes, though below we were almost choaked with soultry Heats: The Reason whereof I judge to be, be∣cause the High Mountains reverberate the flowing Particles of the Atmosphere; as we see the Rocks do Water more strongly, by how much more force the Waves assail them; so here the Air (which is thicker below) driven against these Hills breaks off in Flurries, which seeking to retire into their own Ocean, mitigate the violence of the Heat in their passage, by fanning as it were the Air; by which means, and the Sun's rarifying the Misty Vapours, they are left pure, and fall at Night in more limpid Dews to cool and refresh the Earth: To which Sense sings Lucan, Fulminibus proprior terrae succenditur aër, Imaque telluris ventos tractusque coruscos Flammarum accipiunt: Nubes excedit Olympus. Moreover, Bogs and Fens are rarely found to soil the Air, or pen in the Heat for want of ventilation. This is a sad Starvling Town;Oppagaot a starveling Town. to it belongs a Subidar, or Cu∣stomer; who blown up with the confidence of half a dozen Bill-men, thought to have compell'd me to stay till the Governor of the Castle should examine my Cocket, which he had sent him by the Haval∣dar: I ordered him to send it with one of the Gulean Peons; but he made Answer, the Governor having been up all Night, was not then at leisure. While we were talking, a Drove of Combies (Hinds) passed with Provisions on their Heads for the Castle; and I having staid till Three in the Afternoon, not getting any other Answer, I commanded the Coolies to march, though the Subidar prohibited and kept them from following them with my Men and Arms, as Carbines and Blunderbusses; and the Governor not coming as he told my Peons they would, by Four, I dismissed the Gulean Peons, they daring to go no farther; and if there were farther occasion for a Pass, to bring it after me; thereby frustrating their Intention, which was to retard me, whereby to make their Booty of me.
They durst no more than curse, for all I departed without leave, taking my Course into a deep Valley, which winded and turned like a River,We force our way. and I believe is one in the Rains: Half way we met another Caphala of Oxen laden with Provisions, hardly escaping the Mogul's Army, which they told us was not far afore us: My Coolies more jealous of the Villany of Seva Gi's People than my self, made haste, and by Ten at Night arrived at Aumbegaum, Ten Course. From whence Mucklis Caun's Men had driven all away with a Par∣ty of his Horse,Our escape to Aumbegaum, and hardship of the Coolies. only one Fakier, who had set up his Standard in a Shop in the Buzzar, next to whom I shrowded my self under one of the same Stalls: Before Five in the Morning, for fear of farther In∣terruption, I posted hence, up Hill and down Hill, not having Rice for my People to eat (all being fled) we came to a neat Stone Well of good Water; hard by which was an excellent Fig-tree, on whose Fruit, yet Green, my Indians fed heartily, and trouped by three or four wretched Towns, up another Mountain, not altoge∣ther so bad as the first, yet on the account of their wanting their wonted Food, it went hard with the Coolies to foot it to Beelseer, two Course short of Jeneah, where we baited; it being high time, they having gone near Fifty Miles without eating more than a few squashy Figs: They unloaded at Noon under a Row of spreading Mangos, on the side of a Brook; and provided themselves with Vi∣ctuals in an adjacent Village, liable to continual pillaging on both sides; but being reduced to the Condition of having little or nothing to lose, it is the better born. Hence it is plain to Jeneah,Our entrance into the City of Jeneah. the Hills keeping their distance from its Invincible Gur: The length of whose Bottom fills most of the space from this Place to the City, which is the Frontier of the Mogul's Territory this way; and has been for many Years the Seat of War to the South, which is the signification of Duccan. I sent the Governor's Peon to acquaint him of my approach (I not arriving till Sun-set) when he met me with others that were appointed at a Garden short of the Town, with the Governor's Com∣plement; and conducted me to a Palace in a Compleat Garden, adorned with Cypress Trees (not usual in India) Hummums, Tanks, Choultries and Walks, with Water-Courses: When I was asleep, the Nabob or Governor sent me a Service in Plate covered with Em∣broidered Velvet over Noble Surpooses or Covers, ushered with two Silver Staves, and a Trumpet sounding afore it; which Course was observed as long as I remained there. The last day of April, being Friday, and the next after my arri∣val, he sent to excuse himself, because it was his day of Devotion; when after a Princely manner he rides on an Elephant to the Mosque; and thence divertises himself in some place of Delight within his Se∣raglio till high Night.
CHAP. V. Introduces me into the Nabob's presence;Chap. V. my Business with him; a Prospect of the Gur (Seva Gi's Birth-place); the Army and Country of Duccan: Of the Pass of Tanaw, and benefit thereof, were it in the hands of the English. IT was the first of May therefore before I waited on him; when he ordered a Guard of Horse to attend me to the Castle, which was large, but rude, and the Wall of raw Brick; serving as well to secure Cattle as Men from the Enemy. His own Apartments in the middle encompassed a verdent Qua∣drangle of Trees and Plants;The Caun re∣ceives me publickly. in whose chief Choultry were assembled all his Great Men on his Right hand, he being enclosed in a Seat of State, boulstered up with Embroidered Cushions, smoaking out of a Silver Hubble bubble; afore whom lay a rich Sword and Buckler, with a Crescent Moon instead of Bosses, his Page bearing his Bow and Ar∣rows, much after the Turkish manner, as Busbequius reports of the Grand Segnior, Sedebat in Solio humili instrato; juxta autem arcus & sagittae. All the Floor was spread with a soft Bed, over all a fine white Calicut; the Pedestals were Massy Silver, where I put off my Shooes, and after Respect paid, delivered the President's Letter, and was received immediatly next to him on his Left hand, all that side being kept void for my entertainment: The result of this Visit was, after he had acquainted me who were to be my Patients, to tell me I must be patient till a good day presented, and then I should be called again; it remaining a Custom still in the East to defer im∣portant Affairs till a Lucky Day, totis haerentia fastis. I only intreated he would be mindful the Rains were at hand, falling earlier here than in the Low Countries. Our Discourse being ended,Sycophants encouraged. a Couple of Singing-men began their Songs of Praise, which they pride themselves in, not being content with moderate Flattery; a thing odious to a generous Spirit, ac∣counting those that do it, servile; and those that admit it, impru∣dent to be deluded by Fawning Knaves: But here are not only those that profess it for Lucre, but it is the general strife who may impose most obsequiously. Adulandi certamen est, & unum amicorum omnium officium, quis blandissimè fallat; as Seneca observes in the corruption of his Age, de Benef. Cap. XXX. Such as appear before him make a Salam or Bow before they ascend the Choultry,Several man∣ner of Ad∣dresses. when if he allows them Conference, leaving their Slip∣pers below, they mount the Buchanna, where they bow, by first putting their Hands to their Heads, then to their Feet, which Sa∣lute they call Pervenau, used to Cauns or Dukes. Above their Head, cross their Breast to the Foot is Pharmau, only for Kings; the most familiar is a Bow with the Head: If they are permitted to sit in his Presence, those only of Consular Dignity have liberty to sit (as they call it at ease) cross Legged; but an European, before he is accustomed, will not be reconciled to that Term: Others of inferior Rank kneel,
sitting on their Heels, to which Posture, though I was not tied, I was thankful when he sent me a Bundle of Pawn, and had leave to make use of my Legs; being led out, as I was conducted in, by Two Virgers, and a large Train following, with a Master of Cere∣monies accompanying. In my passage through the Castle they seemed rather Encamped than Fortified;The Castle no strong place. wherefore if Seva Gi brings any Power, they betake themselves to speedy Flight, or retire to the Body of the Army un∣der Badur Caun, Generalissimo in these Marches; being ill provided to endure a Siege, and more able to defend themselves, joined to an Host of Forty thousand Horse always at Pergom, three Days Journy hence. Curiosity invited many Spectators, and Courtesy some of Quality to be my Harbingers at my Lodgings; which at my return I found pestered, as I had the Streets all the way I came: They were very Civil, making no Intrusion before they had requested leave; and then interrogating the State of Europe, the Government, Policy, and Learning; nodding a satisfaction in the account I gave them: Nor were they less communicative in their Relations, of those Occurren∣ces which wheeled in their Sphere, being highly concerned to shew they had Book-men as well as Sword-men. A good Day coming,A good Day consulted, when I had a private Invita∣tion to the Caun. the Governor sent for me to Visit his Lady in the Haram, which was opposite to a Chamber he sate in, Accom∣panied only with one pretty Wanton Boy, his Only Son by this Woman; upon which account he had the greater kindness for her: An Old Gentlewoman with a Tiffany Vail, made many trips, being, I suppose, the Governant of the Womens Quarters; at last I was called and admitted with my Linguist. At our being ready to enter,Admitted the Womens Quarters. she Clapped with her Hands to give Notice; when we were led through a long dark Entry, with Dor∣mitories on both sides, the Doors of which Creeked in our passage (but I was cautious of being too Circumspect) till we came to an aiery Choultry; where was placed a Bed hung with Silk Curtains; to which being brought, I was Commanded to place my self close by it, from whence I might conveniently Discourse and Feel her Pulse, putting my Hand under the Curtains. It was agreed among them to impose upon me; wherefore at first they gave me a Slaves Hand, whom I declared to be Sound and Free from any Disease, nothing contradicting the true Tenor and Rythme of Pulsation; when they began to be more ingenuous, telling me, it was done to try me: Then was given me another Hand, which demonstrated a weak languid Constitution; and collecting the Signs and Symptoms, I feared not to give Sentence; which met with their Approbation, and so I was sent back the same way I came. The Caun had been acquainted with what had passed, and seemed pleased; whereupon I must visit the Haram again the next day to Bleed another of his Wives, he being tolerated Four, though he keeps more than Three hundred Concubines. And now the Curtain was extended athwart the Choultry,What hap∣pened while I was in the Haram. and an Arm held forth at an hole; but this was a slight fence for such Ani∣mals, who leaning too hard as they peeped, pulled it down, and disco∣vered
the whole Bevy, fluttering like so many Birds when a Net is cast over them; yet none of them sought to escape, but feigning a shamefacedness, continued looking through the wide Lattice of their Fingers: The Lady I had by the Arm was a Plump Russet Dame, summoning the remainder of her Blood to enliven her Cheeks (for among the darkest Blacks, the Passions of Fear, Anger, or Joy, are discernible enough in the Face) and she bearing a command, caused it to be hung up again; pouring upon her extravasated Blood a Golden shower of Pagods, which I made my Man fish for. In this Interview they appeared to me not altogether unimployed,Scandal thrown upon the Women. there lying pared Mangoes, and other Fruits for Confection, and Achars, or Pickles; some Samplers of good Housewifry in Needle∣works; and no indecent decorum in managing their Cloystered way of living, making it agreeable to the choice of Custom rather than Restraint: But here are foulmouthed Homers that Stigmatize them, how deservedly I dare not say. . Nil gravius nil improbius quam foemina vivit. And a Man would guess no less, to see the number of Spies upon them, of Toothless Old Women, and Beardless Eunuchs, that they are incontinent in their Desires, for which reason they debar them the sight of any thing Male, but their Lord; they Waiting, as well to hand them Necessaries, as Wood, Water, Meat, and the like, taking them at the Door, as to prevent unlawful Intruders. These have their Singing Wenches;Their Dress is Rich. exercise their Ears and Noses with weighty Jewels, as the Gipsy of Old did her Hair and Neck. —Colloque comisque Divitias Cleopatra gerit, cultuque Laborat. Lucan. And are Cloathed like the Men, only they go in their Hair within, and abroad with Vails. Gaining by these steps a nearer intimacy with the Nabob,A Conference about the Affairs of the English. he cut me new Business out every day; he advised me of the intention of the Governor of the Castle on the Hill, to commit his Brother to my Care; and I in a private Conference, according to my Instructi∣ons, propounded the Commodity might arise from an intercourse of Commerce between this place and Bombaim, from thence to Bussorah, Persia, and Maecha, for to provide the Army with Horses; in re∣turn of whom might be exchang'd the same Goods procurable at Surat and better Cheap, should they succeed in their Conquests over the Low Countries; which is not a matter of such impossibi∣lity should they earnestly set upon it, considering the Avenues are open: But by that proceeding, it would take away a powerful ob∣stacle to the maintaining so vast an Army as is always in Duccan, whereby a main Body of the Soldiery would be out of pay; which is absolutely against the Generals interest, and therefore he would never consent: This I soon saw was the main Argument, though he coloured it with pretext, that 'twas a work of more pains to reduce
Seva, than was represented, in respect of his Situation, being im∣powered not only to make Excursions, but to bid them Defiance. Whereupon I told him, If the latter was not feasible, it was in vain to propose any thing in relation to the former, for that all Ac∣cess was stopped if the Low Lands were not cleared; the Havaldars being unconscionable in their Customs, and without doubt would interrupt what might be serviceable to their Enemies, or bring pre∣judice to their Prince; whereas were the Ways free, it would enrich his Jageah beyond the Bunder at Surat, and tie the English to a per∣petual Truce, who were known in these Parts addicted to Traffick, and Friends to Peace: He asked further, How far we desired to ex∣tend this Liberty? I replied, beyond the Portugal Dominions, which would front the Island of Bombaim about Tull; otherwise we must be at the charge of double Custom, to them as well as the Mogul. He said all this had been moved to Badur Caun, but those to whose hands the Presents for him had been entrusted, had defrauded him of them, on whom nothing was to be wrought without liberal Piscashes, he bearing it as high as the King himself, and at this juncture he was an unfit Mediator to him, having lately had some jarrs with him (the Governor of Jeneah undervaluing his Authority in an Expe∣pedition, not long enough ago to be thoroughly forgot); however did the President immediately apply himself to him, he was incli∣nable enough to let him Settle Factories; which I gave him to un∣derstand, without a mutual Benefit on both sides, was not the pre∣sent Design; but for the esteem we bore to Men of Honour, and that made account of their Word, it was wished the Moguls were posses∣sed of those Parts; which was never to be cultivated, either with good Manners, or Profit, whilst Perfidy reigned there. This being the substance of our Discourse, after he had related the Business to his Council (he replied) he would intimate what might be effected in it, to the President, in answer to his Letter. At Night it was dismally Tempestuous,Mischief done by Thunder. Killing Two of the Watch on Duty, and carrying a Tower of the Hill at one Clap; below, it brake one Man's Arm, the Prologue to the Rains. The Day after the Nabob's Brother,The Gover∣nor's Brother of the Hill descends for Cure. of the Castle, was received kindly here, bringing a noble Train, and Piscash to bespeak his Welcome; he was Lodged in a Palace adjoining that where I was. The Eleventh of May I went abroad to a Garden left by a common Strumpet,A Strumpet's Benefaction. in which was a noble Tomb built in remembrance of her, with a Well belonging to a lovely Spring, which by Aqueducts sup∣plied the City with Water. Who when she died, like Flora Fair, Did make the Commonwealth her Heir. Hence we went to a ruined Palace,The Empe∣ror's Palace. where Auren Zeeb, the present Emperor, was hospitably received in his Father's Reign, and lived a pretended Fakier. Cotton in its season is Planted all hereabouts:The Fields no sooner Sowed than set on Fire. The Fields produce Wheat in abundance, and other Grain; but are often served as the Philistine's were by Sampson, the Foxes from the Mountains with Fire∣brands
consuming them; which made us bethink of retiring, they descending sometimes in Parties to Prey on Straglers, that often Troopers are sent home disrobed and dismounted, to be laught at for their Misfortune. Having tarried now till the Rains had made their first onset Four∣teen days together,Dungeness ano∣ther Heathen Fane. with horrid Thunder; at the end thereof I set apart a day to take notice of the adjacent Rarities; among which is a City called Dungeness, of like Antiquity and Workmanship, as Canorein, cut out of a Mountanous Rock, with a Temple and other spacious Halls, by no means inferior to it both for Water and other Refreshments, and much more entire; Time having not dealt so cruelly with it, but the Lines of its ruined Beauty are still legible, though in old Characters; however it is left a desolate Habitation for Batts and Wasps; to disturb which it is dangerous, being over∣grown and desperately revengeful, following their Aggressors till they have Whealed them into Contrition for their unadvised Provo∣cation: To be out of the Noise of these buzzing Hornets, and to se∣cure our selves from the surprize of any disturbed Idolater, who might bellow the report of our being here, we hasted to the safer Plain, and ended the rest of the day in a pleasant Garden, on the brink of the River which glides hence to Surat. The Governor of the Gur hearing I was preparing for to return to Bombaim,The Request of the Gover∣nour of the Hill for my Ascent. requested before my departue to accept of my choice, either to ascend the Gur, or else to meet him at his Garden below, being the prescribed Limits of his Walk: I signified my readiness to comply with the former, wherefore he sent Four Palenkeens, his Kinsman, an Ingenuous Mogul, and his Brother to attend me. We Travelled Two Miles before we came to the Foot of it,The Suburbs a shelter to the Castle. where is a Garison, or Fortified Town, walled with strong Chockies, or Watches, and a Troop of Five hundred Horse, and as many Camels of War; here are great Stacks of Hay and Corn, all their Droves of Beasts being sheltered here anights. Seva Gi has distressed this often, and put them to the rout; but that, whose Top we are endeavouring to gain, is inaccessible, unless by Seven winding Gates, which are ve∣ry strong, and able to clear one another as they rise, the Way being lined with Murtherers, and they themselves defended with good Pieces of Ordnance: The last is a Piece of excellent Work and Strength, and the place filled with Soldiers. Hence it is painful Riding,The Hill in∣accessible but by Seven Gates. and requires a strong Back to keep State in a Palenkeen, it being carried almost bolt upright, over slippery Marble steps, cut out of the shining Rock, as smooth as Glass, and reflecting the Sun-beams as much: After we had mounted near an Hundred Stairs, we were received into the Neck of the Castle, which is collared about with a Wall, rather to keep them from falling down, than needful to prevent Assailants; from whence an easy Ascent leads to a Level, which is the Circus to train the In∣fantry; where are conspicuous Tombs of their former Kings, being firmly Built, and a Mosque of polished Marble, which on Festivals only they repair unto: No Houses here are able to resist the Storms of Wind, or the Sun's Heat, for which conveniency they have made the Eastern side of the Hill most Inhabited, it serving instead
of a Bank; where they live in little low Huts, the Governor's not exceeding in height, (though a pretty neat Dwelling, fenced with Trees, no where else to be found) who had expected me Two whole Hours; but being impatient of delay, and the Sun growing too hot, he betook himself to his Haram, having ordered his Kinsman (whose Civil Deportment met with his Commands) to Entertain me; he is but Poor (so that he threatens the Nabob to turn Fakier) yet Ge∣nerous, of a free open Temper, neither Jealous nor Lazy, as the Moors most are; but applying himself to several Handicrafts, which he has learned of the Europeans; he is learned too in the Persian and Ara∣bick Languages, though not to Vain-glory; being so Humble, Face∣tious, and Merry, that nothing but Spight and Envy can disagree with him: His Name is Nishambeak; such another I have not met with, so general a lover of Franks; which he specified in an espe∣cial manner to me, receiving me in an Airy Banquetting-house, Embellished and Adorned on purpose; and notwithstanding the Go∣vernor's Son was to pay his Compliments, would not suffer me to give him Place, but diverted me with several Interludes of Morisco Dancing. That which took most with them I perceived, was a Jester, or Mimick, the Ancient Salt at publick Banquets, as we may gather from Statius: Non ego Mercatus Phariâ de puppe Loquaces Delicias, doctumque sui convicia Nili Infantem, Linguâque simul salibusque protervum. And from Lucan to Piso: Sed Miserum (clientem) parvâ stipe numerat —ut pudibundas Exercere sales inter convivia possit. Having feasted the Fancy,Feasted by the Governor's Order. he contends to cloy the Stomach, with loads of Viands stowed in Plate, serving me with his own Hands, his Friends and he being content to feed on the desire they had to satisfy me, not being to be courted to fall to till I had done; they served me with variety of Stews and Baked Meats, but offered me Sherbet only for Drink; I had provided against this chance by fil∣ling my Metarrah with Beveridge, which passed for Water, being drunk out of a Leather Bottle Tipped with Silver, for Travel. After Dinner they made their loud Musick proclaim my going to the Governor (whereat flocked all the Gur) and after formal Salutes,None appear before Great Men without a Present. present him with a Glass of Chymical Spirits. As the Parthians were wont not to receive Visits without a Gift; Et exem∣pla in Oriente plura sunt, interea & Magorum in sacris qui Christum ado∣raturi, munera attulerunt. So here the like Custom prevails. I was placed close by him,How strange our Arms and Apparel seem to them. he like an Hermit, having the Court brought to him, admired the Splendour as well as the Novelty of our Europe Dress; asking my Servant if I lay in them, because it is their fashion not to undress to go to Bed, but lye in the same Clothes they wear in the day; he made me declare the use of my Rapier, at
first not apprehending it so serviceable as their Broad Two-handed Swords; 'twas a Question out of my road, yet I made him under∣stand our Custom in War was to appear all armed Cap-a-pee, where their Broad Swords would find a rebate; whereas these Sharp-pointed Weapons would pierce the Junctures of the Harness, or the Pleats of a Coat of Mail (they denying a Stab to be more mortal than a Slash). He was very inquisitive about our Military Discipline; and heard it with pleasure. He called all his Male Children about him, who sate at his Feet, and gave me an History of their Maladies; as most here did that durst speak, there being an infinite number of Captains and Grave Fellows: The Old Men mended their Eyes with Spectacles, the young marred theirs with staring. The Choultry was hung with Green and Red Velvet checkered;Permitted the freedom of the Castle. his Pawn Boxes were large, and of Massy Gold; his Retinue grave, his Carriage affable; he gave me a Bow-Ring off his Thumb, of Cash∣mire (of equal value as Vertue, being a Charm against Thunder) and the liberty to take a Round about the Castle, never before granted any not listed in his Service: A Portuguez Mestizo, Chief Gunner of the Castle, was very officious, though I was entrusted to the charge of his prime Eunuch. The first Object busied me,A bold At∣tempt of Seva Gi's Men. was a Place Seva Gi's Men had at∣tempted to scale, by me esteemed a desperate Design, and very im∣probable; yet two Men got up, and a Stone casually tumbling, de∣terred their Accomplices, leaving them a Sacrifice to the Governor and Women, who being left alone to the defence of the Castle (all the Men deserting on the approach of a vast Army of Seva Gi's) hurled them down the Mountain for their rash Adventure; con∣firming to me by a great Stone let fall, the unavoidableness of their destruction; it running with that force where-ever it came, that it beat all a-fore, till it rested in the middle of the Valley. It is stored with Granaries hewed out of Stone,Granaries for Stores now, formerly Re∣ligious Cells. I suppose for Re∣ligion's sake at first, being too delicately engraved for the present use; though there be several Tanks filled with Butter of 400 years standing, prized by the Gentiles as high as Gold, prevalent in Old Aches, and Sore Eyes, one of which was opened for my sake, and a Present made me of its black stinking and viscous Balsom: There are other Tanks or Cisterns for Water, which look nastily, Green, Yellow, and Red, being distilled in the Rains, and in the Heats evaporated to a Consistency; in some of these Gurs the Water is so bad, that they use Onions to correct its unsavoriness. (Garlick in∣deed with us is called the Countryman's Treacle). They have Provisions for a Seven Years Siege for a Thousand Fa∣milies,A Rajah slain the occasion of a Barbarous Funeral. but no other Ammunition than Stones, excepting two un∣shapen Sakers of Two and twenty Foot long, with a narrow Bore of Brass of Gentu Mould, at each end one, on huge winding Carriages; one of which at random killed a Rajah some four Months ago, when Seva was encamped about Jeneah slinging a Bullet two Course off; which Shot caused a Bonfire of a couple of his Ladies, beside other Dome∣sticks; one of each sort to attend him in another World, as his Chief Physician, Barber, Washerman, Horse-keeper, and the like, to the number of Twenty odd; a thing as customary at the death of
any great Rajah, as 'tis for the Wife of every Gentue of note at the death of her Husband. By this fatal Instrument of Mortality stood the remaining part of the Tower the Thunder had cleft in twain: Near where a Dutch Apostate has a wretched Dwelling, enjoying a Pair of Wives, the miserable Tools who induced him to this lamentable Condition, that he is despised and slighted by them all; few of those that endure Cir∣cumcision meeting with better fortune. Having taken my full view,Took leave of the Governor. and returning to give the Governor Thanks for this freedom, I met him as he came from Prayers through a Lane of Soldiers, followed by a Crowd of his Domesticks, when taking my leave, he ordered my release, being ushered with the same State down as I came up, leaving him Prisoner in his strong Hold. Hence might be beheld many Dens and Caverns, fondly believed to be carved and cut out of the Rocks by some Divine Power; having no account of their original. Indeed they are miraculous; And I am apt to judge, the pious Zeal of former Ages, when undisturbed in their Tranquility, thinking the greatest labour too little to express their love to a Deity, set them upon such imployments, more than that they could promise to themselves any security from these Places; which though the Passages to them be difficult, yet they are gene∣rally unprovided of Human Necessaries; This Hill being only inde∣pendent, whereby it stands out against all the opposite Forts of Seva Gi, many of whom in a still Night may be heard by Voice, but more by Trumpets. Here are a Thousand Sword-men in pay,This Gur puts a stop to Seva Gi this way. no Horse or Elephant be∣ing able to climb it: It was never fairly taken, the Governor is one of approved Fidelity; the Mogul having not the like Fort in all his Kingdoms, and is of main concern to the Frontiers; putting a stop to Seva Gi's progress, otherwise likely to overrun Duccan. His name is Hagiess Caun, originally a Brachmin, now a strict Musleman; some years past Governor of the City, when oppressing the Poor, their Cries reaching the King's Ears, he was translated hither, in conside∣ration of his good Service; where he receives a liberal Pension, and is at no Expence, which agrees well enough with his covetous Hu∣mour; which Humour of his Seva Gi being informed of, left no means unattempted to gain the Surrender of his Trust; promising Mountains of Gold in exchange of this, which he scrupled not to receive; appointing a day for the delivery of it to Seva Gi, if he sent 7000 to take possession; who keeping touch, met with the same measure he had meated to others, they being all surprised by an Ambuscado from Badur Caun, whom the Governor had advertised of all the Transactions. That which makes Seva Gi so intent on this more than the fore∣mentioned Advantages,Jeneah Gur the Birth-place of Seva Gi. is, because it was his Birth-place; to whom that of Virgil is applicable, Non tibi diva parens generis, nec Dardanus author Perfide: Sed duris genuit te cautibus ingens Jenneah; Duccanaeque admôrunt ubera tigres.
What makes it more famous, it was anciently the Seat Royal of the Duccan Kings, under whom Seva Gi's Father was Keeper; but Auren∣zeeb in his Conquest of this Kingdom (after he had fled hither for protection) had it surrendred unto him: It is reckoned two Course and an half in height; is surrounded, though a good way off, with Hills, all but towards the North, where it seems to stand Captain of the Mountains. The Moguls I perceive are inclinable to the like Credulity the Gentues are,The Moors toucht  the Supersti∣tion of the Gentues. pointing out a Mount where undoubtedly Solomon gave Audit to the two Women claiming the same Child, and pronounced Judgment in favour of the true Mother; and it still bears the name of Tecta Schelimon, Solomon's Throne; I brought Night with me to Jeneah, being too well guarded to suspect any Attempt; though notable enough by the multitudes of Oily Flambeaus. This Day gave me occasion to take notice of the sneaking Offici∣ousness of the Banyans, who pressed on my Heels, and where-ever I went, waited like Lacquies, which put me in mind of that Distich of Martial's, Lecticam sellamque sequor, nec ferre recuso Per medium properans, sed prior ire tutum. The New Moon brought the Soldiers to their several Standards,Of the Luscar∣ry or Army. against the Governor's House, by their Salam to refresh his Memory of their Pay, being Fourteen Months behind-hand. Pay, says Tacitus, is the Cause of Soldiers, and Money is the Cause of Pay; which is not wanting to the Muster-masters, who abuse the common Troopers in retarding it; to the end, that having run into debt, they might compound for half their Wages in ready Money; for all which they leave not often their Side, for they are sure of something with ease, whereas Seva Gi is a kind of Free-booter, whose Maxim is, No Plun∣der, no Pay; which comes with pain and hazard: Yet it is common for him to have Moors in his Army; for the Liberty of their Country is not stood so much upon, as Whose Salt they eat (their own Phrase); so that you may see Gentues in the Mogul's Army, as well as Moguls among the Gentues: For the most part of the Body of the Cavalry consists of Moguls, the Infantry of Gentues, with Match-Lock Muskets. In order to this Convention every Petty Officer brings the number of his Men and Horse along with him,Its Appear∣ance. who first salute him, and he the Governor, owning none else for their Commander, though they fall off under such an Ensign as they are ordered to march with: They are taught little more than the Grand Paw, and to make a Salam: They ride in wide Saddles as our War Saddles, but hold with the Calves of their Legs, not fasten themselves to their Saddles by their Thighs, as we do; by which slight they raise themselves to mow down their Enemies, and will cast a Spear, and take it up from the Ground on full speed: They stop with a jerk, not taking their Horses up by degrees, which they laugh at us for, as well as our riding with our Feet at length: They have no Spurs to their Heels, but in their
Bridle-bit is one to stop the most untamed Horse, or bore his Mouth through, pointing out of a Circle upon their Tongues. They have other excellent Qualities; as he that runs fastest, is the best Soldier: Besides, their Arms are kept so bright, they are afraid to handle them for fear of soiling them: Their Leaders are good Carpet-Knights, loving their Buchannos better than the Field. The old Roman Discipline takes place,The Disci∣pline. viz. Commanders of Tens, so of Hundreds, thence to Legions; and accordingly receive their Salary, making their own Terms with those under them: The Go∣vernor distributing to the Officers, and they to the Soldiers, every one having their Snips; that never was more truly verified that Pro∣verb, Half the King's Cheese goes away in Parings. The Grandees of the Army appear with their Furniture of Silver and Gold,The Com∣mnders rich∣ly accoutred. on Persian, Arab, or Turkish Steeds; the rest rarely get any other than the Race of the Country, which are Fiery and Met∣tlesome, but very Flashy, probably because they pinch Their Bellies to put into their Own. And now the Rains began to urge me to take my Leave of the Caun of Jeneah,I take my leave of the Caun. which I did in a full Assembly convocated for the purpose; where I was informed Two hundred of Seva Gi's Men had pursued me almost to Ambegaum, with a resolution to have carried me back, but durst come no further, for the Report of the Army being in Motion; wherefore the Naibob advised me to take another way, and a select Guard of his should attend me to the utmost Extent of his Territories; after which he dismissed me very honourably, with a Letter to the President, which is not sealed on the Paper, but in a Neat Bag of Cloath of Gold or Silver. This Naibob Mucklis Caun lives not in that Splendor the Governor of Surat does, though he have ten times the Salary, being liable to the daily Assaults of Seva Gi; but he exceeds in Command, being Absolute, without any Dependance on the General; which causes an Emulation on either side, and the more, because the Mogul has lately heaped new Honours on Badur Caun, doubling his Stipend, and giving him the Title of Foster Brother, his Mother nursing the King: But this Governor, to equalize him in Wealth, keeps but half the alotted Number in Pay, and lives sparingly, which makes him take Sanctuary with regret sometimes under Badur Caun, he being always upon the Forlorn Hope. This Cheat is practi all over the Realm,False Musters the Practice of India. notwithstanding here are Publick Notaries placed immediately by the gul, to give No∣tice of all Transactions; which they are sure to represent in favour of the Governors where they reside, being Fee'd by them, as well as Paid by the Emperor; so that if a Defeat happen, it is extenua∣ted; if a Victory, it is magnified to the height: Those in this Of∣fice are called Vocanoveces. The Government of this Place is as in all other Cities of the Mo∣guls.The Govern∣ment and Commodities. The Walls are broken down, but the Gates are still remain∣ing: With the City's Safeguard Trade is fled, though it be commo∣diously feared, and furnished with course Chints, fine Lawn, and plenty of Cotton-Grounds; but the Plowmen and Weavers have followed the Merchants, a Rich one not being to be heard of in se∣ven or eight days Journy from hence.
The Buzzars therefore consist chiefly of Provisions, which they compel the Country to bring in, and sometimes take them by Force, by reason of the general Poverty reigning among them. Wherefore the 22d of May I left them,Returned by Nunny Gaot, or the little Hill. and took my Way by Nunny Gaot, or the Little Hill in respect of the other, which we saw mounted a prodigious height above us: Hither I came by twelve a Clock at Noon, a far shorter and easier Way than the other: It is ten Course from Jeneah, wherein we travelled between a Couple of Seva Gi's Castles; and overlooking the Gaot, is a third very like Je∣neah Gur, which hailed us; I sent one to answer them, but kept on my Course till I came to the Gaot, where I was constrained to bestow more time thn I was willing, 300 Oxen laden with Salt (which is so precious up the Country, as to be proverbially preferred to Bread, they saying, Whose Salt they eat, as we, Whose Bread,) stopping the Gap; but with a little Intreaty, after an hour's standing still in the Sun, I got them, by sending my Peons, to desist below, till we had widen'd the Pass above; after which it is feasible, being sup∣plied at fit distances with charitable Cisterns of good Water, and to∣wards the bottom adorned with beautiful Woods, delighting as well as refreshing us with the Shade: By Sunset I was in the Plain, where an honest Subidar that took off his Liquor, let me pass without trou∣ble, being more like a Scout than a Set-Watch. Nor do I believe the Mogul's Army dare venture to advance be∣tween these Streights,No Army likely to pass this way. which are so well maintain'd; but farther North the Hills seem to stoop more to the Plain, and it may be that Way they may pass; though this Way be tolerable for Caphala's and Merchants who have their Passports. We reckon to have measured this Day Fifteen Course, most in the Heat of the Day, to the side of a poor Village called Wesnure, where we rested under a Tree, the Coolies being unprovided for; nor could they purchase any thing here, the Inhabitants being hared out of their Wits, mistrusting even their own Countrymen as well as Strangers, living as it were wildly, betaking themselves to the Thick∣ets and Wildernesses among the Hills, upon the approach of any new Face; for my Horse by chance breaking loose, set a whole Gom or Town upon the hoof, they thinking Auren Zeeb's Luscarry at hand; thus unhappily live these, a Prey to every one. The Clouds had spread themselves over the Tops of the Hills, that they seemed to make a Ne plus ultra, or the World's-End. The next Day at Twelve a Clock at Noon we struck into our old Road at Moorbar,Glistering Flies about a Tree, scare the Coolies. from whence before we were misguided; we packed hence by Five in the Afternoon, and left our Burnt Wood on the Right-hand, but entred another made us better Sport, deluding us with false Flashes, that you would have thought the Trees on a Flame, and presently, as if untouch'd by Fire, they retained their wonted Verdure. The Colies beheld the Sight with Horror and Amazement, and were consulting to set me down, and shift for them∣selves; whereof being informed, I cut two or three with my Sword, and by breathing a Vein, let Shitan▪ (the Devil) out, who was crept into their Fancies, and led them as they do a startling Jade, to smell to what their Wall-Eyes represented amiss; where we found an Host
of Flies, the Subject both of our Fear and Wonder, which the sultry Heat and Moisture had generated into Being, the certain Prodromus of the ensuing Rain, which follow'd us from the Hills. This gave my Thoughts the Contemplation of that Miraculous Bush crowned with Innocent Flames, that gave to Moses so pleasant and awful a Prospect; the Fire that consumes every thing, seeming rather to dress than offend it. Thus we came to Barfta,Forc'd to keep Watch against the Wild Beasts. a despicable Country Town, Seven Course more; it is in possession of the Combies, who are not strong enough to aid their Herds against the devouring Jaws of the Wild Beasts, a young Buffola being seized the Night before, out of the Ta∣bernacle they lodged me in; wherefore they caution me to keep Fires all Night, lest the Horse might lose one of his Quarters, or our Oxen might serve them for a Supper; I added to the Fires a strict Watch, whose mutual answering each other in an high Tone, was deafen'd by the Roarings of Tigres, Cries of Jackals, and Yel∣lings of Baloos, or over-grown Wolves: At Cock-crow (the Lions Charm) we parted hence, and observed the Sheds here were round, thatch'd, and lined with broad Leaves of Teke (the Timber Ships are built with), in fashion of a Bee-hive: These Combies are the Wood-men. About Seven we overtook our deep Creek, and being somewhat swelled by the Rains, we followed its Current till we found it passable; about Eleven we returned to Gullean. The Hardship these poor Combies undergo was obvious to the sense of the very Coolies,The Coolies Reflections on the Miseries of these People. who often in this Journy would reflect on their own Happiness under the English Government; those being all so harass'd, that they dare not Till the Ground, never expecting to reap what they sow, or remain in their Houses, but seek lurking-Places in De∣serts and Caverns, being naked to the Violence of the Plunderer, and therefore both unsafe and uncomfortable Journeying for Tra∣vellers. I took up my Station where I was before, and sent my Man to the Havaldar to complain of the Treachery of the Guides; he professed he was asham'd, but a new Governor being since put over his Head, with the Command of a Party of Horse, he was incapable of punishing them; yet for what further Courtesy he was able to do he was ready, and to that end sent to the Subidar for his License for a Boat, which now are all pluck'd up and housed ashore, the Rains more than approaching, so that it was troublesome procuring one; but by their joint Power it was at last atchieved; which a cross∣grain'd Brachmin, supported by an outlaw'd Portugal, contradicted in despight of both, seizing it by Force with Three Files of Soldadoes. For which cause I was tied to the Consort of croaking Frogs,Prodigious great Frogs. ma∣king so hideous a Noise, that I took little Rest this Night: When Day broke I could hardly believe my Eyes, for Bulk, or Ears, for Sound, exceeding ours incredibly; and to raise the Wonder, this Night was the first of the Rains, before which none were heard: Wherein Pliny may be trusted, better than in some other Reports; for speaking de Ranis, he says, Mirum semestri vitâ resolvuntur in limum, nullo cernente, & rur∣sus vernis aquis renascuntur, quae fuere natae, proinde occultâ ratione cum omnibus annis id eveniat. Et Aristot. de Gen. Anim▪ cap. 4. Generantur autem in terrâ & humore animalia & plantae; quoniam humor in terrâ,
spiritus in humore, calor animalis in universo est, ita ut quodammodo ani∣maum plena sunt omnia. Sic Ovidius. Semina limus habet virides generantia ranas. Who all consent to the possibility of the thing, the prolifick Virtue lying hid in the slimy Matter, till a conjunction of fit Causes dispose it for suddain Action. Walking the Quarters of my Lodgings,The Nure-Tree. a more delightful, and as unusual a Prospect attracted my Animadversion; a great Tree full of stringy red Flowers, set in open Calices upon a long Stalk, like budding Grapes; which before the Sun had collected much force, I saw begin to fall in showers upon the Ground; desiring to handle one Bough, I observed them fixed; still they upon the Tree dropped till all was shedded, and the Ground strewed with them, which a Brach∣min carefully gathered up to reserve for a Physical use; but more truly out of Superstition, paying Rent for the Privilege: This Wonder is renewed daily, they Blossoming in the Night, and con∣trary almost to all other Plants, are disgusted with the Sun-beams, drooping in the day; which is like the Arbor Tristis at St. Thomas his Mount, only the Flowers of that are White and Sweet, and this Red and indifferently Scented; the Leaves of the Tree resemble those of a Walnut; in the Country Nomenclature it is called Nure; of what Virtue I cannot learn. Discharging here my Oxen,Cruelty to their Beasts. which I hired of a Gentue, who though they will not Kill their Neat, make no Conscience to Work them to Death, allowing them hardly Food to keep them alive. Neither are they less Inhuman toward their Sick,Inhumanity to their Sick. a Woman being brought to die among the Tombs in my sight; pretended to be done to avoid the Governor's troubling the Family (where she lived a Dancing Wench) for Money; they making themselves Heirs to their Estates when they die: Non ad eundem finem quem Herodotus ait, uti Antiquiores Aegyptii aegrotos suos non ad medicos, sed in compita, & publicas vias deferebant, populum praetereuntem pro morborum cura∣tione consulturi: Not for that purpose, as Herodotus presumes; the Egyptians brought not their Sick to Physicians, but laid them in the Streets and publick Passages, that the People passing by might be consulted for their Cure. Every Third Hour I had the din of a Man of God of the Moors,The Moor-men Priests follow Trades. permitted to come hither to call them to Prayers; as he cried aloud he stopped his Ears with his Fingers, that he might emit his Voice with the more strength, and less disturbance to himself; experience thereby directing us to hear our own Sounds the better; and some Anatomists tell us, Nature has framed a Cartilaginous passage from the hollow of the Drum of the Ear, to the process of the outward part of the cuneal Bone reaching to the Palat, which being open may possibly divert the Noise; but whether this do help, or is un∣derstood by them, yet this they do Practise; and this Afternoon their Sanctum Sanctorum was open, the Priest entring in Barefoot and Prostrating himself on the Mats spread on the Floor, whither I must
not have gone, could his Authority have kept me out; the Walls were white and clean, but plain, only the Commandments, wrote in Arabick in the West-end, were hung on a Table over an Arched Place, where the Priest Expounds on an Ascent of Seven Steps, railed at top with Stone very handsomely: It is supported within with Four sub∣stantial Pillars of Timber well carved, the Roof all Wood, with a square Hole over the Pulpit: Underneath are fine cool Vaults, and Stone Stairs to descend to a deep Tank, where this Priest was following the Occupation of making such Paper as they use; which after he had steeped Cotton Rags in Water, he by beating brought it into the form of Paper; and cutting them, or slicing the Mass into Sheets, was past∣ing them up on the Stone-sides of the Mosque, next the Sun, to dry; after which they are polished and glazed, and so made fit for their use. In the Evening I saw the reason of our stay this day;A Pragmatical Portugal hin∣dred me Em∣barking. a Pragma∣tical Portugal fled to this Place, for designing the death of a Fidalgo in the front of 40 Men marching to the Governor's; his Name Pedro Sylvio, a Rich Lout, no Gentleman: Besides these he keeps as a Guard to his Body, he has a Bloudy Leash of Cofferies imployed to be revenged on his Antagonist at Baçein; here he acts without Controle, and is about to accept of Pay under Seva Gi, he being courted there∣to, because he is a bold desperate Fellow, the fitter Instrument to ruin his Nation. In the mean time here arriving a Bombaim Boat,A Bombaim Shebar carries me to Bom∣baim. she was presently disburthened of her Lading, and I Embarqued, and the 26th of May came abreast of Tanaw, the Pass here being another main Impedi∣ment to the intended Trade up the Country with the Moors; which, had we in our possession, according to the Contract with Portugal, we might the easier make Seva Gi comply; and more than that, find Lordships for Englishmen, where they might live contentedly, and not be beholden to Foreign Supplies for Provisions: By Three the next Morning I Anchored against the Bunder at Bombaim, and Landed presently after Travally-Beat, delivering my Letter from the Caun to the President. Here rode an Europe Ship called the Fleece;What Europe Ships I found in the Road. which lost her Passage last Year, coming too late out of England; and about Noon the Rain∣bow arrived, they being both forced to put in at Bombass, an Island of the Portugals on the Coast of Melinda, which produces excellent Ivory, and other Miracles, from whence they failed together; till just on this Shore a Storm separated them, the Fleece gaining this Port; the Rainbow fell first in with Surat, and to Day came to an Anchor here. Thus if I have been too prolix in this Narrative,The Conclu∣sion. I must beg your pardon for endeavouring to satisfy you on two Scores, which none but one of my Profession must pretend to; the one relating to the Women, and the other to their Fortified Gurs or Castles; and if it find your Acceptance, it is all the Aim I have, and my Pains is there∣by sufficiently rewarded. Bombaim 1675. Sept. 22.
A RELATION OF THE Canatick-Country. LETTER IV. CHAP. I. Concerning our Shipping for Carwar; of the Factory there; the Unsetled Condition of the Place; and our coming to Goa. SIR, THE Pleasure you express on the Receipt of Mine,Chap. I. makes me continue your Invited Trouble, as truly not enjoy∣ing any thing till I know your Sentiments; and there∣fore is it, next the quieting your Concern for my Life in so unhealthy a Place, I let you know Bombaim is my Station no longer than the President resides there: From whence you may perceive I have had Opportunities to expatiate. And now the Rains are over,The President goes to Surat, and Friendship concluded as well between particular Factions, as the Dutch; the President esteemed no Enemies so formidable as still to exact his Presence on this Island; wherefore constituting Mr. Philip Gyffard in his Place, he took Ship∣ping in the Fleece, for Surat, accompanied by the Rainbow, New Lon∣don, and East-India Merchant, English Ships, the Bombaim Merchant, and other Country Ships. After some time,I to Carwar. Seva Gi's Na∣val Power. Curiosity more than Business tempted me to go with the Chief of Carwar, that I might see Goa. In our Pas∣sage at Serapatan, to the South of Dan de Rajapore, a Strong Ca∣stle of Seva Gi's defended a deep Bay, where rode his Navy, consisting of 30 Small Ships and Vessels, the Admiral wearing a White Flag aloft.
Arriving at Carwar,Letter IV. and the Chief going ashore, he was met on the River by the Governor with two Barges; and landing, was wel∣comed by the Ordnance of the English House. Carwar,His Arms have Con∣quer'd all round Carwar. what remains of it, is under the New Conquest of Seva Gi, being lately, with Anchola, Pundit, Cuderah and Semissar, brought under (though all of them very Strong Places): At which time the English were moulding a Fortification, or House of Defence, for their own safety, when by the Assistance of a Small Pink they defended themselves from all Hostile Mischances; and though their Town was wholly laid in Ashes, yet they built this their stately Mansion Four-square, guarded by Two Bulwarks at the Commanding Corners of the House: In the mean while Seva Gi made himself Master of Carwar Castle, together with the rest, the Inhabitants flying to the Woods and Hills for shelter: Thus it continues not without daily disturbance from these Sylvans and Mountaineers, the commiserated Subjects of Visiapour, who often make an Head and fall upon them; by which means the Government is unsetled, and the Governors shift from Place to Place. Our House stands on a delicate Mead (on the Ground of **** Cutteen Esq The Ground our House stands on granted by the King. a Cornish Gentleman, who had it by grant from the King of Visiapour, being impowered by a Claim of his Countrymen to the Right of Trading to the East Indies, but long since left off) Seated on an Arm of the River, surveying a pleasant Island stored with Game: The Castle is nearer the Hills, and higher up the Streams; about a League off the Sea the Hills guard the Plain till they make a Bank against the Ocean. Seva in his Government imitates the Moors in this,Seva governs by Brachmins. appointing a distinct Governor here for Town and Castle, and over all these a Commander with a Flying Army, who is Superintendent: Into Places of Trust and Authority he puts only Brachmins, or their Sub∣stitutes, viz. Pundits, (a mean cast) for Physicians; Sfosdars or Cen∣turions▪ Subidars, Havaldars, Civil Governors, Generals or Fight∣ing Bishops; of whom truly may be said, Privata cuique stimulatio vile decus publicum. They are neither for Publick Good or Common Honesty, but their own private Interest only: They refuse no Base Offices for their own Commodity, inviting Merchants to come and trade among them, and then rob them, or else turmoil them on ac∣count of Customs; always in a Corner getting more for them∣selves than their Master, yet openly must seem mighty zealous for their Master's Dues: So that Trade is unlikely to settle where he hath any thing to do; notwithstanding his Country lies all along on the Sea-shore, and no Goods can be transported without his Permission; unless they go a great way about, as we are forced to do. It is a General Calamity,The hard Usage of Seva Gi's Sub∣jects. and much to be deplored, to hear the Complaints of the poor People that remain, or are rather compelled to endure the Slavery of Seva Gi: The Desies have Land imposed up∣on them at double the former Rates, and if they refuse to accept it on these hard Conditions (if Monied Men) they are carried to Pri∣son, there they are famished almost to death; racked and tortured most inhumanly till they confess where it is: They have now in Limbo several Brachmins, whose Flesh they tear with Pincers heated
Red-hot, drub them on the Shoulders to extreme Anguish, (though according to their Law it is forbidden to strike a Brachmin.) This is the accustomed Sawce all India over, the Princes doing the same by the Governors, when removed from their Offices, to squeeze their ill-got Estates out of them; which when they have done, it may be they may be employ'd again: And after this fashion the De∣sies deal with the Combies; so that the Great Fish prey on the Little, as well by Land as by Sea, bringing not only them, but their Fa∣milies into Eternal Bondage. However,Distractions of the King∣dom of Visia∣pour. under the King of Visiapour the Taxations were much milder, and they lived with far greater comfort; but since the Death of the late King, his Son being in Minority, and the King∣dom left to a Protector, the Nobles, who held their Provinces as Feu∣datories or rather Vassals of him, begin to withdraw their Duty; Bullul Caun, General under the Protector Cowis Caun, an Hobsy, or Arabian Coffery (they being preferred here to Chief Employ∣ments, which they enter on by the Name of Siddies) having but the other day set upon the Protector and assassinated him; who was so terrible to Seva Gi's Men, that to render him the more dreadful, they speak of his Hobsies after this manner, That with their Swords they are able to cut down Man and Horse: That greater Commoti∣ons than yet have happened, are to be expected in this Kingdom; not only Seva Gi, but the Mogul at this time bidding for the Kingdom. Bullul Caun is a good Soldier, and a Patan; yet as much envied by the Duccan Princes, as Cowis Caun was by him; whereupon it be∣hoves him to be watchful of their Motions, to which Vigilancy adding Expedition, he yet keeps them from joining Forces: Where leaving him on his Guard, I will present you with a small Taste of the Condition of the People about us, which fell out the Day before I set out for Goa, being desirous to be present at the Natal. Early in the Morning came Delvi's Men,Miserable Condition of the Inhabi∣tants, betwixt the Desy and Seva Gi. 500 in Company; whereupon Seva Gi's Men being but 100 Foot, and 25 Horse, retired into the Castle; miserable Souls for Soldiers on both sides; they look'd like our old Britains, half naked, and as fierce, where all lies open before them: They had a loud Noise of Musick, and a tumultuous Throng of People, and thus they marched on without any Order, till they encamped near our House: Their Leader was a Man of a good Presence, but a Rogue, an Hindu by Birth, a Soldier by Education; making this his Maxim, Ibi Fas ubi maxima Merces: There is the greatest Right where is the best Pay. At Noon, by the Hurly-burly of all Ranks of Men, Women, and Children, with what little Substance they had, flying under our Guns for Succour, we were given to understand Seva Gi's Men were in Motion (whom they dread more than the other); but on ap∣pearance of the Desy's Grob they retreated again: This Desy is one that was Rendero of all this Country, under the King of Visiapour, and had 1000 Men under him (of whom Delvi was Chief); but being entrapped by his Subtilties, whom he least suspected (being raised by him), he was forced to subscribe to the Power of Seva; of whom Delvi not having his Ends, he turns about, and does pro∣mise to set his former Master in Possession once more. At Night we
had Letters (for you must know both Parties Salam to us, being in so strong an House, else we should be liable to their Fury), That Seva Gi's Party of Horse, whilst Delvi had passed the River, seized his Baggage, which was left guarded by 60 Men, whereof he ha∣ving Notice, soon overtakes them, and causes them to surrender their Booty, driving them to the Castle, with the loss of two of their Horses, and one Cavaleiro slain: Under these Circumstances these Folks are left to struggle, without hope of Relief from Visia∣pour, they being all to pieces there. The next Morning,Take Barge for Goa; where we found the Passes well guarded. in the Company's Baloon of 16 Oars, with seven Peons, two English Soldiers, two Factors, and my self, having a Competency of Arms and Ammunition, with a small Piece a-head, we set Sail for Goa. We had not gone far down the River, before we met two Boats full of Men for a Supply to Seva Gi. Near Sun-set we reached an Oyster-Rock, on which we landed, and fed plentifully, being in their prime this cold Season; our Bargemen would frequent∣ly dive 9 or 10 Minutes, and rise with great Lumps of Oysters clod∣ded together, as big as a Man could well carry. The next Morn we put into the River Sal, half way to Goa: At Three in the After∣noon we entred the Mouth of Goa River, where in convenient Pla∣ces stand four Forts and a Block-house, not only impassable by Wa∣ter, but impregnable by Land; as the Dutch proved them twelve Years together, having a Fleet riding constantly before them, and for that time, while the Monsoons permitted, making continual As∣saults, but with little Success: On the left, stored with Brass Pieces, stands the Agoada, or the King's Aquaduct, running from the Top of the highest Hill to the Water-side, where for a consierable Space is a Platform of their chiefest Ordnance; facing this is the Fort and Monastery of Nos Signior de Cabo, a pleasant as well as strong Cita∣del: Beyond this, in a wide but dangerous Bay (so that what Boats come in must pass the Channel under the Muzzles of the Guns) stands Marmagoun, defending that Island and Bay: By the Bar is Roys Magi on the Left, and Gasper de Dios on the Right: Before Sun-set we came to Captain Gary's House at Pangeim, over the Bar a Mile; a Seat by reason of the Healthiness of the Air chosen by the Fidalgoes, who have beautified it with their Summer-houses; the Viceroy ha∣ving a Palace here, where he retires in the Heats and time of Ship∣ping: Betu on the other side enjoys the same good Fortune. The Eve to the Eve of the Natal,The Gallantry of the Portu∣gals, and ne∣glect of their Carracks. or Christmas, we came up the River, adorned all along with stately Churches and Palaces; the Wa∣ter circling with its Stream several Islets, and half-way up to the City passes under a Bridge of 36 Arches of Stone; and from thence runs a Causeway of Stone two Miles in length, admitting the Flood only by two Sluces, into Wears or Dams made for Fish and Salt, and ends with three Arches more: A little beyond which is depainted on a Church, a Story of a Ship brought from Cape Bon Esperanzo, hither in one Night, and fixed where the Church is now built, and by that means helping them with Timber for the Roof, and two Crosses set up as far off as the Ship was in length; whether true or false, I ask no questions, for fear of the Inquisition, which here is a terrible Tribunal. At Noon we came in view of Goa, not without
the sight of a many Baloons passing to and again very swiftly,Chap. II. it being the greatest Pastime they have to Row against one another; more bewitched with such outward Gallantry, than prompted on to more Benficial Charges; their Europe Ships lying here neglected till they rot for want of Cargo, Three great Carracks being ready to drop in Pieces; notwithstanding they have small Trading Ships in the River, and against the City, beside a Carrack under the Agoada, which they send home this Year. CHAP. II. Takes a View of Goa; makes a Voyage to Vingula; Engages with the Malabars, and returns us to Carwar. THE City of Goa looks well at a small distance, not being to be seen far by reason of the adjacent Hills and windings of the River; it is Ten Miles up the River, stands upon Seven Hills; every where Colleges, Churches, and glorious Structures; it has Gates to it,The Arch∣bishop's See, and a Wall; it is Modelled but rudely, many Houses dis∣gracing it with their Ruins, the Streets interfereing most confusedly: We were directed to a Tavern against the See, the Habitation of the Archbishop of the Order of St. Bernard; which the Clergy here mightily stomach, especially the Jesuits, who bend not to his Au∣thority, having a Provost of their own,and Provost of the Jesuits. going in as great State as the Archbishop; he appears abroad in a Sedan, and has Eight Cle∣rico's on Foot Bareheaded, walking on each side, beside other At∣tendance: The Cathedral is not often excelled by ours at home for the bigness of the Pile; the Architecture but Plain, though very Neat; the Altar and side Chappels filled with Images of delicate Sculpture of our Blessed Saviour and the Virgin Mother, Gilded all over with Gold. From thence we were brought to the College of the Dominicans,The College of the Domi∣nicans the Seat of the Inquisi∣tor. the Seat of the Inquisidor, who is always one of this Order; a mag∣nificent Front to the Street, ascending by many steps, being a huge Fa∣brick; the Church surpassed the Cathedral, the Pillars from top to bottom being overlaid with a Golden Wash, and on the Walls the Martyrology of their Order: In the Sacristan were Massy Silver Can∣dlesticks, and other Vessels very Rich; the Dormitories elegantly contrived in upper and lower Walks, and the whole without Com∣pare to others that fell in our Ken: Erasm. Vincit opibus Parathalassi∣um tot candelabra argentea, tot statuae aureae, Baptisteria, &c. The Ha∣bit is a white Vesture with a Crotchet under a black Gown, or Cowl, like Nuns. Their College was well replenished with Devotes, and commanded a blessed Prospect. The Paulistines enjoy the biggest of all the Monasteries at St. Roch;St. Roch. in it is a Library, an Hospital, and an Apothecary's Shop well furnished with Medicines, where Gasper Antonio, a Florentine, a Lay-Brother of the Order, the Author of the Goa Stones, brings
them in 50000 Xerephins, by that invention Annually; he is an Old Man, and almost Blind, being of great Esteem for his long pra∣ctice in Physick, and therefore applied to by the most Eminent of all Ranks and Orders in this City; it is Built like a Cross, and shews like a Seraglio on the Water. We paid a Visit to the Domo of Bon Jesu,Domo of Bon Jesu. the Church an admirable Piece, the Repository of St. Xaverius, the Indian Apostle, where is a famous Tomb in Honour of him, who first spread the Gospel as far as China, and sealed it with his Martyrdom, near Two hundred Years ago, leaving his Body a Miraculous Relick of his better part, it still retaining its vivid Colour and Freshness, and therefore exposed once a Year to publick view, on the Vespers of his Festival. St. Paul's was the first Monastery of the Jesuits in Goa,Why the Je∣suits are called Paulistins. from whence they receive the Name of Paulistins; it is the Seat therefore of their Provost, who is Independent, and Rules suo Jure. The Jesuits are Clad in Black Gowns with a Collar and Rings, with high round Caps flat at top, Shoes but no Stockins, as few in∣deed, either Clergy or Laity have here: (Por Amor de Frisco). Of all Orders when they die they are Inhumed in the Habit of the Order they belong to, without Coffins. The Policy, as well as the Trade, of this place, is mostly de∣volved from private Persons on the Paulistins, wherefore this saying is in every Body's Mouth; A Fransiscano guardo minha mulier; A Paulistino guardo minha denier. We went to the Convent of St. Austin's,The Convent of St. Austin. Inhabited by that Order, who when they go out, wear Black Gowns (girt about with a Lea∣thern Girdle) like our Bachelors of Arts, with Black Hoods; with∣in doors White, of the same Fashion with a Scapulary. We saw several Seminaries,Several Semi∣naries. or Schools, where the Students dispute in long Cloaks, or Vests. We saw the Convent,The Francis∣cans. or Church, of the Franciscans, or Grey Friars, with Cords instead of Girdles about their Middles, Sandals instead of Shoes; they wear Grey Broad brimmed Hats, as Countrymen do, as well as Cowls abroad, their Habit being borrowed of the Rusticks; they touch not Money, but carry one with them that will, and are Mendicants. The College of Carmelites is on an high Mount,The Carme∣lites. prospecting the whole City, it is a fine Building; these are Begging Friars too, Eat only Fish, except in Sickness, Cloathed with a course Russet Tippet Coat and Vest, girt about with a Cord: In their Hall where they Repast, at the upper end on the Table is placed a Death's Head; over their Cells, Sentences denoting each Virtue, which were Wrote in Capital Letters of Gold over the Doors, as Fortitude, Patience, and the like: Here we left many Devout Old Men on their Knees, Praying Fervently, and Living Piously. We descended from this lovely spectacle to the Spittle, where we found the Poor aring well from their Benefactors. The forepart of their Vespers to the Natal,The Spittle. I spent at the King's Hospital; where their Care for the Sick is commendable, an hand∣some Apothecary's Shop furnishing them with Medicines: The Phy∣sicians
here are great Bleeders, insomuch that they exceed often Galen's Advice, ad deliquium, in Fevers; hardly leaving enough to feed the Currents for Circulation; of which Cruelty some complain invidiously after Recovery. In our return we saw a Nunnery,St. Monacha a Nunnery. and the Nuns at their Devotion, a Confessor through the Grates Reading Mass, and performing the Ceremonies to a Couple with Maiden-Crowns on their Heads, ready to be admitted into the Virgin Society: —Innuptaeque aemula Phebos Vitta coercebat positos sine lege capillos. They had good Faces and excellent Voices; the Nunnery was called St. Monacha; here is another of St. Clara's. Near the Palace is a Modern,The Theatini in the Virge of the Palace. but a compleat Convent of the Theatini, where Captain Gary staid to shew us the Palace, not so Sumptuous as Convenient; passing the Guards we were usher'd into a long Gallery, hung round with the Pictures at length of all the Vice-Roys that had been in East-India down to the present Vice-Roy: At the upper end was the Canopy Royal and Chair of State; upon information of our being there, we were introduced the Vice-Roys Presence; he received us Standing, and after a little Confe∣rence, dismissed us. A Proper Man, Courteous to Strangers, his Name Lewis Mendosa de Albuquerque, newly created Marquess by the King; in this Room was another Canopy of State, with the Arms of Portugal. Coming into the Court-yard we saw some Men in Gowns, like our Aldermen, the Emburgadors, or Council of the City, going to attend the Vice-Roy to his Devotion at the Church of Misericord, where was to be Presented a Pious Comedy; but their Representations being too tedious, and the generality making Re∣ligion the least of their business, not respecting either God or the King, they made such a rout among the Women, that we were glad to leave and Reimbark for our Lodgings. At Night we were alarmed by a paultry Fellow that took our House for his Sanctuary, being forced to it for his own Security; the Soldiers assuming great license for want of Pay, and the Cofferies for want of Victuals, so that every one walks the City with his naked Sword in his Hand for his own defence at Evening; and now within Doors, and in a Private House, we were forced to make our Arms our Pillows. The next day we passed the Bar for Vingula;In our going to Vingula we Engage a Ma∣labar Pirate. half way we put ashore to refresh our Men, and at Ten in the Morn set out again; by Twelve we came close up with a Malabar that had seised a Grob, but we soon made him yield his Prize to engage with us; which they did briskly for Two hours, striving to board us, casting Stink-pots among us, which broke without any Execution, but so frighted our Rowers, that we were forced to be severe to restrain them; they plied their Chambers and small Shot, and flung Stones, flourishing their Targets and Darting Long Lances; they were well Manned in a Boat ten times as big as our Barge, and at least Sixty fighting Men besides Rowers; we had none to manage our small Gun, the Gunner
running away at Goa after Sluts in Brothels: One of the Factors un∣dertaking it, was blown up by a Cartrige of Power, and squenched his Cloaths a-flame in the Ocean, so that they were fully bent to board us; but they rising to come in, we all this while having sculk∣ed under their Targets, discharged our Blunderbusses, which made them sheer off, never to come near us again; after which we chased them, they flying afore us. The Spectators of this Encounter were the Dutch Chief and Go∣vernor on the Shore,They caress us ashore at Vin∣gula. and a Ship of a dozen Guns in the Road; by Three we came a-shore with slight Hurts, but cried up mightily by the People, who are continually infested by these Pirats without any Resistance: The Dutch receiv'd us at their Factory very kindly, whose House is handsomely seated a Mile up a Shallow River, (except at Spring Tides, when lusty Ships may come up); it is built upon Ar∣ches Geometrically, by the present Chief, in the Figure of a Roman T, all of Solid Stone; it is Trenched with a Square Trench, and de∣fended by a Platform of Two Great Guns on every side, and Two Great Bulwarks, bearing Smaller Guns at the Two Corners of the House; the Front is Italian Fashion, passing to it over a Draw-Bridge; at Night we walked into the Town, part of it lately destroyed by the Syddy; where was a Buzzar, and a neat Choultry of the Dutch's, and beyond a Garden watered by a Fresh Stream, where we bathed: After Supper they treated us with the Dancing Wenches, and good Soops of Brandy and Delf's Beer till it was late enough. We went next day to the Governor,Monuments for Women burnt alive with their dead Hus∣bands. who Complimented us highly; he is under the Tyrannical Government of Seva Gi, where all Bar∣barous Customs are exercised; and here it is permitted the Women not only to burn with their dead Husbands, but here are many Mo∣numents raised in honour of them. Et certamen habent laethi, quae viva sequatur Conjugium; pudor est non licuisse mori. Ardent victrices & flammae pectora praebent, Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris. A shame 'tis not to die; they therefore strive, Who may be fam'd to follow him alive. The Victor burns, yields to the Flame her Breast, And her burnt Face does on the Husband rest. Which Custom, if we believe Tertullian, is as old as Dido, on a generous Account; not by constraint, as these are mostly said to be. Dido profuga in alieno solo, ubi regis nuptias ultro aptasse debuerat, ne tamen secundas expeteretur, maluit è contrario uri quam nubere. The Famous Dido, driven a Stranger into another Country, was courted by the King, which one would have thought she should willingly have entertained, rather than to refuse a Second Marriage on so hard Terms, as to burn her self alive, for fear of polluting her self there∣by; which shews that Virgil in his Account of that Lady killing her self for Aeneas, was a Fiction more to his own Credit than hers.
At Hubly in this Kingdom are a Cast called Linguits, who are bu∣ried upright, whose Wives when they have a mind to accompany their Husbands into another World, are set in the same Pit with them, covered up to the Shoulders with Mold; who after Ceremo∣nies performed, have their Necks wrung round, and the Pit filled up with Earth immediatly. Our Factors having Concerns in the Cargo of the Ships in this Road,Return from Vingula to Goa. loaded two Grobs and departed; I leaving them to prosecute their Voyage, I put in at Goa again; and in Captain Gary's Baloon rowed round the Island over against Goa, where the Industry of the Portugueze Ancestry is worthy of our commendation, in securing their Land both from Water and their Enemies, by strong Banks and ne∣cessary Block-Houses; Seva Gi possessing all against it, called Norway, famous for Curtisans. Hence I went to the King's Yard,The King's Yard viewed. where lay half a Score Galeons fitted for any Expedition; in these the Best Fidalgos think it no scorn to go Commanders, it being the only thing they can serve their Country in; these are they they send out with their Caphalas to con∣voy them, when they return with Corn either from the North or the South; when every Cabesso de Squadroon has Two or three Royal Gal∣leys under him, that wear the Arms of Portugal in their Ancients only, and the Admirante, Vice Admirante and Captain-Major wear the King's Flag aloft as well as a Stern: The best of these carry no more than Eight or Ten Small Pieces, and the rest fewer; over all these there is a Generalissimo both by Sea and Land, who is John Corea de Saw. Incited daily by New Wonders,The Industry of the Portugal Ancestry. I intended to inviron the Island of Goa; which is circled by High and Strong Walls, with Flankiers on every winding of the River, besides Four or Five lusty Block-Houses, commanding the whole Work, a thing of vast Compass and Expence, striking through the heart of the Island; which is altoge∣ther near Thirty Miles in Circumference, the Wall parting it in the half: We passed as far as to the Fort of St. Lawrence, which is placed conveniently to command the Mouth of the River from Marmagoun Bay; we endeavoured farther, but Wind and Tide prevented us; wherefore thinking it more facile to enterprise it on the other side, we deferred it till another day: All the Land about Goa is divided in∣to Islets, it lying in the heart of them: Whereupon the next day that lay fair for our Design we came over the Bar, and sailed with a favourable Wind into Marmagoun Bay; on the right part of it were many pretty Caves, or small Bays, in one of whom rode near twenty Grobs, loaden with Cocoe-Nuts, Cair, Salt and Salt Fish: Beyond it half a League an Islet of Emanuel Lobos, fortified and main∣tained in despight of the State, till lately reconciled. From hence we parted to Old Goa on the main Island of Goa,A well weigh∣ed choice of an Harbour. which with its various Creeks and Bays makes up the left side or Cod of the Bay, pointing out in the middle of Nos Segnior de Cabo, it lying short between Marmagoun and the Agoada, which makes the Mouth of the Bay to be reckoned from the Head-lands or Out-guards, some Three Leagues over, and Nos Segnior de Cabo a Commodious assistance to them both by its well-placed Ordnance, easily reaching them on ei∣ther
hand; but withal befriending Marmagoun, from which it is the widest, with huge Stakes of Rocks hid under Water, that Vessels of Burthen must either seek out the Channel or Shipwreck themselves, or else force themselves on the Mouth of their Guns; a Fortunate and well weighed Choise of a Port and Harbour: In our Course we saw the bottom of the Bay meet with the River of St. Lawrence, and a Fleet of 30 Grobs more ready to receive their Lading; the Bay is two, if not three Leagues deep; the truly Noble Aldeas of the Fidal∣gos, the Temples and curiously wrought Crosses of the Ecclesiasticks, striving on every open Strand and rising Hill to outshine one ano∣ther, by their Whited Outsides, and Artificial and Delicate Adorn∣ments. At our Landing the Sea bestowed a kind Murmur on the yielding Sand,Old Goa. and cast us ashore in a Place quadrated more for still Retire∣ment, than noisy Commerce; there lying before its Banks Canooses belonging to Fishermen, and Baloons of Pleasure only; the Segnioros minding nothing less than Merchandizing, and the Pover imploying their Fish-hooks, and knitting-needles to get a Livelihood: So that I presume Old Goa need not complain for the loss of Trade, which she never had; nor lament the deprivation of Costly and Spacious Build∣ings, which she never wanted; but hath them rather as a Country Town (of whom she is the Dame) than City, though she might claim the Title of Mistress; her Soil is Luxurious and Campaign, and abounds with Rich Inhabitants, whose Rural Palaces are immured with Groves and Hortos, refreshed and cooled with Tanks and Rivu∣lets; but always reserve a graceful Front for the Street, which are broad and cleanly at this time of Festivity, celebrating with Trium∣phant Arches and most Pompous Pageants: Palenkeens pass as com∣monly as at Goa it self, the People as urbane, though less pestered with Drunken Comrades, as Soldiers, Seamen and Ruffians; the Market place is stored with Provisions, and the Parish provided with a large Church; but nothing antiquated as I could discover, by which it is easy to judge Old Goa never was deserted; but Now Goa hath stoln from hence for the sake of Traffick, for that purpose the River is more suitable than this Bay; it may measure from one end to the other, two Miles. Abreast of it on an hanging Hill is a Sumptuous Structure of the Capuchins called Sancto Pilar,Sancto Pilar the Seat of the Capu∣chins. the Ascent to it is by a winding Stair∣case cut out of the Rock, and Railed with Stone Banisters; this Or∣der is discalceated also, and consanguineous to the Franciscans, differ∣ing only in Superiority and Austerity, their Hood is long and taper∣ing, on their Scapular in fashion of a Sugar-loaf; to both whom are annexed a Lap-Fraternity, which wear the Mantle and Tippet, but not the Vest and Cord, neither are they shaved as the Fathers are: So that all Degrees of them in every Order are comprehended under these Three Classes, viz. Patres, Fathers; Fratres, Brothers; Ju∣venes, Young men: To these also belong the Sisterhood of Sancta Clara. Thus parted we from the comely Galataea,The Way be∣twixt Old Goa and New Goa. and bent our Addresses toward the Courts of the stately Amarillis, whose Highways were full of Travellers, Country Mansions, Villages, Churches, shady
Stands, and Places to ease the Brawny Shoulders of the wearied Slaves: Half Way is a School, where their Cofferies (which come most from Mosambique, or Bombass) are taught to sound on Trum∣pets and Loud Musick; a Gang of whom forced their Noise on us along the Fields. A Mile wide of the City we entred a Gate that was strong, to which the Wall is contingent, that compasses the better Part of the Island together with the City. From Old Goa it is three Miles: Within the Wall a fair Road leads to the City; a little out of the Way is erected an high-wall'd Well, and goes up Steps to a Pair of Gallows, whereon Malefactors are left hanging till they drop into the Well, or the Birds prey on them. By Night we gained the Out-part of the City, boasting in as large a Ruin of the Moors, as their own numerous standing Fabricks; ly∣ing so in Obloquy of the hated Mahometans, who once made all stoop, where the Christians have now advanced their Sacred Sign: We quartered our selves this Evening in a Tavern kept by a Chinese, who are White, Platter-fac'd, and Little-eyed, tolerated on account of embracing Christianity; our Baloon met us, and coming round by St. Lawrence was here before us. Going the next Morning to the Palace-stairs,Their Prisons and Executi∣ons. we saw their Sessions-house, the bloody Prison of the Inquisition; and in a principal Mar∣ket-place was raised an Engine a great height, at top like a Gibbet, with a Pulley, with steppings to go upon, as on a Flag-staff, for the Strapado, which unhinges a Man's Joints; a cruel Torture. Over-against these Stairs is an Island, where they burn (after ex∣posing them to the Multitude) all those condemned by the Inquisi∣tor, which are brought from the Sancto Officio dress'd up in most horrid Shapes of Imps and Devils, and so delivered to the Executi∣oner. As we rowed by the Powder-Mills, we saw several the Holy Office had branded with the Names of Fetisceroes, or Charmers, or in English, Wizards, released thence to work here; known by a Yel∣low Cope, Weed, or Garment, like our City poor Pensioners, sleeve∣less, with an Hole for their Neck only, having a Red Cross before and behind. St. Iago, or St. James's Day, is the Day for the Aucto de Fie, when a general Gaol-Delivery is made of those unhappily intrapp'd in the Inquisition; at which time there is a great Cavalcade to the Cathedral, and every Fidalgo appearing there, is honoured with being a Patron to some of these poor Wretches; St. James being the Tute∣lar Saint of this City. On whom Seva Gi minds them to invocate,Seva Gi a bad Neighbour. having but just now wrested Pundit, the chief Strength of Visiapour from that King; on the surrender of which followed the Conquest of the Low Country beyond Carwar: And by this means the Diamond-Trade is intercepted, this being the greatest Mart for small Diamonds, be∣fore these Incursions: And not only so, but they are straitned for Butchers Meat, which used to come down plentifully that way; for these had rather kill a Man, than suffer a Beast to be led to the Stall; and not only for Meat but Firing, they being beholden to that Coun∣try for Fuel, as well as Timber for Building. These Calamities, be∣sides the Approach of Seva Gi's Army, make no small Distractions,
especially having small Recruits of Europe-Men; so that the Padres must not only Pray but Fight, there being in the Convents more than in the Garisons. GOA Is the Metropolis of the Portugals in the East-Indies,The Power of the Viceroy and Archbi∣shop. and the Residence of a Viceroy,The outward Port of the Fidalgoes. who gives Laws to all Seculars, though he cannot exe∣cute them on the Fidalgoes in Capital Crimes, the King reserving the Definitive Sentence in such Cases to himself; they are therefore sent home to be tried in Europe, by the established Courts of their Kingdom. The Archbishop is Supreme in Spirituals, or ought to be so. The City is a Rome in India, both for Absoluteness and Fa∣bricks, the chiefest consisting of Churches, and Convents, or Reli∣gious Houses; though the Laity have sumptuous ones all of Stone; their Streets are paved, and cleaner than the tops of their Houses, where they do all occasions, leaving their Excrements there. They live with a splendid Outside, vaunting in their number of Slaves, walking under a Street of their own Umbrelloes, bare-headed, to avoid giving Distaste in not removing their Hats: They being jealous of their Honour, pardon no Affront; wherefore to ogle a Lady in a Balcony (if a Person of Quality) it is revenged with a Bocca Mortis, or to pass by a Fidalgo without due Reverence, is severely chastised; they are carried mostly in Palenkeens, and sometimes on Horseback. The Clergy affect little of outward State,The Clergy how respect∣ed. going out only Frater cum Socio, in Couples; they salute a Father by first kissing the Hem of his Garment, then begging a Benediction. The Mass of the People are Canorein, though Portuguezed in Speech and Manners; paying great Observance to a White Man, whom when they meet they must give him the Way with a Cringe and Civil Salute, for fear of a Stochado. The Women,The Women and Children. both White and Black, are kept recluse, vailed abroad; within doors, the Richer of any Quality are hung with Jewels, and Rosaries of Gold and Silver many times double; Moneloes of Gold about their Arms, Necklaces of Pearl about their Necks, Lockets of Diamonds in their Bodkins for their Hair, Pendants in their Ears; a thin Lungy, or Half-smock reaching to their Waste, shewing their Skin through it; over that, abroad, a close Doublet; over their Lower Parts a Pitticoat or Lungy, their Feet and Legs without Stockins, but very Rich Slippers. Amongst them some are extraordinarily featur'd and compleatly shap'd, though not of that coruscant Beauty our English Ladies are; and for Mien far be∣neath them, being nurtured up in a lowly Bashfulness, whereby they are render'd unfit for Conversation, applying themselves wholly to Devotion and the Care of the House: They sing, and play on the Lute, make Confections, pickle Achars, (the best Mongo Achars coming from them), and dress Meat exquisitely, not to put the Sto∣mach to much trouble, but such as shall digest presently; Supoes, Pottages, and varieties of Stews, in little China Dishes or Plates, which they shift before you are cloy'd, and at a common Enter∣tainment
alter half a dozen Modes: Their Relishing Bits have not the Fieriness of ours, yet all the pleasure you can desire; and to speak truly, I prefer their ordinary way of ordering Victuals be∣fore any others. If a Stranger dine with the Husband, and he con∣sent to have the Wife come in and sit at Table as our Women do, there is no means of persuading her, but she will be much offended if you taste not of every thing they cook. The little Children run up and down the House naked, till they begin to be old enough to be ashamed. The finest Manchet it may be in the World is made here,The finest Manchet, &c. and the purest Virgins Wax for Tapers. At Nerule is made the best Arach or Nepa de Goa, with which the English on this Coast make that ener∣vating Liquor called Paunch (which is Indostan for Five) from Five Ingredients; as the Physicians name their Composition Diapente; or from Four things, Diatesseron. The way they give Notice from the Outguards of what Ships are seen off at Sea,How the Out∣guards inform the City. is after they have spread the King's Standard, to ele∣vate so many Baskets on Poles; which Sign the next appointed Watch receives, and so successively till it arrive at the City. On New-Year's Day,Return'd to Carwar. Stilo Veteri, with Captain Gary in his Ba∣loon of Ten Rowers, and Six Servants, we set sail for Carwar, and had brought half Salset behind us, when the Moon being two Hours high we discovered a Light, and immediately Three Sail making after us, and by the Shore another small Sail intercepting us: Our Men that before would not handle an Oar, fell to it tightly, and two more pursuing us out at Sea, we ran fairly into Cola or Salset, a Fish∣ing Town, where lay several Boats to carry off Mountains of Fish salted on the Beach▪ the Scent whereof was very noysom under a miserable Shed we took for our Lodging: The next Morning we came early to the River Sal, where we found Eight Boats scared in for Protection against the Malabars; where we had this Advice, That Five were roving in sight, and had vowed Revenge for the In∣jury we did them at Vingula, killing their Captain and three or four of their Chief Men, besides as many more Soldiers, all which they buried at Anjediva: We staid here therefore this Night, and lay in the open Air by the River's side, being sufficiently soaked by the Dew. Captain Gary therefore the next Morn, not willing to hazard himself on a Voyage undertaken only for Pleasure, procured a Pilot Boat to go before us, and make Signs by a White Flag, if the Coasts were clear at every Point; and so we got safe to Carwar River's Mouth, when the Chief having notice of our coming, came on Horseback to welcome us, and accompanied us in the Baloon to the House. This Captain Gary is he that was the last Governor for the King on the Island Bombaim: He is a Person of a Mercurial Brain, a better Merchant than Soldier, is skill'd in most of the Languages of the Country, and is now writing a Piece in Arabick, which he dedicates to the Viceroy, with whom he is in great Esteem. He lived at Achein, and was created a Noble by that Queen; was born a Vene∣tian, but of English Parents, by which means he understands Ita∣lian, Portugueze, and Latin, perfectly, and is an accomplished Cour∣tier.
CHAP. III. A Pilgrimage to Gocurn, where was a great Gentile Solem∣nity. A cursory Discourse of the Bordering Princes. AS much to the Southward as Goa is to the North, lies Gocurn, whither I took a Pilgrimage, with one other of the Factors, Four Peons, and Two Biggereens, or Porters only; we set out all on Foot the Second of February, at the beginning of the Heats, at Ten in the Morning, and with wonderful toil clambered up Anchola Hill, a woody Mountain of an extraordinary height; where resting a little while we made for the bottom; at which lies an Horse of an Haval∣dar's Interred under an huge square Stone, and his Effigies Dormant upon it Escuthceon, or Diamond-wise; not much farther, the Wood being on Fire, we were in danger not only of being Smothered but Roasted (this place not long since the receptacle of Delvi and his Crew, and therefore I suppose purposely Burnt): Et neque jam cineres ejectatamque favillam Ferre potest, calidoque involvitur undique fumo. But having conquered by our better Angels this lively portraicture of Hell, we were led into an happy Elysium, or Plain, that was bounded by the immense Ocean; and had we been Shades, to have been satisfied with an Aierial Diet, we might have fared well, for nothing else could we purchase, the poor Inhabitants being Fishermen, were left by the iniquity of Delvi, without either Fish, Boats, Nets, or Rice; and upon that account unlikely to supply us. Night approaching we knew not where to better our selves than un∣der a Mango-Tree; where our wearied Spirits afforded us not much time for Contemplation, nor our eager Stomachs much Sleep; wherefore by break of Day we made for Anchola, where we found the Buzzar half Burnt, and the remaining Shops without Tenants, a bad Cordial to an empty Maw: We sent our Pass to the Gover∣nor, and procuring from him another, we hastened to seek our own Provisions. Seva Gi spared not this Town when he took the Castle,Anchola Castle supplied with Brass Guns from a Portu∣gal Shipwreck. so that it is almost down or deserted; the Soldiers by that means disfurnishing themselves of all Necessaries, but what they seize by Violence abroad; the Castle is a fine place and of good force, bearing Fifty Brass Guns, the Moors had got out of a Portugueze Shipwreck; it commands as far as the River Gongole, the utmost extent of Seva Gi's Dominions, South; Two or Three Mile out of the Town we met with some Game, and made Prey of it, walking by the Strength of it to Gongole River. Where we Ferried over and took up our residence this Night at Gongola,The Country properly Ca∣natick. the first Town in the Country, which still retains the Name of Canatick, and therefore is properly so called; though we shall shew
by and by all this Tract of Land we have passed from Guzzerat deserves the same appellation,Chap. III. being originally so. The People looked Chearful,Peace makes People chear∣ful. and live in Peace under a quiet Go∣vernment. —Sine militis usu Mollia securae peragebant otia gentes. By the break of the next Dawn we got to Gocurn,Our coming to Gocurn di∣scovered. and ex∣changed our English for Moors Cloaths, yet not so privately but that we were discovered by some that told our Banyan (who was come to perform a Vow to the Manes of his dead Father,) that Two Englishmen were come to the Tomasia, or Sight; whereupon he came to us before we expected, with a Band of Thirty or Forty Men; but we desired to be concealed and pass for Moguls, that we might see without being taken notice of; he was conformable thereto, and we went into the Town, which was in a Valley near the Sea; formerly very splendid, now of more esteem for the Re∣licks of their Pagods than any thing else. It is an University of the Brachmins and well Endowed;It is an Uni∣versity. here are innumerable, but ruinated Pagods; Two only of any Mark, and they half standing; they were Large and of good Workmanship in Stone, after their Antick and Hieroglyphical Sculpture; they had, as all have, a dark Entry at the farther end, wherein are continually lighted Lamps burning before the Duel, or Image, seated there to represent a Glory, or Phosphorus, whither they resort to Worship and Offer Oil, Rice, and Frankincense, at it's Feet, on an Offer∣tory; some make a great pother of Anointing and Washing it, being lavish both of their Pains and Cost. At this time the Brachmins Reap a great Harvest,This Tomasia, or  the Brachmins Harvest. for this Place is of such repute for its Sanctity and Meritoriousness of a Pilgrimage hither, that all sorts of Idolaters, from the remotest parts of India, come in sholes, , celebritas ad quam plurimi mortales conveniunt , and we found so many, that the Streets were troublesome to crowd through; with much ado we got into the Buzzar, or Fair, only so upon this occasion, long Rows of Sheds being put up on both sides the high Streets, where the Two great Pagods stood, one at each end. We were carried by the Tide of the People that bore that way out of this place, to a large oblong stone Tank, with Descents to go down all about it; in the middle a neat Pagod supported on Four Marble Pillars; here during this Festival at Evenings, are blazing a Lecque of Lamps. In this all of both Sexes Wash (this Solemnity being called the Jatry,The Jatry, or Washing. or Washing) and Present Rice and Mony to the Brach∣mins; and the Fish which Swim here frequently receive their Benevolence, being so Tame you may catch them with your Hands; to be the death of one of these is held Piaculare. Those whose Parents or Friends are deceased,A Vow per∣formed. the Hair of the Head is an Offering to their departed Ghost on this manner; After the Barber in this Water has shaved the Head and Beard, it is deli∣vered
wrapped up to the Brachmin; who brings a Cow and a Calf into the Water, and binding them with Frontlets ceremoniously, they bestow on them, as they are disposed, either for Ornament or Main∣tainance ever after; imagining their Souls to have their residence in them: From whence they are conducted to the Pagod, which they enter bare-footed, and offer to the Duel; returning, they smite on a Bell hung in the Body of the Church; and going to the Porch, re∣ceive their Slippers, washing afterwards at more liberty for the rest of the Festival. It was a Primitive Custom among the Jews to shave when they had made a Vow, Act. Apost. Chap. 18. v. 18. Coasting along the Sea-side,Jougies or De∣votes. we came to the Pomaerium of the greatest Pagod, where near the Gate in a Choultry sate more than Forty naked Jougies, or Men united to God, covered with Ashes, and plted Turbats of their own Hair; two above the rest remarka∣ble, one sitting with his Head hanging over his Shoulders, his Eyes shut, moving neither Hands or Feet, but always set across, his Nails overgrown like Talons: The other as a check to Incontinency, had a Gold Ring fastned into his Viril Member. And now we returned into the Market-place,A Solemn Procession of their Duels or Heroes. having obtained leave to seat our selves by the Chief Captain to see their Duels pass by in Pomp, being to do their Devoirs to a Mother Pagod: At the upper-end of the High-street were two great moving Pageants drawn on Wheels, two Stories high, with a Cupulo on the top, which was stuck round full of Streamers of Orient Colours; the inferior Stories were painted with deformed Figures of their Saints, on every side Portals: In the lowest was placed the Duel, attended by their Chief Priests with a dark Blue Cope over their Shoulder, their under Garments White, and Puckeries on their Heads, a Mussal within, and an Ofta∣gary (a Skreen of Silver and Velvet with Sarcenet Borders) to keep off the Sun. Thus the Chief Naik with his loud Musick of Horns, Trumpets and Drums waited on it, and the Brachmins with softer, of the Dancing Wenches singing, with Bells at their Wrists and Heels, and their Tamboles or Tabrets: An Ensign of Red, Swallow-tailed, several Chi∣tories; little, but Rich Kitsolls (which are the Names of several Counties for Umbrelloes); 500 Men, with Javelins of Brass and Steel, with Bells and Feathers, as many more with Guns under his Command; and the Naik Wherry with like fashioned Ensign of Green, bordered with a Checker of White and Green, followed by 200 in the same order as before; after these followed a Medly of Pots and Pans of Copper or Brass, Men clattering on them, and dancing a good measure: When the Train drew near, it was drawn by a Team of Holy Men, the People rising and clapping their Hands as it passed to the opposite Pagod; a Troop of the Gentry in Cavalcade rode after it, where having paid a Visit, it returned with the like Solemn Procession, and by discharging of Guns the Cere∣mony ended: There were several other Duels fanned by Women, offering Censers of rich Perfumes with huge Lights; before which People possessed with Familiars ran Cudgelling themselves; others in a different sort of Mummery belaboured themselves, till they
could not stand, all striving to outdo others; thus blind and heated were they in their Zeal. To describe every particular Duel or Pagod, both for the number, and difficulty of the Shapes, would be impossible; take therefore only one that had escaped the Fire, and therefore highly venerable; 'twas cut out of Excellent Black Marble, the height of a Man, the Body of an Ancient Greek Hero, it had four Heads, and as many Hands, had not two been cut off; it was seated on an Offertory in a broken Pagod; a Piece of Admirable Work and Antiquity, ex∣ceeding, say they, Bonares, the other Noted University of the Heathens. Who founded these,Their Foun∣ders un∣known. their Annals nor their Sanscript deliver not. But certainly Time, and the Entry of the Moors, ruined them. This, though a Principal University, can boast of no Bodlean or Vatican; their Libraries being Old Manuscripts of their own Cabalas, or Mysteries understood only by the Brachmins. They live not under a Collegiate Confinement,Their Divines under no Vow of Ce∣libacy. but in pretty Neat Houses plastered with Cow-dung, which is done afresh as oft as they sweep them, where they abide with their Families, Celibacy being no Injunction to their Divines; excepting one House of the Sinai Cast, where is a Reverend Old Man, Head of their Tribe, who pro∣fesses a Life without the Company of a Woman, and has the Atten∣dance of a great many Young Ashmen, and Grave Brachmins: These live a reserved Life, and spend it wholly in Praying and Abstinence; as the others count their Prayers by Beads, these do it by Cowreys, Fish∣shells: They wore Red Caps, such as those are brought from Tunis; and our Seamen wear daily aboard Ship: But the Stricter, and more Undefiled Cast, is the Butt, the reason whereof you will find in the General Account of India. All Brachmins are distinguished by a Cotton-thred athwart their Body from their Left Shoulder,A Brachmin can hardly at∣tone the vio∣lation of his Cast. hanging down under their Right Arm; which Badge, if they violate it, costs them vast Sums of Money to redeem, besides the undergoing of strict Pennances. They fetch Water for the Duels from the Tank with loud Musick and Dancing Wenches three or four times a-day (the Brachmins waiting in course) and those dancing Wenches and Boys set a-part for that Service,The Cast of the Dowlys. dare not dance afore any else: These Dancers are taken out of the Cast of the Dowlys, who are obliged to devote the Eldest of the Males and Females to that use; having for that reason large Dispensations concerning their Marriage, or the Liberty of getting Children, being common to all: To conclude with these, Whether Religion make these People Morose, or it be to be attributed to the Virtue of their Manners; you see in them a carelesness of behaviour towards Strangers, neither regarding the Novelty, nor Gawdiness of their Garb; being here, as it is said, Romae, Lutetiae ac Venetiae, —Nemo quicquid miratur. From hence we trooped to Tudera, at the Mouth of Mirja River, over a Rocky barren Hill, where the Company's Barge or Baloon met us; and went up in it to Mirja, where our brisk Young Banyan treated us
with the Dancing Wenches; his Father dying soon, left him young, and he out of Government, lavishes into Excesses not approved of by that stingy Tribe. At Mirja stands a Castle,Of Mirja. which though old is a very fine one, being double Wall'd and Trench'd, with high Turrets on the Ba∣stions: It was surrendred by the Treachery of a Moor Governor, and is now under the subjection of the Canatick Ranna; it has a wide Moat about it, but few Guns: The Town has a Buzzar, at the end of it a Cemitery for the Moors, with an ample Aquaduct of good Stone. Being tired,An huge Snake. and lying to repose out of the Noise of the Dancers, on the Bank of the River, under a shady Tree, I was made at by an unsizable Snake, which I hardly escaped, had it not hissed with an unheard-of Noise before me, which rouzing me, made me shift its speedy Course, as it angrily gathered up its Body, and darted its self into the Flags on the River-side: These Creatures are dreadful to the Inhabitants, and when I related my Hazard, they wondred I came off so, there being of them big enough to master the largest Ani∣mals: After my Danger was over, I was told she had a Nest in that Place, it being lately turned into a Burial-place. Hic, obitèr, notandum quod scribit Plinius, lib. 10. Hist. Nat. cap. 66. scilicet, Ex cerebro putrescente humano angues gigni. Hujus rei exemplum habet Plutarchus in vitâ Cleominis, quem scribit à Ptolomaeo in crucem actum fuisse, ejus∣que Caput paucis post diebus ingentem Dracnem Complicasse. Et Rolfi∣nus simile quid narrat declarante Diemerbrook, Anat. lib. 3. cap. 5. Here by the by, might be noted what Pliny writes, to wit, That Snakes are generated out of Human Brains putrifying, &c. Returning we overtook the Portugal Armado from the South, with Two hundred Paddy-Boats with their Convoys, and touched at An∣gediva, from whence we came to Carwar. Before I left Mirja I received this Information from the Natives,The Story of Canora. That the Canatick Country reaches from Gongola to the Zamerhin's Country of the Malabars, along the Sea, and Inland up to the Pepper-Mountains of Sunda, and the Precinct of Sergi Caun. Bed∣mure, four Days Journy hence, is the Capital City, the Residence of the Ranna, the Relict of Sham Shanker Naig, (murdered by his No∣bles) Raja of Canora; who now Rules in her Son's Minority, Basse∣pae Naig, the young Raja, by and with the Authority of one Timi Naig, that from a Toddy-man has by his cunning Policy, more than by true Prowess and Valour, raised himself to be General and Pro∣tector. Sergi Caun, a Prince of the Kingdom of Visiapour, and he, have lately entred into an amicable League and firm Confederacy, who have already Eat together, whereupon it is bruited Timi Naig is about to embrace the Mahometan Faith. The Prime Nobility have the Title of Naiks or Naigs, as those of Malabar, Nairoes. The Language is Canorein, which to me seems to be the Primitive, from the Malabars up to Surat; the Country short of it, as well as Speech, being Canorein, and those between varying only in Dialect, and the Names of the Country altered, as the Chance of War pre∣vailed.
Here are Wild Elephants, some Pepper, and store of Beetle-Nut, and Wild Nutmeg,The best Pep∣per comes from Sunda. used to dye withal. The best Pepper in the World is of the Growth of Sunda, known in England by Carwar Pepper, though five Days Journy distant from thence. This Raja vends his Pepper, as it is the best, at the best rates, finding a Trade up the Coun∣try, and therefore is it we have little of it in Europe; he contents himself to live at Sunda, from whence he and his Country receive denomination, being as little Absolute as the rest of the Princes of Visiapour, being Tributary, or rather Feudatory, obliged as well by Allegiance as Purse. The Raja of Saranpatan must not be slipped by in silence,The Nose-cut∣ting Raja of Saranpatan. because his way of fighting differs from his Neighbours; he trains up his Soldiers to be expert at a certain Instrument to seize on the Noses of his Enemies with that slight either in the Field or in their Camps, that a Budget-full of them have been presented to their Lord for a Breakfast; a thing, because it deforms them, so abashing, that few care to engage with him; and this he makes use of, because it is against his Religion to kill any thing. He enjoys a vast Territory on the back of the Zamerhin. Beyond him lies Raja Madaree,Raja Madaree. possessing all from him as far as the Cape, bordering on them both. All these are the disjointed Members of Visiapour, neither trust∣ing on another, nor uniting for the common Good of the Kingdom: Since Seva Gi has put all into a Ferment, they know not who to side with, being uncertain of his Intentions; though he tells them, his Compeers the Duccanees, he is their Champion, and that none of them besides himself has the heart to stand up for their Country; and therefore if he chance now and then to rob them, it is but to reward himself and Soldiers for his and their pains in endeavouring to free them from a more unnatural Slavery. This makes them begin to Cabal,The Irresolu∣tion of the Duccanees, not brooking the Perfidy of this Man on the one hand, or the Insolence of Bullul Caun, being a Fo∣reigner, on the other; nor to call in the Mogul to their Assistance; though still it is not resolved by a General Consent to be aiding to each other. In the mean while Seva taking advantage of their Irresolution,Emboldens Seva Gi. ranges where he lists, quite through Visiapour, as far as Badnagur in Gulconda, with one Detachment led by his Son; with another he flies himself as far as the Walls of Surat, leaving the Main of his Ar∣my at Pundit, before Goa: His Son, after he had plundered and burnt Badnagur, having been observed in his Passage thither by Bullul Caun, did no harm in Visiapur; but the Protector being to watch the Conspiracies of the Duccanees, could not be long out, for fear of being intercepted in his Return, and was therefore pressed to retreat to his Post; and Sambu Gi retiring, set upon Hubly, Rabay, and other Mart Towns, and ransack'd them: And Seva Gi his Father being not wholly disappointed at Surat (which he calls his Treasury) by their shutting their Gates upon him pro formâ, but give him his usual Pis∣cash; whither on his repeated Excursions being forced to ask leave of the Raja of Ramnagur,His wild Ex∣cursions. to carry his Army (by reason of the Mogul's Forces in the Plain Country) through his Country, over the Hills
that reach within Thirty Miles of Surat; and having obtained leave of the Raja of Ramnagur, made himself thoroughly acquainted with the Avenues, and in his last Return took it; giving only this Rea∣son, That it was inconvenient for him to trust him with the Door of his Exchequer. The Inhabitants of Ramnagur are the Salvages cal∣led Coolles. Bullul Caun being at the Helm, thought fit, on these unaccounta∣ble Pranks, to send to him, to be informed how he durst attempt the Robbery of these Places? O, quoth he to the Messenger, Go tell thy Master, I wonder how he durst dispossess any Great Man of Life or Place, without having advised first with me, (reflecting on his usurp∣ing the Protectorship by the Death of Cowis Caun); I did  only to let him know, I, not he, am a Member of Visiapour. By which,The Protector of Visiapour breaks the Measures of the Confede∣rates. Bullul Caun foreseeing the approaching Storms, was too wary to stay the breaking of them over his Head, but fairly steps forth to prevent them: Wherefore surprizing Sergi Caun and Timi Naig, as they were moving to join with some of the forwardest of the Duccanees, the first fled, not without loss, the other was environ'd by Bullul Caun's Army, and compelled to stand it out, till the Ca∣mels of War, who carry small Petareroes, slew the greatest part of them, and Timi Naig himself was trodden to Death under his Ele∣phants Feet, whereupon an easy Victory ensued, the rest yielding when their General was slain; who is not much lamented by the Nobles of Canora, whose Greatness he diminished by cutting them off upon small Suspicions, and advancing in their steads inferior Per∣sons to great Employments; confining the Princess-Mother with her Son to a Pension, and that but ordinary. Things now begin to return to the Royal Current, and they confess him a Chastisement for their former Rebellions against their Natural Prince, vowing a perfect Allegiance to the Infant Prince, in whose Name since the Death of Timi Naig, all things are transacted. These were to have been seconded by Badur Caun,Bullul Caun beats the Mo∣gul's Army. the Mogul's Ge∣neral, who has since appeared twice before Visiapour with a formida∣ble Army, pretending to right the Duccanees, and to call Bullul Caun to an account, but has been as often repulsed by Bullul Caun and 12000 of his Patans, who the last time made them leave their Kosanna or Treasure, some Elephants, 1000 Camels, several Pieces of Ordnance, and cut off the Bassa of Busserah with his Son, whose Heads were put on long Poles on the Walls of the City, and slew of the common Soldiers Four or Five Thousand; not without great da∣mage on their own Party: So that he must be distressed for all this Rout given, unless the stomachful Duccanees come to an Accommo∣dation (from which they are averse as yet), if, as it is likely, the Mo∣gul send fresh and more numerous Supplies. So miserable is that State where the other Members grow too pow∣erful for the Head, as in this costituted Government of Duccan, where the King's Munificence to the Grandees has instated them in Absolute Authority over their Provinces, that they are Potent enough to engage one another, and countermand the King's Com∣mands, unless suitable to their Humours.
By the fundamental Establishment of this Realm,Chap. IV. every Lord in course was to come to Court once a Year, and all to pay their Ac∣knowledgment by doing Homage to their Sovereign, where he could demand their Heads, they becoming obnoxious to his Displeasure; but the present disturbances have found matters of excuse to release them from these Injunctions, and furnished Seva Gi in this bustle with encouragement to March up the Gaot again with 15000 Horse and 30000 Foot, knowing Bullul Caun neither to be at leisure from his Intestine nor Foreign Broils, to divert him from his wild Enterprises. CHAP. IV. Of the King and Kingdom of Visiapour; their Policy and Government; Hobsie-Cofferies Preferred: The present Protector, and other Members of Duccan: The Life, Exploits, and Expeditions of Seva Gi: The Wealth, Strength, and Powers of each, with respect to the Great Mogul as Supreme. OF which Incendiary of India, as well as of these Parts, to give you some knowledge, it will be necessary (these Affairs being so interwoven) to look back as far as the time of Ramras, about Two hundred and fifty Years ago, sole Monarch of India in∣tra Gangem, and the last Emperor that was a Gentile; he nourished Three Slaves that were Chias Moors, and advanced them to the prin∣cipal Employs both of Court and Empire, to wit, Catub Caun, Ma∣ster of his Hunt; Nisham Maluke, his Chief Treasurer; Adul Caun, Catwal, or High-Constable; from these Offices they rose to be Commanders of the greatest Provinces in the Realm, with as Ab∣solute Power and Authority as could be transferred on Subjects, be∣ing Kings, only wanting the Appellation: The first of Baynagur, now Gulconda; the second of Dowlet Abud, and all the Country from Guzerat to Bengal, and great part of Duccan (into which his Successors were crowded till they Annihilated); the Last, the other part of Duccan, with all the Continent on this side the Gates, till it conclude in the Cape of Comora. Thus were they seated,The Conspi∣cy of Ramras his Favourites. and by the sequel not minded to be dis∣mounted; wherefore they jointly Combined against their supine Master, whilst he too credulously relied on their Fidelity, and outed him and many of his Heathen Nobles, only such as were befriended by strong Gurrs, or Fastnesses upon the Mountains, who are those that retain the Name of Raja's to this day; and who are still not∣withstanding so Numerous, that would they stand up unanimously for their ancient Freedom, the Mahometans could not stand in Com∣petition with their Idolatrous Tribes; sed quos Jupiter vult perdi, dementes facit; but whom God will destroy he makes them infatua∣ted
to their own Ruin; for they are so jealous one of another, that without that inbred Disposition it were impossible to keep them under. After this Conspiracy every one betook himself to his Govern∣ment,They make themselves Kings, and are Curbed by the Mogul. there being no more to possess themselves of; the imprudent King having given all away, even to his Person, which they scru∣pled not to Violate, Extinguishing the very Lineage, or leaving them so undefenceable, that they are only said to be a petty Rajaship in the Plain, and thereby easily prevented to aspire to their Lawful Sovereignty; the Supremacy being established in their own Hands, and shared to their mutual Contents, they took upon them without controul the Regal Dignity and Title of Pedeshaws, and exercised their Functions very Amicably some Years; and so long they kept themselves safe enough from the Moguls, who began to make Inroads into their Country, without any notable Success, till they found means to make them break with Nishamshaw, who maintained the Frontiers against them; for all that, he was beset afore and aban∣doned behind, he held them play a long while; though by degrees the Moguls from without, and the perverse remissness of his own Sect at home, reduced him to that part of Duccan, the entire Con∣quest of which the present Auren Zeeb finished (though unhand∣somely) he having been Hospitably receiv'd when he came under Co∣lour of a Fakier, and a Banished Man from the Court at Jeneah; where I saw the Ruins of a sumptuous Edifice Nishamshaw Erected for the present Emperor of the Moguls: The Reward which he gratified him with, was the Extirpation of the Royal Race of the Nisham∣shaws; whose Destruction the remaining Two may at leisure repent, being thereby incapacitated to make Head against the Mogul, maugre all their Forces; when before, Nishamshaw alone could withstand, and even Defeat his most puissant Armies; but since his downfal they have enough to do to Guard themselves.On the fll of  the Raja' Desert. The Rajah's (the most Powerful of whom subscribed to his Jurisdiction) beginning to set up for themselves; so that the Two Kings of Visiapour and Gulconda are often left alone to endure the brunt, the Rajah's coming in as they list. For all that, what is left of Duccan under the King of Visiapour, is still a spacious Kingdom, reaching North to Jeneah, South to Porto Nov, bounded East with Gulconda, West with the Ocean; though unsettled and ill Governed, whereby it is often distressed; but when it comes near to the upshot, Gulconda puts in either as a Mediator, or an Assistant with Men, (for which he pays dear if it be publickly, for then the Mogul turns his Arms on him) or Mony he helps him to underhand; though he is mightily awed by the Mogul, suffering the Mogul's Ambassador to reside at Court in quality of a Supervisor; who Lords it without controul, causing his Coin to be stamped with his Master's Inscription, his Subjects Mulcted and Sessed by his Imposi∣tions; yet he is sensible should he seize Duccan, Gulconda would lose the stoutest Bulwark on that side his Kingdom, which hath made him these Forty Years a firm Confederate to Visiapour; sometimes sending Piscashes of considerable Value to Seva Gi and the Bordering Princes and Raja's to disturb the Mogul's Forces, other-whiles
stopping the Mogul's Mouth with a Tribute, as also his Generals with large Presents. Which are the Reasons the Mogul hath made no farther Progress of late Years,How it comes to pass the Mo∣gul has made no farther progress in his Conquest of Duccan. satisfying himself to keep these Kingdoms in the na∣ture of Vassals, though never absolutely Conquered; frustrated chiefly by the means of the Soldiery and great Ombrahs, who live Lazily and in Pay, whereupon they term Duccan, The Bread of the Military Men: Or because that he is never wholly at leisure to prose∣cute these Wars himself, being always busied in one place or another of more import, as lately against the Patans, and now against the Ʋsbeque Tartars; besides a vast Army always upon the Marches of Persia and Candahar; so that this huge Empire seldome has its Auxiliary Bands entire: However distracted as they are, this flying Battalion would easily suffice to dispatch these Two Kingdoms one after another, there being ready on the Confines of Duccan never less than Forty thousand Horse, beside Foot. Notwithstanding all these formidable Numbers, while the Generals and Vocanovices consult to deceive the Emperor, on whom he depends for a true state of things, it can never be otherwise but that they must be misrepresented, when the Judgment he makes must be by a false Perspective; whereby it is apparent on what Bases these Kingdoms are supported. Of the Government of Gulconda something hath been spoken al∣ready,The Govern∣ment of Duc∣can. it remains therefore to give an account of Duccan; the sub∣stance of which is, that as the former was Modelled according to the Policy of Indostan, with this difference, that Eunuch's wedded to their Master's Concerns, were promoted from the dregs of Slavery to Empire, so here Cofferies at their first arrival as Slavish, are be∣come as endeared to their Master; who, as they Merit, have the first places of Honour and Trust imposed upon them, with this Proviso, ever to be faithfully obliged to their Lord; in which point their ap∣proved Faith has rarely failed, Interest teaching them to be true to him that raised them; they thereby being liable to the envy of those they are purposely set as a Checkmate to; for by their exalta∣tion, the swelling exorbitancy of other Princes is corrected, and they being only at the Will of their Master, are tied to their good Behaviour. On the contrary,The Duccan∣nees are Prin∣ces Born. the Lords of Duccan are Born Princes, assume Honour from their Lands, have as perfect a Right to them as the King to the Kingdom, and descend from Father to Son by Inheri∣tance (though the Commons are as meer Slaves as any where in the East besides, excepting none); whereupon they grow Insolent and Stubborn, and are not so easily Bridled, as where the Rule is Arbitrary, and are only restrained from Raising Men in the King's Name and for his Use; but these make Peace and War, Build Forts, and fall out one with another, and with their Sovereign too at their own Pleasure; and hardly Unite, though a common neces∣sity require; nay many times side with the Enemy. However, when the King gets them in the Toil, they are treated as they deserve; for he makes bold with their Heads, takes their Estates wholly into his Custody and for his own Use, bestowing them on his Creatures, when Forfeited, making them understand,
that they are obliged by Fealty to follow his Command, as their shewing themselves at Visiapour in course to pay their Respects de∣monstrates; which yet of late they have done but remisly, making a Salam at Four or Five Course distance, and then accompanied in an Hostile manner, as if coming to Besiege the City, more than to perform their Duty: For which they plead the King's Minority, be∣ing either Afraid, or too Proud to commit their Persons, or give Ho∣mage to the Protector, being an Alien, and a Patan, who hath but lately wrested the Management of Affairs from the hands of Cowis Caun, to whom was intrusted the Safeguard of the King and King∣dom, by the Last Will and Testament of the Deceased King, and (with much ado) at length confirmed by and with the general Consent of the Duccannees; he being from an Hobsy Caphir made a free Denizen, and Naturalized by the precedent King (who only in this Nation arrive to great Preferments, being the Frizled Woolly∣pated Blacks) under the known stile of Syddies). He,Cowis Caun the Protector Murthered at a Treat by Bullul Caun. although an excellent Man of War, submitted himself too often to be overcome with Wine (than which among Musselmen nothing renders them more odious) and upon that score Pretences were found to lay the blame of the Government, and the Loss of the Country, over-run by Seva Gi, upon his Head, together with other Disorders. Though the Patan knew well his Commission was to put a stop to those growing Mischiefs, and had he not been emu∣lous of the other's Charge, was Man enough to have deterred Seva Gi from his Attempts. But Ambition knows no mean, and therefore lets all to the hazard, rather than admit the Commands of a Supe∣rior; wherefore he stands Idle, and studies only how to displace the other, which was effected in a small time after his being called back. For he inviting Cowis Caun to a Treat, who suspecting least, when no∣thing was pretended but Friendship, came with a slender Retinue, and taking off his Cups freely, fell dead drunk into the merciless Snare of his Enemy, who surprizing his Followers with 12000 brave Patans, made way into the Royal Castle, where the young King became a Prey, the Caun first a Prisoner, and then a Sacrifice to the Lust of the Usurper. And this is the sum of the present Tumults of this Kingdom,The Successi∣on of the Kings of Visiapour. which at this juncture of time, in the face of a mighty Host of the Moguls, and the frequent Incursions of Seva Gi from the Mountains on the other side, beside the Civil Mutinies and Dissentions within, to prevent ill consequences, calls for a skilful Pilot; for it never, since the primary defection of Adul Caun, was in such danger, from whom to this present King, is transmitted the Stile of 1. Adul Shaw: As Caesar to the Romans, or Pharaoh to the Egyptians. 2. Asoph Adul Shaw. 3. Bissa Alah Adul Shaw. 4. Ibrahim Adul Shaw. 5. Sultan Mahnud Adul Shaw. 6. Alah Adul Shaw. 7. Sulton Socodre Cauder Adul Shaw.
Long controverted whether he should reign after his Father Alah Adul Shaw, it being bruited that Alah Adul Shaw was begotten by an Elephant-keeper, when the King's choicest Elephants were for∣ced to be stabled near the Womens Quarters, to hide them from the Mogul's Ambassador (whom they dare not refuse any thing he begs in his Great Master's Name), where one of them found the Conve∣niency to descend from the Trunk of his Elephant into the Queen's Apartment, and get her a Son when the good Old King was past his Labour, and withal she fixed him upon the Throne: Which some of the Issue of Sultan Mahmud enquiring into, made their Claim, and upon the expiring of Alah stirred up Factions, with hot Altercations on either side; but were finally quelled by Cowis Caun, who conti∣nued Sultan Socodre Caudre Adul Shaw, till he was taken Prisoner and slain by Bullul Caun the Patan, who may do now as he thinks fit, the Young King being scarce Ten Years old. It was thought he intend∣ed to have delivered both King and Kingdom to the Mogul; but 'tis believed as long as he can keep both for his own Ends, he will not. He yet Salams to the King,Bullul Caun keeps the King and Kingdom in Possession. and carries it fairly, endeavouring to win the Duccanees to a good Opinion of him, which they seem little to regard, unless he would restore the Fort, City, and Royal Person of the King, and divest himself of his Power; all which he holds yet Hero-like, maugre all the Practices of his Adversaries; who now, as he hath attained the first Place in the State, we therefore must reckon him the Chief Grandee or Prince of Duccan, imme∣diately next the King. Bullul Caun, General and Protector. His Salary is 60 League of Pagods, 20000 Horse, 100000 Foot out of the King's Demesnes annually; besides Camels and Elephants equipped for Battel. Sergi Caun's Country maintains 3000 Horse and 10000 Foot, at 15 Lecgue of Pagods per Annum. Sunda Raja's Pepper-Country is worth 30 L. P. but pays one half into the King's Coffer, and now and then Seva Gi shares with him; it maintains in good Pay 12000 Foot, and 3000 Horse. Samba Gi Raja, Brother to Seva Gi, In Baligaot can raise 10000 Horse, and 20000 Foot; worth 30 L. P. per Annum. Ekou Gi Raja, another of Seva Gi's Brothers, Who is very solicitous with him to desist from his lewd Courses of
Robbing and Stealing, and content himself with his Purchase; which he derides, and tells him he is no slowbelly, to desire to expire lazily on a Bed, rather than to meet his final Doom in the Field; and to sit down as he does, with 10 L. P. 2000 Horse, and 8000 Foot. Syddy Jore Maintained 2000 Horse, 16000 Foot, 28 L. P. per Annum. Rustam Gemma Was worth 30000 L. P. 10000 Horse, 20000 Foot. Both these outed by Seva Gi. Syddy Massute, 5000 Horse, 10000 Foot, 20 L. P. A Potent and Eminent Member of the Realm. Sheke Minas in Baligaot, Enjoys large Possessions there, as does the Raja of Canora in Canora. Seva Gi is reckoned also as a diseased Limb of Duccan,The Members of Visiapour. impostu∣mated and swoln too big for the Body; in some respects benefiting, in others discommoding it; beneficial, by opposing the Mogul's Entry into the Kingdom; but prejudicial in being his own Paymaster, rewarding himself most unconscionably; all Conchon being little enough for him, extending in Length along the Sea-Coasts, 250 Leagues, that is, from Balsore Hills to the River Gongole; where nei∣ther is he limited in his extravagant Desires, expecting only opportu∣nity to gain further. Inland he hath not much, the Gaot seeming to be a Natural Line of Circumvallation to the Up-Country, where it is Campaign, though below Hilly; so that you ascend to it by Mountains piled on one another, over which Seva Gi hath total Do∣minion, the Duccanees not striving to retake any thing, for all he hath blocked up their Ports, which may prejudice them for the fu∣ture; an irreparable Damage, (Arab Steeds being the Life of their Cavalry); they having only Porto Novo beyond Tutticaree left themfree. Nor has he done this Injury to them alone, but the Mogul hath the same measure up as far as Surat; so that he enjoys them wholly, ex∣cepting what the Portugals have, and the English at Bombaim; which are of no Import in respect of Trade, while the Caphalaes are hin∣dred to pass those Ways; of which did he know or consider the Ad∣vantage, he might amass greater Treasures than he purchases by pil∣laging and pilfering, and might come off with the Glorious Name of a Conqueror; whereas otherwise, following his barbarous Courses of Fire and Sword, he merits no more than to be branded as a Thief: Witness those intolerable Cruelties, Devastations, and De∣serts made by him every where in his Range up and down in the Mogul's Territories, as well as in the Duccanean.
'Tis undeniable he hath taken and maintains against the Moguls Sixty odd strong Hills: But the Cause is, the Moguls are unacquaint∣ed with, and their Bodies unfit for such barren and uneasy Places; so that they rather chuse to desert than defend them: Whereby it is sufficiently evident Seva Gi is unable in the Plain to do any thing but Rob, Spoil, and return with all the speed imaginable: And on that account it is Aurenzeeb calls him his Mountain-Rat, with which the greatest Systems of Monarchy in the World, though continued by an uninterrupted Descent of Imperial Ancestry, have ever been infested, finding it more hard to fight with Mountains than Men. Thus it falls out here,The Moun∣taineers in all Conquests the last that stand out. by the like Chance as in most Conquests, that though the major Part have submitted to their Victorious Arms, yet some out of Confidence in their Strength, Reputation, or Fortitude, have been so daring as to oppose by open Violence or se∣cret Stratagem, the acquired Trophies of the Triumphing Party: As the Apennegeni did the Romans, and the Wild People about Taurus and Caucasus the Grecians; the Welsh, the English; the Highlanders, the Switz; and as many as have been encouraged thereto by the inac∣cessibleness of their Fortresses, or the Discontent of some Great Ones to head them: From whence, though inconsiderable in them∣selves, it is, that they presume to boast of their never being totally subdued. Such are the Rajahs of the Mountains,Seva Gi raises himself on the Ruins of other Lords. the most eminent among whom is Seva Gi, derived from an Ancient Line of Rajahs, of the Cast of the Bounceloes, a Warlike and Active Offspring: His Grand∣father was a Man in Esteem under Nisham Shaw, whose Name was Vangu Gi Rajah; his Father Shaw Gi Rajah was made Commander by the same King of Juneah Gur, where, upon that Rock his first Wife brought forth the Obdurate Seva Gi, his Eldest Son, and Samba Gi, his Second; by another Wife he had a Third Son, called Ekou Gi. Upon the Downfall of Nisham Shaw, the Father and his other Sons listed themselves as Pensioners to the King of Visiapour, where the Father was, and the Sons now are advanced to considerable Em∣ploys. Seva Gi could not be won upon, but sought to raise himself by the Ruins of others, setting the lesser Lords at variance with their Prince, in whose Quarrels he always made sure of the upper Ground; wherefore his Father at his Death disinherited him, and instated his youngest Son Ekou Gi in the Rajahship of Benglure; a Starveling Ra∣jahship, since it hath been harass'd by the Troubles of Duccan, where he sits down quietly, whilst this Turbulent Young Man works him∣self into Greatness. At which the King of Visiapour beginning to cast an Eye,The King of Visiapour jea∣lous of Seva Gi. finding him aspiring, and intending to blast him in the Bud, sent a Potent Army against him, conducted by Abdul Caun, an Experienc'd Sol∣dier, yet outwitted by Seva Gi: For he understanding of his having taken the Field, while the Main Body was yet at distance enough, he sent to him flattering and seducing Messages, intimating withal, if he would but stop his March, at an appointed Choultry out of sight of each Rendezvouz, he would meet him, and kiss his Feet; beg∣ging that he would act the obliging Office of a Peacemaker between him and the King.
Abdul Caun thinking no less than that he meant sincerely, consent∣ed, though advised to the contrary by his Friends, (whether out of Superstition,Seva's Trea∣chery in slay∣ing Abdul Caun. as the dying of an Elephant, and other bad presaging Omens, or they doubting the Integrity of Seva Gi, I know not), but they could not prevail: At the Day prefixed therefore he takes with him his Son and a selected Number, which he credited would not be out-equalled by Seva Gi, upon his former Protestations and Hopes of Reconcilement; but the Perfidious Man had placed an Am∣buscado, and with a smaller Shew in appearance than Abdul brought, waits his coming; who as soon as he spied him afar off, went forth to meet him, and prostrates himself before him with feigned Tears, craving Pardon for his Offence, and would not rise till he had assured him of his being his Advocate to procure it: Going to enter the Choultry together, he cries out, like a fearful Man, That his Lord (so he stiled the General) might execute his Pleasure on him, and ease him of his Life; which Abdul Caun surmising was because he was armed, and the other came seemingly unarmed, delivered his Sword and Ponyard to his Page, and bad him enter with Courage; where after some Parley he slips a Stiletto from under his Coat-sleeve, and then eying his Blow, struck it at his Heart, whereat the Signal was given, and his Men came forth, in which Scuffle Abdul's Son gave Seva Gi a Wound, but was forced to change Habit with a Frass im∣mediately, and venturing through untrodden Paths hardly escaped to the Camp, who thereupon were so discomfited, that they quickly dispersed themselves, and left the Field open to Seva Gi. Who,Whereupon follows the Discomfiture of the Army, and taking Pa∣nala. grown proud with this good Fortune, resolves not to return till he had sacked Panala, one of their Wealthiest and Strongest Ci∣ties; but finding it a Work not over-facile, they within, though thinly Mann'd, being obstinate, he disbands therefore, under pretext of Ill Usage, Seven or Eight Hundred of his Men, who presently took their way to the City, and offer their Service, complaining of Seva Gi as an Inhuman Butcherly Fellow, some Marks of which they produced on those suborned for that purpose: The present Occasions urging, and being willing to blind themselves with the Improbability of its being a Cheat, they within admitted them the City, but so as for some time they could not put their Plot in execution, the Citizens watching at Night the Gates with their own Men, and disposing them on the Walls and Out-posts: But the Inhabitants taken up with their Delight more than Security, had pester'd the Ditches with Gardens and Trees, whereby on a Set Night, they on the Walls having so contrived it, received their Friends of the Camp under Covert of the Trees, and overpowering the Citizens, opened the Gates, whereupon the Enemy entred, and by this Treachery the City was gained for Seva Gi; which he makes his Retreat, ordering those Trees to be cut down that were so fatal to the former Possessors. And now he forages the Country,Another Roy∣al Army broke by Perfidy. and lays all waste in his Round, till young Abdul was reinforced to revenge his Father's Death, and to join with another General Rustam Gemma, with whom Seva Gi had been tampering: Such is the Covetous Nature of these people, that Money shall corrupt the most Loyal among them: Which made him when they were ready to give Battel, withdraw his
Cavalry, leaving young Abdul and his Men to try it out with Seva Gi; whose Force, though an Handful, fell bravely on, and so gauled Seva Gi, that he wish'd him well off; Abdul crying out wherever he went, Thou Coward Seva, here am I; whereof though Seva had notice, he avoided him, saying, He was a Rash Youth, let somebody else kill him: He made through his Army two or three times in Per∣son, till being tired he was fain to leave off, and speed to Visiapour, to complain of Rustam's Falshood: Upon this Rustam's Horse disband∣ed, some choice Friends only going over with him to Seva Gi, advi∣sing him to follow his Blow, and set upon Visiapour its self, which he did; and had not Syddy Jore come to its Relief with a vast Recruit, he had not only attacked, but carried it. Then it was time for Seva to retire to Panala,Seva has Raja∣por surren∣dred by a false Pharmond. where being long detained by Syddy Jore's lying before it, at length (as 'twas thought) through the Connivance of the said Syddy, he stole out by Night; and by a false Pharmond takes the Syddy's Town of Rajapour, pre∣tending the Syddy was to surrender it in exchange for Panala. After which the Syddy resorts to Visiapour to his Master,Syddy Jore tricked out of his Life by Bullul Caun. who bore his Disgust for letting the Traytor go, under a serene Countenance, and dismiss'd him with Thanks: But having made Bullul Caun Com∣mander in Chief, he dispatches him after the Syddy, who being wa∣ry and doubtful of the King's Intentions, had provided to stand to it, putting Bullul Caun to Flight: Whereupon begins another Civil Dis∣cord; the King in Person resolves to bid at his Head, which other∣wise by the clandestine Practices of Bullul Caun was hoped to be at∣chieved, as it proved, he doing that by Fraud he could not do by Force: For the Night after both Armies were in view, the Omrahs on the Syddy's side forsook him, and he was slain, and his Head brought to the King, without any more Strokes fought; such deadly Venom bears Secret Malice and Hellish Insinuation. This still makes for Seva Gi, for he was not able to cope with him singly; which Impediment thus lopped off to his hand, he seizes at leisure smaller Places, as Dan de Rajapour, whose Prince sueth for Protection to the Mogul, being beaten out of all but his Strong Ca∣stle at Dan de Rajapour, environ'd about by the Sea, but within Shot of the Main, which Seva with a great Effort has lain before these fif∣teen Years: The Mogul succouring it by Sea, it derides the Batteries of his Artilleries; and these are the Fleets we are so often troubled with at Bombaim. In this Juncture of Affairs the King dies,The King of Visiapour dies. and leaves a Babe to dispute for the Throne; when Seva Gi enlarges himself, flies out as far as Surat, and comes home with Rich Booty; which hapned presently after the Emperor of the Moguls was warm in his Seat (by the Over∣throw of his Brethren, and the Death of his Father Shaw Juan, by his Interest on Raja Jesseign); who desirous to try if by Kindness he could reclaim this famous Rebel, allures him to Court (Faith being plighted for his Safety), where shortly after, the Outcries of the Women in whose Kindred's Blood his hands were imbrued, made him shift for himself in an Hamper on a Porter's Back, which passed the Guards among many other, which were forced to be sent as Piscashes to his Friends, as the manner is when under Confinement: With this
Slight he got away (not without the Mogul's Privity), and 'tis be∣lieved will hardly venture to Agra again, unless better guarded. For this he made a second Rape on Surat, and now lately has ta∣ken the Rajahship of Rhamnagur, though he had first spread himself more South, even to the Walls of Goa, from whence he slided to the Borders of the Canatick and Sunda Rajah's Country: His Chief Resi∣dence is at Rairee, where he bids Defiance to the Emperor, Gulconda, Duccan, Portugueze, and all the World; magnifying himself in his Strong-Holds; installed Mau Rajah Two Years since, when I sent you a Journal of an English Gentleman's, sent Ambassador to him at that time: His Mother was then alive, to whom he shewed Filial Obedience: He is married to Four Wives, to whom he keeps reli∣giously, being a strict Observer of his Heathen Rites. He sways by Brachmins;Seva's Soldiers hardy. his Soldiers are Hardy Brave Fellows, fit for the Mountains; 30000 Horse is the most he can make, Foot innumerable. Merchants have little Countenance from him: Of the Common People he says, Money is inconvenient for them; give them Victuals and an Arse-Clout, it is enough. They tell their Tale in Moratty; by Pro∣fession they are Gentues; some few Moors are among them; Whores and Dancing Wenches he allows none in his Army: This Barbarian Commander being like the Scythian Ateas, who hearing one sweetly modulating on an Ismean Pipe, swore he had rather hear the neighing of an Horse, or the Clangor of Horns or Trumpets. At Sea he is no stronger than his Neighbours; once he went Admiral of his Fleet of Grobs and Boats, against Dan de Rajapore, but Storms arising dis∣hearten'd him for a second Adventure. The Kingdom of Visiapour. Although it be Hereditary,The King not Absolute. and not Elective, yet it comes nearest it at present, since the remaining part of the Duccan Kingdom is dwindled into it, and some more Southern have withdrawn, and the rest at Pleasure only own themselves Members thereof; it must bor∣row the Composition of these several disagreeing ones to make it bear the Port of a Kingdom. For when entire, it was of large Extent, taking in the Zamerhin and Malabars; and while the Three Chias Moors represented the An∣cient Geron; where for the common Safety, if any Part were af∣flicted, every Member ran to the Succour of the other, as if it were to their peculiar Tranquility; their Counsels one, their Minds one, their Designments one; their Dominions flourished, and every one owned Subjection, and held their Provinces as Vassals to the same Monarch: When that Band was loosed, they were broken with more ease; Duccan is lost already, Visiapour seems de∣clining, Seva Gi's Example putting others on to un-yoak themselves; so that as yet no Tye is strong enough to reduce them to their for∣mer Temper. Whereupon it is clear the Duccanees are a Warlike and Trouble∣some Nation,The Duccanees of a restless Temper. apt to dislike Government, Proud and Brave, having an Army more splendid than the Mogul's; adorning their Elephants,
Horses and Lances with Silver Bells and Feathers,Chap. V. Gallant and Rich in Apparel and Sumbrero's: The People Swarthy or Olive; of all Religions. The Country Fruitful, Rich, and Campaign, unless it be near the Sea-Coast, where the Mountains are blest with Woods and Cattel, the Valleys with a bountiful Increase of Rice and Coco Nuts, with store of Rivers both Fresh and Salt; though these Hilly People are of a rougher Temper, more Hardy, and less addicted to the soft Vanities of Musick, Cloathing, Pomp, or Stateliness, being all Naked Starved Rascals; Seva Gi's Men thereby being fitter for any Martial Exploit, having been accustomed to Fare Hard, Journy Fast, and take little Pleasure. But the other will miss of a Booty rather than a Dinner;The Diffe∣rence between the Hilly Peo∣ple and the Plain Country. must mount in state and have their Arms carried before them, and their Women not far behind them, with the Masters of Mirth and Jollity; will rather expect than pursue a Foe; but then they stand it out better; for Seva Gi's Men care not much for a pitched Field, though they are good at Surprizing and Ransacking; yet agree in this, that they are both of stirring Spirits. The Language of Visiapour is peculiar.Cities, Marts, and Ports. Cities of Note in this Kingdom, bear commonly the Names of their Grandees: Mart-Towns are Hubly, Rabag, and Huttany. The King's Sea-ports Gullean, Bimly, Blocked up by the Portugals; Rajapour, Dabul, Vingula, Carwar, which is Seva Gi's; the rest are Possessed by the Malabar Raja's round to Porto Novo, which only is properly the King's; whose Revenues are very large, though not computed by common Rumour as the others are. CHAP. V. Shews the Pleasure and the Product of the Woods: The People bewitched to Idolatry; the Sottishness of the Atheist. I am sent for to Bombaim; after some endeavours to go thither, and some time spent at Goa, am forced to Winter at Carwar, and then I return to Surat. THE Exercises here are common with India, only Cock-Fighting; for which Sport they have a Breed of Cocks as big as Turkies; which they Arm with Razors tied flat under their Claws, and faulched Two Inches instead of Gavelocks, with which they slash one another Mortally; so that the Dispute endures not long, for most an end the first or second Blow decides it. For our own Diversion here we had none besides Shooting,Diversions. in which we spent sometimes a whole Week in the Woods and Rivers sides; for if we expected Flesh, or Fowl, we must take Pains for it; no Beef being to be Bought here, though up the Country from the Moors we could; so that our usual Diet was (besides plenty of Fish) Water-Fowl, Peacocks, Green Pidgeons, spotted Deer, Sa∣bre,
Wild Hogs, and sometimes Wild Cows. Going in quest where∣of, one of our Soldiers, a Youth, Killed a Tigre-Royal; it was brought home by Thirty or Forty Combies,A Tigre Kil∣led and Dis∣sected. the Body tied to a long Bamboo, the Tail extended; so they brought it to the House, where we saw 'twas Wounded in Three Places, one through the Head with Two Bullets, another through the Body slanting up to the Shoulders, a Third in the Leg; it was a Tigre of the Biggest and Noblest Kind, Five Feet in Length beside the Tail, Three and an half in Height, it was of a light Yellow, streaked with Black, like a Tabby Cat, the Ears short, with a few Bristles about the Lips; the Visage Fierce and Majestick, the Teeth gnashing, Two of which she brake against the Stones for anguish, the Shoulders and Fore-legs thick and well set, the Paw as Large as the biggest Fist stretched out, the Claws thick and strong. The Boy Shot it in the Night from a Chouse, or Estarzo, as it came to Drink, supposing it to have been a Deer; the first Shot was that under the Shoulder, which made her Spring Three times an incredible Height, at the last of which she fell into the Chouse from whence she saw the Flash, where with the English Boy were a Comby, and a Comby Boy of Eight Year old, asleep a little on one side; she pawed the Straw with her Feet, while all but the Child asleep fled; but being wrung by her Pain, she soon left the place with an horrible Noise that made the Woods tremble, all which awaked not the Lad, nor had it any Harm. In this interval, the English Youth Charged again with a couple of Slugs, and tracing the Blood, as she was making at him, discharged through the Brain-pan, at which she was quiet; but to make sure, he made another shot at her, which he believed was that in the Leg: All this time the Moon was Obscured and Cloudy; the Comby that had left him and his Son, at length came with a many more, calling Fringi, the Term they have for Europe-Men and Franks; the Boy was walking about, fearing to venture within reach, till at last laying aside his well-advised Suspicion, he approaching, found the Terror of the Wood Slain. Disrobed of its Royal Hide,Two Bones bound in the Shoulders im∣mersed in the Flesh. Two Bones of the Bigness and Figure of a Levator, presented themselves to our view, that had no Connexi∣on with the other Bones, but wholly immersed in the Flesh per sy∣sarcasin, in the ends of each Pectoral, and the Three circumducing Muscles, towards the joining of the Shoulder-blades, and the upper Bones of the Fore-feet, commonly called Shoulder-bones; of these there goes a Story handed by Tradition, as that Licking the Right Shoulder it appeases Hunger, the Left it whets it where these Bones lie; but probable enough it is, that Nature added these for its greater Strength; The Entrails were little variable, but the Heart was mighty, and the Liver (they say) had as many Lobes as that was Years old, which were Six and an half, like to a Foxes. The Chief,The Custom of the Ombrahs on any grat Action. to encourage the Lad, told him, That though he were a Boy, he had done a Manly Action, and therefore according to the Custom of the Country, in presence of all his Admirers, he plucked off his own Coat, which was Venetian Cloath of Silk and Silver, and gave it him. The Great Ombrahs always do the like upon any hazardous
Atchievments, and if Wounded, throw them their Sashes and Pa∣merins to Bind them up, and Cover them, though never so Rich: Having likewise another Custom among them, to Cloath the Gun with Scarlet that has made any notable Breach, Slain any great Sol∣dier, or done any extraordinary Feat. It is memorable what is attested,Monkies the common Re∣past of the Tigre. by these Woodmen, of the Tigre, that when he intends to Prey on the Monkies (with which these Woods abound) he uses this Artifice or Stratagem; the Monkies at his first approach give warning by their confused Chattering, and im∣mediately betake themselves to the highest and smallest Twigs of the Trees; when the Tigre seeing them out of his reach, and sensible of their fright, lies Couchant under the Tree and then falls a Roar∣ing, at which they trembling let go their hold, and tumbling down he at leisure picks them up to satisfy his Hunger: They are his ac∣customed Repast, seldom making Man his Meal, and they are judged (as St. Paul's Barbarians did him) guilty of some horrid Crime that such Vengeance overtakes; the Woods and Mountains yielding them variety of other Food. The Tigre is dull Scented, and not long Nimble, Three Leaps Tiring him, otherwise it's probable he would make more havock than he does. The She brings forth but once in Twelve Years, and then but a single Cub; they are Ingend∣ring Three Months, in which time their Fury as well as Lust rages upon one another; thus has Providence suppressed the Growth of this masterless Creature: Besides, if the Proverb be true, the Bitch brings forth but once in her life, or very rarely more; Iteratus haud partus leoenae contigit, notwithstanding Aelian says otherwise in his 4 lib. de Historiâ Animalium. The most frequent in these Woods are the lesser sort of Tigres spotted like a Leopard; these are Cruel and Ravenous, but more Fearful than the others are; that Monkies are their Food, the very Ordure declares scattered up and down, where is visible the shagged Coats or Hair of these Creatures. Many of these Apes fell by our hands,Apes Anato∣mized. either for being noisy and impertinent spoiling our Game, or provoking us by their constant pursuing us, being of the largest size, upon which account many came under my Knife; opening them I found and observed their se∣minary Vessels turgid, their Virge White and Nervous. To Kill one of these the Natives hold Piacular, calling them Half Men, saying, once they were Men, but for their Laziness had Tails given them and Hair to cover them: Towards Zeilon they are Deified; at the Straits of Baligaot they pay them Tribute. Bamboos make the gross of the Woods,Bamboos. which are High, Taper∣ing, Thorny Trees, incumbred from the Roots with abundance of shrubby ones, the Bark Green and jointed with the Wood, the Branches are Tapering and inclining, sending from every Joint sprouts of the same form, leafed like long Five-ingered Grass, the Body is thick and strait; their use is for Staffs, Poles, or Rafters for Houses,  Fences; being slit they are hollow and serve for Laths. Those they carry their Palenkeens on, require an exact attend∣ance, Shaping them while Young and Tender, and taking care to keep them growing in that Position; Cut and Pickled they make
good Achar: Bamboos are so general, that by way of Excellency they call all Sticks and Canes, Bamboos; the Woods are over-grown with them; for which reason often impassable. I travelled to the Tops of the Hills for the Cassia Fistula Tree,Cassia Fistula. whose Trunk is but slender, but Tree tall, leafed most like an Ash, with small Veins, and the Cassia hanging down in long Green Canes or Cods, in manner of its Keys between the tender Nodes, by the Natives called Singa. Et Lobel Siliqua, aut Cassia purgatrix Arabum Carobis similis. In the Groves about Carwar grows Cassia Lignum,Cassia Lignum. Xylo-Cassia, or Bastard Cinamon; the Trees are large as a Pear-Tree, a Leaf of the like bigness, but ribbed like our Plantain, the main Bark and Body like other Trees, of no different Smell or Taste till dried, when it bites, and smells Spicy; the Leaf bruised and chewed smells like strong Cinamon, and upon the Tongue is as hot as a Clove; the Bark of the small Branches also when Green alters nothing in Taste from Cinamon, but dried is more slimy, and is very good Cassia Lig∣num: It bears little long Whitish Flowers, of no Smell nor Taste, but the Leafs of the Branch that bear them have a more Aromatick Taste. The Thamarind Tree hath a small Leaf like a Vetch,The Thama∣rind Tree. bears the Fruit in a Cod like a French-Bean, wherein is the Pulp, inclosing the Stones and Fibres; it is a great spreading Tree, the Body thick, the Bark rough and brownish, bears its Fruit in March; the Indians feed on it, and grow Fat with it; they have not the Art to preserve it with Sugar, but Salt it up: This is Siliqua Arabica too, but not Ni∣gra, as the Cassia Fistula is. Teke by the Portugueze,The Indian Oak. Sogwan by the Moors, is the firmest Wood they have for Building, and on the account it resists Worms and Pu∣trefaction, the best for that purpose in the World; in Height the Lofty Pine exceeds it not, nor the Sturdy Oak in Bulk and Sub∣stance; the knotty Branches which it bears aloft, send forth Green Boughs more pliant, in Form Quadrangular, fed within by a Spongy Marrow or Pith, on which at the Joints hang broad, thin, and po∣rous Leafs, sending from the main Rib some Fibres, winding and spreading like a Fan. This Prince of the Indian Forest was not so attractive, though mightily glorious, but that at the same time I was forced to take notice of the creeping Cow-Itch, raising its self upon the Shrubs and Under-woods, there spending in lascivious Twines its Verdure, leaving nothing but withered Stalks to be the Props of its brindled Offspring, which is a small Cod covered with a light and tickling Down; within, it includes in four Cavities, four specked Beans; the fallen Leafs make some appearance of a Nobler Stock, having a Countenance like those of Lawrel; the Root is dif∣ficult to find, being mixed among other Trees, like our White Briony. Here grows Nux Vomica on a Tree of indifferent bigness,Nux Vomica. in a round Shell as big as an Orange, filled with White , where the Nuts are lodged. Near the Sea grow Squills, or Sea-Onions, as also a Species of Sarsaparilla, with which they do great Feats with the Juice of the Leafs in Venereal Cases.
In their Fields they plant, besides Rice, Nuchery, a small Seed they make Bread of, as also Cushcush, which is Millet, Hemp, and Flax: In the Inclosures Turmerick, which rises with a broad Leaf like our Water Plantain, bearing a broad flaggy Leaf of a Span long, oblique∣ly ribbed till it end in a Spear-Point at top; it proceeds immediately from the Root by a winding Stalk, which the main Leafs embrace, the other Leafs creeping through it till it rises Six Foot. Ginger comes up like our Gentian; they pickle it well, but cannot preserve it with Sugar. Potatoes are their usual Banquet. And to give the Soil its due Praise, it obeys in all things the first Commandment, Increase and Multiply. For these Blessings,A Feast of Priapus. as if Men were to lose their Reasons, and sink below Brutes by a base Superstition, they are ready to acknowledge a Stock for a Deity, rather than to go without, infatuated by the Delusions of the Devil, being captivated at his Will; for which cause they not only make Oblations to him, but give up their Souls and Bodies to his Devotion: As might about this time have been be∣held at an Idol Worship of Priapus, (where the Women prostitute themselves to him, and receive the Pleasure of Copulation, all that while being as it were possessed) at Semissar, on the other side of the Water from our House, where he lay with Two and twenty, who reckon it a great Honour, and the Husband thinks himself happy in his Cornucopia. There are a sort of Jougies, Priests fit for such a God, among the Linguits of this Country, who practise this daily; the Husbands entertain them courteously, wash their Feet, and the whole Family is at his Beck, as long as he stays to do the Wife a Kindness. Others slash themselves with sharp Knives, and suffer themselves to be hooked by the Muscles of the Back, and hang so some Hours upon a Vow. Under the Banyan Tree, an Altar with a Dildo in the middle being erected, they offer Rice and Cocoe-Nuts to the Devil, and joining some small Ladders together made of Osiers, do the like; when the Gomcar or Bayliff of the Town takes a falched Knife for Sacrifice in one Hand, and a Dunghil-Cock in the other, and cutting off its Head, fixes it at top of the Ladder, and sprinkling the Blood they all dance, and beat Brass Pots with a great Shout, saying, The Devil must be pacified with Blood, God with Prayers. Some of these sell themselves to Wickedness,The Dregs of the People use Charms, or think they do so. and these must be endued with the Spirit of Fascination, always nourishing a Familiar in their Families, which they keep mostly in the forms of Snakes or Serpents, appearing to them upon their Command; and undergo fiery Afflictions to have the most hurtful Devil; and as they wreak their Malice more powerfully, esteem themselves more in favour with their Grand Master: These are the Dregs of the People, who are full of Envy and Ill Designs, who glory in their Shame of In∣cantations and Charms: Such as these are those that out of Fear pray to the Devil and Evil Spirits, saying, God will do them no harm. The better sort acknowledge a God, and live in the Rules of their Tribes, abstaining from Flesh, and all things of a Sensitive Being:
Sicuti Pythagorici, qui herbis & bellariis tantum vivebant: And these Patronize these more Innocent Rites, such as the Swains asking Advice of their Deities about Increase; and to that end offer Rice, Oyl, and Cocoe-Nuts in a thick Grove, where they piled an huge Heap of long Jars like Mortivans, about Figures resembling Serpents, before which they present their unbloody Sacrifice by the Priest, the Peo∣ple circling the whole Grove in a Ring, beating on Brass Instru∣ments, and shouting. In their Hooly,Their Sacri∣fice for the Fields. which is at their other Seed-time, I observed they cut a whole Tree down to the Rots, and lopped off the under-Branches till it became strait, when leaving the upper Boughs, they shoulder'd it with great Clamours, the Brachmin beginning a Note which they all followed: Thus they brought it into the Pale of their Pagods, before which, easing it down at one end, the foremost made a Salam, and hoisted it with the same Noise again, and about they went three or four times repeating the same; which being finished, the Arch-Brachmin digs an hole, and baptizes it with Holy Water, where∣in they fix the Tree, crowning it with Flags aloft, and about the Bo∣dy up to the Green Boughs they bind Wisps of Straw, to which they put Fire, and look earnestly on the Flame, according to the Ascent of which the Brachmin pronounces his Auguries; then they offer Rice and Flowers, painting their Bodies with the Ashes, depart∣ing with a Mace of Flowers carried before them, beating of Drums and a great Noise. This resembles the Ambar vallis hostia, or Sa∣crifice for the Fields; of which see Scaliger, and also Virgil, Terque novas circum foelix fuit hostia fruges. But to be clear,Whether these Wretches do work by the Devil, or no. & ut Fama ad liquidum producatur, let us consider, that these Underlings of the People that do these Services to the Devil, or are said so to do, may be aspersed: For the Brachmins, and other the Purer Sort, as they account themselves, may defame them only, because shedding of Blood is horrible to them, and therefore Diabolical: Besides, those Diseases that are said to be Devils put into one another, (which as many as I have met with, I have been cu∣riously inquisitive of) their Phoenomenaes or Energies are discussed by Natural Causes, and as often cured by Natural Means; but on the contray, it is allowed where they resist them, it is suspicious: And the Devil without doubt cannot easier work on any, than the Weak and Simple, (wherefore he chose the Woman, not the Man) and upon that account may probably delude and overawe these People, that give themselves up to him wholly out of Fear, having not so much Virtue, Fortitude, and Cunning, to resist and check their own Lusts, as the Wiser sort. As for the visible appearance of a Devil or Daemon (which they say is common among them, by those that see it) I am convinced it may be credible; but in the mean while, Rage and Melancholy Madness, assisted by the Infernal Pow∣er, may create great Illusions to a Fancy fitted for such an Opera∣tion, and they may think they see things which in reality are not so. Now as these, by the low and mean Conceptions they have of a Godhead, reach not the great Branch of its Omnipotency and Good∣ness,
whereby it is able to defend them from all Assaults and Wiliness of the Devil, depressing their Understandings, bow under the in∣tolerable Yoak of his Slavery;The sublime Wit as much in the wrong as the depres∣sed. so there are a sort of sublimated Wits, that will own neither God nor Devil, and put all things upon Chance so long, that the very Notions they framed to themselves, after beating of the Air, fly out of their Giddy Heads in Fumo. Let them place themselves under the Aequator, where the Sun is at pre∣sent, and take a Prospect on each hand of the Orderly Course of the Creation; How he passes the Ecliptick, and dispenses his Irradiations as far as either Pole: How within the Tropicks, entring the first De∣gree of the Ram till the second Degree of Taurus, it is Summer; that is, from January till the One and twentieth of March; when the Woods are most denuded of their old Leafs by the parching Heat of the Sun, though new ones succeeding, the Trees keep their perpetual Verdure; yet these lying on the Ground, makes this time then the most like Autumn of any till the Rains fall; which while the Sun is over their Heads make their Winter; till which come, it would be unsufferable living here, did not the Variable Winds ga∣ther the Clouds to obscure the Sun: After the Rains, follows their Spring, when by reason of the Remoteness of the Sun it is most pleasant living. Thus truly might Ovid be deceived, whilst he only reasoned, and not experimented, when he sang of the Zones and the Climes: Ʋtque duae dextrâ Coelum totidemque sinistrâ Parte secant Zonae, quinta est ardentior illis. Sic onus inclusum numero dist inxit eodem Cura Dei, totidemque Plagae tellure premuntur, Quarum quae media est non est habitabilis aestu. But what Colour is there for the Ignorance of our Atheistical Young Gallants?No Evasion for the Atheist. Certainly none: Would they abate so much time from li∣ving, as to see and consider an admirable and well-contrived Provi∣dence, and not to harp too much on Casualty; which I am confi∣dent their own Logicians would hiss at as an Absurdity, to say, That such an exact Progress and Observance ever since the Frame of Na∣ture was instituted, should continue such an unalterable Decorum on these Four great Anniversary Wheels, fitly adapted to every Climate; or that they first proceeded from a Bundle of Nonsensical Fortuitous Atoms conjoined into an Hodg-Podge of confused Nothings. For the very Matter being Chance, would without doubt produce a rare Stability for the Impressions of any Forms, but what must be blowed out of as idle Chimeras. I could wish therefore, such bold Disputes being waved, they would confess an All-wise Creator and Preserver of Heaven and Earth; unless they will verify the Proverb, Atheus est talpa de die caecutiens, Rationi autem paret qui Religionem sectatur: The Atheist is a Mole, being blind at Noon-day; the Man that adores God, and follows Religion, is the only Master of his Rea∣son. Which made Cicero profess in Lib. 2. Divinat. Esse praestantem aliquam aeternamque Naturam, & eam suspiciendam adorandamque, ho∣minum genus cardoque rerum Caelestium cogit confiteri. Et in Nat. Deor. Lib. 2. Quid potest esse tam apertum tamque perspicuum, cum Caelum
suspeximus Coelestiaque contemplati sumus, quam aliquod esse numen prae∣stantissimae mentis, quo haec reguntur? The Deputy-Governor of Bombaim being sick,I am sent for to Bombaim. the Phaenix-Ketch was ordered to bring me up to that Island; wherefore the 6th of April, 1676. I took my leave of Carwar, which hath no peculiar Commodities or Manufactories of its own Product, but lies conve∣niently for the Markets of Pepper, Bettle-Nut, or Arrach; Cloath, as Potkaes, Suffaguzes, from Hubly, six days Journy hence; Dia∣monds from Visiapour, ten days Journy: But the Factory decays, by reason of the Embroils of the Countrey, Merchants being out of heart to buy or sell: Here are good Returns to be made from this Port to Persia, and back again; as likewise from Mocha, from whence are brought Horses for War. The Variable Winds kept us six days before we could reach Goa,All Butchers Flesh forbid∣den at Goa in the Heats, ex∣cept Pork. though but twelve Leagues: At the City all Butchers Meat is for∣bidden, except Pork, upon account of the Heats, which afford not much Sustenance for the Cattel; and the approaching Rains, which robs them of that little Flesh they retain, and scours them to mere Carrion: Wherefore the Religion of the Indians has enjoined them the most Healthy Rule to avoid Sickness, the forbidding them to eat Flesh, than which nothing now can be more prejudicial. At this time the Citizens remove mostly to their Aldeas, the Air of Goa being less temperate than the Fields and open Bays. The Diseases here are Epidemical,Mangoes good to cleanse the Blood. unless Plagae Veneris be more Endemial, for which at this Season they have a Noble and Familiar Remedy, the Mango (which they have improved in all it kinds to the utmost Perfection) being a Sovereign Medicine; they are the best and largest in India, most like a Pear-Plum, but three times as big, grow on a Tree nearest a Plum-Tree; the Fruit when Green scents like Turpentine, and pickled are the best Achars to provoke an Appetite; when Ripe, the Apples of Hisperides are but Fables to them; for Taste, the Nectarine, Peach, and Apricot fall short; they make them break out, and cleanse the Blood, and Salivate to the height of Mercurial Arcanaes; and afterwards fatten as much as Antimony, or Acorns do Hogs; these and Sarsa being their usual Diet. Cheruses grow on a Tree whose Branches send forth a Stone first,Cheruses. like a Bean, whose Meat or Kernel when Green tastes like a Walnut, roasted, like a Chesnut; the Fruit follows, large and of a fine Co∣lour, squashy, of a better Relish than Smell, the Leaves Oval and Succulent. The Fruit the English call a Pine-Apple (the Moors, Ananas) because of the resemblance,Ananas, or Pine-Apple, the most ad∣mired for Taste. cuts within as firm as a Pippin; Seedy, if not fully ripe; the Taste inclinable to Tartness, though most ex∣cellently qualified by a dulcid Sapor that imposes upon the Imagina∣tion and Gustative Faculty a Fancy that it relishes of any Fruit a Man likes, and some will swear it: It grows on a thick Stalk like an Artichoke, emitting a Tuft of Leafs upon the Crown; the Leafs a-kin to a Carduus Aininus (as has been partly related already); the Juice will corrode any Iron or Knife, like Limon.
The Eleventh of May, being still Wind-bound, I received a cour∣teous Invitation to return to Carwar; but I could not be diverted till the Full Moon had passed with Rain, Clouds, and Thunder; Jamque erat in totas sparsurus fulmina terras. When the Current changed, with which were brought innumerable Shoals of dead Fish; the Toddy worked on the Tree over the Pots, the accustomed Forerunners of the Rains, but hitherto fallible; which is a wonder even to the Country-People; though our Pilots have observed an unwonted Deviation these two or three Rains to∣gether. The Nineteenth an Express coming from the Chief of Carwar,I winter at Carwar. That a Gentleman there being almost desperate, importuned my Assistance, and I fearing to Winter here, for Expediteness chose a Baloon, though he had sent Horse and Peons, in case I could not ac∣quire one; and the next day by Two in the Afternoon I returned to Carwar House, though two days after the Winds set in Southward to∣gether with the Rains, when the Ketch set sail for Bombaim, with a great Fleet of Grobs to the North. It is the Freshes from the Up∣lands that kills and sickens the Fish. And now the Rains invade all India, which puts a stop to all Journying and Voyaging, as well as Warlike Preparations, Aspera tum positis mitescunt secula bellis. Till St. Francis's Moon in August, when the Earth is discovered, and the Rice begins to ripen, which all this while floated in Water, which it rejoices in; and this is the first Harvest; for it is to be under∣stood this World produces two Harvests; this most natural and un∣compell'd, because of the Rain; the other about March, with great pains of bringing Water by Gutters to their sown Fields, which not∣withstanding yields not so plentiful a Crop as the first, which this Year increases vastly; but the misfortune is, three quarters of the Land lies unmanured, through the Tyranny of Seva Gi. October the Seventeenth I bad a final Adieu to Carwar,Bad a final A∣dieu to Car∣war, and come again to Goa. and em∣bark'd in the Berkly-Castle with Mr. Oxendine, who was called up to succeed Mr. Gyffard, the deceased Deputy-Governor of Bombaim: Coming again to Goa I lodged at the House of a French Physician in the Camp of St. Thomas, which the City overlooks in the same manner Old Rome did the Martian Vale. I saw there an unfinished Piece of the St. Thomas Christians, but the Troubles of their Prince called them back before it could be per∣fected; others say prevented in it by Thunder and Lightning. The great Traders of this Place for Diamonds are the two Martins,Jews feed on Hogs-flesh, for fear of the In∣quisition. both Jews, yet to carry on their designs permitted to live as Christians, they constantly frequenting Mass, and at Table every Meal during our Say had Hogs-flesh served up. We left Goa on the Eve of St. Xeverius's Feast;Left Goa on St. Xeverius's Eve. the Tomb there∣fore was richly set out; and as Erasmus relates of Thomas à Becket, that nothing could be seen baser than Gold, so truly here Silver was
the meanest; Pearls and Precious Stones, as well as Gold, cast forth their Lustre, by the reflection of the Virgin Flambeaus upon them: From the tops of the Towers belonging to the Jesuits, we beheld Lamps at Night striving to vie with the Stars for Number and Lustre; which appeared Gloriously on the Water as we Rowed down the River to our Ship. Being in sight of Bombaim,In Danger of being Ship∣wrecked at Bombaim. the Tides horsed us to the Northward, which insensibly threw us on a Ledge of Rocks running from Old Womans Island, where the Ship Struck; after a Quarter of an Hour she cleared, but with the inconvenience of falling more upon them, not without danger of Bulging; whereupon we Fired several single Pieces of Ordnance to give notice; for the Tide being made, the Water began to Ebb and forsake the Ship, so that she stood wavering without any prop, which way to incline; and though the Wind and Sea were Calm, yet the fear of Over-setting caused a general Consternation; no help appearing, we won on the Captain to spare Hands for the Yawl, wherein Four of us got Ashoar (though she was very Leaky) leaving them in despair of their Ship, her own pressure threatning to break her Back; at Night Boats and Pilots went off to her Relief, and with the Tide of Flood as she Floated, re∣leased her to a wonder, being heavy Laden, receiving no damage but in her Sheathing. I Reimbarked and arrived at Surat the Eleventh of December,Return to Surat. where giving you a general Account of all India, you will hear from me next out of Persia.
A Special Chorography and History OF EAST-INDIA. CHAP. VI. Is a Summary Rehearsal of the Whole. EAST-INDIA,Chap. VI. when Alexander's Sword had enlarged its self thither,The Business of Alexander and King Pore is suspici∣ous. was Inhabited by the Daedali, Mezegi, Melli, Oxydraci, and Gangarides (if History tell truth); which Nations Time has long since worn out of the Indian Annals. Something they do speak of King Pore, but so uncertain, that it is a doubt whether ever he and Alexander waged War, though good Authors do attest it. But it is plain that Two hundred and seventy Years ago, between the Indians and Scythian Tartars, under Tamer∣lane, there was begun, what after-Emperors compleated by the then introduced Forces, a total Conquest; under which the greater part of the Natives rest content with their Subjection. India it's likely took its Name from Indus,The Name of India doubtful from what be∣ginning. whose Mouths are so choaked up by Sands, that they cannot speak much in this behalf neither, it being changed into the Name of Sinda, which imposes at this day a Name to as large a Province as is in all India; the shal∣low Currents of which River stretching themselves far and near to the River Ganges almost, has given occasion to Geographers to call it a Peninsula. Omitting these Disputes, I shall at present apply my self to give you a faithful Chorography and Account of those things that fell under my Remark: It is then the largest Country in Asia, which Ptolomy divides into Within and Without the River Ganges, being in Length from the Golden Chersonese, now called Comory, 3600 Miles: In the most Northern part the Day lengthens to Fifteen Hours, but in the Southern it has no more or less than Twelve: The Breadth of it, from the widest place, to wit, Bengal to Candahar, 1500 Miles; from whence, like a Wedge, it lessens into the Cape of Co∣mory. On the West it was formerly bordered by the River Indus; on the North by the dispersed Mountains from Taurus; from the East it
is washed with the Oriental Sea, and from the South with the Indian. It is a Land in all places very fruitful,India produ∣ces Three Harvests in some places. and enjoys a Temperater Air than would be allowed by the Poet under the Fifth Zone, under which the greatest part of it lies; as often as the Sun visits the Arctic Pole, it brings with it grateful Showers and Winds (whose Heat otherwise would be intolerable) by which the Earth is cooled and made Productive; neither in the extreamest Heat does it want by the equality of Days and Nights after Sun-set, the favourable Dews of the Heavens, when you shall soon perceive a kind Moisture fall to refresh the Earth, and nourish the almost scorch'd up Plants; though these alone are not so powerful to take away the Labour from the industrious Husbandman, who this Season is forced by artificial Channels to assist Nature to produce, otherwise she would fall one short of a threefold Harvest in some places, every Year; but every where they have a double Harvest. As the Sun becomes Twice Vertical to them within the Tropicks,The Year made up of Lunary, not Calendar Months. at each Tropick but once, beyond never; so nearer the Equator the Sun and Stars ascend and descend more directly, but the farther from the Equator the more Obliquely, whereby the dawn of Light here is but short before either the appearance or fall of these Bodies, when as the Twilight is some Hours after Sun-set or afore Sun-rise the nearer either Pole: Having premised this, know they begin their Alma∣nack with our Lawyers, or rather when the Sun is in the Equinoctial Line; but their Months being Lunary, every Third Year bears an Intercalary one, which they clap in August, and count it double: The Names of their Months are March Falgunu 1 Chaitru 2 Vaixaque 3 Zestthâ 4 Assadâ 5 Srauana 6 Bharapadrâ 7 Asuinu 8 Castica 9 Margassica 10 Puxu 11 Magu 12 They distinguish their Time by Weeks,Sunday Ob∣served by the Indians. i e. Seven days; Sunday being observed by the Indians as an Holy Day; agreeable to what is Taught by Philostratus, Dion Cassius, and Justin Martyr. The Hours of Day and Night have all the Year round the same Number,How they count the Hours. Twelve; not minding their Length or Decrease: They have no Watches or Hour-Glasses, but measure Time by the drop∣ping of Water out of a Brass Bason, which holds a Ghong, or less than half an Hour; when they strike once distinctly, to tell them it's the First Ghong, which is renewed at the Second Ghong for Two, and so Three at the end of it, till they come to Eight; when they strike on the Brass Vessel at their liberty, to give notice the Pore is out, and at last strike One leisurely, to tell them it is the First Pore; which is repeated after the same manner for the Second about Mid∣day, when they strike Two, and so at the end of the Third Pore Three, and of the Fourth Four; at the end of which Pores the Priests Ascend their Steeples and are Monitors to them of their Devotion;
And as solemnly dividing the Night into as many Pores; so that Thirty two Ghongs and Four Pores make the Day, and as many more the Night; in all Sixty four Ghongs and Eight Pores. As our Year is divided by the Seasons of Spring,Their Year divided into Three Sea∣sons. Summer, Autumn, and Winter; to every which we allow a Quarter of a Year: Theirs also agree with their Seasons of Weather, but square not in respect of the Account of the Year, having Four Months for each Season; New Colla The Rains. Ger Colla The Cold Season. Deup Colla The Heats. To every one of which they attribute Eight Constellations; are skilled in the Sun's Course through the Zodiac, have their wandring and fixed Stars, and are exact in the Eclipses of the Two Inferior Luminaries. What has been Experienced in the particular Accounts, I must confirm again in this general one, That the first Full Moon in May brings the Rains, when it Rains a Fortnight only, and holds up till the middle of June, in which times, Empyemas, Fluxes, Fevers of all sorts (except Pestilential) Haemorrhages, rage; after the Rains are fully settled, it grows Healthy. From the setling in of the Rains till the Full Moon in August, it Rains without intermission, after which it clears up for a Fortnight, and with little variation (bating the accidental Causes of its beginning earlier or later) it Rains all September till the Elephant breaks up, the last Rainy Star: After which is the Harvest for Rice, when it is gathered; and then just af∣ter the Rains they are most Sickly, the Sun exhaling Vapours, the Earth grows Muddy and Stinking, though abundantly Productive: From thence to the latter end of January commences the Cold Sea∣son, when their Bodies are Healthier, and a lovely Verdure Cloaths the Earth; at the latter end of this they reap another Harvest with∣out extraordinary pains; all this time the Evenings are very sharp, and at Surat I have seen an hoar Frost in the Morning. From Fe∣bruary the first, till the Rains set in, are the Heats, and in March the Leafs fall off the Trees, yet always supplied with fresh, so that the Trees are always Green, though the Grass and Fodder are quite burnt up; and with difficulty, by the advantage of Aquiducts, a lean Harvest is brought forth: The Peasants Morning and Evening draw Water out of Wells by Buffola's, or Oxen; or else by a thwart Post poised with a sufficient weight at the extremity, laid over one fixed in the Earth; the Water is drawn by a Bucket of Goats Skins; others have Pans or Buckets of Leather hanging round about a Wheel, some always in the Water, others rising up, and at the same time others pouring out as the Wheel turns round: And thus are their best Gardens kept alive. The Mountains here are one continued Ridge,Mountains: dividing the Two Coasts each from other, and are all along called the Gaot; they run North and South till they cross the Imaus; and are the reason of some difference of the Seasons, both in respect of themselves and Low-Lands:
They are plentifully stored with Woods, and Increase of all things, except Rivers, which are in some Places compensated by living Springs out of the Rocks, but every where by Water falling in the Rains. The Rivers are innumerable;Rivers. but those of greatest fame are In∣dus and Ganges, the latter not only for its many Navigable Streams for some Hundreds of Leagues, but for its Purity in the esteem of the most Religious; besides all which, are great Tanks or Ponds of Rain-Water, where it wants the other Benefits, with deep Wells, of extraordinary Costs and Charges; some purely for Pomp, and to transmit their Names to Posterity; others for the good of Travellers, but most for the sake of Religion, in which they are extravagantly profuse, every great City striving to outvye each other; the most ad∣mirable whereof are those cut on high Hills and Fortresses thereon, out of the main Rocks, seeming rather the Works of many Ages than one to finish them: At Rajapore are Hot Baths; here are very few other Mineral Waters. The Plain Country is Rich in all things necessary;The Country rich in In∣crease. Pasturage, by reason of the long Summers Drought, being the only lack; which in the Rains and Cold Season they have Time and Store to provide against. Cocoes grow all along the Sea-side round India, within the Tropicks, and Beetle-Nut is in great Request, not only for that it is the Courteous Entertainment or Farewel at all Friendly Interviews, but because wrapped in Pawn-Leaves with Chinam, it exhilarates and makes a kind of pleasant Drunkenness, if much eaten, as the Na∣tives of any fashion are seldom without it in their Mouths; and these are peculiar to the Low-Countries as are Water-Melons; other Fruits, as Grapes, Mangoes, and the like, are the common Growth of In∣dia: Rice thrives best in Watry Places, it swimming always there∣in till Harvest, when the Water is let out by Drains; all other Corn rejoices better in drier Grounds; Cotton is a Lover of the same, from whence comes all the Wealth to India, quae effodiuntur opes, which are dug for in other Places and laid up here. Woods are every where, in which sometimes are met Inhabi∣tants not yet mentioned, and for their Solitariness called Men of the Woods, or more truly Satyrs; there are Nereids too, or Men of the Rivers, but dye as soon as taken: A Couple of the former I saw asleep in the day-time, in the Night they Sport and Eat; they were both in a Parrot-Cage, they had Heads like an Owl, Bodied like a Monkey, without Tails; only the first Finger of the Right Hand was armed with a Claw like a Birds, otherwise they had Hands, and Feet which they walk upright on, not pronely, as the other Beasts do; they were coloured like a Fox, of the length of Half a Yard; though they grow bigger till Twelve Years old, when they copulate. Here are Sandy Deserts near the Gulph of Cambaja, and beyond Bengala,Deserts. towards Botan and Cochin China, whence they fetch Musk. Mines, besides those of Diamonds, Rubies, Agats, Cornelian, Granats,Mines. Topazes, and Iron, none are discoursed of; which with what else comes to Memory, shall be specified in their proper place. Of Diamond-Mines there are two sorts, the Old and New Rock, the
latter the Larger, the other the Best; the first in Duccan, the other in Gulconda. Wild Beasts frequent here,Wild Beasts. are the fiercest Tigres in the World, with all their sorts; Lions here are some, but feeble and cowardly; Leo∣pards, Balus, a sort of Wolf, wild Cats, or Catamountains, Monkeys, wild Dogs, which they say Piss out the Eyes of Venison as they feed in the Woods, and so Venom them with their Urine, that they be∣come their Prey; Squirrels, Jackals, Mungooses, wild Bulls, Ele∣phants, Rhinoceros, Buffolaes, Bears. For Game,For Game. all sorts of Antelopes, Deer, Boar, and Elks. The Fields are stored with Tame of all kinds, but mostly with Kine and Goats. Fowls of Prey,Fowls of Prey. Eagles, Vultures, Kites, Newries, Crows, which last hath an Enemy, though in Bulk contemptible, yet in Revenge implacable, being no bigger than a Bumble-Bee, yet it never leaves the Crow's Breast till it have left it breathless, making a Vent there∣in by its piercing Bill. For Game, abundance of all sorts: The Bats here are the biggest of any place. Fishes common to India are not to be numbred,Fish. some spangled with Gold, Vermilion, and other Colours, not usual with us; but the best known are Sharks, Whales, Sea-snakes, (the assured Tokens to the Pilots of their approaching the Coasts of India); Pilchards come in Sholes as our Herrings do; Porpoises, Oysters, Crabs, Tor∣toises, the Sword-fish, Saepae, or the Ink-fish of Gesner, Spanish Mack∣rel. The Rivers are well provided (and the Grass too) with Snakes, many of which are venomous, and some big enough to devour a Sow and Piggs, if the Natives may be believed. Insects (besides Fleas) are large Flies in the Rain,Insects. who will be sure to be our Tasters, unless one stand purposely to beat them off with a Mirchal; nor are Ants less vexatious, nothing eatable can be set by but they will be at it; but the greatest Pest is the Mosquito, who not only wheals, but domineers by its continual Hums; the Chints are as venomous, and if squeezed leave a most Poysonous Stench; these breed in the Cotton, and where once they beset an House, they are not easily removed, they being Proof against all Fumes or Remedies used to destroy such-like Vermin; and there∣fore keep Possession, while the Inhabitants being not able to endure them, must turn out to other Dwellings; and these Plagues are in all their Quarters. The Inhabitants and Natives of India are divided into Five Sects, to wit; I. Gentues; the first Possessors, Aborigines, or Natives. II. Moguls; the next Invaders or Conquerors by Land. III. Portugals; the first Discoverers or Conquerors by Sea. IV. Dutch, English, &c. Strangers; partly by Conquest; partly by Trade. V. Parsies, by Permission.
The Gentues are again distributed into these Classes; The Gymnosophists, Brachmins, or Book-Men. The Quetories, Rashpoots, or Soldiers. The Merchants or Mechanicks. The Labourers, Peasants, Combies, Coolies, Frasses and Holencores. The Brachmins Are chiefly distinguished by Butts and Sinais;Their men of Learning. from these two Roots spring the other Branches: The difference was occasioned by a Famine in the Low-Countries, where the latter resided, on which ac∣count they were constrained to break their Fast with Fish, or else starve; for which reason they are greatly despised by the purer Butt, having never deviated from his Pythagorean Institution and Primary Abstinence from all living Creatures. Yet notwithstanding, the Si∣nai keeps his Cotton-String Badge (the Characteristick Note of a Brachmin) under his Left Shoulder as well as the Butt, and has his Disciples. The Butts addict themselves to the profoundest Mysteries in their Religion, giving themselves over to an exact Regular Life, abstracted from all Worldly Employments, unless such as are for the saving and preserving of Life, the Chiefest and Skilfullest Physicians being of their Tribe: These are the Masters of all their Heathen Cere∣monies, or Doctors of their Canon Law, every Tribe being instruct∣ed by them; they chiefly consist in Washing, Abstinence, and other Austerities imposed at their Pleasure. The Sinais are more biass'd by Secular Offices, out of which are made their fighting Bishops, Defies, or Farmers of the King's Rents, Pundits (Governors of Towns and Provinces), Physicians, Ac∣countants, Scrivans, and Interpreters: Any of these, if they ar∣rive to any smattering in Learning, are admired and highly reveren∣ced by the Vulgar. Their Cabala's or Pious Secrets are kept in a Language communicated to none but themselves, as are all the Ar∣canaes of every Science, written in a peculiar Character; they are very dogmatical in their Dictates to the People, singing them out in a Lofty Tone, as the Fauns and Bards of old are reported, as the Sy∣bils by Lactantius, the Salians by Livy, the Druids by Caesar, the Delphian Enigmaes by Herodotus, the Spartan Rites by Eustathius: Suas nimirum cogitationes non eâ pervulgatâ & detritâ & dissolutâ quâ quilibet uteretur oratione, consignare, sed aliâ exquisitâ, & astrictâ, & numerosâ, & vinculis alligatâ, praeclarum aestimârunt. Dr. Beyn. in Orat. 6. God they say is incomparably Good;Their Notion of God. in some of their Languages they hardly have a name for Hell; their Notions of the World's Creation and the Origine of all things, are mere confused Stories; their Account of Time is perplexed, and not to be reckoned up. For the Immortality of the Soul, they rely as well on Plato as Pythago∣ras, (viz.) That it is transmigrated, and in such a Revolution of time they appear in the World again, Princes or Rajahs, according to the
Demerits of their former living, or Penalties inflicted on them to pu∣rify them; their Souls not being informed, but inclosed as a Bird in a Cage. Whence it is that,The Conceit of Transmi∣gration forci∣ble to Merits. propped by these Persuasions, the Women freely Sacrifice themselves, in hopes of coming into the World great and famous, after they have passed the Limbo of Transmigra∣tion with their Husbands; and in the mean while are Canonized and Invoked as Saints by their Kindred and Relations; and their Patri∣archs oblige themselves to incredible Abstinence from Food, for ma∣ny days together refusing any Sustenance, undergoing the strictest Penances; having learned from Pythagoras, Angustam & asperam esse viam ad vitam beatam. SCIENCES In Esteem among them are principally Magick and Judicial Astrolo∣gy,Their aptness to learn Lan∣guages, and Skill in Phi∣losophy. one of the Sectators of which on all accounts are consulted, as well by Moors as Gentues; Grammar and Rhetorick, some of them being Masters of Persian, Indostan, Arabick, Sanscript (or Holy Lan∣guage) Portugueze, and all the depending Speeches of Indostan, as Duccany, Moratty, Conchany, and the like; besides the Canatick, in which all their Sonnets and Poesies are expressed, being softer and more melting than the others; which is an Argument also of its Antiquity, Indostan not having a Character to express its self in, on which the later Dialects depend. Elocution, Physick, Metaphysicks, are not out of their Element: Their Philosophers maintain an Ari∣stotelian Vacuity; nor are they quite ignorant of Medicks, though Anatomy is not approved, wherein they lean too much on Traditi∣on, being able to give a very slender account of the Rational Part thereof. In what Perfection Musick stands (as I am no competent Judge) I could never give my Ears the trouble to examine, it seem∣ing loud and barbarous; yet they observe Time and Measure in their Singing and Dancing, and are mightily delighted with their Tum∣bling and Noise. They as much dislike our shriller Musick, hardly allowing our Wayts fit to play to Bears, and our Stringed Instruments strike not their hard-to-be-raised Fancies; but our Organs are the Musick of the Spheres with them, charming them to listen as long as they play. Arithmetick being the most profitable Science, is the best understood by them; to which they have a Natural Propensity, and will in a trice, without the help of Pen or Ink cast up the dif∣ficultest Sums, and never pause upon it. In some Places they write on Cocoe-Leafs dried,Write on Leafs. and then use an Iron Style; or else on Paper, when they use a Pen made with a Reed, for which they have a Brass Case, which holds them and the Ink too, always stuck at the Girdles of their Scrivans. Among these are enrolled the Muttanies,Muttanies and Jougies. Jougies, or Pilgrims, who lead a Beastly Life, having all things common, and are courted wherever they come; nor do they ever depart, without leaving a Stain to their Profession: When they ease Nature they scrape an Hole, as Dogs or Cats do, to bury their Excrements, to prevent breeding of Insects. These are covered, the first with a White Sheet,
and carry Perfuming Pots, and Bless all as they pass; the others have a Snapsack, a Mirchal, and a patch'd Goat, rambling up and down as the Fakiers; the first are buried with their Heels upwards and Heads downwards; the others sometimes buried, sometimes burnt. At the Heel of these may be reckoned the Bengal Juglers,Juglers, &c. Moun∣tebanks, and Conjurers, as also the Dancing People; these are Va∣grants, that travel to delude the Mobile by their Hocus Pocus Tricks (living promiscuously like our Gypsies); among whom I saw one who swallowed a Chain, such as our Jacks have, and made it clink in his Stomach; but pulling it out, it was not so pleasant to the Spectators (being mostly Ladies, for whose Diversion he was brought) they puking when it was accompanied with a filthy roapy Slaver. Others presented a Mock-Creation of a Mango-Tree, arising from the Stone in a short space (which they did in Hugger-Mugger, be∣ing very careful to avoid being discovered) with Fruit Green and Ripe; so that a Man must stretch his Fancy, to imagine it Witch∣craft; though the common sort think no less: Sed Magus quò peri∣tior eò detestabilior. I was promised to see a Fellow that cast up his Tripes by his Mouth, Stomach and all, shewing them to the Beholders; but he was excu∣sed, having some time allowed him to prepare himself for it: In his stead were brought me two; the first of which, by Suction or draw∣ing of his Breath, so contracted his lower Belly, that it had nothing left to support it, but fell flat to his Loins, the Midriff being forced into the Thorax, and the Muscles of the Abdomen as clearly marked out by the stiff Tendons of the Linea Alba, as by the most accurate Dissection could be made apparent, he moving each Row like living Columns by turns. The Aetiology whereof I think to be this; that while all the Contents of the Belly are moved upwards, all Respiration is expelled, only the voluntary Motion of the Animal Spirits acts upon the Nerves (the Mind or Soul commanding them) while the Vital or Natural are compelled to the contrary. After this I saw another Fellow of a good Habit of Body, that had taught himself by use to depress his Sternum, with the Serratus Posticus Inferior, Sacro lumbus, and Triangular Muscles, so that the Cartilaginous Substance of the Ribs, which Anatomists separate for Dissection of the Thorax, and throw it back over the Face, by this means was crowded in, that it made a notable Cavity as deep as the Spine would suffer; in the mean while the Man was almost strangled, as if pressed to death; for under this Constraint neither he nor the former could take their Breath, yet remained so some time: Which may be a visible Instance that divers Urinators may continue a long space, being inured from their Infancy to keep under Water. From the rest of these I observed nothing more excellent than what is perform∣ed by our Rope-dancers, for Feats of Activity, or Slight of Hand. These pester every open place in great Cities and Publick Fairs, as they do in Europe. The next Rank, Is of the Soldiers, commonly called Rashpoots, who by their Valour
have won unto themselves the Perpetuity of their Arms, and the Credit of being called in to the Aid of divers Princes,A Crocus-co∣loured Coat intimates a Resolution to dye, or be Conqueror. and are in con∣tinual Action under some one State or other bordering upon them; never altering their Vocations, being bred Warriors; these aspire not to great Charges, nor admit Commanders over them, unless o their own Cast; fighting Pell-mell, as every one is inspired from the Pay they receive; their Arms are Sword, Pike, and Buckler. A Soldier that puts on a Crocus-dye, intimates a Resolution either to dye or be Conqueror. Opium is frequently eaten in great quantities by the Rashpoots,Opium eaten often, and in quantities. Queteries, and Patans, when they fight, which makes them run up∣on any Enterprize with a raging Resolution to dye or be victorious. Before Engaging, it is usual for them to embrace one another, as if parting for another World; esteeming it happier to be killed in their Vocation, than to submit to the Lust of a Conqueror; their very Women disdaining to own them for their Husbands, when they once turn their Back upon their Enemies: Of one of which Vira∣goes goes this Story; Her Mate had made an Escape honourable enough for a prudent Retreat, when coming home and craving Meat from his Spouse, after many obloquious Salutes she put this Affront on him, she served him with a Brass Ladle, whereas before his Meals were taken up with one made of Iron; whereof he demanding the Reason, she tartly replied, Lest the sight of Iron should turn your Sto∣mach from your Victuals, as it had done from Fighting. The Banyan Follows the Soldier,Whether the Banyan be a Jew. though as contrary in Humour, as the Antipodes in the same Meridian are opposite one to another: These have for∣got if ever they were Jews, or no; but if any of these People are such, these are most likely; and by a double Right of Jew and Gentile, are a Compound of the greatest Cheat in the World, the fittest there∣fore to make Brokers and Merchants of: They are devout Proselytes in the Worship of this Countrey, and tenacious of their Rites and Customs; strict Observers of Omens, so that in travelling ten Miles they shall sometimes double the Ground, to avoid encountring a Caphala of Asses, or to take the Hand of a Flock of Goats or Cows grazing: In the Rains they will not ride in a Coach, for fear they should kill the Insects generated in the Cart-Ruts, or stinking Puddles: So foolishly superstitious are they and precise in Matters of Religion; in cases of Trade they are not so hide-bound, giving their Conscien∣ces more Scope, and boggle at no Villany for an Emolument. The Poor Artisan Can hardly live for these, who will grind their Faces to fill their own Hoards, as much as the Desies do The Peasants And Combies, who Till the Land, and dress the Corn, with no re∣markable
difference from other Nations; they plough with Oxen, their Coulters unarmed mostly, Iron being scarce, but they have hard Wood will turn their light Grounds. The Gentues thrash their Corn with a Stick, not a Flail; the Moor-men that are Husbandmen tread it out with Oxen (but muzzle their Mouths), which they do in the open Fields, before they carry it home; fixing a Stake in the Earth, and yoaking the Oxen three, four, or more abreast, fasten them to a turning Pole, passing round till all be done. Coolies, Frasses, and Holencores, are the Dregs of the People, and are not permitted to have their Funeral Rites or Marriages with the others; so abject, that the others think themselves defiled if they touch or converse with them. All these are distinguished one from another by the Cut of their Beards,Distinguished by their seve∣ral Paintings on their Fore∣heads, or different Painting of their Bodies and Foreheads, as well as winding of their Turbants. A Brachmin paints himself on the Front with a Pythagorean Y between his Eyebrows, descending to his Nose, and gives to every Tribe their peculiar Mark. The Gentues wear little Beards,And Cuts of their Beards. and shave them; the Moors great Beards, and trim them only to keep them decent: And since their Barbers are so necessary, as well to give them their distinguishing Shape, as for other Uses, we will let you know they seldom keep Shop, but go about the City with a Checquered Apron over their Shoulders, and a Mirror in their Hands, which they offer any to see their Face in; and if any employ them, they are well paid with a Gosbeek, much under a Farthing: When they pluck out a Razor not an Inch long, a Bason of Brass as big as a Coffee-dish, and a piece of Castle-Soap, which they dip into the Bason of Water, and rub about the Lips or Head, with no more Water than it gathers up, and so shave very well; and for the Head few out-do them, both for Ease and Readiness: They have an Iron Tool also, one end to pick the Ears, another to cut the Nails, both which they do dextrously, clearing the Ears of great quantities of that thick Wax inclosed therein; they also wash and anoint their Bodies, it being not obsolete here to anoint every day with Sweet Oyls, and the Poor, both Men and Wo∣men, with CocoeNut Oyl, which being Rank, together with their eating Hing and Garlick, makes them always smell so strong, that it is very offensive passing through Places of Resort, before one be accustomed to them; they also rub the Hair of their Head with a sweet Powder to get the sweat out, and then bedawb it with stinking Oyl, which they say preserves it: In the Bath or Hummums they have a large Province. The Moguls Are the Invaders of their Liberties and Properties, ruling tyranni∣cally; yet more tolerable than what they were when first invited hither by the Plenty of this Country, and Scarcity of their own, which was a means to gain, as well as now to preserve their Conquest; for they were originally Tartars, coming from Scythia with their Leader Tamerlane, and thence prided themselves to be called Whites, and still do so in scorn of the Indians, who are Blacks;
and it is the Flower of their Emperors Titles to be called the Great Mogul, Burrore Mogul Podeshar, who reckons but few Descents from Tamerlane, and is at present Auren Zeeb; who Governs by this Maxim, To Create as many Ombrahs, or Nobles, out of the Moguls or Persian Foreigners, as may be fairly entrusted, but always with this Policy, To remove them to remote Charges from that where their Jageah, or Annuity arises; as not thinking it fit to trust them with Forces or Money in their allotted Principalities, lest they should be tempted to unyoke themselves, and slip their Neck from the Servitude imposed on them; for which purpose their Wives and Children are left as Pledges at Court, while they follow the Wars, or are Administring in Cities or Provinces; from whence when they return, they have nothing they can call their own, only what they have Cheated by false Musters and a hard Hand over both Soldi∣ers and People; which many times too, when manifest, they are forced to refund to the King, though not restore to the Oppressed; for all Money, as well as Goods and Lands, are properly his, if he call for them. Out of these are made Generals of Armies,The Ombrahs. under whom are Commanders of Hundreds and Thousands, as the Centurions and Legions; from thence to Fifty, Twenty, and Ten. A Cavalier is Armed with a Poniard at the Right side of his Gir∣dle; a broad Bladed Sword of an unwieldy size (and therefore poi∣sed with an heavy Pummel), on his Left side in a Belt; a Bow made of Horn strongly and artificially Glutinated (Adducto flectere cornua nervo) and Arrows in a Quiver at the Bow of his Saddle; and a great Lance in his Hand, with a Target hanging cross his Shoulders Bossed. A Foot Soldier carries a Match-lock Gun, or else a great Lance and Target, and sometimes a Sword; the former are ranked under the great Ombrahs, or the Chief Commanders of Hazory; the latter have a Standard of their own to repair to. Munsubdars,Petty Ombrahs. or petty Ombrahs, own the King only for their Lead∣er, and have not above Four or Five Horse under them. Rousanders are Cavaliers that are Paid by the Day, a considerable Salary, surpassing the Munsubdars, though not so Honourable. A simple Cavalier under the Ombrahs have some of them Two Horses apiece, as his Lord favours him, and his Pay 30 or 25 Rupees per Month. Among these may be reckoned the Artillery in which the Fringi's are Listed; formerly for good Pay, now very ordinary, having not above 30 or 40 Rupees a Month. For Artillery they have both great Ordnance and small Field Pieces,The Artillery. drawn by Elephants and Oxen, adorned with Streamers, be∣sides Camels that carry Petereros. The Soldiery are Paid, partly out of the Treasury, and partly out of the Lands allotted for that purpose. The Husbandman is forced to Build low, and the Doors like en∣tring Ports, otherwise the Soldier would bring his Horse in as well as himself.
The Moormen domineer over the Indians most unsufferably; and these are of the Turkish or Arabian Sect in matters of Religion, owning Mahomet,Their Differ∣ence in Reli∣gion with the Persians. and his Brother to be his Successor: The Chias, or Persian, own Mahomet also, but place the Succession of the Caliphship in the Daughter; and this is a Dispute of so high a nature, that they Eat not, neither Communicate one with another. There are some great Merchants among them,Their Pride and Luxury. that are buoy'd up more by the Authority of their Religion and Cast, than Cunning, the Banyan being forced to flee to them for Patronage: They imitate a noble Pomp, and are not encountred abroad nisi magna Comitante catervâ, without a great Train, using many Odors in the Hummums, or Balneo's; nor are they without Oils, Perfumes, and Essences of Sandal, Cloves, and Oranges, which are in their kind very exqui∣sitely drawn off. They go Rich in Apparel, their Turbats of Gold, Damask'd Gold Atlas Coats to their Heels, Silk Alajah, or Cuttanee Breeches, Embroidered Sashes and Slippers, Golden Hilted Swords and Poniards, as also Golden Embossed Targets; Silver and Gold Capparisons for their Horses, which are of Arabia, Persia, or Turky. The Moguls Feed-high, Entertain much, and Whore not a little. The Women are conformable to the Wills of their Husbands, be∣ing truly no more than their Chief Slaves; Dressing the Victuals, and Waiting till their Lords have Dined, before they Eat themselves. Every Cast in India refuse to Eat with those of a contrary Tribe or Opinion, as well Gentues, Moors, and Persians, as any other; nor so much as to Dress the Meat in their Vessels, they accounting them Defiled. A Fakier Is an Holy Man among the Moors;The reason of the Licenti∣ousness of the Fakiers. for all who Profess that Strictness (for such it should be) they esteem them Sacred; and though be∣fore apparent Traytors, yet declaring for this kind of life, and wear∣ing a patch'd Coat of a Saffron Colour, with a pretended careless neglect of the World, and no certain Residence, they have Immunity from all Apprehensions, and will dare the Mogul himself to his Face: Of this Order are many the most Dissolute, Licentious, and Pro∣phane Persons in the World, committing Sodomy, will be Drunk with Bang, and Curse God and Mahomet; depending on the Tole∣ration the Mogul indulges them with, having been one himself in the time of the Contest among his Brethren; so securing himself till they had destroyed one another, and made an easy passage for him to the Throne; these People Beg up and down like our Bed∣lams with an Horn and Bowl, so that they enter an House, take what likes them, even the Woman of the House; and when they have plaid their mad Pranks, away they go to repeat them elsewhere. Under this Disguise many pass as Spies up and down, and reap the best Intelligence for the benefit of the Prince that Employs them.
The Portugals, Not to defraud them of their due,The Portugals might have Conquered In∣dia had not the English In∣terrupted them, and the Dutch fal∣len upon them. might have Subdued India by this time, had not we fallen out with them, and given them the first blow at Ormus; upon which the Dutch fell in and took from them the best of their Conquest, and all their Spice Trade; notwith∣standing they have added some Christians to those formerly Con∣verted by St. Thomas, but it is a fond report to say all India; no more than to have Conquered all the Inland Country, where they never pierced, their Possessions being most by the Sea-side; yet at this day they bear the Port of a Vice-Roy at Goa, who has his Council, and Governs after the Mode of Portugal: His Reign is Triennial, as are all their Capitaneas. The Dutch, Though a Commonwealth in Europe, find it properest to bear the face of a Monarchy here, appointing a General at Batavia, whose Power is extensive over all India: These begin to be taken notice of, and are esteemed as Men of War among these Nations; for obliging and fair Means prevail not here, they being of a less Ingenuous Temper than to be won by any other ways than Force; so that a Tyrannical Government in India is as necessary to keep them under, as abstaining from Flesh and Washing their Bodies, to keep them in Health; wherefore they have wisely Ordained Religious Rites: And this is the reason they have a value for The English, Who they see are content with Bombaim,The English much valued. and a peaceable way of Trade; square with the Humour, and meet with the Praise of the Banyans; but command not that Awe by which these People are best taught to understand themselves. The Parsies, As they are called,The Parsies expose their dead to the Fowls of the Air. are of the old stock of the Persians, Worship the Sun and Adore the Elements; are known only about ; where they are famous for what all other Nations deem infamous, the ex∣posing their Dead to the Fowls of the Air: And these coming in by permission are obliged to Conformity with the Heathen Customs, being almost, as the Gibeonites to the Israelites, Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water; having been curbed formerly by the Gen∣tiles, and now by the Moors used as perfect Slaves; yet they en∣dure this, that so they may enjoy their Religion, and that benefit, which is tolerated to the Indians more than any where, the liberty of getting Children, and an indulgence for Poverty. The Indians are Tall of Stature, Large Boned; their Colour va∣ries according to the diversity of the Region; the Parsies are Straw Coloured, as Hyppocrates witnessed for them; Aethiopians are Black
and Frizled; the Indians here are a mixture of these, but long Haired. The heat of the Sun alters our Europe-Men to a dark Brown; such as Sail to and again constantly in these Climates, by going Naked and exposed to the Sun, being almost as Swarthy as the Natives, with this difference, that by Cloathing the Sunburnt wears off; but contrariwise, it remains indeleble on the Indians. Infants when newly Born have the same Flesh Colour as ours; but in a few Days, by the inbred Humour, and the Sun's Heat, de∣clare their Hew to be of the same with their Parents. The Women are Small,The Women of the same Species as others, the Position of their Veins being the same. and most an end Plump, and Short in respect to the Men; as to the order which Nature observes in them they are more forward than ours in Europe, and leave off Child∣bearing sooner. It is reported the Menstruums of the Africans are pernicious, but there is no such slander here, these being Neat, Well-shaped, and Obsequious to their Husbands; for the different Positions of their Veins it's a silly Query, they being of the same Species of the rest of the World, bating their Education, which is agreeable to them, and bear as good a Meen naturally, as ours in∣structed by the Masters of Behaviour; they keep their Breasts bound up carefully, and on that account are no more extended than they should be; they are quick in Labour, and Affectionate to their Children, Bearing them Naked on their Hips a straddle; are well Proportioned, and for that reason not ashamed to shew the Motion of their Bodies, all their Limbs being visible, yet love to hide what should not be seen: They are Cleanly, as well in their Cookery as in their Bodies, Pruning themselves by plucking the budding Hairs off their Privities up by the Roots, they being all as smooth there as the back of their Hands, though they suffer the Hair of their Heads to grow in Tresses, which the Rich Embroider with Gold, Coronets, and Rich Jewels; the Poor Brade with Strings of Jassa∣min Flowers, and make Necklaces of the same; the Rich have their Arms and Feet Fettered with Gold and Silver, the meaner with Brass, Glass, or Tuthinag; besides Rings at their Noses, Ears, Toes, and Fingers: Their Attire alters not into new Modes, nor need they a Taylor; a Lungy being tied loose over their Shoulders Belt-wise, and tucked between their Legs in nature of short Breeches, besides a short Wastecoat, or Ephod to keep up their Breasts, being all their Garb; going constantly without Shooes or Stockins, Shoes being allowed their Midwives only, which are like the Mens, only a few Silk Tufts upon them for distinction sake. Those that have Buried their Husbands (or rather Burnt them) are rifled of all their Jewels, and Shaved, always wearing a Red Lungy, whereby to be known that they have not undergone the Conflagration; for which cause they are despised, and live more Uncomfortably than the meanest Servant. The Moors Women are all Cloathed like the Men, as has been said elsewhere, only Vailed when they go abroad; and thus the In∣dian Women are Habited. They use no swathing to their Babes,Few Crooked or Deformed. and have very few deformed or Dwarfs among them; are Temperate, and live to a good Old Age, when their Hair also turns from Black to Grey. What Ovid relates
of the Glaucus Fish, Aestivo nunquam conspectus Sydere Glaucus, is true in these Hot Countries of the Colour of the Eyes of these Sun-burnt people, for I never saw but one Grey-ey'd, and therefore I suppose them rare; (unless they should tincture them with some Fucus, it may be of Antimony, which we read in the Sacred Page the Jews used, especially the Women, both to preserve them from Filth, and to procure a graceful Blackness, 2 Kings 9. Jer. 4. Ezek. 23.) Nor but one Dwarf, which was a Brachmin, 109 Years old, well limb'd, and of a quick Apprehension, being not Three Foot high, free from the Infirmities of Age. In general they are melancholy inclined,The Cause of their Blackness left in sus∣pence. and love a sedate Life more than Action; and whether that may not add to their Dye, I leave to the Sceptical; and conclude in this Point of these Asiaticks, as Naso did of his Africks; Sanguine tum credunt in corpora summa vocato Aethiopum populos nigrum traxisse colorem. The Indian Wives dress their Husbands Victuals, fetch Water, and grind their Corn with an Hand-Mill, when they sing, chat, and are merry; such prevalency has Custom: They make their Bread as thin as Wafers, bak'd on broad round Plates or Stones, commonly of Rice; the Moors is made of Wheat, thicker and oblong, bestuck with Seeds to correct Wind, and mostly bak'd in a Furnace, which they stick to the sides, when Dough, as we see Cow-Turds on a Mud-Wall. Boiled Rice, Nichany, Millet, and (in great Scarcity) Grass-Roots, are the common Food of the ordinary People; which with a Pipe of Tobacco contents them. CITIES Are many and Populous; three more Renowned than the rest (Dhil∣ly, Lhor, and Agra), for the Residence of the Emperor in one of these for every Season of the Year: The rest are known either for Trade, or the Provinces whose Names they bear. Their Buildings suit with the Country and State of the Inhabi∣tants,Their Houses built for Con∣veniency. being mostly contrived for Conveniency: The Poorer are made of Boughs or Oleas of the Palmeroes, or Leafs of Teke, and thatch'd both Sides and Coverings; the middle sort of the Gentues with Mud one Story; floored with Cow-dung, which they do afresh every day, after they have swept and cleansed them: Under which, their Houshold-Gods, themselves, their Family, and Cattel, are all housed, and many times in no distinct Partition: They plaster Cow-dung be∣fore their Doors, and so keep them clean, having a little place or two built up a Foot Square of Mud, where they plant Calaminth, or (by them called) Tulce, which they worship every Morning, and tend with diligence. The Richer and the Moors build with Stone and Mortar, some∣times with Brick, making small Shew without, but delicately contri∣ved within, with Tanks, Airy and cool Choultries, private Recesses for their Women, Tarass'd atop, and sometimes three or four Stories
high: Their Furniture is moveable, as Rich Carpets to sit on the Floor, and Rich Cushions behind them, without any Chairs within-doors, unless large Elbow Chairs when they sit at their Doors smoking in State. And in these they spend their Lives,Live to a good Age, and have the Length of Days here as in other places, they spinning them out a long while: Whether the Cause may be attributed to the Air, or Temperance in their Diet, I know not: Yet this is certain, they are careful what they eat shall be well dressed, that the Stomach be neither over∣charged, or have much trouble to concoct. And as they are careful what they take into their Bodies,By Care of their Diet, so are they solicitous to evacuate in good order, always washing their Fun∣daments, and squatting when they make Water; nor do the Wo∣men scruple to do their Occasions in Publick Streets or Highways, going hand in hand for that purpose at Set-times of the day, and if any pass by in the Interim, will turn their bare Backsides upon them, but will hide their Faces; and this at Sun-rise and Sun-set every day they do in Droves; Men by themselves, and Women by them∣selves; if in the City, most an end, under dead Walls, where when they have finished, they wash the Filth off with their Left Hand, be∣cause they feed themselves with the Right. The Moors think hard of them for this Freedom; nor do they conceive a better Opinion of our Women, when they see an Englishman salute them with a Kiss, or walk together in a Garden to take the Innocent Diversion there: So that the Jealousy of the Moor must not reflect on the Modesty of our Indian Women. As soon as they are gone,And Cleanli∣ness. the Cows come and lick up their Ordure (which they watch for), being nothing but Herbs, Roots, or Pulse, digested without any other mixture either of Flesh or Strong Drink: If they unload themselves out of the Town, they make to∣wards the River-side, or Brinks of their Ditches, and leave a filthy Stink behind them, notwithstanding they eat nothing Carnous, which remains upon their Excrements; and for that reason it is somewhat strange the Kine should be so fond of them: And hence is it that in their Streets, and near the Towns and Cities, it is but ill taking the Air. Yet however Natural this becomes to them, as well as the rest of Mankind, they are not in this particular to be taxed with Sloth and Sluttery in respect of their Bodies; for besides their constant Washings at the Times of their Devotion, they never eat nor drink before they have cleansed themselves with Water poured all over them from Head to Foot; nor will they suffer their secret Parts to harbour any Nastiness, they using Depilatories for Breast, Arm-pits and Groins, are always shaving their Heads and Beards, cutting their Nails, washing their Mouths, and rubbing their Teeth, whereby they look like Ivory. And since Cleanliness is the next in esteem to Godliness in Human Society,Their Wash∣ers and other Craftsmen work well for little Money. I will conclude with their Washers, which are Women as well as Men; they are hired at easy Rates, and are the best in the World, as our Calicuts transmitted hither declare; they have each a little Pit, into which the Water springs, and near it a great smooth Stone, on which they beat their Cloaths till clean; and if for Fa∣mily-use,
starch them with Congee, and so carry them home when dried; if for Sale, they lay them a Whitening, and after Congee or stiffen them, and so deliver them to the Packers, Labour being to them instead of Soap, for were they at much Expence therein they could not live, their Pay being inconsiderable. And by this small Taste of their unweariedness in Pains-taking, their Cheapness of every thing, and their faring hard, all their other Craftsmen may be valued, who work for nothing, comparatively with our Europeans; though in many things they exceed them for Curiosity, as in staining of Calicuts, and fine Work either in Gold or Silver. The Language At Court is Persian, that commonly spoke is Indostan (for which they have no proper Character, the written Language being called Banyan) which is a mixture of Persian and Sclavonian,The World peopled after the Flood from Scythia. as are all the Dialects of India: A good Argument to me of the peopling the World this way originally from the Scythian Mountains after the Deluge; their Speech containing many Words agreeable enough to ours in Sound, as well as Figure; more Scraps whereof may be found when we come to Persia. The last thing Observable is the Coins, Weights, &c. A Col∣lection whereof follows:
COLLECTIONS OF THE COINS, WEIGHTS, AND Precious Stones, Usual in those Places of Trade within the Charter of the Honourable East-India-Company. Tantum scimus quantum in Memoria tenemus. Ex Reminiscentiâ fit Scientia.
CHAP. VII. COLLECTIONS OF THE Coins, Weights, and Precious Stones, Usual in those Places of Trade within the Char∣ter of the Honourable East-India Company. Coins of Surat, Amadavad, Agra, &c. in India. THere are divers sorts of Coins in Gold, seldom used in Payments among Merchants, some of a greater, others of lesser Value; so also in Silver; but the Rupee is the most ordinary, whereof there are; RUPEES Cazzanace, Hundea, Magarree, Chillannee, All valued at Mamoodoes, 2 ¼; the latter is of greater Weight, but course. MAMOODOES are current only in Surat, and Parts adjacent; they are worth somewhat less than an English Shilling, but are so account∣ed in the Company's Books; and among Merchants in the Countrey, 2 ¼ Mamoodoes is reckoned a Rupee. Yet to change Mamoodoes into Rupees, there is sometimes given 3, sometimes 8 or 10 Mamoodoes on the 100 Ru∣pees, according to their Plenty or Scarcity, or as the Governor or Banyans please to advance the Cambio, which is called among them Vattaw: In Anno 1663. was given 20 Mam. per Cent. PICE, a sort of Copper-Mony current among the Poorer sort of People;As in Anno 1660, 61, 62, 63, when Cop∣per was dear. of these, sometimes 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, to 24, make, or are reckoned to a Mamoodoe; therefore because they rise and fall, the Com∣pany's Accounts are kept in Book-rate Pice, viz. 32 to the Mam. and 80 Pice to the Rupee, for that without any reason the Rupee is by the Ac∣comptant rated at 2 ½ Mam. whereas if it were rated at Mam. 2 ¼ per Ru∣pee, then in Book-rate the Rupee would fall to be 72 Pice. Weights and Measures of Surat, Agra, &c. The Surat Maund was formerly 18 Pice to the Sear of 40,Md Surat, 40 Sr, is 37 l. Md Pucka, double so much. Md Ecbarry, 40 Sr, 30 Pice the Sr. and made 33 l. Averdupois: At present it is 40 Sear,Letter IV. of 20 Pice the Sear, which is 37 l. The Maund Pucka at Agra is double as much,4 Md Ecbarry, 6 Md Surat. 3 Md Shaw Jehan, 6 Md Surat. where is also the Maund Ecbarry, which is 40 Sear, of 30 Pice to the Sear, whereby Indico, Silks, and other fine Goods are sold.
By the foresaid Maund of 20 Pice to the Sear, 40 Sear to the Maund, all sorts of Grain are sold, and other Goods of Weight, whereof 20 Maunds make a Candy. Amber and Coral, 18 Pice weight goes to a Sear. Measures of Surat are only Two; The Lesser and Greater Coveld. The former of 27 Inches English, the latter of 36 Inches English: By the first are sold all things (except Broad-cloth,32 Tuss▪ is an Englih Yard. Velvet, and Sattin, which are sold per English Yard); by the other, the foresaid Goods in all other Places. Goldsmiths and Jewellers Weights in Surat, viz. Goldsmiths Weights. 1 Sear is 35 Tolaes. 1 Pice is 1 Tola ¾. 1 Tola is 12 Mass. 1 Tola is 32 Valls. 1 Tola is 2 Gudjanas. 1 Tola is 96 Ruttees. 1 Tola is 2 ¼ Tanks. 2 Tolas and 19 Valls; or 83 Valls make 1 Ounce Troy. 2 Tol. 6 Val. the Weight of a Cruzado. 2 9 the Weight of a Dollar. 9 9 ¼, the Weight of a Chequeene. 100 Duchra, 1 Rupee, an Imaginary Coin. 48 Juttals, 1 Pagod, an Imaginary Coin. Jewel Weights. 3 Ruttees is 1 Val. 1 Tank is 24 Rutt. 1 Rupee Oranshaw, 64 ½ Rutt. 1 Miscall is 1 Tank and 4 Ruttees. 8 Ruttees is 7 Carracks. 1 Carrack, 4 Grains. 20 Vassael, 1 Rutt. 3 Tanks, 1 Tola. 1 Mangere, 1 Rutt. 11 ½ Vas. Note, That 3 Grains Gold, make one Carrack, Diamond-weight. A Venice Ounce is nearest 1 Tola ¾: And 1 and ½ Venice Ounce, makes 1 Ounce Troy. Coins, Weights, and Measures of Rajapore. Imaginary Coins. The Pagod is 3 and ½ Rupees. 48 Jattals is 1 Pagod. 10 and ½ Larees, 1 Pagod. Zeraphins 2 ½, 1 Old Dollar. Weights, &c. The Candy is 14 Maunds Surat. 4 Maunds Rajapore, 1 Surat Maund. 56 Sear Rabag, is 40 Surat Sear. 9 Maunds Rabag, is 8 Maunds Raja∣pore. And 8 Maunds Raja. is 6 Maunds Surat. Coin and Measure in Rabag. 48 Rues in Rabag, is 1 Tucca. 8 ½ Tuccaes 1 Pagod. The Guzz is 28 Inches ⅘. 5 Guzz is 4 Yards.
Coins and Weights in Goa.Chap. VII. Coins. The Old St. Thomas, 16 Tan. 30 Res. The New St. Thomas, 15 Tan. 15 Bas. The Pagod, 15 Tan. less 96 Bas. The Venetian, 18 Tan. 30 Res. The Cruzado of Gold, 12 Zeraphins. The Zeraphin, 5 Tangoes. The Tango, 5 Vinteens. The Vinteen, 15 Basrooks, Whereof 75 make a Tango. And 60 Rees make a Tango. Weights. 1 Baharr is 3 ½ Kintal. 1 Kintal is 4 Arobel, or Rovel. 1 Arobel is 32 Rotolas. 1 Rotola is 16 Ounc. or 1 l. Averd. 1 Maund is 24 Rotolas. 1 Candy is 20 Maunds. 1 Mark is 8 Ounces. 1 Pipa is 4 Barrels. 1 Barrel is 6 Almoodaes. 1 Almooda is 12 Cannales. 24 l. Portugal is 26 English. Coins, Weights, and Measures of Duccan. The Maund or Barkey of Hubly and Carwar, is 26 l. ½, Averd. The Gunny of Pepper in Hubly is 12 Maunds. The Candy in Ellepore is 20 Maunds, of 26 l. ½ per Maund. The Sungar Pagod is 8 s. 9 d. The Tipkee Pagods, 4 Rupees. But in Vattaw differs from 100 Sun∣gar, to 118, and 123. The Asmeloh Pagod is 1 per Cent. less than the Sungaree. Coins and Weights of Bombaim. 3 Larees is 1 Zeraphin. 80 Raies 1 Laree. 1 Pice is 10 Raies. The Raies are Imaginary. 16 Bugerookes make 1 Piece of Eight. The Company's Mark upon all their Goods, Bales, and Parcels. The Company's Rupee, equal to the Surat, called Paxdro. The latter inferior by 4 Pice each. 28 l. is a Maund. 15 Pice to the Sear. The Country Weight is a Rotola, 27 making a Maund. A Candy is 20 Maund. 100 Mooras, 154 ¼ Candies. 8 Parras is a Candy. 12 and ½ Parras is a Moora. 20 Addalins is a Parra. Calicut. N▪ B. The Weights are the same as at Cocheen and Quilom. The Coins are specified in its History, pag. 55. Tarrs are the peculiar Coin, the rest are common to India. Cocheen. A Kental 128 Rotulas. 120 Rotulas is 112 l. English. 7 per Cent. difference. The Candy 20 Maunds; 25 l. per Maund. Quilom. The Babar is 20 Maunds; 24 l. Port. or 26 l. English, is the Maund.
Fort St. George, Mechlapatan, &c. Pagods Gold of 2 Matts fine, 10 Pa∣gods wt, is worth 2 ¼ 3—3 3/8 3 1/—4 4—4 ½ 4 ½—5 1/8 5—5 ¾ 5 ½—6 ¼ 6—6 ¾ 6 ¼—7 1/8 6 ½—7 ½ 7—8 7 ½—8 ½ 7 ¾—8 ¾ 8—9 1/ 8 ¼—9 ½ And so on. Note, That a Pagod touch is 8 5/8 Matts fine. Note, 1 Pagod is 1/ weight of 1 Dollar. The Standard, Is 8 Matts, and 5/8 Matts Fine: Our English 20 s. is 9 and more. Fa∣nams is 4 ¼ Mats fine. 9 Pagods weight make 1 Ounce Troy. 16 Pagods weight of Silver, is 1 Pa∣god weight of Gold. ½ Pagod in 1000 is allowed for loss in Mint. 5 Fanams in 1000. 8 Pagods is just weight of 1 Piece of Eight. The Accounts are kept in Pagods and Fanams, at 32 Fanams to a Pagod, and Cash, 6 whereof make a Fa∣nam. There is likewise a double Fanam current at Porto Nova. Eight Shillings make one Pagod; 32 Fanams 1 Pagod; every Fanam 3 d. and 6 Cash a Fanam. Coins and Weights of Siam, Bantam, &c. SIAM. 1000 Couries is 1 Miam. 2 Foods is 1 Miam, or Mass. 4 Miams is 1 Pecul. 80 Pecul is 1 Cattee. 1 Cattee is 100 Rupees. 500 Cattees is 1 Hobb, or Pecul; or nearest 130 l. English. Note, 1 Pecul Macau is a tenth part more than 1 Hobb Siam. The Pecul is 1 Rupee ¼. 4 Mass is 1 Pecul. 15 Pecul is 18 ¾ Rupees. BANTAM. The Bahar Banda is 100 Cattees, and each Cattee 6 l. is 600 l. Neat. The Bahar Malaga is 200 Cattees, each Cattee 2 l. is 400 l. So that 1 Cattee Banda, makes 3 Cattees Malaga; and 300 Cattees Malaga make 100 Bahar Banda. 22 Cattees Banda, make 1 Pecul China, of 132 l. 4 Pecul and 12 Cattees Malaga, make a Bahar Banda. 66 ⅔ Cattees Banda, make 1 Bahar Malaga. All Commodities and Merchandizes in Macassar, by the Banda Datchin, or Weight, and from thence, are to be reduced to their proper Weight. Pepper is sold by the Ganton, of which 225 make a Bahar Banda. The Quoin, which is the Rice measure, 40 Great Gantons, each Ganton weighs 90 l. English, which makes the Quoin 3600 l.
A Lesser Ganton there is, whereof 20 makes 1 of the Greater. Tortois-shell is bought by the Bahar Malaga, which is 200 Cattees, weighed by the Banda Datchin. 1 Cattee Banda is 4 Catt. China, which is 21 Ounces Averdupois. 1 Cattee Malaga, 1 ½ China. In Macassar The Mass is 2 s. 10 d. 2/7. 4 Cappans is 1 Mass. 7 Cappans is 1 Dollar of 5 s. ACHEEN. COINS. 1152 Cash is 1 Mass, 16 Mass is 1 Tale, 1 Tale is Sear, or 18 s. 1 Mass is ½ Rupee, and 32 Cash is 1 Pice. Ditto WEIGHTS. 1 Bahar is 10 ½ Maunds Surat; 200 Cattees is 1 Bahar. 1 Cattee is 29 Ounces; 1 Bahar is 360 l. English. 1 Cattee is 70 Tolas, Surat. 1 Buncal Gold Weight, is Tola's 3, 18 Vals. 20 Buncals is 1 Cattee of Gold. Note, That if the following Goods from Acheen hold out the following Rates, the Factor employed is no farther responsible. Tin for 1 Bahar Maunds 10 18 Sear. Pepper, 1 Bahar Maunds 9 20 Benzoin, 1 Bahar Maunds 9 20 Sapan Wood, 1 Bah. Maunds 9 00 Dammar, 1 Bahar Maunds 9 00 Patch Leaf, 1 Bahar Maunds 7 20 Quedah and Jahore. COINS. 160 Tares is a Mass; 16 Mass is a Tale; 1 Tale is 40 Rupees, or 4 l. 10 s. at which Rate 1 Mass is 2 ½ Rupees; and 1 Tarr is 1 1/8. Ditto WEIGHTS. 20 Cattees is 1 Bahar; 1 Bahar is 10 ½ Maunds Surat; so 1 Cattee is 2 /10 Sear. The Quedah Baharr of Tin holds out more than the Acheen Bahar, about 10 Sear per Bahar. MALLACCA. Coins. 1 Cruzado is 6 Tangoes. 1 Tango, 10 Vinteens. 1 Vinteen, 20 Lashees. Weights. 1 Bahar is 14 Roves. 1 Rove, 32 Pounds. The Cattee, 32 Ounces. 1 Ganto, 2 Cannales of Goa.
MANILLA. Coins. The Royal of Eight is 8 Tominians. 20 Barillioes is 1 Tomin. 34 Maravidies to the Tomin. Weights. The Rove, or Aroba, is 26 l. The Pico is 140 l. 00 Cattee is a Pecul. MACHAWO. Coins. Formerly the Course Dollar Silver, being in the Year 1657, and since, in Esteem, was current with them; but since they have coin∣ed Dollars of their own of an ex∣quisite Fineness, and buy our Goods with their Dollars, and re∣ceive them again for what Goods we buy; insomuch that all the Dollars the King Ferdinando, &c. ships, they brought back again, to their great Loss. 1 Cattee is nearest 16 Taies. 1 Teen is 10 Mass. 1 Mass in Silver is 10 Quandreens. 1 Quandreen is 10 Cash. 733 Cash makes one Royal. 1 Grain English Weight is 2 Cash. Weights. 1 Pecul the Datchin Weight, is 4 Maunds Surat. 1 Pecul is 100 Cattees, which is near∣est 132 l. Averdupois. 1 Cattee is nearest 21 Ounces Aver∣dupois. The Maund 27 ⅔ Surat Sear, of which 40 makes 37 l. Averdupois. BƲSSORA. Coins. The Old Royal. Embraems. The Laree 58¾ make 1 Royal. Abassees turn to Loss. 5 Fluce is 1 Parrow. 6 Parrows, 1 Shahee. 4 ½ Shahees, 1 Abassee. 3 ½ Abassees, 1 Royal. 2 Mamod. 1 Abassee. 2 Royals, 1 Chequeen. Weights. The Maund is 24 l. or 28 Sear. 1 Muckee 4 Maunds Surat. 1 Mertigat, 1 ½ is a Surat Tola. 1 Miscal, 12 Valls, and ½ Ruttee. The Measure lacks little of an Eng∣lish Yard. MAECHA. Coins. The Royal. The Ebraim 1 ⅞ is 1 Royal. The Cabeer 80 is 1 Royal. 2 Royals accounted a Chequeen. Weights. The Bahar 15 Ferasilahs of 30 l. The Ferasilah is 10 Maunds of that place. The Maund is The Ferasilah is 27 l. Rottulas 30. The Rottula is 15 Vachia. The Vachia is 1 Ounce. The Marbat or Catla is 7 ½ Ferasilahs. Indico is sold by this Weight.
Weights in Aleppo. A Quintal 480 Pound English. A Churle, 130. A Rottolo, 4. PERSIA. Coins. 10 Cosbeagues is 1 Shahee; 4 Shahees is 1 Abassee, or 16 d.; 50 Abass. 1 Thomand; 3 Shahees is 1 Mam. Surat; 2 Shahees is 1 Mamood. Persia; 6 ¾ Sha. or 67 ½ Cosb. is 1 Rupee. 200 Shahees is 1 Thom. or 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. 2 ½ Sha. is 1 Larree, or 10 d. Weights. 1 Maund Shaw is 12 l. ½; 1 Maund Cannala is 9 l. 3/8, being a Wine-Weight; 1 Maund Taberez is nearest 6 l. ½; 5 Maunds Taberez is 33 l. 400 Drachms is 1 Maund Shaw. 200 1 Maund Taberez. 300 1 Maund Cannab. 2 ½ Miscals is 1 Surat Tola. Measurcs. 37 ½ Inches, 1 Guz for Cloath, &c. 27 Inches 1 Guz for Carpets, Silk, Fine Stuff, &c., Coins of Mosambique. 1 Cruzado is 4 Testoones. 1 Roy of 8/8 is 5 Testoones. Elephants Teeth. Elephants Teeth of Mozambique, are bought per Weight, whereof are three sorts, viz. Muyn, such are the greatest, free from Flaws. Muyda, which are the lesser, or the great ones with Flaws. Sera, the least, or worst sort. The Weights by which they are bought, are Baharrs and Frasslees; each Baharr 20 Frasslees, each Frasslee 12 l. and they call the Baharrs Gross. Of Muyne, ½ Baharr of 20 Frasslees, makes 1 Baharr Gross. Of Muyda and Muyn they hold equal Price, in regard that though the Teeth of Muyn be bigger than the other, yet the Muyda giving more Weight, they balance Account. Formerly they have been worth 260, 270, 280 Cruz, per Baharr Gross. Of Sera, the current Price was 150, or 160, and rarely 180 Cruz, per Ba∣har Gross. In Surat are three distinctions of Elephants Teeth: All over 16 Sear sell at 40 Sear to the Maund; from 10 to 16, at 60 Sear to the Maund; from 10 Sear and under, 80 Sear allowed to the Maund. Tortoise-shell. When one Head (as they call it) which is more properly an entire Body, weighs 1 l. ½, or 2 l. 'tis worth 30 or 36 Cruz. per Frasslee.
Directions for Knowledge of Bezoar-stones, &c. BEZOAR. THE Monkey Bezoars which are long, are the best; those that are rough prove commonly faulty, breaking with Stones in the middle: Others in form of Tares, somewhat flat, which break in smaller Stones in the middle, are better than the rough ones. Bezoar is tried sundry ways: As the rubbing Chalk upon a Paper, then rubbing the Stone hard upon the Chalk, if it leave an Olive-Colour it is good. Also touch any with a Red-hot Iron, which you suspect because their Colour is lighter than ordinarily they use to be, and if they fry like Resin or Wax, they are naught. Sometimes they are tried by putting them into clear Water, and if there arise upon them small white Bubbles, they are good, and if none, they are doubtful. The use of the Hot Iron is esteemed infallible. MOSK. It is best to buy it in the Cod, for so it will be preserved; that which openeth with a bright Mosk Colour is the best, and will yield per Ounce. When taken out of the Cod, if a little being chawed, and rubbed with a Knife on clean Paper, do look smooth, bright, or yellowish, it is pro∣bably good, but if the Colour be as it were mixed with Gravel, it is bad. The Goodness is best discerned per Scent. AMBERGREECE. The Grey is best; for Trial thereof, if a little be chewed, and yield an odoriferous Fragor, feeling in substance like Bees-Wax, then it is good, otherwise not. The Names of Precious Stones of the East. A Diamond. Ruby. Saphire. Emerald. Topaz. Hyacinth. Amethist. Gurnett. Chrysolite. Turkois. Agat. Splen. Jasper. Lapis Lazuli. Opal. Vermillion. Clystropie. Cornelian. Onix. Bezoar. The DIAMOND IS the hardest, and when Cut, the most beautiful of all Stones; in knowledg whereof there is great difficulty, having a Crust on them before they are Cut; therefore Caution is to be used in buying them, be∣fore-hand to make a Patern in Lead: Their Waters are White, Brown,
Yellow, Blue, Green, and Reddish; whereof take notice, rating them according to their Waters: In our Climate the perfect White Water is most esteemed. Rough,Brute Stones. Brute, or Uncut Stones, are in Value half the Price of Cut, or Polished Stones. Neither the Thick nor too Thin in Substance is best;Of Perfection. a Thick Stone, which is high and narrow Table, not making a shew answerable to its Weight, must be valued at less than that which is well spread, hath its rners perfect, and a pure White Water: Without Spots or Foulness, is called a Paragon-stone, and in full Perfection. Uncut Stones are distinguished into two sorts, Thick or Pointed, which are called Naife-stones, and Flat Stones: The Flat Stones are to be cut into Roses or Thin Stones, the Naife into Thick Stones; and those Rough Stones which will bear a good shape, without least diminishing in cutting, are in best Esteem. The Names of Rough Stones, according to their Forms and Substance. A Point. An ½ Point. A Thick Stone. An ½ Ground Stone. A Thin Stone. A Rose Stone, if round; if long, a Fossel. A Naife. The Rough Diamonds that seem Greenest, prove of a good Water when cut; and those that seem White when rough, prove often Bluish being cut. Care is to be taken likewise in Choice of Rough Diamonds, to avoid those that have Veins, for they will never cut well, seeming as if they were filed with a rough File. For vending, Stones of six Grains and under, to one and a half, are best. For Trial of a Diamond, take a Pointed Diamond, such as Glaziers use, try it on any Stone but a Diamond, and it will cut the same. The Diamond that is Sandy, or hath any Foulness in it, or is of a Blue, Brown, or Yellow Water, is not worth half the Price of a perfect Stone of a White Water. For cutting of Diamonds, you must never mould any Diamond in Sand or Cuttle-bone, but you must use the second Lead to make a Patern of, because the first will come somewhat less than the other. Never cast it off but of the perfect Lead; for if you should cast it with Tin, it being the lighter Metal, you may wrong you Judgment thereby, but in Lead you will find the Experiment to be good; viz. Take the Mould of the Stone you would buy, which having moulded, cast it off in perfect Lead, then make a Patern of it; but before you go about to make a Patern (of the Stone you would cut) weigh the Lead,
and set down the Weight in a Piece of Paper; then form the Piece of Lead to what fashion you think best and most advantagious to the Stone; then re-weigh the Lead so formed, and setting down the Weight, you may find what the Stone will lose in cutting. The Lead will weigh three times as much as the Stone, which is a sure Rule; and commonly it loseth one third part in cutting. To make Diamonds clean; if you see a thick Table Diamond in a Ring, a Jewel, or in a Collect for a Jewel, you must first make it clan either with a little Pumice-stone, or with a few hot Ashes, or with a lit∣tle Oyl, and boil it, which will make it very clean. Valuation of Diamonds. There is a Rule acurately to be observed, which is this; A Stone of one Carrack is worth 10 l.; to value 2 Carr. multiply per 2, which makes 4, and that 4, per 10, the Price of 1 Carr. which makes 40 l.: So for 3 Carr. 3 times 3 is 9 Carr. and 9 times 10 l. is 90 l. This for even Car∣racks comes nearest the true Value; but for ½ or ¼ of a Carr. although a Stone of 2 Carr. be worth 40 l. yet in this Rule and way of reckoning (meaning ½ a Carr. so valued) it is valued at but ¼ of a Carr. which is 50 s. and ¼ of a Carr. but at ¼ of 50 s. although a single Stone, containing a Crain, or ¼ Carr. is worth 30 s. As for Example: You would know what a Stone of 6 Grains is worth; 6 Grains is 3 ½ Carr. 3 times 3 is 9, and 9 times 50 s. is 22 l. 10 s. which is the Value of the Stone of 6 Grains. So of 5 Grains, 5 times 5 is 25, and 25 times 12 s. 6 d. is 15 l. 12 s. 6 d. To make a Foil for Diamonds. A Foil to be set under a thick Table Diamond, is to be made with Black Ivory and Mastick, picked and made very clear, with a very little Oyl of Mastick to incorporate them. Black Ivory and Turpentine heated on the Fire is good, but the former is better. For a thin Table, Black Ivory scraped very fine is good; or take a lit∣tle of the said Ivory with a little Oyl of Mastick, and dry the same; or Ivory with a little Gum; fair Water is also very good. If you sell a thin Diamond that hath high Bisalls, then you may set it upon fll scraped Ivory, which graceth the Play of the Stone. A Rose Diamond that is very thick, it's good to set it close upon the Ivory, and it will play very well; or Black Velvet is good under a thin Table-Diamond, scraped as you do Lint. The RƲBY. There are four sorts of Oriental Rubies; that which is the hardest, the best, and fairest Colour, if it be very fair and cut Diamond-Cut, is no less esteemed than a Diamond for the Weight, (or of the same Weight), but it is rare to see such an one. The second sort of Ruby is White, Oriental, and Hard, which also is of good esteem, if cut of a Diamond-Cut, but not of so high Price as the perfect Red Ruby; but yet if it be in Perfection, 'tis very rare, be∣cause there are but few of this sort. The third sort of Ruby is called a Spinell, which is softer than the for∣mer, and is nothing of like esteem, because not so hard, neither hath it
the Life of the other, nor of such perfect Colour; it's naturally some∣what greasy in cutting, because of its Softness. The last sort is called a Ballace Ruby, which is not in so much esteem as the Spinell, because it is not so well coloured: This also is a Stone natu∣rally greasy, and will scarce take a Polish: This looks like a Garnet. SAPHIRE. There are three sorts, one perfect Blue, and very hard, which if cut of a Diamond-Cut, and without Calcedone, is of very good Esteem, and worth a good Price, if it be in perfection. The second is perfect White, and very hard, which if without blemish, Diamond-Cut, is likewise in Esteem. The third, called Water-Saphires, are of small Esteem, being not so hard as the other, and commonly of a dead Waterish Colour; they are of a slender Value. CORNELIANS. Cornelian Rings, of pure Red Colour, without spots: Seal-stones of the bigness of 6 d. or 1 s. well coloured, are esteemed. TREE-STONES. Stones with the lively Representation or Form of a Tree thereon, are esteemed. EMERALD Is a Stone of good account, and if in Perfection, 'twill bear a very good Price, especially if it be cut Diamond-Cut, which is very rare; for naturally they are foul, and softer than the Saphire or Ruby. There is a paler sort, but not affected, being base. The TOPAZ Is a Stone very hard, full as hard as the Saphire; some are very yellow, and like the Colour of Muskadine, pleasant to look on, which bears a good Price if good and without fault. The Stones may be burnt white in the Fire, and look very well. Another sort are said to be white natu∣rally, which would bear a good Price if perfect, and cut of the Diamond-Cut. There's another sort of them soft, yet shew very well, but have not the quickness of the other, and therefore of low esteem; trial of their hardness may be made by a Saphire or such a Stone. The HYACINTH Is a Stone Yellow and Transparent; it's of the hardness of the Eme∣rald; these Stones are naturally foul, and full of little Sands like Gold; if they be in Perfection, and of a very good Colour, they bear a reaso∣nable Price.
The AMETHIST Is a Stone of three several Colours, some of them are of a Violet Co∣lour, some are of a more Oriental Colour, therefore called (Amethist Oriental) which bears a very good Price, few of these being to be found, but are the pleasantest Colour of all Stones. Another sort being Pales called the White Amethist, or Amethist of Carthagena: This naturally is of a quick or sparkling Water, and very good Colour, having for the most part a Blush of Red, which Stones in Perfection bear a tolerable Price. AGATS for Hafts of Knives, white and well marled are good.
TRAVELS INTO PERSIA. LETTER V. CHAP. I. Of our crossing the Sea to the Persian Gulf, Arrival at Gom∣broon, and Stay there. SIR, THE Agent of Persia representing how highly conducing to the Company's Interest one of my Profession would be there,Chap. I. I was easily won upon to embark on the Scipio Afri∣can, which with the Persian Merchant were sent out this Year for the Gulf, as well to support the declining Credit of the English there, for not complying with their Articles of Agreement, as to try if a Trade of English Cloth and Tin might be promoted on this Side, as well as in India; but with a fruitless Attempt, as in fit place may be made appear. The 22d of February,The Scipio A∣frican sent to drive a Trade in Persia, not to guard the Gulf. 1676-77 from Swally-hole the Ship was dispatch∣ed alone, and the Persian Merchant sent into the South-Seas; the Council judging it needless to send two such Ships on such an Errand as they could not repeat for the future, without incurring a Repri∣mand from their Masters: And for the Traffick of that Place, the Scipio African was enough, and more than enough, it only carrying a Gawdy Outside, having Gilt Galleries two Stories, rounded with Banisters after the French Mode, more for Shew than Use; which was taking, till the bottom of the Business was enquired into, Whe∣ther it came as by Capitulation, to be a Guard to the Gulf? Which not answering that design, it could expect to be received with a Welcome only suitable to such a Pageantry, and no other.
Whereupon it was laden like a Merchant-man more than a Man of War;Letter V. though at the same time we carried with us a Portugal Fi∣dalgo, Emanuel Mendos, to appear for their Royalties, which are lit∣tle inferior to ours, they supplying our Defects in a constant main∣taining a Squadron, not so much to defend the Persian, as to annoy the Arab, their sworn Enemy; yet by that means gain both the Ho∣nour and Reputation due only to us, did we not neglect it. With Emanuel Mendos was shipped a Young Friar of the Order of St. Francis, who had undergone the Discipline of the Goa Physicians with that Severity, that his Mouth was full of backward Blessings for their having exhausted almost his Heart-Blood by their unmerci∣ful bleeding him; insomuch that he seemed to have little more left than would suffice to make him a walking Ghost. There are few Christian Ships on the Seas,Few Christian Ships without Friars. or Caphalaes on Shore, move without these Passengers, they finding not only safe Conduct among them, but courteous and inexpensive Entertainment. Having quitted Surat River's Mouth,Diu bravely defended a∣gainst the Turk∣ish Force. we kept the Coast of India on Board, till we had weathered the Flats of Diu Point, the Easter∣mst Point of the Bay of Cambaia, in whose Bottom the Mouth of the River Indus opens, and the most Northern Fortification the Por∣tugals possess on this Coast, as Ancient and as Strong as any they have. It was signally famous for the defeat given Sultan Badur the Emperor of Cambaia, and all his Forces, when at the same time it was besieged by a numerous Fleet of Turks from the Red Sea, as well as Arabs from the Persian Gulf; thus assaulted on all sides, it singly bore the Fury of the Barbarous Nations, till relieved by a Fleet raised when the Exchequer at Goa was impoverished, the Militia dispirited, the Ecclesiasticks were forced to serve as Volunteers, and the Gen∣try to take up Arms in Person, under the Command of Don John de Castro, Viceroy; to whose Virtue even the Females were so devoted, that they willingly parted with their most precious Jewels for no other Pawn than an Hair of his Beard; which he held to be so sa∣cred an Obligation, that he could not be satisfied till he had redeem∣ed it at the Expence of all his Wealth; so that in that profitable Sta∣tion, lying on his Bed of Sickness, he had not left himself where∣withal to provide common Necessaries. This City is placed under Twenty one Degrees and an half of North Latitude. And now launching into the Main Ocean,Pirates infest all the Indian Seas. the Wind at North-East, we braced our Sails close, in expectation of the Southern Gales, which met us about the Nineteenth Degree of North Latitude, sooner by Ten degrees than usual. Here in this large Field of Water the Sindanian Pirates wreak their Malice on the unarmed Merchants, who not long able to resist their unbounded Lust, become tame Slaves to their lawless Rage, and fall from the highest Hopes, to the humblest degree of Servitude: These are alike cruel, and equally salvage as the Malabars, but not so bold as to adventure longer in these Seas than the Winter's Blasts have dismissed them, retiring with their illgot Booty to the Coasts of Sinda, where they begin to rove nearer their Dens of Thievery, not daring to adventure Combat with the Malabars, or stir from thence till the Season makes the Malabar retire. No part of
these Seas are without these Vermin, the Bay of Bengal being in∣fested as much as the Coast of Coromandel by Outlaw'd Portugals, and a mixture of that Race, the most accursedly base of all Man∣kind, who are known for their Bastard-Brood lurking in the Islands at the Mouths of the Ganges, by the Name of Buccaneers. Of the two former we had often sight, neither of which sort were so fool-hardy as to come nigh us, being content to gaze on wht they durst not seize, and to wish us Impotence instead of Force. When we had made Way Three hundred seventy four Miles to the West from the Shore,The Tropick Birds. at Sun-set we saw the Tropick Birds, which all day long had shewn us the Recreation of the Sea, they being a kind of Sea-hawk, and something bigger than a Lannar, mount upon the Train to a lofty Pitch; and stooping to their Game (which is the poor Flying Fish, when raised by those that hunt them in the Wa∣ter) they perform it at one down-come: When they fly for Plea∣sure they are more free than the best Falcon: They being now a pretty way from Land, and not to be supposed to reach it e're dark, 'tis believed they make the Sea their Home, unless in moulting time. Here is another sort follows the same Game, but not so cautious where they alight, the other being fearful of the devouring Inhabi∣tants of the Deep, but these fly close to the Water, and turn about every Wave, so that they often escape our view, and seem to be overwhelmed by the swelling Surges, by the Giddiness of their Flight being oft given over for lost, when by a pleasing Surprize they ap∣pear, contrary to all hopes: These have White Bodies and Grey Wings, their Beaks are Red, and two Feathers stand at distance for the Tails, by which they guide themselves to their Prey. In Calms these Birds rest themselves upon the drowsy Tortoise, supinely float∣ing in the Sea, so that we could take them by our Long-Boat mann'd, and bring them captive tamely aboard Ship; which was often done, the stupid Tortoise only lamenting with deep Sighs and piteous Tears the Condition their Heedlessness had brought them into: The Sluggards helpless and utmost Effort, to bewail what a timely Care and active Endeavours might prevent. The Princely Dolphin and the brisker Train,The Cuttle-fish. afforded more Sport to take, while they pursued the Chase themselves through the Wa∣try Plains, and more Invention to elude the Crafty Cuttle-fish its dark Politicks, if what Gesner writes were true; Stomachi seu earum Ven∣triculi putridâ quadam sanie quam Graeci  dicunt, quâ atrum cruorem atramenti instar aquam effundunt quum se peti animadvertunt; That it emits a black and cloudy Liquor, to disturb the cunning An∣gler; the Truth whereof I could never observe; only what was more certainly miraculous, its monstrous Figure: The Body was of a duskish Colour, all one Lump with the Head, without Scales; it was endowed with large Eyes, and had long Shreds like Gorgon's Hair, hung in the manner of Snakes, bestuck with Snail-like Shells reaching over the Body; under these appeared a Parrot's Beak; two Slits between the Neck are made instead of Gills for Respiration; from the lowest part of the Spine are taken the Bones Druggists sell for Ossa Sepiae; the Inky Matter is bred in the Stomach, if we be∣lieve
Naturalists; to which Conceit Claudius inclining, relates its Tricks; Naturam juvat ipsa dolis, & conscia sortis Ʋtitur ingenio.— Conscious of her shiftless Plight, She Nature helps by Artful Slight. With the Pleasure of these, and innumerable other Objects of the pliant Elements, we had sufficient Meditation to admire the diversity of the World's Creation, which how differing soever in Shape, yet agree to compleat a Symphony of Praise to the Great Author; and though uttered by an Heathen, yet it was a Divine Saying, Jovis plena sunt omnia; Productive Nature is all full of God. March the 9th we were Westward off Cape Rouselgaot,Cape Rouselgaot a Promontory on Arabia Foe∣lix. which lies in Twenty two and an half North: It is that Promontory in Arabia Foelix which gives Entrance to the Mouth of the Persian Gulf, and rises high, being most notoriously Sandy. This Country in General was deservedly by the Hebrews called Arabia, signifying Barren; yet how speciously this part may bear the name of Happy, I determine not. And now we are in the opening of that Gulf, into which Eu∣phrates and other Rivers of lesser Note discharge themselves. At Night we saw Muschat,The Imaum is Caliph. whose vast and horrid Mountains no Shade but Heaven does hide, though they cover the City with an horrid one; reflecting thence the Heat scorching us at Sun-setting and aboard Ship; within their fiery Bosom the Pilots find secure Har∣bour for their weather-beaten Ships, the Water moderating the Air. The Prince of this Country is called Imaum, who is Guardian of Mahomet's Tomb, and on whom is devolved the Right of Caliphship, according to the Ottoman Belief: Wherefore the Indian Princes of that Persuasion send every Year Rich Presents by those Vessels set out to carry Devotees to Mahomet's Tomb, which are wholly his, and at his disposal, whereby he heaps up more Wealth than accrues to him from the Income of his Barren Soil. Sailing Westward, the City and the Castle lye open to our View; it is much frequented by Merchants over the Deserts, and no less by those from Mocha in the Red Sea, and by the way of Grand Cairo; it vends all Drugs and Arab Steeds, and pays Gold for Indian Com∣modities: Here they keep safe those Ships they steal or purchase, for Wood, no Timber growing here: They are a Fierce Treacherous People, gaining as much by Fraud as Merchandize. The Matchless Outrages,Breach of Faith the Loss of Muschat. after Faith plighted, committed in that Place by the Portugals, was not only the Occasion of their be∣ing quite beaten out thence, but of an eternal and irreconcilable Quarrel between them: For where Religion, backed with the great∣est Interest, strives for the Prize, I know not whether is most con∣cerned, to gain a Conquest, or to perpetrate Barbarities, the com∣mon Event of such a War, where to kill their Fellow-Creatures is esteemed a service to the Creator. And thus it proved here; For while that bold Nation persisted in its Discoveries, Navigation per∣fecting
their Geography, they began to enquire into the course of Profit, as well as their Ships way, and found that all their Inland Trade tended to this Sinus and the Red Sea; wherefore they bent themselves to be Masters of their Keys that unlocked the World's Treasures, for which Muschat, is very commodious, of which be∣coming Possessors, had not a too hot Zeal thrust them on, they might to this day have enjoyed it with a just Commendation due to their Industry; but sacrificing to Lust and Rapin what should have been to the Glory of God and True Religion, which is Pure as well as Peaceable, they soon were driven out thence to Ormus; where we shall conclude what belongs to this Story. In the mean time we had gained the Tropick of Cancer,Enter the Streights of the Persian Gulf. the very day the Sun had gained the Aequinox; when the North-West Winds envied our entry into the Gulf, and drove us out for Sea-room on the Persian Coast, nearer the Shoars of Sinda, so that we spent a Week in tossing up and down, and striving against a mighty Stream, before we reached Muschat again; but then the Winds were spent, we calmly passed by some Islands in the Gulf, and a South Wind gently blowing, we stemmed the furious Current, till we could see on each side Land from Persia and Arabia; on the one side St. Jaques his Head-land, on the other that of Mussendown appeared, and afore Sun-set we entred the Streights Mouth, not above a League wide: It lies in Thirty six Degrees North Latitude; a Mile within its Neck on a row, are Four or Five Rocks, or Islets, by Mariners called the Coines; from the resemblance of those Leavers of the same Name, wherewith they raise, or lower the Breeches of their Guns. About Midnight we were between Ormus and Larack, Forty four Miles from the entry of the Streights, the biggest not above Four Mile in Length; the lesser is Ormus; great indeed for Name in time of yore, now only famous for its Clifts of Salt (which though pierced by extream Heat, yet are a cure for the most burning Fever, the only known Remedy for such cases in this Climate) and the Castle built by the Portugals, the chief strength of all these Seas. Passing both these Islands, we made Kismash, and leaving it a-stern, we turned off short to the Port of Gombroon, or Bunder Abassee; in which Road we found Two lusty Dutch Ships. Two great ones of the Moors, and One small one from Bombaim; it is good Riding for Ships in this Harbour, though an open Road, by reason of the firm Anchor-hold; it is otherwise subject to hot Blasts from the adjacent Hills, which move the rowling Sands between, in such sort, that in the station near the shoar when these are raised to Clouds, the Ships cannot be seen. The 22d of March in the Forenoon we were wafted ashoar just to the English Factory,Wafted ashoat at Gombroon. the Sea washing the very Sand afore its Doors; upon our Landing we were Welcomed with a Civility more essential to the Temper of the People, than what could proceed from any De∣merits of ours, for they are naturally the most Courtly of the East: So strange an alteration in Three hundred Leagues as passes admiration! for whereas we left a Sullen, Melancholy, Sunburnt Nation; an Open, Jovial, and a Clear Complexioned Race of Man∣kind is offered in exchange.
The House the English reside in, was formerly a Caravan Seraw, and built after the best manner, with upper and lower Piazzo's, flat atop, with a stately Portal; where every Morning the Servants be∣longing to it make a profound Reverence, and the Puritannical Ba∣nyan will Kiss the Threshold, Adoring that for his God that brings him most Profit, though pretended to be done out of respect to their Masters. It bears St. George his Banner at one Corner, as do the Dutch and French their Flags, between whose Factories it is seated; Ours was the Emperor's Gift, both theirs purchased; the first Beauti∣fied and Strengthened with good Stone Building; all the rest, but the Caun's, being most of Mud and Stone, the usual Materials for Building in this Town, without either Lime or Mortar. The Structures are all plain atop,The Structures. only Ventoso's, or Funnels, for to let in the Air, the only thing requisite to living in this fiery Furnace with any comfort; wherefore no House is left without this contri∣vance; which shews gracefully at a distance on Board Ship, and makes the Town appear delightful enough to Beholders, giving at once a pleasing Spectacle to Strangers, and kind Refreshment to the Inhabitants; for they are not only elegantly Adorned without, but conveniently Adapted for every Apartment to receive the cool Wind within. The Streets are generally Narrow, especially where Merchandise are exposed to Sale, the better to receive the advanta∣ges of Umbrello's extended from side to side to keep the Sun's vio∣lence from their Customers: It reaches more than a Mile along the shoar, has Three Block-houses, and one old Castle dismantled; the other stored with Guns, the Portugals left behind them. The Governor's Palace fronts the Sea, and is a stately Mansion; a Mile from the same is a Garden as good as can be imagined in this sandy Desart; whither the Merchants, as well as the Caun resort to Feast, or upon any publick Solemnity go in Cavalcade for the more pompous observation thereof. The Shawbunder has his Grandeur too,The Custom properly be∣longs Half to the English. as well as receipt of Cu∣stom, for which he pays the King yearly Twenty two thousand Tho∣mands, every Thomand making Three pound and a Noble in our Ac∣compt; Half which we have a Right to, were our Company as good as their words, the Persians having not failed in theirs before the defection on the part of the English; which I reserve for a more proper place; the Agent sitting content only with one Thousand Thomands paid out of the Customs yearly, and the Custom free of all the Agent protects as English; which was but lately granted, by the earnest and repeated Request of the present Agent, they before only giving us good words instead of Payment. This great Officer,The Chief Customer ob∣liged to se∣cure the Roads. or Farmer of the Emperor's Customs, is obli∣ged on the Roads to provide for the safe Travelling for Merchants by a constant Watch, insomuch that they are in no fear either of Rob∣bers or Loss of Goods, they upon entry into the Customhouse being secured through the Kingdom without Oppressing the Subject, the Shawbunder being obliged to make satisfaction; for which Rhadorage, or high Imposts, are allowed by the Merchants, both at Landing and in their passage Inland.
From which we have Immunities, the Agent only Presenting an handsome Piscash,The English Free of all Imposts. to the several Cauns in his Journy, of Europe Ra∣rities, placed to the Company's Account; and in requital have Provisions of Fruits and all other Necessaries, sent in Gratis to the Agent, though the Company pay dearly for the Civility, while the Agent is only Benefitted thereby; they carrying not only Goods, but great returns of Money unmolested; for which reason the Natives cast themselves upon his Management, rather than suffer the Ex∣actions of the Rhadarage, for which reason the Agent has no ordi∣nary Recompense, it being the chief Emolument of his Place: The Natives still paying their Respect to his Character, which is, one of the Emperor's Friends, not daring to Offend him whom the King delighteth to Honour. And therefore it is that at Port no small care is taken to carry fair with the Governor of the Province, (who is a Caun, or Duke) and the Shawbunder; and on this score we were no sooner on shoar, but we must Compliment both these, where we were received in their open places of Audience, and entertained with Coho, Tea, or Rose-Water, Boiled with Cardamoms, and sweetned with Sugar-Candy, Plates of Persian Fruit dried, and Sweetmeats; while the Room is Perfumed with Rackbeet, a Compound Sweet Water, Wood of Aloes smoaking, or Glasses of Rose-Water poured on our Garments to exces∣sive slabbering; and if leave be desired to Smoak Tobacco, they will offer Wine of the Country, and at last dismiss us with Pawn; which Visit they fail not to return, nor must it be forgotten to bestow on them Presents of considerable Value. The Rooms are spread with Carpets as in India, and they have Pigdans, or Spitting Pots of the Earth of this Place, which is valued next to that of China, to void their Spittle in. The Water is preserved in Jarrs, and drank out of Puckeries, that keep it Cooler than any where else. This Port receives most Ships going or coming from Busserah,The Hollanders Absolute in the Spice Trade. as they find the Markets answer their designs: But the greatest Traf∣fick, next Indian Cloth, comes from the Spice Trade; which the Dutch engross, beside Sugar and Copper formerly; for which they carry off Fifty thousand Thomands worth of Velvets, Silk, Raw and Wrought, with Rich Carpets, besides many Tunn of Gold and Sil∣ver, Yearly; so Great and Absolute is their Trade from the Moluc∣coes, and South Sea, hither, that they are reported to have brought Six Ships laden with Spice, which the cunning Merchants thought to make advantage of; but the Hollanders, being Crafts-Masters, sent for the Cargo on shoar of Two Ships, and piled it up before the Factory Gate, where they not coming to their Price immediately, set Fire thereto, and consumed it all; which the Buyers neglecting, or laughing at, they caused other Two to be served in the same manner, knowing so great a quantity had caused a Glut, when they asked the same Rate for the remaining Two; as the old Sybils did Tarquin for their Oracular Writings left unburnt; whereby the Persians were Taught, that their Extravagance was not Madness, but Policy, they being obliged to Bid Higher for fewer Commodities; the Hol∣landers
being well assured none could furnish them with others than was brought by them. The English Company's Trade is but small here,The English Trade more in Shew than Reality. only carrying off some few Drugs, Carmania Wool, Goats, Dates, and Horses; though they make it worth their while to keep their Agent in good Port, as well from the Allowance from the Shawbunder, as by Con∣sulage of 2 l. and ½ per Cent. for all Foreign Goods that seek their Pro∣tection; on which score they seem to drive a Trade, and send up every Shipping Three or Four hundred Camels laden with Indian Wares; as many as the Dutch bring down to Ship off on their own Stock and Ships: But this Year a great Bluster was made with English Cloth and Tin brought by our Arrival; which, however, the understand∣ing Traffickers smile at, knowing it comes better Cheap by the Caphala's in Exchange of other Goods from Stambole, i. e. Constanti∣nople, Smirna, Scanderoon, and Aleppo; and that Suffahaun is already over-full of London Cloath, or Sackcloath Londre, as they call it. The French have as little to do at this Port as in other Places;The French have nothing to do. and were it not for the Credit of their Interpreter, who gets good Profit by Wine, (he being priviledg'd with a Wine-press for that Nation at Siras, as well as the other Europe Nations), they could not subsist: But Monsieur makes an outside, lives retiredly, and without more Business than to visit and be visited (which Courtesy passes inter∣changeably among the Christians as well as Natives) lounges his time away. The convenient Situation of our Factory Butting farthest out on the open Strand, yields a Prospect over the Sea to the Arabian Coast, and on a clear day Ormus Castle might be discovered by the naked Eye, it being not above a League from our House, as all the Islands interspersed in this Gulph; though the most diverting was of our Europe Sailors mounting their Starts or Asses, the briskest, neatest, and nimblest of that kind I ever saw; so that they seemed both by their Mettle and easiness of their going, to lose the Epithet of dull affixed to their Nature: For their Masters waiting here their Fare, no sooner had left them to the Guidance of the Seamen, who would prove their Skill in Riding, where many times they would cast them on the Sand, both to the Sport of the Standers-by, and Mirth of their Companions; letting them know a Yard was more squared for their Cavalcade, than these Headstrong Creatures: Though for this Diversion afforded from the Seamen on their ac∣customed Element, they are quit, when these Asses forsake their surer Footing on Land, to stagger on board Ship; which was often at∣tempted for the Gilded Outside of the beautiful Scipio, where the Captain entertained the Governor and all his Train, and as many as would venture out of Curiosity the Laughter of the Roguy Mari∣ners: Till on the 15th of April,The Scipio dispatch'd for India. 1677. it returned to the Indian Coast; but not before the Sailers had stigmatized this Place for its Excessive Heat, with this sarcastical Saying, That there was but an Inch-Deal betwixt Gomberoon and Hell. And to speak truth,The excessive Hets. when the raging Dog-star reigns with us, it is not half so hot as it is now here; wherefore all People of any Quality are preparing to leave this Place; and the Caun had been
gone e're now, had not the King sent him a Collat or Robe of Ho∣nour, he having by his Male-Administration of his Office not long ago provoked his Master; for which, large Sums of Money have hardly made Attonement, even to his utter Impoverishment, had he been displaced as he expected. But a Goloomy Shaw, or Messenger, arriving with the joyful News of his Restoration, he invited all the City to be a Witness of this Grace. The Goloomy Shaw staid at the Garden without the City some days at the Expence of the Caun,The manner of receiving a Message from the Emperor. till things could be provided for his Re∣ception, which was thus; Early in the Morning the loud Trumpets and Drums gave notice that the Caun and all his Troops were ready to take Horse, and waited the Attendance of all Ranks to the chief Mosque, thence to the Garden; where coming and seeing the Mes∣senger with the King's Letter advanced on the Top of his Turbat, with his Back towards the Caun, he alights, and after Three Obey∣sances and Thrice kissing the Ground, he approaches and takes it in his Hand, sealed up in a Sarbaff Bag, or Cloth of Gold, and first kissing it, gives it to the Mullah, or Chief Priest, when he retires to Prayers, and vests himself with the Robe of Honour; in which time all seat themselves in a decent Posture, and at his appearance rise till the Mullah have read the Emperor's Pleasure, when every one pays him their Congratulations, and after a Dish of Coho or Tea, mount∣ing, accompany him to his Palace; the Ships in the Road on this Occasion discharging their great Guns, and the several Forts and Blockhouses saluting him as he passes: Where alighting, a Noble Banquet, and truly Persian, was ushered in, to which the sly Banyans were invited with the rest; who durst not but be present, though on∣ly to make their Honours, and return; for they will not eat with any but their own Tribe, lest they should be defiled: Yet here they live not so exactly up to their Pythagorean Rule, as they of Guzerat do, though the very next Neighbours to them, coming from the Pro∣vince of Sinda; for these indulge themselves in Goats-Flesh, Sheep, Pullen, and almost every thing but Cows-Flesh, for which they wil∣lingly pay 350 Thomands Yearly, to spare them alive; and for this reason is it the Shambles have none; but of every thing else, both Flesh and Fish, here is as great Plenty as the World has besides. The Oysters of this Gulph are the best,Plenty of Food. next the British; which I purpose to treat of in their turn. Amidst this Fulness of every thing, it is wonderful to consider where they fetch them, or how they are bred; for these Sandy Meadows produce little more than Shrubs (neither Grass nor Corn being to be seen near this Town); yet on these, both Goats, Sheep, Oxen, and Camels, Mules, and Asses, brouze and grow fat; were not the Food of the Commons Dates (which this Soil is properest for) and Fish, and so the Merchant is furnished for his Money good cheap. The Water serving this Town generally,Their Wate. is of two sorts; the first and most brackish strained through the Sands into Pits from the Sea, with which they boil Meat, and give it their working Cattle to drin; the other is immediately from the Heavens, reserved in Ci∣sterns built by the Charity of well-disposed Persons; out of which, the Poor, the Covetous, and Slaves, the Flocks and Herds too, are
often supplied, when a plentiful Rain has made them overflow. For here are neither Fresh-Water Rivers nor Springs to be found nigher than four Pharsangs (whither the Rich load an Ass, Mule, or Camel, and send a Servant to fetch every day's Store); so that did they not lay up such Provisions Yearly, they would subsist very poorly. These Cisterns or Storehouses for Rain are digged out of the Ground deep into the Earth, beyond the Surface of the Sand, and are curiously covered above with Stone, and plastered within with excellent durable Plaster; some Spherical, others Transverse, cutting one another in manner of a Cross; others, and the largest, Oblong, Square, Orbicular, or Oval; which being once finished, like their Caravan Seraws have no Endowment to maintain them, either to keep them clean, or from falling to Decay; so regardless are they of Futurity, that no one is suffered to repair them: On which account it is, that about their great Cities so many of all sorts are found, newly built, superannuated, defiled, (which they esteem so, if either Man or Beast have dropped in and been drowned), unfrequented, and full of Nastiness; so pervicaciously Vainglorious, that they will have the Repute of an entire Founder, or none. To replenish which,It rains but twice a Year, and then not long. two Seasons shower down their Benedictions; the one about this time in May or June, and the other at or near Christmas; and then not of a long continuance, by reason the intense Heat of the Sun permits not the Vapours to condense themselves in∣to Clouds, but expands them into Air: For this cause is it that the Rains do not always fall, or if they do, more sparingly in this Month than in December; which gives more opportunity by its Retrograde Course, and longest distance from this Circle, than when that great Luminary approaches nearest. The Periodical and stated Winds of the Gulph are the Northwest,The Winds. by the Inhabitants termed Shemauls, which begin when the Cowshees or South-East leave off, which is not before the Heats are entred, when the Shemauls blow from the Sea to asswage them; this Climate, otherwise uninhabitable, would become more miserable than the Ve∣suviau Plains, or Tops of Aetna, since it is not above Three Degrees and an half beyond the Tropick of Cancer, towards the Artick Pole, and floored with vast Sands pent in by the surrounding Sprouts of Taurus and Imaus continued hither: By either of these Winds when they blow impetuously, the Sands are whirled about, to the obscu∣ring of the Day, and burying all alive in darkness, as Prosper Alpi∣nus relates to happen sometimes in Egypt; which, as he observes, oc∣casions sore Eyes and Blindness in all Sandy Regions, from the in∣flammable Particles kindled by the Sun-beams striking on the Sands, which here is verified in an high degree on the Natives; nor are they less afflicting to Strangers newly arrived, chasing and fretting their very Skin to Rawness, and then vexing them by their fresh assailing with Botches and Blanes. To these Winds we may add the Diary, or Terrheneos from the Mountains, which breathe a gentler Air all the Morning, hardly curdling the Ocean; in the Afternoon stronger from the Sea, refresh the Fiery Plain. The most unhealthy of these are the South-East, for that then the Air is thicker, by reason of the Seas Vicinity, and the Sun's depar∣ture
towards its Southern Progress; for upon its return the Skies do clear, and the Clouds, which used to hang about the Mountain-tops till Mid-day, vanish earlier at the Sun's approach; whereupon this Climate is not subject to the greater part of Distempers a more Wa∣try Country may abound with; though it be to some; to wit, to Rheumatisms, Numbness, and Periodical Fevers, such as are Ter∣tians and Quartans, but chiefly to Quotidians; rarely incident to Dropsies; oftner obnoxious to Jaundice, Obstructions of the Spleen, Mesentery, and Windiness of the Hypochondrias: They dread not a Lask, but are concerned when they cannot go to Stool. The Fury of these were not over at our Arrival;The Inland stifling hot. to avoid which I was forced in the beginning of May to betake my self to Asseen, a Country Village Three Miles from Gombroon, than which it is not much better, only remoter from the Sea, wherefore it labours under the Incommodity of a stifling Air, it being so near the Hills that the free Blasts are thereby intercepted; only it enjoys a greater benefit of limpid Water, for which it is highly valuable; and by the In∣dustry of the Hinds some things do sprout here, and the Date-Trees are nourished by the unwearied drawing of Water, which flourish the better for their Pains. The constant Din of a great many at this Work together, like the creeking of so many Cart-Wheels ungreas'd, afford the Sick little Rest; and without this obstreperous Noise no Water could be had; for they use only the Indian Wheel, drawn up and let down by Oxen, with as little Intermission Day or Night, as Sysiphon's repeated Trou∣ble is reported. In the day,Locusts come in Armies. besides the Heat and Sands, the Winds brought with them another Plague, the Locusts, to benight the day, and fly in Armies to devour the Greens wheree're they find them, gnawing the Palms and other Trees, both Leaf and Fruit, spreading where they alight as thick as Bees drove out to swarm a new Colony; no other Charm than Fire can expel this Pest, when kindled with Wisps and withered Boughs they run up and down from Tree to Tree, ma∣king an hideous Clamour, yet scarcely make them leave, where they once beset: Thus Salamander-like these People live in Fire, making a Remedy of their Disease; for here all things seem as if they had un∣dergone a General Conflagration, or that Phoebus with his Solar Rays had like another Phaeton scorched this part of the World; or rather this unhappy Soil retains the Curse of Adam's Fall,This Earth accurt for the sake of Adam. for being once so nigh that Terrestrial Paradise; concerning which I am not ignorant that it is left undetermined among Divines, and for that cause there is always administred matter of dispute to the Interpreters of Genesis. Elias the Thesbite is positive that the Garden of Eden is still in being, not doubting many still go thither, and that the Pas∣sage to it lies easy and open, but that overcome with the Delights thereof they never care to return. Origen and Philo, tenacious of their Allegories, have fancied a Mystical Paradise, the true Ideas of Plato; and are imitated therein by Psellius, who says, that Chaldean Pardyse (so he calls it) , is nothing else but a Choir of the Heavenly Virtues which illustrate the Aetherial Father, and the Rays of Holiness flowing from the first
Creator. Some situate this contended-for Place in Mesopotamia; others in India, between both which we now are; but there remains the difficulty of reconciling the Four Rivers, which admits of no other subterfuge than to have recourse to the General Inundation. But I leave this, and proceed to acquaint you, that nothing is left here but a sensible Map of Purgatory, if that may please some to be a Road to Paradise; to see how the Fiery Element makes the Moun∣tains gape, the Rocks cleft in sunder, the Waters stagnate, to which the Birds with hanging Wing repair to quench their Thirst; for want of which the Herds do low, the Camels cry, the Sheep do bleat, the barren Earth opens wide for Drink, and all things appear calamitous for want of kindly Moisture; in lieu of which, hot Blasts and Showers of Sand infest the purer Air, and drive not only us, but Birds and Beasts to seek remoter dwellings, or else to perish here; for which purpose 'tis familiar to behold the Crows and Spar∣rows take their flight to Upland Countries, as also Dogs and other Vermin to remove, to avoid the Tyranny of this Season. The Caun and Shawbunder were gone before us; at length by their Example we left the Port, tho it was not before the latter end of June. The Governor of this Province is stiled the Caun of Bunder Abassae,The Caun of Bunder either for the store of Abasses shipped off here, or that it more im∣mediately respects the Abasseen Countrey than any other: The adjacent Islands, with the Soldiery, are annexed to his Jurisdiction; though Northwest beyond Gombroon his Rule extends not far, nor much Inland, yet along the Gulph to its very Mouth he possesses a large Tract of Ground for many Leagues together: His Metropolis is Gombroon, where he resides till the soultry Summer makes him fly beyond the Hills, to breathe in cooler Air. Which we betook our selves to, after I had returned from Asseen, whither I went for the sake of the Water, as welcome to our parched Throats, as a drop of that cool Liquor to the importunate Dives, who was involved in the Center of those Flames which we on the Brink of the Abyss only had a Taste of. Nor was a Present at this time from the Caun,Sent us a Pre∣sent of Apples candied in Snow in the middle of the Heats. of Apples candied is Snow, less grateful, though more feasible, the Messenger being impowered, for all the scorching Gulph interposed, at Night to bear them to us; and by Break of Day we drank a Glass of Wine quench∣ed with a Lump of Snow and Ice, to the Caun's Health. Nor had we less hope to pass this dreadful Lake of Sulphur, since he had sent us a Token of his discovery of a more Temperate Climate, by a Fruit not unknown to us (Genetins), being Natives of a calmer Region; with these we cheated our Thirst for a while: In the mean time it fared not much better with us, than with those groaning un∣der a burning Fever, who by large Draughts endeavour to quench their Appetite, till it enrage the Distemper to an higher Fit: for now we saw (what before we believed) the tardy Fowls pay for their lin∣gring here, and leave their dead Bodies to be mummied in the Sands: Nor does this proceed from Heat alone, but the Seas nearness, which now furrs the Shore with discoloured Foam, poysons the Air as well as its own Inhabitants by its Corruption, staining the Strand with Mossy Green, and evaporating thence a Noysome Scent, by the pu∣trifying
of Fish left dead at the Ebbing Tides. Whence the Air breeds Insects, their Water-stores grow unwholesome, and a languid Habit seizes Human Bodies, disposing them, though not to Scurvies, yet something analogous thereto; for few escape without depascent Ulcers feeding on their Limbs, which creep out into long Worms our Idioms hardly find a fit Name for, unless we may reckon them a-kin to Wolfs, , Phagadaenae, or Cacoethicks. Upon their first appearance they carry with them the presence of Imposthumations,Worms breed in their Bo∣dies: How they must be treated. but presently after suppuration a long white Fila∣ment like a small Gut comes forth, which gently caught by the Head is wound on a tender Twig, which while it increases is turned round, and fed with Rose Water, by a Clout dipped therein to keep it moist, lest becoming dry it should dye; this by Congestion of Humours causes great Pain, and as long as it continues, the Part affected swells into an huge Tumor; and if by chance the Worm be broken or ill handled, that it come not entirely forth, it breaks out in other pla∣ces with more severe Symptoms; wherefore great Care is taken to bring it out whole, lest it should reduce the Patient to a worse Condi∣tion: It is rebellious to all common Medicines, and must be nou∣rished with Milk and Butter, or else a Poultice of the Patient's own Ordure. At this time also the Pullen fare but ill,Poultry dye suddenly. a Pest among them kil∣ling them without the help of Cookery; nor do the Persians care much for eating of them; whether suspicious of the III Practice of their own Nation, who fancy Diseases gotten of Prostitutes are drawn out by buggering of them, or out of any other Superstition, as that Worms and Scorpions are bred in their Guts, I know not; yet this is certain, they are often found to dye suddenly. Here, if the Subtilty of the Enquiry could discover any thing to find the Reason of this Slaughter, 'twould be worth the while; but a simple Putrefaction must not bear the blame, for then all living Creatures would fall under the like Fatality, as well Sheep and other Cattle, as these; 'tis necessary therefore some more secret and pe∣culiar Cause should be rendred; which seems to be fairly hinted at by Virgil: Hic quondam morbo Coeli, miseranda coorta est Tempestas, totoque Autumno incanduit aestas: Et genus omne neci pecudum dedit omne ferarum, Corrupitque Lacus, infecit pabula tabo. Here once the Air infected, did beget A Plague which rag'd through the Autumnal Heat; A kind of Cattel and of Wild Beasts di'd, The Grass was tainted, Rivers putrifi'd. Which whether it be done by the Influence of the Stars, or disposi∣tion of Particles, I dispute not. Certain it is, the Sun by its Eclip∣tick Motion determines generally the various Seasons of the Year, as Summer, Winter, Autumn, and the Spring; yet all Summers are not equally hot and dry, nor do all Winters share of the like Cold and
Moisture; whereupon some Summers bring Swarms of Flies and Gnats, others are clear from them; and on this account is it so many Armies of Locusts have invaded these Quarters (which though often, is not perpetual), that they have devoured all things as they bud, unless where the Husbandmen have drove them away by Fire; so that I am willing to incline to the unaccustomed Alterations of this Year, which by the more constant blowing of the South Winds has filled the Air with a longer time of Moisture, and thereby impressed something more Mortal by some unwonted Conjunction of Planets, than other Years: For these South-East Winds as they are the most unhealthy, so used they to be the least durable; but hitherto they have hovered with Clouds without Rain, and kept off the Northern hot ones, which restore Health to the too hasty perspiring Spirits by the dewy Southern Gales. CHAP. II. Our setting forth from Gombroon, and leaving Lhor. AT last the Heavens drop Fatness, and the Showers refresh the Earth, and fill the Tanks with purer Water, washing away the old Filth and Nastiness contracted by the former indispositions of the Seasons. And now we having this Opportunity,The Ceremo∣ny at our De∣parture. set forward towards the Evening of the 28th of June, the Ships in the Road Saluting us, and the Merchants, both French and Dutch, Conducting us onward of our Way, with Pomp and Ceremony, till we came to the Garden out of the City, where we entertained them with a Sum∣ptuous Treat, and took our Leaves; they returning to Gombroon, and we going on Three Pharsangs that Night to Band Ally, Inhabited only by Poor People, in pitiful Cabbins covered with the Palm-Tree Boughs, by the Sea-side, expecting Profit, as well by Strangers as by Fishery; these Houses are placed on Wheels, to draw up and down at their Pleasure. Band Ally is the Chast Ally,Band Ally, a Caravan Se∣raw. to whom this Caravan Seraw is De∣dicated, in the same manner as we our Churches and places Sacred, to our Saints in Commemoration of them: Caravan Seraw, signifies no more than in Inn, viz. Se, the Head, Raw, of the Way. For this Journy we have no Wains for our Baggage, or Chariots for our selves; we Ride on Horseback, and our Sumpters are Loaded on Mules, Asses, or Camels, which march toward Evening and Travel till Morning; We go but slowly by reason of our Beasts of Burthen, though a greater part of them were dispatched a Month before us by another Road, less Mountainous, though farther about.
Coming to our Inns,Chap. II. we have no Host, or Young Damosels to bid us Welcome, nor other Furniture than Bare Walls; no Rooms Swept, nor Cleanly Entertainment, Tables neatly Spred, or Maid∣ens to Attend with Voice or Lute to Exhilarate the Weary Passen∣ger; but instead of these, Apartments covered with Dung and Filth; Musick indeed there is of Humming Gnats pricking us to keep an unwilling Measure to their Consort: So that here is neither Provision for Man or Beast, only an open House, with no enliven∣ing Glass of Pontack, or Poinant Cheer to encourage the Badness of the March; but every Four or Five Pharsangs, i. e. Parasangae, a German League, on the King's High way, a Caravan Ser Raw, as dirty as Augeus his Stable, those before always leaving the next comer work enough to cleanse where they have been; that after coming in Tired, they are more intent to spread their Carpets for Repose, than re∣move the incrustated Cake of Sluttery, the constant Nursery of Flies and Bees, they often bringing their Horses into the same Bed-Chamber. These Houses Built by Charitable Persons,Our manne of Travelling, and how Pro∣vided. are always supplied with Tanks and Cisterns, which now run over since yesterdays Rain, and are commonly very Fine and Costly; but other Com∣modities we must bring with us, otherwise we are likely not only to go to Bed on the bare Ground, but depart more Hungry than we came thither (very few Places maintaining Sutlers for Horse-meat, or Diet for the Wayfaring Man): Therefore when we undertake this Journy, we carry not only all our Family, but Housholdstuff too; for which every one has a separate Allowance for his Servant and his Baggage, and a Butler in common, who Mounts the Trojan Horse, suplied with Bread, Wine, Salt, Cold Meat, Knives and Napkins for the Viaticum, in Two Canisters, or Chests hung on each side one, under whose Belly is girt a Metarrah, or Goat Skin full of Wine, and another of Water; a Metarrah full of the latter every one ties to his Horses Saddle, in the fashion of a Leathern Bottel, and a Silver Toss, or Cup, in a Case at the Bow of the Saddle: In the middle of the Munsel (i. e. a whole Day's Journy) the Butler alights, and by some advantageous Brook, or Tank, spreads a Table on the Ground, while the whole Caphala refresh: (We generally make our Munsel from Four in the Afternoon till before Four in the Morning) when after a Glass of Wine, and the Fragments of yesterdays Provisions, we betake our selves to Rest with much eagerness, if it be possible among so many strange Customs at first; as Noise of Carriers Bells, Feeding, Neighing, Breying, and Noise of so many Creatures, Loading and Unloading, with the Singing, Chatting, and Din of Servants, Horse-keepers and Muliteers; but Custom makes all things familiar and easy, that we generally Repose till Two the next Day; when our Cook has provided not only our Dinner (which is as Sumptuous as if at Home, and brought in with the same Order) but furthermore, our necessary Provant for the ensuing Day's Jour∣ny; and after this manner are we fitted to measure out our future Hardships. Hither the Banyans,The Shotters, or Footmen. or English Brokers, Accompanied us, they taking their Leave for the Port, we keeping on our Course, Three
Englishmen with our Retinue answerable to the Quality of each; we had with us Twenty Camels for Lumber, Fifteen Horses, Three Mules, and Two Asses, besides Three Shotters for our Guides, which are the only Men here also, who wear Plumes of Feathers in their Tur∣bats, small Bells about their Wastes, Truncheons in their Hands, Horse-Cloaths over their Shoulders richly Embroidered on Scarlet, Packthread Shoes on their Feet, and close Jerkins with Breeches be∣low their Knees; these are our Guides, and hold our Horses while we Mount, look after them and the Equipments, as Bridles and Fur∣niture, (the most mean of which are Silver) when we alight; and are not only swift, but lasting Footmen. Beginning to set forward, neither Tract nor Road was followed, all being covered with Sand; but our Guides steered by their own Experience; this was not so comfortable, to behold nothing but a Sea of Sand; for now we began to turn our back upon the Gulf, and steer a more Northern Course, from whence to reflect what Sustenance this barren Earth could produce, that, should our Stores fail, we might want; yet even for this Jealousy we had not the least shadow of Reason, for had we been less provided we might have met with Plenty, every one striving to Vend us Necessaries, to the no small encrease of my amazement how they came by them. After we had waded through Two Pharsangs of this Desolate Way,Of the Palm-Tree. we began to Clamber up those Hills, which seem hanging over the Road of Gombroon, now beating the Hoof on more solid Rocks: In this Passage we could here and there descry some Groves of Palms, whose Fruit were tinctured with a Cherry Red, the constant fore∣runner of their full Maturity; at which time they look for the same Unhealthiness we do in our Autumn; though I find them not so su∣perstitiously addicted to Symbols, as the Egyptians to their Hiero∣glyphicks, yet they express the Year by this Tree; because this Tree, say they, of all others alone (which I before noted of the Coco-Nut Tree, and therefore I think it a kind of Palm) at every appearance of the New Moon procreates a fresh Branch, by which Twelve Productions the whole Year is resembled and compleated; the Trees are Tall and Slender, bearing their Boughs all a top, like a shady Tuft, some standing bolt upright, and others spread abroad, with others flagging and ready to give way to the Birth of more; when they are Young and in their Infancy, they no sooner sprout up but the prickly Leafs guard its tender Head, which is of a pithy substance, and when Wounded spoils the Trees Growth, so that it Dies; but while it escapes that danger, it rises by degrees after the former Order, the under Branches bowing Archwise to their upstart Youngsters; the Leafs are set in Rowslike Ribs to a great Spine, arising from a Circular Base, till it end in a sharp Point; under these Boughs the mighty Branches hang full of Dates in Clusters, and which is more than say so, The more they'r Burthened better do they Thrive, Like depress'd Virtue better kept alive. So patient under great Loads of this Fruit, that they seem to rejoyce
with a more chearful Verdure, and unconcerned reject the withered Boughs, whilst a more lively Product makes them glad by a new Succession; by which means it keeps Green the whole Course of the Year. Nor when the old ones all, are these only fit for the Fire; for they being orderly laid, and finely Gilded or Painted between the Beams of the same Wood, supply the Ceilings and other Adorn∣ments of their best Houses; nor are they less serviceable to Thatch their meaner Cottages: The Trunk being deprived of those Comb∣ings, from the main Head is beheld a flourishing Peruke of Palms, fit to be worn by the greatest Heroes; from whence downwards without any Sprouts, it appears all in Coat of Mail Cap-a-pee, or like a Pine-Ap∣ple from its scaly Structure, caused by the falling of the precedent Branches, by which compactness it emulates its Conelike Figure. Of these Trees there are Male and Female, and which is worthy our Notice, the Female Palms (which only Bear) will not Bring forth before they are Impregnated at the Roots with the Seed of the Male, first pounded into Meal and sprinkled about them; which how true I dispute not; but certainly Tradition has confirmed the Practice, and they are not to be persuaded to neglect the Custom. In the midst of this Days Munsel,Hell Gate. among the Mountains we passed by the Mouth of an horrid Cave; where they entertain Travellers with Tragick Stories, and a Legend of Fables, as that it is the Road to Hell; for, say they, whoever Enters never Returns; as if thence had arose the Proverb, No Redemption from the Shades; or that of the Poet, —Facilis descensus Averni; Sed revocare gradus, hic labor, hoc opus est. Easy the Descent's to Hell, but back again Our steps to call, this is the Work, the Pain. But it stuck not on my Fancy, who had been informed of Plea∣santer Stages on that Journy, and an higher way to more open Doors. —Patet Atri janua Ditis. Hell Gate wide open stands. But it may more probably be an Invention to fright Passengers into the right Way, and that they should avoid, by so sad and terrible a Remark, the wrong, which would wilder them in an unlucky Maze; for here the Way was not only Intricate but Difficult; whereby I was encouraged to auspicate a more Coelestial Path might lead us to Getche,Getche a Vil∣lage on Wheels. in the Turkish Language signifying a Goat Village; which was on Wheels, as the other, being not Twenty Miles distant; it is in a Sandy Valley full of Shrubs, on which the Camels Feed, but the Asses, Mules, and Horses, on Barly and chopt Straw; [the Per∣sians learn'd the Indians how to Treat their Horses; where having
declared the manner, I forbear here, it being exactly the same] for these Eight or Nine Munsels they care not to House them, but only Cover them with Yawpengees, or Horse-Cloths, and expose them to the open Air; which is not so Unhealthy for them, as for Human Bodies, who carefully prevent such Lodgings for fear of Aches, and other Inconveniences incident thereupon; wherefore in the middle of the Vale we repaired to the Caravan Ser Raw, almost buried in the Sand, it being the only obstacle to their rowling Billows. The next Morn we were waited on by the Country Women bringing us Cheese, and Butter made before our eyes, with no other Churn than a Goatskin, in which they shook the Milk till Butter came; Fish, Roots, and Herbs, with all sorts of Pullen: In these Two Munsels we only meet with these Servitors, in other Pla∣ces Men appear alone, not allowing their Women that Freedom; but were they no more tempting than these Swains, they'd have small cause for the Restriction; for they are Strapping Sunburnt Lasses, with little more Cloaths on than a dark coloured Smock, or Frock; and for their Meen it is not enticing; these bring us Water to Drink out of their Tanks, newly filled, which was Thick, Troubled, and Slimy; for which reason the Vapours, or rather Fumes from the Sun's violence, were very Offensive, and the more irksome, because we were constrained to tarry here another Night, for that the River Rute Conna Shure, or Salt-Water, was now over∣flown by the Waters falling from the Mountains beyond the Barks to that excess, that it could not be Forded by Travellers, and the Stream ran with that Rapidness, that it was unsafe to venture over till the descending Cataracts had left off pouring on the overswell'd Brinks, and emptied themselves into the wider Gulf, not many Leagues distant hence. The Day after, as soon as we heard the Waters were abated, we set forward, and found it true what had been reported (Three Ca∣phala's not daring to pass the Lake, where they had lain some Days, till we dhad led the way). It was sultry Hot when we assayed to go, but Delays in this case were dangerous: besides, we were uncertain whether it would hold up should we tarry, which made us confide on our Guides, who gave us assurance, that the Marshes were passa∣ble; we were more troubled with Waves of Sand than Water, both which, by Rain, or Wind, keep on their Course with some noise till silenced in the Persian Gulf. Athwart this Fen,A Great Bridge. which was upward of Three Miles, was Built not long since, as by the Modern Architecture may be guessed, a state∣ly Stone Bridge with Arches, on which high Banisters with Niches, and a brave paved Cawsey Elegantly Built, which kept pace with us, but by the Negligence of these People, as well as Injury of Floods and Sands, it was broke down in several places, especially where the Torrent made the deepest Channel, so that though firm and strong in the greatest part of it, yet by its being ruined in the most needful, it is become impassable; and though a Work of ex∣traordinary Benefit and Charge, yet already rendred of little Use.
The rest of this day's Journy was between the Mountains, where we were encounter'd by strange Flashes of Lightning, the Foretellers of this Night's Rain,Caurestan. which we hardly escaped before we came to Caurestan, in all Twenty Miles: This Caravan Ser Raw is named from a Tree growing here, and a Village properly so called (of which it is a Composition in Persian), it being the first we met with whose Houses were fixed. The following Day we continued going between two Chains of Dry and Burnt Hills,The Place where Men and Beasts have been de∣stroyed by the Heats. through a stony Valley, not without fear of suffocating, although it was near Evening e're we set out, and Ye∣sterday's Showers had benignly distilled on the Fiery Drought, to cool the parched Earth: But this is the dreadful Vale, where when the Hot North Winds blow at this time, it sweeps both Men and Beasts away, either by Night or Day, the Heat being as intense and as intolerable as that from the Mouth of an Oven: We were con∣ducted through this Furnace by the Divine Protection (without being put to make use of the common Remedy in this Exigency, which is, upon perceiving of the hot Blasts, to cast our selves flat on the Ground till they are over, thereby to prevent the Fate attending those who refuse to stoop to this known Prescription, which is, to fall down dead, never to rise more alive), till we were mounted where these two Chains are linked to each other, and by their mutual Ascent we were lift up on high, and then gently descending we were let down to Goorbazergum, Fifteen Miles from Caurestan. In this Bottom is a solitary Inn,Goor Bazergum, the Merchants Grave. very commodiously seated; it is surrounded with Mountains, at whose Bottoms are store of Water-Melons, a grateful Cooler in this Extremity of Heat: Goor-Bazergum is as it were to say, The Merchants Grave, in the Persian Tongue. Hence up Hill and down Hill, through broken Rocks and unstea∣dy Stones, through kindled Fires from sulphurious Caverns, and the more raging effects of the burning Orb, enlightening and enliven∣ing all the World beside; here it kills and consumes the un-nurtur'd Plants, leaving them dry and sapless; as if these great Heaps of Rocks were made for no other end but to counterpoize the more Fruitful Part of this Terrestrial Globe; insomuch that it had been utterly impossible to have drawn Breath in this Place, had not the late unusual Rain something allayed the Fury of the Heats, which yet were troublesome enough by reason of the steaming Mists ari∣sing boiling hot with the Sun; which so late in the Year are by the most Ancient of this Country esteemed so far out of course, that their Memory fails them to relate the like. Nor do the Publick Roads deny the Calamity of these Munsels,Jehun. which are frequently strewed with Bones of labouring Beasts, expi∣ring under their Burthens, many of which were fresh Examples of this Truth, lying reeking Carkasses in our Way from Goor Bazergum to Jehun, which is but Twelve Miles, where we were forced to stay to get more Camels, for Three had failed us in this Conflict; and af∣terwards with much Pain we measured six Miles more to Tangedelon, where we eased our selves at a Caravan Ser Raw, near a Stream of li∣ving Water sweetly gliding through the middle of it, and wash'd
the Dust off our sweaty Bodies, in a Tank contrived to make a plea∣sant Bath under the Roof of the Seraw. Tangedelon expresses in its Mothers Speech,Tangedelon and Cormoot. A Strait Passage, which hits exactly with the following Munsel; for we travelled long under hollowed Mountains, whose lofty Rocks hung over our Heads, threatning to stop our Career, which after Twenty Rocky Miles di∣rected us to Cormoot, a Town of Dates, Cormoot being a Date, . Thus far we came directly in a Line;Sham Zangee. now we wander to and again in the Meanders of the Barren Hills, with indefatigable Indu∣stry, till we descend into a large Plain, at the End whereof sham Zangee an Abassin, had built an old Caravan, Twenty Miles from Cormoot; where we met a Caphala of light Asses going for the Port; and here we were obliged to change more of our Camels, they being quite tired. In this Plain the Heats increased upon us so, that we could not touch the Walls but they were like Fire, the Winds that should re∣fresh us were ready to inflame us, nor was any thing cool but the Water, which they had kept in Earthen Vessels dipped in their Wells or Tanks, where being drowned they came up shivering cold, which was all the Comfort we received here; wherefore at Sun set we made for Lhor, choaked with Dust and Heat; half-way, at a new Caravan Ser Raw, we encountred three Caphalaes laden with Dry Fruit for the Port: This was founded by the Overseer of the Building of the Long-Bridge over the Lake leading to the Gulph, who raised him∣self thereby, and begins (though covetous in other things) to be∣stow his Mony on these Works, having laid the Foundation for ano∣ther at Sham Zangee. From this Place to Lhor the Ground is more Even, and fit for Cul∣tivation, the Husbandmen having planted their Cottages along the Valley, on each side of a gliding Brook, here and there beset with Tamerisk Trees. About Nine in the Morning we came to Lhor,Phor. near Forty Mile from Sham Zaugee. The Hollanders have here a neat, but small Dwelling, whither their Commodore comes sometimes: In this we designed to have worm some days away, but neither the Heat nor Musquitoes would let us rest long in this City; wherefore desiring to fly from these, we changed our Camels for Mules, that we might make better speed than these slow Animals would endure; for these intemperate Seats were too hot for us, so that the same Afternoon we mounted, and on Horseback saw the remaining part of the City leading us on our Way. The Road from Bunder to it is spacious and open, through a pleasant Campaign for near Twenty Miles, the Mountains observing a modest distance on that side, although behind it is begirt with enough for defence; at top of which is a notable Seat, fit for a Castle, being of difficult Access, from whence those that approach, may hear the Thundring Cannons roar among the Valleys, which were most taken from the Portugals in their being beaten out of the Gulph. Lhor is a City of an Ancient Date, and still retains its Name, which for that it was so guarded by Nature that it could not easily
be conquered, held many Ages the Majesty of a Kingdom; but now it is governed by a Puritanical Caun (for that he has visited Mahomet's Tomb) under the Persian Emperor; yet still it extends its self far in its Province, reaching almost to Bunder Abassee, and has two eminent Ports tending to the Mouth of Euphrates, viz. Bun∣der Congo and Bunder Reek, with half the Pearl-fishing, divided be∣tween the Arab and Persian. He is in such Vogue at Court for his Probity, that his Neighbour Caun was ordered to submit to his Judgment, before whose Tribunal he appeared to answer the Crimes objected to him in his Government. However he is not so great a Bigot as to abstract himself wholly from the Pleasures of this World, so as to deny himself his Paradise here: for his Palaces shew not only studious Contrivances, but are Luxurious both for inward Furniture and outward Beauty, with which Pleasures he oftner indulges himself than he is at Leisure for Publick Affairs. Before his Palaces a Foursquare Piatzo takes in a large Space of Ground, with Gates to every Quarter; over which his loud Musick are placed, either to entertain Strangers, or by their Noise to give the Time of the Day at every Three or Four Hours: At the Gate entring the Palace is a constant Guard: Within are stately Apart∣ments, with Lakes and Gardens, equal to the Roman Pride in its Age of Wantonness; but so much the more to be extoll'd, by how much more this Soil is incompatible with the Italian Mold. Structurae magnificae undique Latius Extructa visuntur Lucrino, Stagna Lacu, populosque vitis Evincit altas: Tum Violaria & Myrtus & omnia copia narum Spargentque pometis odorem. Fertilibus Frugibusque electis Aurantiorum spissior igneos Excludit ictus, arbor & foliis Fragrantis Hesperi Poma— Auspicij pariens secunda. Magnifick Buildings shortly will allow Few Acres of firm Land unto the Plough. Now may be seen huge Pools to make, Of much more wide Extent than Lucrin Lake. The solitary Plane the Vine supplants, Nor any Flower sweet Odours breathing, wants; As Myrtle, Roses, and the Violet, Where the first Owner fertile Date-Trees set. The Orange now to Phoebus piercing Eye, Through his thick Branches Passage doth deny. Besides all these, there is an Exchange, or Burse, full of Wares, in the Figure of a Cross, reared with polished Stone on a large Area before the Duke's House.
The Water in use for the common People is chiefly Rain; where∣fore the Cisterns are more costly than in other Places; of the same Figure as at Gombroon, only some few are tubilated and built of Mud. Many Merchants possess Princely Edifices in this Town, it being a Place of some considerable Trade both Inland, and from the several Ports. The Earth is productive of Sulphur,Brimstone the most refined here. whose Chymical Spirit is ex∣tracted here, and is preferable to any other, I never having met with more refined Brimstone; they generally distil it per Campanam. The Bezoar-Stone is purchased at this Mart,The Bezoar-stone its name. being said to befound in the Stomach of the Mountain-Goats hereabouts, occasioned by some Plant they delight to feed on, to which they attribute its Growth: On which Subject more may be seen in Bontius Junior's Animadversions on the Second and Sixth Paragraph of Garcius ab Ortâ: Whose Words are to this Effect; This Stone I find not only to be generated in Persia, but also in other Parts of the World; and because none as I know of before my self have given the true Etymon or Derivation of this Stone, or how it grows, hear the Business in a few Words. The Persians then call this Stone Pazahar, being a Compound of Pa and Zahar, the first of which is against, the other is Poyson; as much as if you should say in Greek, Antidoton, in English, Counter-Poyson. It grows after this manner;How bred. there is a Place in Persia called Ste∣banon, as Bontius writes, the Persians Shabanat, Three Days Jour∣ney beyond Lhor, in whose Fields there springs up an Herb like Saffronand Hermodactyls, on which the Flocks of Goats (or Sheep) feed, and by their eating thereof these Stones concrete and become an hard Substance; but I suspend my Vote, whether in the Stomach, Reins, or Bladder: However, that Belief may be gained for any of these, seeing them halt and complain as much as Men under the same distress, would more than incline the most in∣credulous. They are not, says he, unlike the Europe Goats, only they have logner and straiter Horns: They are not of divers Co∣lours, as the affirms, neither go they in Flocks or Herbs together; though I have eaten of their Flesh more than once, hunted by Greyhounds, being turned loose from the Mountains, they having much of the Nature of Venison both in their Taste and Aspect. Moreover these Creatures (rather Sheep than goats) as they breed greater or lesser Stones, they discover it by their Gate, of which both the crafty Armenian as well as Persian are well advised. Other Creatures as well as these are subject to this Distemper, as Cows, Sheep, and Apes; which last is reckoned the most excellent Bezoar by more than a few. To the Directions already given,Its Trial. I shall add, That the true Bezoar Stones have a Straw, or something in resemblance thereof, which never fails but in the Adulterate; and if the upper Coat being sha∣ved ff, there succeed not another Round, as is visible in Onions, till you come to the Straw, without doubt it is Counterfeit. But the following Method will better betray the Cheat, because they leave nothing unattempted to impose upon the Buyers: If you
rub the Stone with a little Lime, and if in the chafed Part there ap∣pears a Purple Colour, it declares it true and genuine, without sophi∣stication. Or if you cast them into a Bason of Water, after an ex∣act Account is taken of their Weight, and they be taken out Three Hours after, and weighed again, and it answer the first Account, nei∣ther losing nor gaining by their stay in the Water, then pronounce them right: But if being rubbed with Lime they chance to crack, or a Flaw be made in the Trial, or that they alter upon their Im∣mersion in the Water, you slander them not, if you say they are False. In this Country Assa Faetida is gathered at a Place called Descoon;Assa Faetida. some deliver it to be the Juice of a Cane or Reed inspissated; others, of a Tree wounded: It differs much from the stinking Stuff called Hing, it being of the Province of Carmania: This latter is that the Indians perfume themselves with, mixing it in all their Puse, and make it up in Wafers to correct the Windiness of their Food, which they thunder up in Belchings from the Crudities created in their Stomachs; never thinking themselves at ease without this Theriac: And this is that they cozen the Europeans with instead of Assa Foe∣tida, of which it bears not only the Smell, but Colour also, only it is more liquid. It is usual on the News of our Approach to these great Cities,The Civility of the Persian Governors ends in Cove∣tousness. or Populous Towns, for the Governors or their Deputies to expect the coming of our Agent a Pharsang out of Town, bringing the Men of Note with him to attend us to our Lodgings, and bring us with Pomp through their Streets, and at the same time lay in Store for us and our Horses, ushering in huge Courses of Provisions, both ready dress'd and undress'd, as also Services of Sweetmetas dried and un∣dried, sending in Sheep, Goat, and Pullen, Barley, Rice, and the like; and at our departure Present us with Persian Steeds for our Journy: For which we must not stir till we have paid sufficiently, by return of our Country Manufactures, as Scarlet, Watches, or some∣thing of greater Value: Tam citò in avaritiam excurrit sua humani∣tas; quommodo enim beneficium est quod in quaestum mittitur? cum à bene∣ficio abesse debeat negotiatio, &c. Senec. lib. 3. de Benefic. So soon their Humanity is turned to Avarice; for how can that be esteemed a Gift, which is bestowed with an intent to gain? Since any manner of Profit, which is fordid, makes void an entire Benefaction. But being rewarded for their forced Courtesy, upon our mounting they conducted us on our Way, as far as they waited to bring us in.
CHAP. III. We Measure the utmost Bounds of the Provinces of Lhor and Gerom, to the City of Siras. BEING now advanced upon the Mountains, among whose Tops and Turnings we make our Progress; fresh instances of the Convulsions which this Sulphurious Soil is subject to encounter us, as by the Cloven Hills and Rocks we may be convinced could be effected by no other means than by terrible Earthquakes from the Bowels of the Earth: Among these droughty and uncouth Paths, having wearied our Steps for Three Pharsangs, we came to a Caravan Ser Raw, by Name Pokutal, at the foot of these Mountains, and the beginning of a spacious Plain, where we found the first alleviation from the fierce Heats of the Noon of Night, though at Noon Day we could not think our case much amended. Po is interpreted the Basis,Pokutal. Kutal of the Hill; this Inn was a new, strong, square, large Inn; the first we stabled, or rather shut our Doors in a-Nights, it being Built after the best Form, and Capacious of a great Number, both in the outward Square and inner Stables; to this belonged Three stately Tanks with a deep Well, some an Hundred Fathoms down to the Bottom, with a Pond, either to Wa∣ter or Wash the Cattel in, hard by it; the perfect proof of our be∣ing passed the Sands, which hold not digging such a depth, this being White Marble; and the whole Plain promised a more fruitful Clay. Hence to Bury metes out Twelve Miles more,Bury. where the best Carava Ser Raw is on all the Road, it being not only well Adorned with White facing Stone, but is both a Large and Convenient, as well as Stately Fabrick. Hard by this is a Peor,A Peor, or Prophet's Tomb. or Burying-place of one of their Pro∣phets, being a goodly Monument, with an Arabick School Founded in his Honour, and Endowed witha good Pension for to maintain the Devotion of their Priests. The next Munsel we hardly Went,Bonaru. but Crept onward to, through amost impassable and dangerous Precipices, with all the heed imagi∣nable, for a Trip here could not hae been retrieved without the loss of our Lives; but by the Divine Providence we came to Bonaru, an Eight Cornered Carousan, Eighteen Miles from Bury; there on an Hill are the remains of a regular Fortification, with a suppliment of Outworks on every side, without any Avenue, unless on one side; between this Village and Bury, the Inhabitants reckon a many Ca∣stles on the Mountains with large Tanks of Water, and Store-houses for Provisions of Corn, Cut out of the main Rocks with indefari∣gable Cost and Industry, which Works were they to be begun now (say they) could not be Finished by the Expertest Artists in Fifty Years. They yet retain a Warlike Disposition, being still accounted the best Gunners here of any other places in Persia; at the Entrance into this place are unsizable Heads of Mountain-Rams with their
Horns,Chap. III. set up as the Trophies of their Skill in Shooting them; and as a farther Argument of the cruel slaughter made among their Fore∣fathers, for more than Three Days Journy together, the Fields are every where filled with Graves. And now we began to be acquainted with the shift they make for Water in these dry Countries,What shift they make for Water. where there is little Rain, and no Rivu∣lets; they Dig for Springs, and when they have found one, they fol∣low the Water-Course which way it directs under Ground, Hollow∣ing the Ground, and at every Thirty or Forty Yards, cast up a Mole-Hill, where they make a Pit to Ventilate and let in the Air to Purify the Water, as well as to Cleanse and Channel, and this Course holds on many Pharsangs together for the advantage of the Vallies; and this I look upon to be as much the cause of the Generation of the Bezoar-Stone in the Animals aforesaid, as the reasons alledged there by Bontius for their Production; for by the consent of all Phy∣sicians, nothing contributes more to the Breeding of the Stone in Men, than such things as are Undigested and create Obstructi∣ons; nor can any thing be more Obstructing than such Water as is drawn from Wells and deep Caverns, where the Sun has little influ∣ence, as we may have occasion to manifest afterwards; and there∣fore we may probably Conjecture, these Unconcocted Waters to be a main instrument of their production, since where these are in use, this Accident is more general than in other places. From Bonaru to Mousar,Mousar the ut∣most extent of the Province of Lhor. another Eight-square Caravan, are Fif∣teen Miles, fine, plain, and easy way; near the Caravan Ser Raw was a pleasant Garden, the utmost extent of the Caun of Lhor's Dominions on this Road. And as a Boundary thereto, is opposed the steepest Hill we have yet met with, insomuch that we found it a notable Task to gain the Top by the Morning of the following Day, contenting our selves to sit down at Chawtalk, but Nine miles from Bonaru, being advised of a more troublesome Day's Journy the Munsel after this; not so diffi∣cult for Access as this, but a more continued Labour by the multi∣tude of Mountains we were to Master, and on that account it was highly necessary to Feed our Caphala's well before we undertake so great a Work. Chawtalk, (by the most valuable Munificence of the Benefactor, yet living to Oversee this good Deed compleated) is a noble newe Caravan, an Ample and Princely Building: Naer to it was, not long since, only a Well of Bitter Water, which gives Name to the Place; but by the Cost and Inquest of this Pious Benefactor, Sweeter Waters are at this time produced, something more remote, for Men to Drink, though the Cattel refuse not generally the other. On these Mountains the Mastich Tree brings forth plenty of that Gum,Manna. of which the Country People make good Profit: Nor does less Benefit accrue by the Mellifluous Dew a-Nights turn'd into Manna, from the Leafs and Shrubs, as well as Plants, upon the sides of these Mountains, which are not altogether so Barren as those we have hitherto passed; this Manna is White and Granulated, and, what I have found my self, I think not inferior to the Calabrian.
As for the Mastick Trees, they bore Red Berries, and if wound∣ed would spew out the liquid Resin from the Branches; they are not very tall,Mastick. of the bigness of our Bully Trees: Whether they bring forth a Cod or not, this Season would not inform me, nor can I say it agrees in all respects with the Lentisk Tree of Clusius. Here also grows the Wild or Bitter Almond,The Bitter Almond. the Wands or Sticks of which are in Esteem, for that Tradition of their being of the same Tree with those of Aaron's Rod, which budding brought forth Almonds, and for that reason are worn by those of the highest Rank among them: More of this anon. And now the time approaches we must pass over in one Day as many Mountains as we have hitherto been conquering, some of whose Clifts could never be gained, had they not been joined toge∣ther by vast Arches from Rock to Rock, their dismal Pits otherwise being rendred impassable: Thus by inexpressible Endeavours we strive to clear this formidable Chain of Hills, all in the Heat of the Sun (not daring to trust our selves in the Night), whereby we had our Skins flead off of those Parts exposed to the Solar Rays; and those that fared best had Bladders raised, as if scalded or burnt by the Fire; for which, when we had travell'd One and twenty Miles, we found at Gerom a ready Medicine of the Butter of the Seed of Gourds made into an Ointment, which appeased the Inflammation by its cooling Virtue, and immediately asswaged the Pain by Basting our selves herewith, being half Roasted. We refreshed our selves one entire Day at Gerom,Gerom. where a small White Grape, without any Stone, was an excellent Cordial; the Wine pressed from it is white also, and the strongest by Natural Fer∣mentation only, that I ever drank; they are called Kismas Grapes, and the Wine is known by the same Name farther than where they grow, it being of so stout a Body that it is not subject to decay presently; though their best Wines when they begin to turn, are fit for nothing but Vinegar, they being inexpert either in their Cure, or to preserve them; that which we drink is pure, without any So∣phistication. There grow no where better Dates than at this Town;The strongest Wine and best Dates here. and pack∣ed up dry are preferred before others all the World over. The People that dwell here are for the most part blind; for of Three you meet, Two shall not see, and it may be a Third shall have but half an Eye. The Occasion whereof,The Cause of their Blind∣ness. as they report, is, because little pretty coloured Mice and Weasels by their poysonous Stale infect the Trees so, that they produce Worms, the Parent of this Distemper; more tru∣ly fancying than proving this Secret, for want of that Microscope whereby Kepler assisted this enquiring Age to discover, That no kind of Plant whatsoever but procreates of its superfluous Juice some putrid Humour, which by active Nature is enliven'd into Vital Motion, forming to every one their proper Insects. Whether any Virulency may be ascribed to these, or the immoderate eating of Dates ought to be accused of their excessive Heat, as we do Wormwood, which for that reason we account offensive to the Eyes, I know not; following herein the Prince of Physicians, Calidis enim qui
saepè multumque utuntur, nervorum infirmitatem adferunt, in Aph. 16. Hyp. lib. 5. who says, They who accustom themselves to eat Hot things, bring on themselves the Weakness of the Nerves, and con∣sequently decay their Eyesight, the Optick Nerves being signally affected, through which Organs, Spirits ought to be conveyed princi∣pally for the service of the Eyes. To which Evil no doubt Sympathy makes a great Addition, whe∣ther in the Individual, or in respect of others: Wherein the Poet Philosophized, when he sang, Cum spectant oculi laesos laeduntur & ipsi. But above all, the Sands, which have here the same effect as else∣where. This is a Free Town, enfranchis'd with Liberties peculiar to its self, being independent on any other Governor but its own; though he be but a Calenture or Bayliff, giving Laws, and ruling by his own Power, being accountable to none but the Emperor: His Jurisdicti∣on spreads a great way, for that he is not inferior in Wealth to many Cauns, only somewhat less in Dignity. Mr. Herbert in his Itinerary relates Gerom to have its denomina∣tion from certain Jews who took up their Abode here,This Town is Mr. Herbert's Kirjoth-Jerom. and gave it this Name in honour of their Kirjoth-Jerom: But whether more of that Nation dwell here than in other great Towns, I am not tho∣roughly advertised, and therefore forbear determining. A Mile from the Town had been a Coloss, now half ruined by Age, bearing still some Marks of its pristine Majesty, it being more than Sixty Foot high, and Thirty in Circumference, raised in Me∣mory of some departed Saint; it overlooks a great many more hum∣ble Tombs, not liable therefore to such Dilapidation. Leaving these,Wheat. we pass through plough'd Fields, sowed with Wheat and almost mowed, it being Harvest time. In this Plain abundance of Liquorice grows wild;Liquorice. and by the Brooks sides are planted Country Mansions, with store of Sallows and Willows. At Midnight we came to Mocock Sugta (i. e. a dry Clove) Twenty two Miles, having forded several Plashes where flourished lascivious Shrubs, more like Southernwood than Osiers, till we were inclosed again in the Mountains. The Rhadars here had apprehended a sturdy Thief,Theft punish∣ed with im∣muring. who had set upon a poor Merchant, and drove away his Ass loaded with Indian Cloth: These sort of Vermin are rare, either for the exemplary Pu∣nishment inflicted, which is Immuring, when detected, or for the for∣mer mentioned Satisfaction to be made by the Shawbunder, who em∣ploys these Rhadarees, restoring to every one their proper Goods, or else giving them the full Value. I shall not deviate much to give a credible Instance from our Agent, who upon the Road by the Remissness of the Shotters had his Gold Bridle and other Furniture stole out of a Caravan Ser Raw, after they had come tired in. As soon as they were missing, upon notice given to the Captain of the Rhadars, a strict Search being made presently, it was not long e're the Criminal was detected, and taken with his
Prize, the latter restored, and the other left to the Mercy of the Agent, who might have cut him to pieces without any other For∣mality of Process, had he not delivered him over to be chastised by his Accusers, who were not wanting to inflict what Punishment his Fact deserved, the next Caun adjudging him the Severity of the Law. Here again over the Portal of the Inn,Monstrous Persian Rams. were advanced the Crests to the Persian Arms, I mean huge Rams-heads, Horns and all, which declare what would seem monstrous to relate, they surpassing in Bulk as well as Courage all those of other Nations; not for their Heads alone, but their Tails, which sometimes prove such Incum∣brances, that unless small Carts were ordained for their Carriage (especially the tame ones), they would trail upon the Ground, and wound themselves against every sharp Stone and rough Piece of Ground: But these exalted are the Offspring of the Mountains, shel∣tring themselves among the Rocks and untrodden Paths of the Hills. Where,Polium. and in our Passage, grew the Mountain-Poly, which struck our Scent, till we descended a Fruitful Valley, abounding with Springs of Water, which gave Increase to many Furlongs loaded with Rice or Paddy, being courser than the Indian; from whence not only Persia, but all the World besides, must fetch the best and finest Rice. This Valley led us to Caifer,Caifer bounds Garom, and the Growth of Palms. some Five Pharsangs, a Village blest with all Fruits Persia glories in, but above all, the choicest Oranges; but this unseasonable Year, with the help of the Locusts, had blast∣ed them all. This Town, as it terminates the Bounds of Gerom, so it puts an end to the genuine Growth of the Palm-Tree, it being barren beyond this Place, and therefore only set in Great Mens Gar∣dens for Shew, it delighting rather in Hot and Dry Ground, such as Sands, and such as come nighest in Nature to them: Moreover, the Climate beyond this Place admits of too cold a Winter for their Nou∣rishment, which I impute to be the chiefest Cause. This Town is planted in the Bosom of two Rows of Hills, reach∣ing Siras, which delivers us to a delightful Plain, adorned with Cy∣press-Trees on each hand, and plenteously stored with Villages and Running Water on every side. And now it was pleasant to behold the Harvest-men labouring with their Sythes, the Wheat blading low; the Ruther Beasts with distended Bags grazing in the Meadows, the Sheep with their broad Tails gathered into Folds, and the wary Shepherd on his Guard to defend them, as well as to dress them when infected with any Ma∣ladies; the Groves look'd Green, as in the midst of Summer's Pride, whose Bowers the Winged Choristers made chearful with their un∣confined Notes, their Mirth as free as their Melody untaught, being actuated by no other Rule than Instinct. These gave us hopes of future Moderation;Firaw. nor were they flat∣tering; for we had not traced Ten Miles of this pleasant Way, when we came to Firaw, (The Foot of the Way,) where Aga Tocke had placed a Caravan Ser Raw; but here we were forced to gather those Garments close about us, the wearing of which we hitherto rather thought an useless Decency, than a real Requisite.
From hence to Mussaferry we toiled through rugged and uneasy Ways to a very splendid Caravan Ser Raw,Mussaferry. some Fourteen Miles more, where we took our Rest: And thence along a sweet Campaign, wa∣tred by a delicate Rivulet on the Left, at the Bottom of the decli∣ning Hills, bestowing its Blessing on the adjacent Villages and Coun∣try Towns. We continued journying all this Night;Bobba Hodge. wherefore the Sun had gilded the Firmament with his Vermilion Red, before we took up at Bobba Hodge, Thirty Miles compleat from our last Stage. Where intending to have been quiet, we were interrupted more than ever by impertinent Gnats and Flies, by reason of the Concourse of Wa∣ters nourishing abundance of Rushes and Fenny Plants, which har∣boured these and gave them Refuge in the Day, but at Night they broke out of their Lurking-places, and beset us with that Rage and Force, that no Resistance or Fence can be made against them; for, say they hyperbolically, They will bite through Armour; the best Persian Boots (which are low-heel'd and good Cordavan Leather) being not Proof against their Assaults. Wherefore the Eve to the same Day,Udgewally. to avoid these invincible Assailants, the disturbers of our Repose, we held on our Pace through Pasture-Grounds, such as our Commons, where they are down-fed, that little more than Green-Sod appears, in which were wanton Foles and unback'd Colts, with Mares for Breed, and unbridled Stal∣lions, sporting on the spacious Downs, which brought us onwards to Siras Twelve Miles more, viz. to the Beggars-Garden (but one Phar∣sang short of the City) called Ʋdgewally. Here we had scarcely alighted, but the French Agent having no∣tice of our coming, beat up our Quarters, and broke us of our Sleep. By Break of Day the Armenian Christians, which are numerous, came to congratulate our Arrival, and brought Banquets of Wine, Fruit, and a Cold Treat, with Led Horses of State, and loud Mu∣sick, to make our Entry the more Pompous.Our Entry in∣to Siras. In order whereunto, about Eleven in th Morning, conducted with much Ceremony, we approached Siras, where we found Spectators answerable to the Novelty of our Appearance, and the Greatness of our Train, with which we were passing through this City nigh Two Hours, before we were enclos'd within the Walls of the English House, which is a Noble one, in the middle of a stately Garden. Hither came the Fathers of all Orders to bid us Welcome, that were resident in the several Convents allowed them in this City; all which, and other Christian Attendants, were not dismiss'd till after a Splendid Dinner provided by our Interpreter, who makes some Thousands a Year by the License of our Winepress, the Profit where∣of is wholly his. The Wines of the Growth of this Country are esteemed the most Stomachical and Generous in all Persia,The Wines of Siras gene∣rous. and fittest for common drinking, when allayed a little with Water, otherwise too heady for the Brain, and heavy for the Stomach, their Passage being retarded for want of that proper Vehicle: It is incredible to see what Quan∣tities they drink at a Merry-meeting, and how unconcerned the next
day they appear, and brisk about their Business, and will quaff you thus a whole Week together. In which Exercise when they engage,The People good Compa∣nions. they observe this Maxim, Always to lay in Ballast, they eating heartily; and all the time that Healths are passing about, they have Cucumbers, Melons, and other Fruits before them, which must be acknowledged to receive the most perfect Ripeness, and therefore are more innocent here than any where else. Tobacco is a general Companion; and to give them their due, they are Conversable Good-Fellows, sparing no one his Bowl in their turn; and to be sure none shall escape a Nosegay, Orange, or some such Mark as passes with every Health; so that sometimes when they mind Discourse more than the Business in hand, a whole Nest of Posies wait on one Man, who must clear himself, or disgust those whose Healths remain unpledg'd. Having discharg'd the Fatigue of this Day, it remained incum∣bent on our parts to return these Civilities, which was to renew the Trouble again, each striving to outvye others in their Entertain∣ments: In these Courteous Visits we spent a Week, nor was that suf∣ficient, but we being late in the Year for this Journey to Spahaun, our Interpreter excused our Neglect. CHAP. IV. Of Siras, and the Ancient City Persepolis, and our Journying quite through Persia. IN our Stay here we had Opportunity to observe Siras, not only by Fame, but indeed to be, second to none, except the Royal City, in the whole Empire: And in this Country, the Country which is pro∣perly Persia (extended from the Gulph to luchos, which parts Parthia from it by a great Ditch made for a ndary on that Side to this Ancient Kingdom) it is the principal Metropolis. It is delivered as a Tradition,Siras the chief City in Persia. That it arose from the Ruins of Per∣sepolis: Others will have it as old as Cyrus▪ who contend for him to be the Founder, for that the nearness of the Name intimates as much: But that he should raise it as a Monument, seems not so probable, who would not permit it at his Death, as that these People, devoted to his Memory, might on the Miscarriage of Persepolis, raise this in Honour of him, whose Remembrance might at once revive the Glo∣ry of the then fallen Monarchy, and bury the hated Name of the new Conqueror in Oblivion, who had sullied all his Lawrels by hearkning to the unlimited Revenge of a Prostitute, to lay the most flourishing Persepolis in Ashes, from whence, Phoenix like, this is supposed to spring. And when we enter its Wealthy Markets, or Buzzars, Basilick Buildings, supported by Rows of vast Pillars covered at top, of which there are innumerable, large and splendid, abounding with
Rich Merchandize;Chap. IV. the stately Palaces of the Caun and other No∣bles; the pleasant Walks and Gardens, Colleges and Temples, the Tombs, and Water-Courses; we may afflict our selves with the Losses magnified by Historians, but at the same time do Injustice to so valuable a Reparation, which, for ought I know, exceeds the worth of the other: And what adds to its Esteem, it is reckoned by the Persians an Holy City, wherefore it's Endowed with Schools and Con∣vents, with Allowance for Students; nor do they in any place ex∣cel, (for the Concinnity of Harmony in Chorus from the high Towers of their Mosques at their stated Hours for Devotion) these sweet Singers of Siras: It boasts therefore of its being an University; which it truly merits from the confluence of all the Learned Tribe coming hither for Education. Their stately Gardens and Summer-Houses are out of the Town,Their Gar∣dens. whither resort those Invited either by Curiosity or Recreation; the most famous of which we Visited, under whose shady Bowers we were Feasted, from the Heel of every Day till Midnight, while we remained here, by the interchangeable Solicitations of our Christian Friends. Among which,The Cypress Trees the big∣est in the Uni∣verse. that, honoured with the Royal Claim, and there∣fore stiled the King's Garden, deservedly carries the Lustre from the rest, and though every one share in some Excellency or other, yet this comprehends them all in one, being a large Map of the whole: Here grow the loftiest Cypress-Trees in the Universe; nor do they want Bodies proportionable to their Height, one of which is said to be Set by Shaw Abas, their Beloved Emperor, Measures some Fathoms round: So addicted are these People to Loyal Heartedness, that what is Great, or Magnificent, they offer up as a grateful Testimo∣ny to perpetuate the Fame of those Princes who have deserved well in their Annals; for which reason these Trees keep the Name of To∣ken Cyr, even down to this our Age; willing thereby to Immorta∣lize the Grand Cyrus, transmitting an unalterable Tradition as lasting as Posterity its self. These set in Order make Majestick Walks, under whose shelter thrive the Underwoods; which were they removed from the first Rank of the Quarters, whether our Countrymen would allow the rest to be Wilderness, Orchard, or Garden, would be a Question; since these, with the Water-courses, make the whole Design of the Perspective; in which promiscuously are included Philberts, Hasle∣nuts, Pistachias, Sweet Almonds, Cherries of both sorts, Peach, Apricot, Prunello's, Figs, Prunes, Grannet, Chestnut, Nectorines, Quince, and all those we call Wall-Fruit, without any Assistance: Oranges and Limes begin to flag here, rejoycing more where Cold is less felt; for though it is very Hot now, it has a short but severe Winter; for which cause, Roses, Lillies, and Jassemin, are Shaded under all these to defend them from each Extreme; and below these the Violet and Primrose, with what exalt not their Heads above the Grass. In the midst of all a Banquetting-House, or House of Pleasure, with this Conveniency, that which side so-ever we cast our Eyes, most grateful Greens refresh our Prospect, and cooling Springs feed
spouting Fountains, till they unite in a full Sea, and thence are di∣verted into pleasant Streams, both for Diversion and benefit of the Place. Here is beheld the Trembling Poplar, the Tall Sicamore, and the Humble Elm, contrary to what we see in Europe; the Pine and Ash are Natives of this Soil, by the diligence of the Skilful Planters; but out of these Enclosures, no Woods, nor Thickets of any of these accost us. The Nightingal,The Nightin∣gal. the sweet Harbinger of the Light, is a constant Chearer of these Groves, Charming with its Warbling Strains the heaviest Soul into a pleasing Extasy. We return'd back to the City, Lighted by Torches and Flambeaus over a noble Bridge, from whence the Street enlarges gracefully a good length, till we were received into straiter Allies, the rest of the Streets being mostly such, or else covered Buzzars; this Bridge serves only to pass over, when the sudden Showers, and Water falling from the Mountains, raise a Flood, at other times it being dry un∣der it, here being no River; though Water is not lacking every where there, flowing plentifully in Rills or Brooks, taking their source from the Mountains, with which it is invested on every part, except the South-side, which lies plain and open a great way. These Mountains,The Vine∣yards. as well as Vallies, are stocked with Vineyards, being disposed to bear good Grapes, out of which they press their Wine, and from the Wine-fat set it to Work in great Earthen Jars, from which it is drawn off into Flasks, and so packed up in Chests. In this place only these Glasses,Glass only made here. and some course Drinking Glasses are made; as also Rose-Water Bottles, the best Water whereof is Distilled here; they likewise rectify Spirit of Wine very well: Moreover this City has the noted'st Coppersmiths in all Persia. It has neither Fortification nor Walls,No Fortifica∣tion. neither Ditch nor Mounds, nor other Guard, save its own Soldiers, which are the only Bul∣works. The Chief Magistrate was the Caun, Governor of the City and all the Province; but he, poor Man, lately by the King's Tyranny, is Deposed and cast into Prison, laden with Irons, as a Capital Of∣fender, for no other reason, but that of abounding with unheard of Treasures; all that he could not convey away the King Seized, and in his room has Nominated the Steward of the King's Houshold's Brother (who is Chief Favourite at Court) as Delegate for the time being, but not wholly Deprived the Caun, giving him hopes of Re∣lease, provided he confess his Wealth and consign it for the use of his Master. Some say the King took occasion to quarrel with him for neglecting to send his Annual Tribute of Limes to the Haram,The Caun Im∣prisoned. he expecting to be served first, with the Product of every Province for the Expence of his House, by the Governors thereof before any other; which as it appears reasonable, it is unlikely the Caun would have been defective in that point; but it is an easy thing to find a Staff to Beat a Dog; Facile est invenire baculum Canem ut caedas.
By which single Instance it is visible how it fares where Arbitrary Power bears sway, and how Monarchy is defaced when it takes upon it to be Circumscribed by no Sanction, and what a Monster it looks like when all Laws are swallowed in the Absolute Authority of Di∣spensing with them; by which means the Godlike Government be∣comes an insupportable Thraldom. In all the Cities of Persia,The Kindred of Mahomet Disturbers of their Societies. as well as this, there are abundance of the Jewish Nation (known only at Lhor, where the Caun is an Hodge, by the upper Garment, marked with a Patch of Cloth of different Colour); Banyans also, and Armenian Christians, with Eu∣rope Roman Catholicks; driving a Trade, and exercising the Superstiti∣ons of their several Religions with freedom, being disturbed by none unless sometimes by the Bigotted Kindred of Mahomet; who presume on that account (knowing the Reverence every where paid to that Impostor) very often on open and extravagant Injustice, setting poor People at Work and never satisfying them; entitling themselves Lords Paramount, and all others by a servile Tie of Conscience to be their Slaves; which sort of People (though Cursed by all) must be appeased, or else all will be in a flame: Which sort of Behaviour of theirs, has wrought the most understanding among the Persians to a Diffidence of that Doctrine with its Author, they so mightily preach up, yet practise so little. The Houses of Siras are Built with Brick,Their Houses. not Red, but better Hardned than they are, I mean theirs of the Better sort, not of the Common People, they agreeing with the rest elsewhere mostly, being composed of Mud and Clay. Pipes, or Conduits for Ven∣tilation are not so requisite here as in other parts, and therefore not so universal as in the Sandy Countries; here they are more Expensive on the Beautiful Adorning the Porches and Gatehouses leading to their Houses, taking care to Enclose them with huge high Walls, so that they are hid from the Streets; to which they are admitted by double Gates, over which are Folding Doors opening into Balconies. Their Publick places of Worship are illustrated with Mosaick Work:Their Tem∣ples. Painted and Glazed Slates grace the outward Case, artifici∣ally disposed into Convex Towers, representing the bending Heaven about them: Panes of Glass for the more solemn Light, are fetched from Venice, Tinctured with divers Colours; the Portuco's and lower Walks shine with polished Marble, supported by substantial Pillars of the same. The Midan,The Caun's Palace. or open space before the Caun's Palace, is an Oblong and Stately Piatzo, with real, not belied Cloisters. Taking our leave of this City,We take our leave at the Armenians Bu∣rying-Place. we were ushered out as we came in, the Armenians compelling us to take a Treat in their Garden ap∣propriated for the Burying of their Dead, where were many Neat Tombs; but the Oddest, because New, was one beset with Young Cypress Trees, and Trimmed to that advantage, that they stood like deep Mourners Clad with Sable Green; pretty Attendants by their Tapering Figure to so sad an Office.
On the outside of this City are Repositories for Snow and Ice, which they preserve to Cool their Wine with, and Sell it constantly in the Market for such uses;Repositories for Snow, Ice, and To∣bacco used by the Vulgar. these are fine Buildings. Ice dissolved in their Liquors, is as prevalent, even among the Vulgar, as Drink∣ing Tobacco. When we had crossed the fruitful Valleys and Hills of Vines, we turned out of the high Road to Ispahaun, to a poor Village called Zergoon,Zergoon. Inhabited by Mulateers, in the plain of Per∣sepolis, Fifteen Miles distance from Siras. From hence to the River Bindamire,The River Araxes, now Bindamire. or the River Araxes, (fa∣mous for its untraced Windings upon the Mountains, and sometimes under their very Bottoms, till by its rapid course it vents its self in∣to the Sea), were Twelve Mile more; which having passed, I be∣gan to revolve whether ever Alexander, the Macedonian Victor, had been over it or no; which because it is Recorded he passed his Army over Araxes by a Bridge of his own Building, I know not if that be proof enough of this being that River, or of his passing this place more than that; the Stream runs with a Torrent whereby it is unsafe Fording the River without such a Suppliment. Though as if that were too Trite and Common, I cannot forbear without some Mirth, relating what I had from a Persian in this Journy, pointing to an Hill; There, quoth he, stands the Monu∣ment of a Miracle performed by Band Haimero, the Prophet who gave Name and Credit to this Plain, and consequently to the Bridge athwart this River, which is a thing beyond Human reach to effect, otherwise too mean to exact our Belief. This Prophet was one of the Twelve Apostles, or Succes∣sors of Mahomet; nor was this Fact unworthy of so great a Title; for he leading an Host this way, after a notable descent of Rain, which caused this place to overflow, the progress of his Forces was thereby impeded; which he peceiving, thus bespoke that Mountain, March into the middle of the Waters Confluence, and lay thy self in that man∣ner, that there be sure Footing for my Host; to whom it readily obey∣ing, became an high Road for his Soldiers to pass over dry shod: But when after this device he had Ferried over his Multitude, it was told him an huge Casm, or Hell-Kettle was left where the Mountain had emptied its self; not being much concerned at the Accident, and meeting a Country Fellow who by chance had a Cheese, he cast it into the Well; which was not filled so, but that it gave occasion to the Satyrists of that time to Lampoon it in their own Language, Band Haimero has Agger hau tauk konet As Colobe Painer has. What wanting is to fill the place, Not from Band Haimer is, but the Cheese. Band was the Epithet to the Prophet,Why called Bindamire. which signifies Abstemious, a Virtue more admired than followed, and Haimero his Proper Name, wherefore both the Bridge and Plain, as well as River, by Boterus is corruptly called Bindamire, as appears by this ridiculous
Tale; which I mention for this end, that the true Appellation the Persians now give them, and their Reason for it may be recovered. The Bridge over the River is very old, raised high by four Arches, in the middle a Watch-Tower for the Rhadars to look out on, to ap∣prehend such as shall by By-ways attempt to deprive them of their Customs, as also to be at hand to secure those that Travel the Road. Unless sometimes they connive at Excursions for their own Booty,We suspect the Rhadars to be Robbers at Meergoscoon. as this Day we had cause to suspect; for this Evening the Rear of our Caphala we had taken with us, being only Servants with Arms (the other coming more leisurely, kept the direct Road), were set upon twice; but finding them in a condition to receive them, they wheeled off in the Dusk, but with an intention to take us napping when we were in our Lodgings at Meergoscoon, Twelve Mile off the Bridge, smooth Way, full of Farms and Country Towns; among which Plain dealing seems most an end to be their only Guard; for they being alarmed by the Rogues that dogged us, rose immediately in our defence, and gave us notice of our Danger, after one of the Villains, on pretence to light his Pipe, had rudely broke in upon us, to discover in what Posture we were, who perceiving their Pains would be only Blows, gave us no farther disturbance. However we were the more willing on this account to get up by the crowing of the Cock,Persepolis now Chulminor. to pursue our Journy to Persepolis, whose Ruins we had reached by Break of Day; when having compassed its Marble Foundations (being above, an Area of a large Extent, on the Plain an high Wall, giving some Pains to the attollent Muscles of the Neck, to give the Eyes leave to reach its Height), we clambred a spacious Staircase united some part of the Way up, when on each hand it led to the several Apartments two different Ways; at top were the Portals, and the Heads of the Columns worn with Age (damnosa enim quid non imminuit dies) which consumes every thing; whose Bodies were Corinthian, but the Pedestals and Capitals of Do∣rick Order, as might be gained from what had resisted the corroding Jaws of Time, hardly lifting up their Reverend Crowns, though of most durable Stone. Being entred the Pomaerium of Cambyses Hall (if Faith be to be given to the most Learned of these Relators), at the Hall Gates we encountred two horrid Shapes both for Grandeur and Unwontedness, being all in Armour, or Coat of Mail, striking a Terror on those about to intrude; their Countenances were of the fiercest Lions, and might pass for such, had not huge Wings made them flying Gryf∣fons, and their Bulk and Hinder-Parts exceeded the largest Ele∣phants. In this August Place only Eighteen Pillars of Forty remain,Stocks build on the Pillars. about Fifty Foot high, and half an Ell Diameter, of the distance of eight Paces one from another, though we could count the Twenty two Bases; which agree with the Persian Memoirs, who therefore still call it Chulminor, The Palace of Forty Pillars: These may be seen on the Plain a great way, and at present are the Residence only of the Tyrants of the Lakes and Fens, Storks only keeping their Court here, every Pillar having a Nest of them.
Nutrit ubi implumes peregrina Ciconia faetus, Ad nidos abies confita primo fuit. Which may serve to contradict the received Opinion, of Storks abiding only where Commonwealths are; this always having been an Empire, and at this time is the most Absolute in all the Earth. Beyond these, many Pieces and Scraps of Antiquity offer us a View, and great Colossus's supporting vast Giants, as if they had been Yeomen of the Guard in the Anti-room to the Presence-Cham∣ber, which was Eighty Foot Square, where on the Fragments of Walls standing, and over the Porticoes especially, were most curi∣ously cut out of delicate White Shining Marble, Men in Military Habit, like the Old Grecian Phalanx (if there be leave for Con∣jecture) encompassing a Monarch represented sitting on his Throne, with a Moving Canopy, such as the Eastern Kings have carried over them: On other parts Bucephalus, or if that please not, some Per∣sian Steed priding himself to carry an Emperor, or some Demi-god. Because neither Quintus Curtius, nor after him Plutarch, mention the reedifying this Palace either by Alexander or any of his Cap∣tains, yet I cannot let it pass without this Remark, That they are habited more like the Ancient Grecians, than Persians now are; be∣sides, the Hair of their Heads is hanging down, and not tied up, which is different from the Modern Fashion of this Country. In this Apartment Eight Doors seem to answer each other, Two on each side of every Square; which Conformity is attended with extraordinary Elegance and Workmanship; the Roof seems never to have had any intervening Pillars, and whether the Beams were of Cedar, it is not so fortunate as to have a Voucher of its own Nation. Many other Parts declared Cost and Pains enough, but nothing more worthy Study than the Characters fairly impressed and engra∣ven, which would unfold the Truth of the Founders of this Build∣ing, were they as Intelligible as Legible; for they remain like the Hand-writing on the Wall (Mene Tekel), till some Divine Expo∣sitor interpret them; yet I must needs say, many of the Characters may be found in the Greek Alphabet. This vast Fabrick is made bigger, by being joined to a great Mountain, out of whose Entrails were worn, rather than digged, Noble Caverns with Stately Sculptures, and wide Ponds of living Water constantly distilling from the Marble Rocks, either for bath∣ing or necessary uses: It is an admirable Piece, overlooking all the Plain, where we took this day's Repast, and over Head saw the Cornish of the Frontispiece embellished with the Royal Arms of the Persian Emperor, immediately on the Union of the Medes and Per∣sians into one Empire, which was a Ram's Head delineated as far as the Chest. In the Afternoon we saw another of the same Make,A Ram's-head the Arms of Persia. answering the other part of the Palace, and underneath on the Plain took no∣tice of Two Pillars at a fit distance, the one for the Goal, and the other for the Starting-place of their Coursers when they run Races. Having thus finished our Perambulation, we descended on the con∣trary
side we came up, and found there Goats and Sheep grazing on the Grass between the Joints of the Pavements; but on the Walls of the Staircase (which consisted of an Hundred and twenty Stairs of Black Marble on each side, till they united to Forty more, which de∣livered us to the Plain) were the Portraictures both of Men and Beasts on each side, and more of this Ancient Writing distinct in large Panes; at the Bottom whereof our Horses waiting us, we mounted, and returned to Meergoscoon, not a full Pharsang from hence. The following Day drove us,Rustam a Prince of the Gaurs. out of the same Curiosity, over se∣veral Branches of Bindamire River, to enquire for other Structures of the like Nature, of which these Mountains afford plenty, bating the great Area of Persepolis, which distinguishes it from these; but we did not alight for these, satisfying our selves to stare on them from beneath, they being fit only for Atlasses, or for Winged Folk to look into, there being no passage to them, appearing like Dens or open Holes on the sides of the Rocks, from their very Mouths per∣pendicular to the Ground: Only one above the rest attracted our Sight and Animadversion, reported and still averred to be of old the Court of Rustam, an Ancient King of the Gaurs or Gabers (the true Original Persian Race), whose Statue was of a Gigantine Sta∣ture, on as large a sized Horse, triumphing over his Foes at the Front of his Cave, with many Attendants clad down to the Heels, with Caps on their Heads (not Turbats) and their Hair loose about their Shoulders. From whence observing frequent Numbers of these,Uncertain whether it be Persepolis. I was apt to collect, that even what goes now for the Persepolis which Alexander gave leave in a Drunken Fit to be set on Fire at the Request of the Costly Thais, may be the Ruins of some Heathen Temple, having seen of the same Recesses among the Idolatrous Indians, which they still pay Adoration to, and own to be the Temples of their Gods. But that that City might stand in this Plain, not only the recei∣ved Tradition among all European Travellers, but the concurrent Opinion of undoubted Historians, certify with all the probable Con∣jectures. From hence under these high Hills we kept our Course, proving it to be a Wealthy Plain, stored with all Cattel, Corn, and Wild Fowl, by the plentiful Afflux of Water to the River from the Mountains, and Cuts from the River into the Plain, whereby it might be a fit Situation for the mighty Persepolis, as it now is for store of Country Towns, besides whole Armies of Nomades, or wandring Shepherds, who pitch their Tents with all their Families, wherever they find a Soil suitable to their Employment. Not far from whom were mul∣titudes of such Tombs as we met with at Bonaru Level, which perhaps may give some surer Account than that more Romantick one in ap∣pearance we met with there, of their being the dying Trophies of former Battels; though here wants not matter to countenance such Tales to those of easy Faith.The Straits where Artiba∣zanes repulsed Alexander. For two Mountains shut up this hap∣py Campaign so, as if Nature had taken special Care of its Security; which as formerly they terminated the Territories of the contending Gaurs, by their opposite Position, that nothing could creep between
them unexamined, so it is not unlikely that these were the Strong∣holds Artibazanes defended against Alexander, when he repulsed him, and had put a Stop to the Torrent of his Victories, had not a Persian Rustick shewed him an unknown Passage by the Pylae Per∣sicae, or Postern-Gates on the back of these Mountains, which open∣ed a Way to his farther Progress, as well as to the ravishing this thus basely betray'd Country to the Lawless Rape of an ungovern'd Ambition. To conclude therefore from hence, That these Burial-Places took their beginning so long ago, as it would savour of small Judgment in the Affirmative, yet it may leave some ground to the credulous, that it is possible some as notable Fights might succeed, for the gaining such a Key to so Rich and Spacious a Valley, as well from time to time after Alexander, as that not a Century since, this Part remained almost unsubdued, till Shaw Abas the Great brought it to perfect Obedience, when there might be occasion for such In∣terments, if their Piety extended to such a Care of the Dead. But these Field-Inhabitants incline me to think it their Work, being far from any Town; though the common Fame give it to the other Report, as well to aggrandize their foregoing Ancestry, as to cast a Lustre on the present Posterity. This may serve also to prove their Scythian Antiquity; for as the Worthy Mr. Sheringham observes, Sacae opiliones Asiam incolentes; that the Sacae were wandring Shep∣herds; whose Names, to shew their Original, he derives from the Hebrew , i. e. Tabernaculum, or Tent in English; from whence came the Getae, as well as present Persians, from their frequent dis∣burthening themselves by Colonies dispersed both into Scythia, so to Europe as well as Asia, where they first inhabited. From Meergoscoon to this Strait is measured Twenty Mile,Maijm. which finishes not this Stage, for now we were encompassed again with Rocks and Stones among the Mountains, (which we know whose In∣stigation it was to command they should be made Bread), our Provi∣sions being spent which we had taken for this Deviation; wherefore we were forced to march Twenty Miles farther, to Maijm, before either we or our Cattel baited; where we arriv'd before our Capha∣la we had left at Siras, they pretending they had lost their Way, but more truly lingred, not having us to spur them on; wherefore we were obliged this Night to make the Earth our Lodging, our Arms our Bolsters, and the uneven Stones our Feather-beds; which though we Travellers often do in this Journey out of choise, yet we found it disagreeable, because the Nights now were as intensely Cold, as the Days were Hot. In the Forenoon to the next Day the Caphala came, which created us this Day's Stay at Maijm, a Town where grows the best Walnuts, of the same bigness with the Spanish, and the choicest Tobacco Persia affords. After a sweet Night's Repose, early in the Morn between the Straits of the Mountains, we traced the Source of the River Araxes, purling under slippery Pebbles, which no sooner removed, than the Crystal Water bubbles forth, by which means, though a little sup∣pressed at first, in Half a Mile's space it emits a Stream able to drive Three Mills, which notwithstanding were not forcible enough to restrain the impetuous Blasts of Heat pent in between the Hills:
Although on the other side when we approached in the Night, all the Cloaths we had wrapped about us, could hardly preserve the in∣nate Warmth, when the Sun had shrowded its self under the Horizon. At Noon-day we overcame an high Mountain after a troublesome Luctation, this delivering us to another Golden Plain of Ojoan, gilded over with Ripe Wheat, being no more than Five Miles from Maijm. This Ojoan glories in the Sepulchre of another Royal Prophet,Ojoan. which is well endowed with neat Dwellings and Orchards for the Mullahs, who take their Service by turns to officiate in their Priesthood, by loud Exclamations and Musick calling People to their Devotions: In this Mansion we were permitted to make our Abode this Day; which because it was so short a Munsel, and these Gardens so de∣lightful, I could not but give my self the Pleasure to reflect as well on those Plants we had met wild, as these more cultivated which grew here. The Bitter Almond-Tree we met formerly in the Highways wild, if it may be called a Tree, and not a Shrub; the Body resem∣bles an Hasle, but slenderer, from whence come Stalks like Broom, on which sprout Leafs synonimous to our Privet; it brings forth Fruit in March or April, and delights in Hot and Barren Countries. The Sweet Almond grows on a taller Tree,The Sweet Almond. whose Leafs are like Ash, and ripen about the same time. The Pistacia sends forth its Branches on high,Pistacia Nut. and renders its Nuts edible in Autumn, whose Leafs are as big as a Walnut's, covered un∣derneath with a soft Grey Down; all these are covered with a succu∣lent Green Shell like a Walnut without, which includes an harder within, in the Shape and Substance we have them brought: Though I find them differently described both by Gerard and Lobelius. The Capper-Shrub accompanies us in the Valleys from Caifer hi∣ther,The Capper Shrub. and is encompass'd with Prickles something emulating our Goosberries; the Leaf is shaped like Purslain; the Seeds or Fruit, which we call Cappers, have a Cod not different from the Cod of the Major Cardamom, in which they are inclosed: In May the Flower is white and open, like a Sweet-Briar's. The lofty Pine,The Pine. the Top of the Woods, as well as of those float∣ing on the Main, is not so Tall in Asia as in Europe, though strait up to the very Top, and is not bunched till the Boughs aloft thrust out the Leafs to embrace the Woody Substance of its Cone-like Ap∣ple; the Body is scaled like the Palm-Tree. The Peach by way of Excellence is termed,The Peach. The Persian Apple; nor does it lessen the Repute, it far exceeding here what can be said in its praise in other Countries. The Pomgranat is passing good,The Pomgra∣nat. being the juiciest and biggest I ever met with, nor does any parallel them, unless those about Ba∣bylon. Early the next Morning we departed from Ojoan, beginning to alter our Course, the Air being more moderate, crossing a River (by a Bridge) running the whole length of the Plain, in whose Bosom great store of Corn was nourished, it looking yellow, and fit for the Sickle: On the other hand, in the Meadows and Marshes
were Droves of Fat Cattle, and all things appeared with the same Face as in England; we enjoyed this Accommodation till we came to Asspass, four Pharsangs; it is a Village shelter'd by the Mountains on the North, from whence spring many Rivulets of Fountain-Water, dispersed among the Under-Grounds a little too much; by whose Exuberance, Flags, Reeds, and Osiers offer Covert to Wild Boars, and Habitation to some Water-Fowl. Here a Countryman of ours is remembred to be Governor of a Castle (whose Ruins still are extant) for Shaw Abas the Great,Asspass once governed by an Englishman. in the beginning of King James the First's Reign; viz. Sir Anthony Shirley, who took Pay under the Emperor to defend this Pass: It is now inhabited by Georgian Christians, who are Tillers of the Ground and Planters of Vines, which are very productive on the sides of the Hills: They are Whiter than the present Persians, and of a flo∣rid Complexion, being Portly well-limb'd Fellows: Many of them have embraced the Mahometan Faith after the Persian Sect, being Vassals to the Emperor. By the favour of the rising Moon,Cuscuzar. August the first, we brought the highest part of another Mountain under our Feet, it dividing this Plain from another Rich Valley cloathed with Green Grass, and therefore dedicated to the Pasture of the King's Breed of Horses, among which were Choice Ones of very great Value: We passed two Pharsangs to Cuscuzar, giving both Name to the Valley and Village: Here is a small but delicate Caravan Ser Raw, though some∣thing improvidently built, the Upper Part being too heavy for the Foundation, it being paved with large Square Stone over the Cloy∣sters, which already begin to press down the Walls, which are most elegantly adorned with Painted Bricks and Polished Marble, both too weak for so great a Weight. As we strove early the next Morning to reach the end of the Plain,The Moun∣tains capped with Snow. being Thirty Miles, and very wide withal, our shivering Joints made us as sensible of Cold, as if the Frozen Bear had hung over our Heads: Nor must we wonder, since the Air is rarified, being soiled by no Lake, River, or Standing Pools, nor near any Sea or Gulph for some Hundreds of Miles; and to this Thinness of the Air another Reason is joined, the Mountain-Tops around this Plain all the Year long are capped with Snow; from whose Ribs the Sun dissolving them, is the only occasion of watering this Valley, where no other Supply can be had, or not so frequent as this; and his hottest Rays are not powerful enough (as 'tis credibly reported by all, though my Eyes I must confess were too short-sighted to inform me, the Summer being far spent, and this more extremely hot than usual), to melt all that fell in the Winter-Season; to which I ap∣pearing unbelieving, there was present a poor Rustick, who for a small Reward proffered to bring me a Piece to convince me; but having seen it nearer the Port, I did not think it impossible. We kept on to Degurdu,Degurdu. signifying the Walnut Town, where grew never an one, and lodged our selves here before Noon, the Sun not in the least annoying us.
The Day after we Marched Two and Thirty Miles to Esduchos:Chap. V. But before we exchanged Degurdu for this place, we accosted a Black Marble Mountain,A Ditch at Esducho parts Persia from Parthia. worn as smooth as Glass, and as slippery as Ice, by the constant footing of all sorts of Animals, so that we slode step by step, as our Horses do in deep Way, with this only advan∣tage, that we had sound Bottom: Beneath this a small Plain led us to the brink of a vast Precipice, the utmost Limits of Pharsestan, or the Old Persian Realm; here a deep broad Ditch, through which a troubled muddy Rivulet runs under a Stone Bridge, (the whole being not Broader than our Thamesis) parts this Country from Parthia: We remained this Night on the Persian side, in a Magnificent Brick Caravan Ser Raw, Built on the descent into the Trench, which West∣ward on the dry Banks was stored with fine Gardens and fruitful Or∣chards; over which on the other side was truly verified what might be Fabulously delivered of Semiramis's Pendulous Gardens and Sum∣mer-Houses, there being Tenements made over this Moat out of the ancient Fortifications, barring the Persian Incroachments on their Confines, whose Mouldring Sands have left the jetting Rocks the bare supporters of these hanging Buildings. The finest Wheat of all the Emperor's Dominions is of the growth of this Soil, the Bread whereof is in highest Esteem. CHAP. V. Our Progress into Parthia; Entrance into Spahaun, and Reception there. ENTRING Parthia by this Mound, or heap of Earth, seem∣ingly cast up on purpose to make this hollow Gulph, we were opposed by no other Mountains till we came to Moxutebeggy, though we encountred almost in every Village with old Castles made of Mud and almost turned to Earth again;Old Castles turned into Dovecots. in whose stead, at the Emperor's Charge, are maintained many Dovecots, pleasantly seated in Gar∣dens, for the sake of their Dung, to supply the Magazines with Salt-Petre for making Gunpowder, they having none else but what is Foreign. These Dirt-Forts might lie buried in silence, were it not for the worthy Memory of the Person who first undertook to de∣molish them,The Tragical fall of Imaum Cooly Caun. thereby expressing his Faith and Loyalty to his Prince. For the Renowned Shaw Abas being placed in his Throne by the Valour and Conduct of the Trusty Imaum Cooly Caun, Maugre all the opposite Factions of Court and Empire, he could not be reckoned to sit firm on his Throne, so long as these Impediments remained in the Hands of either Friend or Foe, because that they not only en∣abled the Possessors to stand on Terms with the Emperor, but were a sure Refuge, not only to Villains and Traitors, but to Thieves and Robbers, as well as Fugitives that fled from the hands of Justice;
whereby they became at once an Obstacle to Trade, Preying on the Subjects at their own pleasure, and became Lurking places, as well as Sanctuaries, to the King's Enemies, bidding Defiance, and many times opposing the Forces of the Empire. To Suppress which Insolencies, and Revenge himself on Offended Majesty, none under the Imperial Banners appeared a more vigorous Chastiser than this General, behaving himself with that Prowess, that he overthrew the Nests of Robbers, released the People from their Fears, and restored an entire Tranquility to the Monarchy: For which mighty Deeds he received a Reward altogether Injurious and Undeserved; for at his return to Court, being Courteously re∣ceived with all the Marks of Favour and Royal Complements, his Jealous Master Invited him far from the City into the Woods to Hunt, remote from the Army, whose Life and Delight he was, the better hereby to Intrap him, not being able otherwise to per∣form his Design; but even here, when he was Seized by the Com∣mand of the Emperor, he was proffered his Escape by his Keepers, which he refused, knowing his Innocence; but this served to enrage Shaw Abas the more, so that he could not be quiet till he had the Death of this Great Man; who fell for no other Cause, than Vir∣tue emulated and envied by his Lord, he being too much the Peo∣ple's Darling; which makes that Maxim true, Kings Hate where they Fear, Rege ut oderint dum metuant; he having obliged be∣yond Retaliation. Shaw Abas being otherwise a great Hero, strictly bound himself to the observance of the Rules of Virtue, only where a Jealousy of his Honour was tainted by Popular Air, according to the Axiom of Julius Caesar, Si violandum est jus, regnandi causâ violandum, coeteris rebus pietatem colas. Moxutebeggy is near Twenty Miles from Esduchos,Moxutebeggy. and admits us into a Caravan Built on the Road; through whose Gates all that Travel this Road must pass as under a Buzzar, where we took up in a Convenient Room, formerly designed for a Coffee-House, having a Tank of Water in the middle, with broad Seats around, either to Lie or Sit on. Here among the Tombs I took notice of several Figures on the Grave-Stones; which, because repugnant to the Command of their Prophet, I had a mind to be informed the meaning of, which they told me was only to express the several Ages of the Departed; as one that Died in the strength of his Age (speaking of whom, they term King of the World) had a Lion Deciphered on his Grave-Stone; many of which I found in sundry places; whereby I am confirmed, that Representations, or Emblems, were not wholly abdicated by the Persians; which I suppose also to be a Relick of their Scythian Extract, what Power, notwithstanding Religion since introduced, may have over their Consciences, yet this shews their natural Inclination to their Primitive Custom; for Getae siquidem Hieroglyphicis ex diversis animalium figuris sepulchra decorabant, qui∣bus tacite vel res gestas, vel officia administrata, vel mores, vel virtu∣tes, aut vitia mortui notârunt: Lupo tyrannum, Agno tranquillum,
Porco sordidum, Equo generosum, Leone Regem, Aquilâ fortem expri∣mebant. Shering. p. 472. Annot. ultim. From this Town to Come Shaw (i. e. the King's Friend) is rec∣koned Twenty four Miles more,Come Shaw. which was a Town of Caravan Ser Raws, made of Mud and generally tubilated atop; in which we re∣fused to take up this Summer time, desiring more Air; and for that purpose chose the Mausolaeum of another Prophet of theirs, Shaw Rezin, in the middle of a great Grove of Elms. Under these ran a purling Brook,The Supersti∣tion of the Persians. which fed a Sacred Fishpond full of Fish Dedicated to this Tomb, as appears by their Noses and Finns being hung with Gold Rings; with which odd, and doubtless to them unvalued Adornment, they Swam up and down in the clear Water, and tamely would visit all Comers, for Meat; besides these, here were Ducks devoted to as soppish a Maintenance; which no one dare meddle with under pain of Excommunication and dread∣ful Anathema's: Which Superstitions I could not but admire to be Licensed among the Moors. As we drew nigher Spahaun,Dovecots for Salt-Petre. the Dovecots were more thick and more stately, they being covered over with a white Plaister, and neater than those we first saw: Of such concern is it to the King to preserve these. The next Day brought us to Mayar,Mayar. Twenty Miles farther, (ano∣ther Town of Country Caravans) through Gravelly, Unfruitful, but Plain way, and good to Travel. In the Afternoon therefore,Mirge. we went to Mirge, Eight Miles more, to an old lonely Inn, where was the last place we rusticated. The Morning following being met by the Citizens of Spahaun beyond the Ʋrchin Hills, Three Miles from Mirge, who Congratulating our Arrival, spread in the Highway a noble Table on Carpets furnished with the Delicacies of this Country, which is enough to commend it both for Cold Treat, Fruit, and Wine. After we had received their Complements,Met by the Citizens. they undertook to be both our Guide and Guard to Ispahaun, Three Miles farther, defend∣ing us against the unwary Insults of Thieves, with which this place is infested; being a fit place for Robbery among the undiscovered Mazes of the Mountains, especially while the Emperor is Resident with his Army; who living beyond their Pay, are often attempting to maintain their Luxury by such unlawful Enterprises. From this Avenue we had a fair Prospect of the City,A Prospect of Ispahaun. filling the one half of an ample Plain, few Buildings, (besides the High Towers of the Mosques and Palace Gates) shewing themselves, by reason of the high Chinors, or Sicamores shading the choicest of them; yet the Hills begin to keep a more decent distance, and we passed part of a spacious Field before we Saluted the City; into which we en∣tred by Two fair Rows of Elms, on each hand one, planted by the sides of the Chrystal Streams, reaching a long way through a broad Street, whose Paved Cawseys Conducted us to the River; Sic Angustiis à nobis devictis ad Augusta ferimur.
Which River was Fifty Ells wide, but not Navigable; this Summers drought having made it Fordable in many places, especially now the Emperor fills this place with his Court and confluence of Mili∣tary Men; the great Commanders and Ministers of State diverting the Channel to their own private Commodity, and for want of this Years Rains, it is hardly sufficient, (they Watering their Gardens therewith) by reason of which unkindly Nurture, both the Beauty and Goodness of the Fruit and Trees do Flag this Autumn. Here at the Foot of the Bridge waited to bid us Welcome the Jelfeline Christians,A Stately Bridge. with the several Europe Residents, as Dutch, French, Portugal, and Russian, with their respective Trains, Trum∣peters with their Ensigns, and Led Horses richly Trapped, with Shotters and Pages, besides those of our own, appearing in their greatest Glory; thus Attended we were brought over a most Mag∣nificent Bridge with Arches over our Heads, and on both sides Rails and Galleries to view the River, the Cloysters whereof were Paved with broad Marble, in which were several Niches and open Portals; the upper part was all Brick, the Foundations Black Marble with gradations to the bottom. Which led us to a stately large Street,Covered Buzzars. continued on the other side with equal Gallantry of Buildings and Trees, till we were carried under their Lofty-Ceiled and Stately-Erected Buzzars; these Edifices run∣ing into all the busy parts of the City in an almost-joined Stack of Structures, (sometimes directly, other times interfereing) not much unlike our Westminster-Hall, with Shops on either Hand, just like them, which is, I confess, the surprizingest piece of Greatness in Honour of Commerce the whole World can boast of, our Burses be∣ing but Snaps of Buildings to these famous Buzzars. Yet to let you know I am not so foppish an Admirer of Foreign Splendour, as to forget to give the due Reverence to my own Nation; they, as they exceed any thing of that kind with us, the extremity of Heat and Cold which this Country is subject to, obliging them to this Contrivance, for their Customers sake as well as their own, to defend them from the Injury of the Weather; so it would be vain in our Countrymen to attempt it, who enjoy better Houses than these dare seem to Erect; and have a Warehouse in every Shop, when these, at best, have no more to shew than their Stalls, however specious Fabricks they are shrowded under; admitting Lights by Lanthorns a-top, or open Holes, not on the sides, the better to Illustrate their Goods, and cast False Lights on them. Through these we were directed to the Midan,The Midan, or Hypodrome. or Hypodrome, an Oblong Square Court, where the Horses are Exercised before the King's Palace, and where are upper and lower Walks, with open Arches for Spectators; not Inferior, though of different Shape, to the old Amphitheatres. At the Entry the Royal Mosque,The Royal Mosque and Throne over the Palace Gate. with its variagated Marble Pil∣lars, possesses the highest end, on whose left hand runs the Front of the Palace; the Gates whereof are guarded by several Brass Basilisks, where several Chevaliers Mounted, as well as Foot Soldiers, stood
on Duty, over which is the Imperial Throne, all Covered with Gold: Regia cujus erat sublimibus alta columnis Clara micante auro.— From whence the Emperor beholds the Combats between Lions and Bulls, or Persian Rams set to run at one another; the Tournaments of the Nobles Tilting at each other, or on Coursers full Speed, stri∣ving to Shoot backward with Bow and Arrow, (after the Parthian Custom) at a Golden Bowl fixed on an high Pole, which who Hits by Fixing his Dart, is not only extolled with threefold Praise, but car∣ries the Prize away, and is taken notice of as a Candidate for the next Preferment: Where the Inferior Citizens have a share in their Diverting their Prince, by entring the list to Wrestle, and Gladia∣tors sometime have the Honour to Kill one another. Over-against this Basilick Seat,A Clock-House. a Clock-House answers it; as if it had relation to Homer's Fancy, who makes the Hours to preside over Heaven Gates, the Abode of his mighty Jove. At the lower end the Royal Exchange, or Queshery, (filled with Plate and Jewels, like our Lombardstreet) opens its folding Doors, over whose rising Porch, in stately Turrets, the King's Musick alternately resound and compleat this Noble Square, whose Court is so large, except on such Days as these, as to make room enough for a great Fair.The Exchange and English House. Through this Queshery we passed under many Fine Buzzars, till we came to our own Palace, which was a noble one, both Siras and this being the King's Bounty; nor are these mean, being as high as any bestowed, under the Blood-Royal; the Porches shining with Gilded Foliages, Architrave and Marble Pillars, as all the Pa∣laces of their Nobles do; here being resigned we returned Thanks with the best Entertainment this City could afford, before our Friends departed. Thus we accomplish'd, on the Seventh of August, a tedious Journy in the hottest Season of the Year, over desolate parching Sands, and naked Rocks, through all Persia into the heart of Par∣thia to Ispahaun, not only the Chief City of this vast Empire, where the present Emperor sets up his Standard, with all his moving Forces, but of Parthia especially; in which Itinerary the Moun∣tains never forsook us, nor for the greatest part met we with other Wa∣ter than what was Impure and Filthy, being devoid of the shelter of thick Woods, or Forests to shade us from the fultriness of the Sun; which was the worst inconvenience that pursued us till within a few Days Journy of this City; which though it appear a large Wood spread over the Plain by reason of the abundance of Orchards and Gardens, yet it wants more on that account than any other, (sending at least Twelve Days Journy for their Fuel, which is dearer than Victuals) and is Built with Brick and Mud for lack of Timber. To the Store of Provisions we carried with us, we never failed of a supply in some part where-ever we came; and for Deer, Antilope, Wild Goat, and Sheep of the Mountains, most
places made us Presents of them,Letter V. which with Young Kids is not only a Noble, but Pleasant Food. From Bunder Abassee,The Distance of Ispahaun from Bunder Gombroon. or Gombroon, to Spahaun, is Seven hundred Miles, or an Hundred seventy five Pharsangs; which we performed in Thirty two Days, abating the Time for Refreshment, and One Day for our Excursion to Persepolis. We were not long here,A Pillar of Skulls. but we must return the Civilities of those who had honoured us with their Company; when riding through the Town, we lighted on an huge stupendious Pillar, composed of the Skulls of all sorts of Creatures, occasioned by an Oath of Shaw Abas the Great (of whom they hardly speak without Idolizing his Memory, his Name being invoked when any Commendable or Fa∣mous Action is performed; saying, Shaw Abas, or Shabas, as we are wont to say, Well done;) for that the Great Men of this Place stand∣ing out against his then unsettled Authority, he vowed, That if they persisted to dispute, he would rear a vast Column of their Heads, to the eternal Reproach of their Disobedience; who after some small Capitulation, surrendred upon discretion, considering his implacable Revenge to the Obstinate, and his Natural Propensity to Clemency towards the Submissive; which was not effected so soon, but that he was forced to make use of an Equivocation to salve his Oath, commanding every one of them to bring a decollated Head of some Beast, and lay at his Feet, which accordingly they did; and he pla∣ced them into an entire Coloss, as a Monument of Obloquy to their Indifferency, and an everlasting Trophy of his subduing them. It is more than Sixty Feet in height, with a proportionable Circum∣ference enlarged about the Basis, which we could not measure, by reason of Market-Sheds built about it. Here by the King's Permission are not only allowed,Romish Friars. but nourished from the King's Table, all the Begging Friars of the Romish Order, with a small Annuity to maintain them in a Pious Manner of Life; this same Shaw Abas bestowing on them pretty Dwellings for Con∣vents, with Orchards and Gardens, which they cultivate with their own Hands, live meanly, and up to the Rules of the Poverty prescri∣bed them; gaining for that reason a Reputation and Reverence not only from the Emperor, but the well inclined Subjects; who often by the King's Example send them Meat, Bread, and other Provisi∣ons for their Sustenance, and pay them a Respect equal to their own Devotes: And I must needs confess some of them are not only Holy Men, but Discreet and Learned, the Chief of whom is Father Ra∣phael, a Capuchin, who has lived exemplary among them many Years, and is well acquainted with the Country, from whom I must own I received the best and most Authentick Information: And this I speak knowingly of him, That he is no Intruder on Mens Princi∣ples, when about to depart this Life, as most of them are, but re∣commends them to God with their own Conscience. These walk humbly about the Streets and Markets, discalceated, and in their distinct Habits, none of them mounting an Horse on∣ly the Superior of the Dominicans, who being Resident for the Portu∣gals, bears a Port suitable to that Character, and lives in a Splendid Palace, with Noble Walks and Gardens: Therein is a Magnificent
Chappel, beautified with good Painting, Sculpture, and Rich Or∣naments. Having undergone the Pompous Fatigues of Saluting, and being thereby taught the Formalities of Compliments, more than truly acquainted with the Current of Affairs here; I found it true, That an exalted Pitch of State is more tiresome than a meaner Condition, it being only a more conspicuous Confinement; for not to move abroad without a Retinue, is to have a Supervisor to every Motion, and a Man is less free either to observe or act: Wherefore being tutored before-hand what a Disrepute it was to the Nation whose Title we bore, to appear to its Disgrace, I resolved to avoid that In∣decency, and change my European Cloaths for a Persian Vest and Turbat, that I might walk about undiscovered, without any Re∣flection to the Publick Minister of my Country, and give my Eyes that Satisfaction my Ears were not capable of receiving; by which Expedient my View was less transient, and I had time to dwell lon∣ger on any Object. The first whereof that attracted my Stay,Jews are Drug∣gists. was to examine the Druggists, whom I found to be all Jews, who are very numerous, and live apart, though their Shops are in common with the Natives in the Buzzars, mixed among a Crowd of other Tradesmen; who sell by Retail, and pass without any Brand, having their Synagogues open every Sabbath day. These are the greatest Brokers, and as cunning, if not exceeding the Banyans, who also are in every Cor∣ner, lurking to make a Prize. The Fruiterers place themselves at the Entry,Fruiterers. and in the wide open Places under the Chief Cupuloes of their Buzzars, vending, besides Fruit, Sherbets of Pomgranats, Prunellaes, Limes and Oranges, with Ice and Snow to cool them. Ice dissolved in their Liquors, is as prevalent here as at Siras, so that the Poor, have they but a Penny in the World, the one half will go for Bread, and dried Grapes, or Butter-milk, and the other for Snow and Tobacco. Besides these common Buzzars,Silk Buzzars. there are others set apart for choice Commodities, as Silks and Velvets, Sarbaff, that is, Gold and Silver Cloth, Embroidery, Persian Carpets, both Woollen and Silk, inter∣mixed with Gold and Silver very costly, which are the peculiar Ma∣nufacture of the Country: In these we meet with Merchants of all Nations and Languages, brought hither for the sake of Traffick, who furnish this City with all Foreign Wares, and in exchange car∣ry the Product of this Land into the utmost Parts of the World. On which account it is,The Armeni∣ans subtle Dealers. the Armenians being skill'd in all the In∣tricacies and Subtilties of Trade at home, and travelling with these into the remotest Kingdoms, become by their own Industry, and by being Factors of their own Kindreds Honesty, the Wealthiest Men, being expert at Bargains wherever they come, evading thereby Brokeridge; and studying all the Arts of Thrift, will Travel for Fifty Shillings, where we cannot for Fifty Thomands; setting out with a stock of Hard Eggs and a Metarrah of Wine, which will last them from Spahaun to the Port; riding on a mean Beast, which they sell or ship off for Advance, their only Expence being Horse-meat; travelling with no Attendance, their Matrass serving at once for
Horse-cloth, and them to lye on; they are a kind of Privateers in Trade, No Purchase, no Pay; they enter the Theatre of Commerce by means of some Benefactor, whose Money they adventure upon, and on Return, a Quarter Part of the Gain is their own: From such Be∣ginnings do they raise sometimes great Fortunes for themselves and Masters. And from these expatiating the Terrestrial Globe,London Sack-cloth, or Woolen Cloth as cheap as in England. together with the mix'd Concourse of other Merchants from all Parts it is, that the Commodities of all the Earth are seen in distinct Buzzars in this one City, as cheap as in their separate Homes. For beholding the Sack-cloth Buzzar, for so they call English Cloth, I thought it exceeded Blackwell-Hall, or any Cloth-Fair in England, being piled in huge Quantities both in their Shops around the Buzzar, and Heaps amidst thereof, of all Sorts, Colours, and Conditions; where I bought a Coat of Broad-Cloth to line with Furrs against the Winter, for Fourteen Shillings the Cobit, almost equal with our Yard, for what I am sure I have paid Twenty Shillings the Yard at home. Whereby it was easy to guess,English Cloth and Tin come to a Bad Mar∣ket. that the Company's Broad-Cloth came to a Bad Market, the Merchants bringing it in Truck for their Goods cheaper from the Mediterranean, than the Company could send it, of which at present there is a great Glut: Nor will their Tin fare much better, for that Tuthinage brought from the South-Seas answers in all respects, if not surpasses the finest of that Metal. From hence I went to the Caravan Ser Raws,The Caravans of the City. stately huge Fabricks of Brick and Stone, bigger than our Inns of Court, but far more uniform, being Three or Four Stories high, with Walks and Galleries; every Country has a separate one, where they lodge whole Caphalaes for Sale of Indian Cloth, Turkish, Arabian, European, and all manner of Goods from the Four Quarters of the Universe. Here they Rent the Warehouses and Apartments, not Let them out at free-cost, as up∣on the Roads: The King and Queen, as they have built Royal Ones, receive from them a great Annuity: Some of these Caravan Ser Raws with their Goods and Chapmen, resemble most our Leadenhall Mar∣ket and Market-house (not for the Shambles there, which is be∣yond any other, but) for Hides and Leather from Bulgaria, Turky, and of their own dressing, which excels that we call Spanish, or the best Cordevan for Fineness, and Shagreen for Durableness; for Bri∣dles, Harnesses, Boots, and Shooes, here are beyond compare. The next great Buildings are the Balneos,Balneos. to which they go with as much Devotion as to their Temples, not permitting any Hetero∣dox to their Opinion, to Bathe with them. Their Coffee-houses,Coffee-houses. as they are more publick, are fine Rooms, shining with Lamps in all their Buzzars. Nor can we forget another sort of Black Traders, burning Light at Noon day,Necroman∣cers. which are the Necromancers, whose Shops are bestuck with Candles lighted in every Hole, who pretend to unravel the Secrets of Nature, to discover Things lost, help the foolishly-inqui∣sitive to the Sight of their Absent Lovers, and by their Art can command Fate, and prophesy all things to wheedle their Admirers; which is so general, that they have Proselytes of all Qualities and Degrees.
In their high Buzzars no Bakers or Cooks are allowed;Chap. VI. and from all but their own separate Stalls, are banished Poulterers and Butchers. Colleges, Schools, and Temples, are very Magnificent; which will admit of a compleater Discussion in the General Account of this Country. CHAP. VI. Carries us to Jelfa; where is treated of the Gabers, or Original Persians, the Armenians, Georgians, and Europe Artisans. IN the Interim therefore I shall attend the Agent to Jelfa, the Abode of the Armenian Christians, from whence they receive the Name of Jelfalines: We pass to this City through two or three of the Palace-Yards, by a great Gate that brought us to a long Walk planted on both sides with high Sycamors, aspiring like the lofty Cedar, whose Roots are washed with two Streams all the length of it. In the middle is a neat Bridge, built more politely than the other (though the Water has long since forsook the Channel): Leaving the Bridge on the left, we cross the old bottom of the River to the Town, situate in the same manner Southwark is from London. Here inhabit not only Armenians, but the Ancient Gabers, who remain here with their Tribes; with some Mechanick French (as Jewellers, Gunsmiths, and Watchmakers); and some few Musslemen, as Spies rather than Inmates. Of the Armenian Christians here are more than Six thousand Families,6000 Families of Armenians in Jelfa. besides an innumerable Company of dispersed Husband∣men in the Villages, following their Patriarch in the same Faith. The French are all Calvinists. The Gabers,The Gabers the Old Persi∣ans. or Gaures, are the true Persian Race, the undoubted Heirs both of their Gentilism and Succession, attributing Divine Honour to the Fire, maintaining it always alive in their Delubriums, or Places set apart for their Worship; and if by Chance they should let it go out, they must take a Pilgrimage to Carmania; where their most Sacred Fire was never extinguished, as if it were a Piacular Wickedness to attempt the renewing of it elsewhere, that being preserved by a more than Vestal Care, from the first time the Sun, their Chief Deity, was pleased to enlighten it with Sparks from its own Rays. The Men and Women are clad with long Vests and Breeches to their Heels, the Hair of the Men appearing under their Caps or Bonnets; the Women have a long Mantle, and are bound about the Head with an Hair-lace, like the Description Curtius gives of those conquered after the Ruin of Persepolis, who bound their Heads with the Slings they used to slay the Venison they fed on, straggling on the Mountains, and kept in Dens and Caverns of the Earth, which made it a matter of great difficulty to overcome them.
These seem to me the most lively Representations of the Figures both on the Rocks, and on the Palace it self at Persepolis: These are Instances how momentary the Grandeur of this World is: These, once the Lords of all the Earth that the Ocean washes on this Side, and the Hellespont shuts in on the other, forgetful of the Everlasting Name of the Grand Cyrus, who first subjugated the Medes and Assyrians under the Persian Yoak, and established the Seat of the Empire among their Renowned Ancestry: These, un∣happy for their Sloth and Cowardise, are the reproachful Relicks, nay, Dregs rather of the former Glory of their Name and Nation, which once gave her Laws, as Unalterable Decrees to all People, Nations, and Languages: These thus dwindled and degenerated, are the miserable Posterity of the Persians; who for so many Ages have with a tame Patience submitted by a sordid Servitude to those whom their Forefathers would have scorn'd to have admitted to be their Slaves; only that they might idely enjoy their Country Gods, Adore the Eternal Fire, and the Influence of the Sun upon their Al∣tars, now Beastly and Impious more than ever, because they have contaminated them with the Impure Rites and Diabolical Customs of the worst of Pagans. For there are some of them Couple together in their Sacred Feasts (as they term them) promiscuously,Their Impure Feasts. when they meet in their Delubriums; where they spread a clean Table-cloth on the Floor, on which they place their Banquets to inflame their Lascivious Hear, which must be acknowledged to be set on Fire by Hell, whatever the Extract that they Worship as a Spark of the Sun, may be defended to be. When they take away, they strew the foul Cloth with Meal-Flower, and the better to perpetrate their Incestuous Lusts, they put out the Lights, and shifting themselves stark naked, both Men and Women, the Men cast their Breeches on an heap in a Cor∣ner of the Room: Which being done, the Women run in the dark to catch as catch can; and whatever Lot they light on, the Lamps being again lighted, they firmly embrace for their Lover, if it be Father or Brother, or any other Relation: And which is still worse, the Night being spent in Bestiality, the nasty Flower (which by their Filthiness either of Vomit or Excrement in which they wallow∣ed like Brutes) is kneaded into a Past, and eaten as a Sacrament to re∣peat the same ungodly Festival Annually, as if it were a Sacrifice well-pleasing to their Deities. But Propagation after this kind is as odi∣ous to Mankind, as offering Children to Moloch, or making them run through the Fire is execrable and abhorrent to Nature: Which made an Ancient Heathen, in detestation of such horrid Crimes offered as grateful Services to the Gods, burst out into this Exclamation: Eve∣ry one indeed ought to have a Sense of Religion, and a profound Vene∣ration for their Country-Gods transmitted by Tradition; but that the Immortal Gods should be appeased or pleased with such Wickedness, is the highest Frenzy to believe. From these, those of India have learnt the same Principles of Reli∣gion; and hence it is they agree in their Ceremonies of exposing their Dead in an open Sepulcher, to be torn in pieces by Birds of Prey, and to adore the Sun as a Chief Being, and, subordinate to it,
the Four Elements; and here, as there, they are Preferred to no higher Employments than to Cultivate the Earth as Villains, not Inheritors. Out of the Women are chosen Whores,Their Wo∣men are Co∣medians. or Dancers for the Court, and Comedians for the Emperor; who by Gesture, Voice, or Shew, are Licensed to utter things Prophane, Lewd, and Ridi∣culous to Chast Ears; only to move the itching Vanity of the Cour∣tiers, indulging themselves in Obscenity. They Feed on Flesh, Live Nastily; whereby that of Ovid is appropriated to them, Trux caper in alis; being of a Goatish Smell, as well as of a Rampant Temper, that they are rather an Antidote than Provocative to Lechery; so much fallen are they from their primitive Worth, according to the Observation of the Lyrick Poet: Aetas Parentum, pejor Avis, tulit Nos nequiores mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Our Fathers Life much worse than Grandsires Age, Sees us more Wicked to produce An Offspring fuller of Abuse. Contrary to what has been reported by a Laureat in their Com∣mendation: Ille penes Persas Magus est qui sidera norit, Qui scit herbarum vires cultumque deorum, Persepoli facit ista Magos sapientia triplex. He 'mong the Persians was a Wise Man thought, Who knew the Stars and Worship'd as he ought, Was Skill'd in Plants, and Virtues of them Taught. Proper Names among them, are Cusset, Biram, Rustam, but the most general is Asa; whereupon I shall let them pass with this Re∣mark, Whether we mayn't here find the Industrious Mr. Shering∣ham's Labour in search of Truth answer'd in his far-fetch'd Asae; Asa being the Commonest Name among the Gabers, whom he makes the Companions of Woden in his German Expedition; which still confirms our Assertion, both of the World's being Repeopled from the Scythian Mountains, and of these being Allied to our First Plan∣ters, however Degenerate they now appear. Among this Off-scum left to upbraid their Predecessors, are placed the Armenians, who are forced to comply to an over-ruling Fate, out of the same necessity that attends the Chance of War, but with a better reserve to their Virtue, which is not altogether so much depressed. Though the State,The Armeni∣ans have a Ci∣vil Governor of their own, as well as one of the Moors. for publick Ends, think it convenient to inter∣sperse Moors among them, as the Egyptians wisely enough did Task-Masters over the Israelites in the Land of Goshen, to suppress, by a timely foresight, what might prove irremediable by an overgrowing
Strength; wherefore one of the Suffean Creed is Constituted Go∣vernor, to put an end to those Differences they cannot Compose themselves; who have for that purpose a Civil Magistrate of their own, Elected Yearly, to whose Arbitriment, if they submit not, it is their own sault, nor can it be by any means imputed to the Tyranny of the Government, who leave them freely to try their own Causes. For so it was provided by Shaw Abas when he deprived them of their own Princes,They are un∣der Protecti∣on of the Em∣press since their Tran∣splanting to Jefa. and redeemed them from the Turkish Slavery; between whose Arms and the Persians, they hung miserably harras∣sed, according to the Successes of eithers Forces, for a long time; removing them from Erewan, Taberez, and Syria, their Native Soil, he Transplanted them to Jelfa, and shaded them under the Protection of the Queen-Mother, asserting thereby their Rights and Privileges in an higher manner (abating some little Circumstances) than the Moors themselves; by which they became not only safe from their Enemies, but they improved the Glory of Spahaun by their unwearied Industry, there being many of them Credible Mer∣chants at this time, accounted worth an Hundred thousand Tho∣mand (each Thomand being Three Pound and a Noble); so mightily do they increase under this Umbrage, in Riches and Freedom; for whilst they sit lazily at Home, their Factors abroad in all parts of the Earth return to their Hives laden with Honey; to which Exer∣cise, after they themselves have been brought up, they train their Children under the safe Conduct of Experienced Tutors, who instruct them first to Labour for a Livelihood, before they are permitted to Expend. Thus this Prince not only expressed himself a good Patron, but a prudent Emperor, by Favouring their Designs, and taking all Occa∣sions from their Adversaries of Injuring them, exposed as they were to open Violence; and at Home Securing them from the Treachery and Envy of his own Subjects; not only allotting them a place over-against his own Palace to Build their City, but encouraging them to Rear Costly and well Endowed Temples, without any Molestation, to the Honour of the Blessed Name of Christ; shaking off thereby the dreadful fear of Captivity, they began to hope for better things, than they could promise themselves in their distressed Condition. Atque illi primum sperare salutem Sic Ausi, afflictis melius confidere rebus. Nor was this hope founded on a vain confidence; for he distinguished them neither in Habit, Excise, or Custom, from his own Persians, only excepting in one thing,Their being forbid Coleons the cause of Apostatizing. small and inconsiderable in its self, being but an exterior piece of Honour; for it is not lawful, even for those of the best Rank, to Ride into Spahaun with their Servants bearing after them their Coleons, or Glass Vessels, out of which they Smoak To∣bacco, by a long Reed, or Cane, fixed into Golden, Silver, or Brass Heads, with other Magnificent Appendices, carried stately behind them, invented to signalize Men of better Fortune among them; and
only forbid the Armenians; whereby letting them know, however Blessed they are with this World's Goods, yet they were to appear in the Royal City only as Merchants: Which thing, how silly and trivial it is in reality, and to Wise Men is but an wholesome Admo∣nition, yet it has been but too often the ground of Apostatizing from their Heavenly Institution; it seeming a Curb to Ambitious and Aspiring Spirits, who prefer the Pleasures and Pomp of this Life, short and uncertain as they are, before those more Permanent in the Assurance of the Life to come; and are as little in love with their own Country Manners, as they are tenacious of the Religion of their Forefathers; shipwrecking thereby, Faith and a good Conscience, for the affectation of the adulterate and glossy Customs in esteem among the Persians, to which indeed they generally incline. On which score it is their Women are little conversant with the Men,They Restrain their Women. so that Women here, (more than any where else) are truly Women, and nothing more; the Men here being unexpert how far the Friendly Offices, a Graceful Mein, and Innocent Discourse, wins among more refined Christians from the becoming Behaviour of that Sex. In heaping up Riches they stoop to any base means,Their Tem∣per. for they arise from the most avaritious Temper: In their Profuseness they are rather Specious and for Shew, than Generous. They have sumptuous Houses, Enriched either by being Mer∣chants, or Interpreters to Foreign Ministers, they being addicted to Learn Languages; few care for Manual Arts, or Mechanick Trades, though some apply themselves to Husbandry. They are great Revellers, and like long Feasting; have as much Religion as serves their turn: Their Rusticks are truly such; and such as are employed in necessary Vocations and inferior Callings, are Sluttish and Slothful. Their Speech, as well as Character, is their own, and if it bor∣row any thing, it is from the Greek; by which it is polished from its Barbarity, and reduced to a more Modish Dialect. Established thus by the King's Favour, they cannot but be excited as a grateful return to the Disposer of the Hearts of Kings, and the Giver of all things, to pay a Tribute of their Increase in Build∣ing and Adorning stately Churches to that God who is King of kings, and Lord of lords; bestowing largely both towards their Beautifying in every kind, as being sufficiently stored with the best Patterns, as well as precious Substance, by their constant Tra∣velling and rich Adventures, as also towards a plentiful Allowance. By whose Munificence and Charge,Thirteen Pa∣rish Churches, a Cathedral, and Convents. besides Colleges and Con∣vents for Monasticks, are Thirteen Parish Churches, and a Cathe∣dral, whose Description shall serve for all: The Majesty of the Mo∣ther-Church at Jelfa, rises not to that Loftiness, either to Offend the Eyes with its Splendor, or to create a Jealousy, from its prodigious Structure, of another Tower of Babel; but keeps the mean, as truly becomes the place separated for the Service of the only True God; not so spacious as neat, leaning on Four Pillars, which bear an Oval Lanthorn, or Crown, over the Center of the Dome, by which the chief Lights are transmitted to the rest of the Building, and by
them the Temple divided into four parts; the first whereof is almost all taken up by the High Altar, Garnished with the Images of the Blessed Mother, and the Holy Child Jesus, unless a small Ascent left for the Singers, the Bishops Chair, and for Persons of Quality among them; the Side-Wings and the Middle half way down the Nave, being left for the Men; all the rest is Occupied by the Women, even to the very Folding Doors of the Temple; the Roof or Vault of the Arches, the Side-Walls and Posts of the Cathedral, are all Painted with Sacred Histories; and had it not been for fear of the Moors, after the Decease of their Patron Shaw Abas, who envied them so Magnificent a Pile, they would have known no measure to the desire of enlarging, nor could have ever thought it venust enough, whilst they abounded with Pious Benefactors; but to this Enterprize there wanted not Obstructions, even in their own Bowels. For every perverse Apostate, on any pretence of Quarrel among themselves, to obtain an unjust Victory over his Antagonist, has no more to do, but throw away his Soul, Renounce his Saviour, be Cut, and made a Musselman; offering himself a Sacrifice to his Malice, Pride, and Revenge, and thence of a Convert, becomes an implacable Enemy to Christianity; and endeavouring to shew him∣self a sincere Prosylite, grows a great Bigot for his new Profession, and the more to ingratiate himself with Antichrist, studiously bends himself to the Ruin of that Church he deserted; whence follows an assured Spoil, and Sacrilegious Rapin, when he declares the exu∣berant Treasure, the vast Profuseness and Prodigality of the Chri∣stians on their Churches, concluding all with an Invective against their Idolatrous Worship: However such as pertinaciously adhere to the true Doctrine of Christ, and the received Ceremonies of the Armenian Church (their Nobility by the Hardship of War being long since extinct) acknowledge Three Patriarchs as Head in Eccle∣siastical Affairs, though Anciently they had but one Patriarch, Pri∣mate of all Armenia, and Successor to St. Gregory. For upon the Glorious Ascent of our Lord Jesus Christ into Heaven,St. Bartholo∣mew, and St. Thadaeus, first Preach'd the Gospel in Armeni. the Holy Apostles, St. Bartholomew and St. Thadaeus, in pursuance of the Commission they had received by the Inspiration of the Divine Spirit, with the rest of the Apostles, to go and Teach the Gospel to all Nations, had their Lot to be Missionaries in the Regions of Armenia; where they compleated their Martyrdom under Sanatrughio the King of the Armenians, who Slew them, not before they had gained many Disciples. From which time,St. Gregory the first Patriarch. Two hundred Years being past, arose the Va∣liant Champion for the Christian Faith, St. Gregory, the true Inheri∣tor of the Apostolick Seat; in whose Days 'tis unspeakable to de∣clare what streams of Blood of the Evangelical Martyrs watered the Armenian Earth, before the ever-to-be Canonized Patriarch St. Gre∣gory could bring forth the budding Fruit of the Gospel to perfect Maturity. In Mount Ararat, under the Persecution of Dioclesian and Maxi∣minian, fell Ten thousand to the Lust of the Tyrants, besides many others in other places. The Holy Patriarch himself is said to suffer
Fifteen Years Maceration in a Well, where he was privately relieved by the daily Charity of a poor Godly Woman, who cast therein a piece of Bread for his constant Sustenance, when it was believed on all hands that he had been dispatch'd by the cruel Commands of Ty∣ridates; who reflecting afterwards with Remorse on his rash Precept, took him from that stinking Dungeon, and endured his Reproof for his Bestiality towards the Good Man, and became an hearty Penitent for his inhuman Usage, and other Prevarications of his Life, and from a Salvage Prince rendred himself a tame Follower of the Pa∣triarch St. Gregory, who ruled the Church Thirty Years: From whom the Armenians received their Consecrated Bishops, Priests, and Monastick Orders, called Vortobeeds, who profess Celibacy, and are as much as to say, Masters, going out with the Formality of a Pastoral Staff and Bible; who are generally such Teachers whose Cogency of Practice and Instruction no other Church surpassed, while they held the Orthodoxy of their Founder. Which might still have continued,False Do∣ctrines spread among them. had not that Instigator of Ills, and Stirrer up of Strife, by his restless and mischievous Machinati∣ons purposely forbid its Durance, by maliciously sowing Tares among the Wheat: Whence sprang up so many Monsters without Heads, blown up by Eunomians and Apollinarians, and that Pestilent Arian Heresy which spread its Infection over the whole Face of the Chri∣stian Churches, maintaining, That God the Son was not of the same Substance, , with God the Father; which after it was crept in here, Arastarces, the Son and immediate Successor of St. Gre∣gory, although he was present at the Nicene Council for that purpose, could not by all his Pains and Endeavours repel. After whom (the space of Sixty or Seventy Years being first spent) St. Basil illuminated the lower Armenia. In the Time of Sourmach, false Patriarchs were foisted on them by the Mandates of the Persian Kings, when some began to celebrate the Nativity of our Saviour on one and the same Day with the Epi∣phany, which is on the Sixth of January; and that while John Chry∣sostom, the Golden-Tongued Orator, survived. About this time there flourished in Armenia a Famous Learned Hermit, called Mesrob, who first disposed the Languages of the Georgians as well as Armenians, into their proper Alphabets, with an admirable Exactness and Accuracy. In the Year of our Redemption Four hundred thirty five,Nierses Pacri∣veruanus call'd a Synod, and separated them from the Greek Church. Four Years after the Ephesian Synod, (in which the Writings of Theodo∣rus Mopsuistius, and Diodorus the Tharsian, from whom Nestorius sucked the Poyson of his pernicious Opinions, were publickly con∣demned;) by Command of the Emperor of Persia, Nierses Pacri∣veruanus called a Synod at Thevin, where by a Decree passed by the greater Suffrage, it was confirmed, That the Nativity and Baptism should be kept on the same Day; giving this Reason, That as Christ was conjointly God and Man, so it was fit the Festival of his Birth and Baptism should be jointly observed on one and the same Day, and not separately on two Days; which Synod also added to the Hymn of the Trisagium now used in the Greek Church, , , ; Qui crucifixus pro
nobis; Holy, Holy, Holy, Almighty and Immortal God, who was cruci∣fied for us,The Acephali Sectarians. have Mercy upon us: Forbidding the Armenians to go to Jerusalem on Pilgrimage, or to unite with the Greek Church. Where∣upon ensued the over-running of these Parts in those Days with the abominable Weeds of False Doctrine of the Acephali Sectarians, said to be without an Head, because none is known to be their Author, or else because they owned no Bishops: They acknowledged two di∣stinct Natures in Christ, so confounding their Properties, as a Drop of Vinegar dropped into the Sea, loses its Qualities: Which Headless Sect sprung up in the East at first, and opposed one another with many Armed Heads; but afterwards confederated upon the Death of the Sacrilegious Diascorus, whom they villanously defended, contra∣ry to the Sacred Synod held at Chalcedon. This Blast pestered not only the inferior Syria, but spread its deadly Effects over all Egypt, by the Contagion Severus Bishop of Antioch had sucked in, from whom they were denominated Severians: And as the Saying is, Ill Weeds grow with speed, so from the same Root grew that horrible shap'd and preposterous Julian Birth, from whom came the Julia∣nists; and from their several ill-begetting Sires, the Gaunits, Theodo∣sians, Bersanians; and at last the most deformed of all, by the unhap∣py Labour of Jacob the Syrian, was produced the Jacobites, who jumbling together with the Acephali and Monosyphites, they confess the One Nature in Christ to be compounded of Two after the Uni∣on: With the Theodosian Theopassits, they assert the Divinity of our Saviour to be Passible; and with the Julianists, Gaianists, and Apthar∣docits, affirm the Body of Christ to be altogether Corruptible; from whence they are nicknamed Corrupticulae and Phantaistae. Under Abraham Rusidianus,The Georgians depart from the Armenians. the Iberians, now called Georgians, de∣parted from the Armenians, and embracing the Chalcedonian and Ephesian Councils, were reconciled to the Greek Church. In the Year of our Redemption, 551, Moyses Arcazuodanus placed the Turkish Computation in the Armenian Kalender, which began about this Time; which number, if it be added to the Thousand of the Armenians, makes out their Gregorian Account, which they follow, and not that of our Lord. In the Reign of this Patriarch, while the Universal Church were busied in corroborating the Four General Councils, to wit, the Nicene, Con∣stantinopolitan, Ephesian, and Chalcedonian, Armenia was employed in resisting and opposing their Determination. When was revived that filthy Sect of the Manechites; which sort of Hereticks had inhabi∣ted Armenia before, receiving their Name from a Persian, who was called Manes; he denied the Trinity and the Old Testament, and held Two Principles, the one of Good, and the other of Evil: By whose Inauspicious Influence, and the Incursions of the Saracens and Tartars invading and subduing the Persians, all the hopes of recon∣ciling the Grecian Church, and extirpating those Heresies, vanished. But on the contrary,The Patriar∣chate branch∣ed into Three Divisions. in Process of Time they withdrew from their Primitive Patriarch, into the setting up of Two more; so the See of St. Gregory became divided, and they despised the Holy Well of Va∣garsciebat; for at Erewan, near Taberez, or Taurus, they translated the Metropolitan; which gave occasion to the Bishop of Sis to set
up for Patriarch at Sis in Cilicia; and the Monastry of Causabar plead∣ing Antiquity, lying towards Candahar, on that Prescript refused Obedience to any but their own Patriarch. By which Seraphick Triumvirate they are now governed, own∣ing no other Head of the Church. But before we descend into the particular Tenents still maintained by them, it will not be amiss to note, That from the Time of St. Gre∣gory to this Division, was Four hundred twenty five Years, in which there were Thirty three Patriarchs, agreeable to their own Annals; I having herein consulted their own unbiass'd Chronologers, and by their Authority corrected Galenus, when tripping in Partiality to the Papal Authority.   Years St. Gregory 30 Aristarces 7 Verthanes 5 Hesechius 6 Parnierssh 5 1 Nierses 34 1 Isaac 4 Zaven 4 Asburaches 5 Surmach 6 Joseph 2 Chyut 15 1 John 12 Samuel 5 Guodanus 6 2 Isaac 5 1 Christopher 5The Successi∣on of their Patriarchs. Leontius 2 2 Nierses 5 2 John 15 Moyses 30 Abraham 23 3 John 26 Chomitas 8 2 Christopher 5 Jeser 10 3 Nierses 20 Anastasius 6 Israel 6 3 Isaac 29 Elias 24 The Series after this Succession of Patriarchs, as it was immediate∣ly puddled with the Mud of Heresy, so it often was disturbed by the Imposition of the Secular Power, forcing not only Ignorant but Ungodly Men upon them; who now at this Time have their Conge d' Eslire from a Prince of another Religion, and many times purchase it by Simoniacal Contracts: So that the Purity of Christianity can∣not be expected, where Gain is made of Godliness, and these high Cures of Souls are bought and sold; entring upon them with the Emperor's License, not the Approbation of their own Clergy; not by Desert and Merit, but by Fraud and Circumvention: And where∣as Humility and Godliness, Learning and Ingenuity, should be the Qualifications, now Pride and Envy, great Gifts with Stupidity are exalted: And which is most deplorable, generally such Men are put into the Patriarchates as are most odious to them; whence it comes to pass, that these Prelates have as little Integrity as Orthodoxy, they favouring the Jacobites even to this day. They are confident in the Superstitious Omens of the Heathens.Their Te∣nents. Judaize in the Choice of Meats, not eating Conies or Pork. Assert the One Nature in Christ, according to Dioscorus.
Hold that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, according to the Error of the Greek Church. That the Souls of Saints departed enter not into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor of the Wicked into Hell, but are in the Middle Region of the Air, expecting the Day of Judgment. And therefore Pray for the Dead. Detest the Council of Chalcedon. They have Five Sacraments, leaving out Confirmation and Ex∣treme Unction, which makes theirs less by Two than the Papists. They buy and sell the Sacraments of the Church for a Price. The Clergymen Merchandize. They make Divorces for Money. The Substance of the Deceased fall into their hands, till the Right Heir redeem them. They administer the Sacraments to Children, before the Use of Right Reason. They deny the Superiority or Primacy to the Romish Church, and they use this Interrogation for an Argument, Why rather That than the Church of Antioch, in which City we were first called Christians, by the Preaching of St. Peter? They are against Purgatory. For which reason the Romanists affix the Error of the Abassins upon them, Of Cauterizing when they Baptize Infants, or initiate any into the Church; according to the Words of St. John, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; taking the Words literally: Wherefore the Abassins, not the Armenians, are called St. John's Christians. They distribute the Eucharist in both kinds to the People, in Com∣memoration of the Body of Christ, dipping the Wafer into the Wine and Water mixed together, and then give it to the Commu∣nicants. They wrap the Word of God in a clean Piece of Silk, which when the Priest unfolds, he kisses the Bible, and bows: The like Ceremony is used at the Elevation of the Host, which he gives to all alike to salute, as also both the Testaments. These are the Customs and Opinions divulged and maintained by their Patriarchs,The Patri∣archs install'd with Pomp. to whom great Honour is paid; being introduced into their several Sees as well by the Pomp of the Moors as the Solem∣nity of the Christians: The Cauns of the Provinces conducting them with all their Train, and Forces of Horse and Foot, with Banners flying, and loud Musick resounding, great Guns discharging, and all the Expressions of Joy congratulating their Instalment, and the King's Favour towards them. The Clergy meet them in their several Habits; the Laity also shew their Gallantry, and the Patriarchs themselves are in their Holy Vest∣ments, Rich Copes, Mitres, and Crosiers, beset with inestimable Jewels. They are distinguished from the Bishops by wearing Rings on their Fingers, embellished with Diamonds, whereas the Bishops wear only plain Gold Rings. Their Pontificals being put off, they walk in a Black Gown with a Mitred Hood and Pastoral Staff, as do the Vortobeeds, who are the learned'st and best esteem'd of all their
Orders, and in absence of the Patriarch and Bishops exercise all the Pontifical Functions: These are Eloquent Preachers in their Pulpits; these only vow Chastity, and what is more strict, endure not the sight of a Woman; and if in the Street by chance they meet one, they presently turn their Backs; and if they have any Business in that part of the Church allotted them by Custom, they commit not themselves to them, but cause them to be drove away, before they will read the Service. At Jelfa some Forty of these live a Celibate Life,The Vortobeeds or Monasticks. at the Monastry joining to the Cathedral, in Cells and Cloysters, with an Archbishop of the same Order, faring hardly, and living devoutly. The Archbishop of Jelfa submits his Province to the Patriarch of Vagarsiabat;The Archbi∣shop. he is a goodly Reverend Old Man, snowed with Age, but not worn with it; he has a Countenance of Sanctity apparent in his Looks, worthy the Gravity of so Eminent a Dignity. The other Orders of the Clergy,Their Clergy marry. whether Priests, Deacons, Ca∣nons, or Choristers, use Christian Liberty in respect of Matrimony, it being disallowed none but the Vortobeeds: They are distinguished no other ways from the Rusticks, than their wearing Blue Vests, Turbats, and Tunicks, as they do, unless a long Cloak, or Gown of Black over all, points them out to be an Armenian Father, or an Ec∣clesiastick in Orders: They are shaved as the Romans are, and unco∣ver their Heads in Salutation; they are constant Frequenters of their Churches, and have Lamps always burning in them; and every one takes his turn in the Order of the Priesthood, to wait Day and Night in the Temples, according to the Mosaick Institution, to whom are appointed Lodgings adjoining to their Churches; at other Times they live with their Families in the City: Every one approaching them pays them a Reverence, and begs their Blessing, kissing the Hem of their Garments, which the Priests return to the Vortobeeds, the Vortobeeds to the Bishops, and the Bishops to the Patriarchs. Having been present at their Masses for the Dead, for Infants in Baptism, and for the Husband and Wife new-married; I shall thence take occasion to relate in short their Banquets, Fasts, and Ceremo∣nies used on their Celebrating these Rites. We shall begin with their first Admission into the Pale of the Church.Baptism. While they are at Divine Service a proper Mass is said, when the Midwife or Nurse brings the Child to Church, with a Tribe of Women, where she delivers it to the Godfather, who carries it to the Minister waiting at the Font on the Right Side beneath the Altar, who unwinding the Swathes, receives the Infant naked, and his Thumb being anointed with consecrated Oyl or Balsom, signs it with the Sign of the Cross, not only on the Forhead, but on the Breast and Back, Feet and Arms, and all the other Parts of the Bo∣dy: After this, pouring of the same Chrysm into the warm Water in the Font, reciting some special Prayers, and dipping the Crucifix into it, it becomes an Hallowed Bath, in which the Babe is washed all over by the Priest: When it is taken out, it is crossed from Head to Foot, and spitting into the Ears and Eyes it is dismiss'd with an Amulet hung at its Breast for Eight Days, as a Charm against Witch∣craft,
and restored to the Women to be cloathed. The Mass being done, the Guests return to the House of the Parents, with a Noise of Musick before them, and the Choir in Procession singing Anthems, where they all make merry before they depart. If it be a Girl it is Espoused immediately after Baptism, to prevent its being sent for into the Haram by the Emperor, who pretends a Power over them to chuse for his own use out of those not betrothed. The great Festivity of the Birth and Baptism of our Saviour, ob∣served on the 6th of January, is celebrated with Rites of the like na∣ture, for they consecrate the Tank or Cistern, filled with Water and Odoriferous Oyls, which, after the Sacrament received, is given out among the People with great Clamour and Striving. This Solemnity has been so Splendid, that the Emperors and the Court were wont to honour it with their Presence, when they were entertained with Interludes, and Representations of the Birth, the Morning being ushered in with Vocal and Instrumental Musick, with Millions of Flambeaus, and shewing the Angels and Shepherds, with the Heavenly Host, Singing praises to God on high, and good will towards Men. When this was performed, the Rich Merchants strove to express their Sense of these Favours, by inviting them to extraordinary Ban∣queting and Feasting; and after Expensive Repasts, the River being consecrated for the purpose, the Ceremonies of Baptism were per∣formed, when notwithstanding it is extreamly cold, those of Riper Years were baptized, and swam about for the Diversion of the Court; concluding all with a Night of Jollity. The modestest account of which Pranks must be, The Hopes of gaining Proselytes by such Shews, rather than to expose their most Holy Religion to the Contempt of Infidels, out of any Design or In∣terest; otherwise this Practice admits of a scandalous Interpretation: But alas! it is too true in the affirmative, That in India among the Idolatrous it might take, but among those that abhor all manner of Forms and Shapes in their Worship, it turns to the Reproach, and not Advancement of Christianity. The next thing after being Baptized,Matrimony. is to commit Matrimony, the only way they have of propagating their Faith; it being a Pu∣nishment no less than Capital, to attempt by any means to persuade a Mussleman to abjure his besotted Fancy concerning their False Pro∣phet; but that is not so much the Reason, as prevailing Custom, which has from Age to Age led them to marry their Children very young; chiefly because the Advantage made by their Bargain is not of such Concern as in Europe, where Portion, more than Honesty of the Family, is considered; but here the greatest Dowry is the Credit of the Relations, and the Women not the Men make the Price, they being Mistresses of nothing more than their Beauty and Virtue; so that they never are snatch'd up for their Great Fortunes, however Wealthy their Parents are, they being wholly at their Disposals who make the Matches, without the Courtship or Knowledge of the Cou∣ple to be married; wherefore they are entred into that sort of Life before they know how to get out of it; for they rarely pass their
Childhood before they are tied in that indissoluble Band; whence some Excuse may be made, for the Priests so frequently taking Mo∣ney to Unmarry them; a thing I have heard more than once wish'd for in other Countries, but in vain; though they promise to be as liberal to the Parson who had that Knack, as any one grieved with the Gout, would be to the Physician who had an infallible way to Cure that Distemper. The Ceremonies enjoined by the Church are agreeable enough to the Romish Institution: Returning home, the Wedded Pair are kept close up together for Forty Days, loaded with Rosaries and Images, and none suffered to come at them, that are Strangers, nor the Womankind to speak to any but their Husband; lest an evil Tongue should have a Sorcerous effect, or a bad Eye should Inchant their fu∣ture Bliss. This Quadragessimal Restraint being over (if no Fast intervene, of which their Church is full) they prepare themselves to Cele∣brate the Nuptials with their Kindred, which is on this manner: The Eldest of the Family on the Husband's side, opens the Festival by first Inviting the Guests to the Marriage Feast, where the Bride∣groom appears in a mean Dress and poorly Habited, till the Priests have received Richer Habiliments of the Grandfathers, or Eldest Uncles Gift, and brought them covered into the middle of the Guest Chamber, where they Sanctify them and Bless them for his use, the Youth standing by; to verify what Paladius used for a Pro∣verb, Investem Puerum quasi imberbem, when he called a Beardless Boy by the Epithet of an Undressed Lad; and every one taking their Places, the Servants lay them down on the Carpets, and unwinding the Silk Embroidered for to wrap them in, discover only the Bride∣groom's Suit, with an old rusty Sword of the Family's, not worn since Shaw Abas reduced them; for in these Countries it is not the Custom that Women of good Fame, or Repute, should meet in Publick Conventions with the Men, but they Transact their own Affairs in their own House of Parliament among themselves. On the Heels of the Servants come the Clerks with their Choir, and taking the Cloaths, only one (which is all Cloth of Gold) being the uppermost Garment, is a loose Coat of London Cloth, without Sleeves, Lined with Sables to keep off the Winters Cold; when the Reverend Sages call forth the new Married Stripling, whom they place between Two Bridemen about his own Age, they all Three Kneel∣ing, while they Sing the Epithalamium, not so much as lifting up their Heads till all the Rites are finished; then they wait on the Bride∣groom into another Room, whither his Robes are carried, and when he is shifted, he returns attended by his Bridemen; when every one of them Salute the Hands of all that are called to this Solemnity, and, after an Ancient Custom, Invite them to take a Cold Ban∣quet among the Tombs, to put them in mind of Mortality at the same time they are contriving to continue the World. The Young Spark being lift up on Horseback, and some time carefully held on each side on Foot, leads the way to the Cavalcade, Riding in State, after a Noise of Fidlers, Drummers, Pipers, and other Lacquies, Pages, and Footmen; after whom an innumerable
Concourse of Horsemen follow to the Graves, near a Mile out of the City (among whom are some very noble Sepulchres fit to re∣ceive so great a Company) but in fair Weather they spread their Carpets, and set up their Tents near the side of a Brook, almost washing their Burial place. Here Ceres and Bacchus having shewn their good will to Venus, (for it is known without them no hearty Sacrifice is paid her) Hymen delivers out his Torches, the Sun having withdrawn his; and every one there takes a Wax Light in his Hand, and Mounting, direct themselves towards the City, in the same manner they came out, only Bonfires, Flambeaus, and Fireworks Illuminate the Road all along: Entring Jelfa, the stately Gates of their Friends and Rela∣tions, especially such as are present at the Collation, are bestuck with Tapers in divers Coloured Paper Lanthorns; which look gracefully and divert the Company with variety of Artful Fires, each striving to outvie others; and are Entertained at the same time with Wine and Sweetmeats, Drinking of Healths, and at last dismiss'd with fresh Tapers given to all the Guests. This continues in the Way to the Cathedral, where about Mid∣night the Bridegroom arriving, begs the Blessing of the Archbishop, and they hardly return to the House from whence they set out, till almost Break of Day. Where they are scarcely composed to Sleep, before the Father of the Bride knocks on the same Errand, calling the Guests to accept of a Treat at his House; where those Invited are carried into a noble open Banquetting-House in a Garden, with Tanks and Adornments very Magnificent, after their Fashion; the Room is Persumed with costly Odours, Smoaking out of Antick, Weighty, Silver Perfu∣ming Pots, or Pans; and being Seated, Voiders of Sweatmeats (with a Russian Coat, as they call it) a Dram of Brandy is set be∣fore every one; and then the Servants bring the best Raiments yet presented the Bridegroom, being the Father-in-laws, or his Repre∣sentatives; the Ceremonies are the same of the Clergy, only with this addition, the Bridemen which Kneeled yesterday, to day stand upright with flaming Flambeaus in their Hands. These Ceremonies ended, and the Sweatmeats taken off, a Table is spread, and more than twice Seven Plates are differently Modified to invite the Palate to Luxury; to which that of Muturantius, for which Juvenal Lampoons him, is a modest piece of Temperance: —Quis fercula septem Secreto cenavit Avus— But here are such loads of Provisions, that none need fear a quicker Eye than Appetite, at leisure to take notice what each Eats; for should they do nothing but devour, their Stomachs must be cloied before their Portions sink. Yet all these Preparations, with the enticing Poinant Sawces, and provoking Pickles, prevail not on the Bridegroom to fall to, till the Father-in-Law lays to his new Son's double Mess, a Purse of Gold; and this is the only thing they bear away by way of Dowry:
After this Debt is cancelled, no Cloud appears to disturb the Mirth, Eating, Drinking, and facetious Discourse is all the Business; and in earnest it is one, and a tedious one where it lavishes into such Excess. For what was reported of Old, still holds good, The Persians Drink Wine in Bowls; and they observe Gellius his Rule, de Lege Caenarum, as a Law to their Feasts, Dum libentissime edas, tunc aufer∣tur, & alia esca melior atque amplior succenturiatur, isque flos coenae ha∣betur; as if they never thought you Welcome before you had Eat like a Glutton, and Drank like a Swine: After shifting of Plates unaccountably, and every one's Health has reason done it, they take off the Table-Cloth, but not remove their Seats; Fruit, Wine, To∣bacco, and Salt Bits for a Whet, being placed before them, they continue Drinking till Midnight, being diverted by Stage-Players, Dancers, and Mountebanks all Day; nor will they themselves dis∣dain to take up a Tabor and Roar out a Song behind that, and a Flute Playing to them. At Night Fireworks begin again, having had the constant ones of the Water all the time, arising in Crowns and Garlands, with other Figures; at last they bring the News that the Matrons had dismissed the Bride Adorned with all her Wealth and Gallantry; when they rise, but proceed not till she is delivered to her Groom, who waits on her to her Horse; when they are both Mounted, the Ecclesiasticks marshal the Procession; all the Streets are Illuminated, the loud Drums and Trumpets proclaim their approach; in the Front is car∣ried a Tree full of Fruit; after it follows the Europeans, then the Ar∣menians in order; in the midst of them the Canonical Gentlemen and Boys, singing and Playing on Musical Instruments, all in their peculiar Habits, which were Rich, and the Choiristers Surplices full of Red Crosses; after these the Bride and Bridegroom, He nobly Mounted and splendidly Accoutred with Magnificent Trappings; his Horse led, and the Bride held on by Matrons, Cross-legg'd, after the Country Fashion for Women to Ride, but Vailed all over with a Saffron-coloured Vail; Lutea demissos velârunt flammea vultus. Lest if the Blushes of the Virgin Bride should be discovered, or if too high a Colour should be discerned in the Maiden Face, it may be im∣puted to the Vail, not the Floridness of the Cheeks; after all, in the close of the Procession, come the Matrons Attired in White Sheets. Nor do they go far before they repeat their Banquets, with Presents of Tapers, Sweetmeats, Squibs, Serpents and Rockets, as they pass; the Glory of this Night is always designed to pay their Respects to their Governor in Chief, who receives them very great, and grants a License for the Youth to carry his Spouse home, which he does, departing from hence to his Father's House, where the Company end their Thalasses, and leave them to Contemplate the Joys of Matrimony.
The next day, if it be a Fast, is intermitted; but the Feast holds on till the Relations have finished their Course, which is sometimes more than a Month; so profuse are they of their Time and Money on this occasion. After Marriage,Purification. of right succeeds Child-bearing, which keeps the same state in Lying in as with us, only they are something long∣er before their Purification, agreeing therein with the Jewish Account of Forty days; when they enter their Baths to Cleanse, and bring the New-born Babes with them to the Church, that the Priest may at once give his Benediction to the Infant, and the Mother return Thanks to God, who assists at their Births and their own Delivery. From these Festivals thus Celebrated at large,The Feasts and Fasts Or∣dained by their Church. it is meet we should see how those enjoined by the Church are tempered with days of Ab∣stinence, as well to fit them for the studies of Piety and Moderation, as on their Feast-days by a Christian Chearfulness, to declare to the World the excellency of their Original, and that they were Ordained as a Refreshment after sincere Humiliation and Penance. Two Days in every Week they hold a strict Fast, not only from all manner of Wine, Oil, and Butter, but from Flesh and all Nou∣rishment whatever indued with a sensitive Being; living like the Pythagoreans, on Herbs and Roots, especially the Ecclesiasticks, who Macerate themselves severely; these Days are Wednesdays and Fri∣days, unless Christmass Day, or the Baptism of our Saviour, hap∣pen on either of them: Before which they prepare themselves by a Weeks continued Fast. The Laics indeed indulge themselves with Wine, but the Clergy by no means: Their much admired St. Chrysostom has exempted Women with Child, the Infirm and Children, from the Rigour of these Observances, leaving them this as a Maxim, That Health is not to be impaired, but the Mind strengthned by a due subjection. On the Dawn of the Gospel, which had been Gloriously dis∣played by the Angels Appearance to the Shepherds tending their Flocks, we have already related the Solemnity; yet because here re∣mains a dispute among the Armenians, which Day to affix the fol∣lowing Tradition to, I shall only mention it here, and leave it to their own decision; for it is a question among them, If it be not most probable, that after the bright Phosphor of the Heavenly Host, the Shepherds Eyes might not be dazled, and for that reason wanting more than the Light of the Stars, were constrained to kindle dry Twigs, or Boughs of Trees to light them in quest of the declared Messias? However this satisfies not the Generality, but that it has many Opposers, and they say, it was on the Morning to the Purifi∣cation of the Blessed Virgin, when Old Simeon had his Age Re∣newed and became Young enough to Embrace the Child Jesus, and being Divinely Inspired, Prophesied of the Salvation of all Nations, and brought the Holy Babe in at the Folding Doors of the Temple; which, by a received Belief among the Jews, were never to be opened till those Days of Peace should come wherein Christ should appear; the Novelty of which Accident being spread about the City of Jeru∣salem, all sorts of People came flocking before day with such com∣bustible Torches, to be Witnesses of the truth: On which day
therefore it being more universally received, the Armenian Divines and Interpreters of these Mysteries appoint Fires to be kindled in their Churches, and Annually rejoice for that they have found their Lord and Master. On the 13th of January, for a less Apocryphal Story, they pro∣claim a Fast, and humble themselves in Dust and Ashes on their Heads, and Sackcloth on their Bodies, for the Denunciation Jonas made of God's Judgment against Niniveh; and on the 20th rejoice for the Aversion thereof on their unfeigned Repentance. The Preparation for, and Continuation of their Lent till the Passion Night, they religiously keep with almost a Suguntin Fast, that is, al∣most famish themselves to Death; when they repair to the Tombs of their Friends and Relations, with burning Incense and lighted Can∣dles; where they pray for the Dead, or more charitably recommend them to a quiet Repose by the Mouth of their Priests, and at the same time refresh themselves with Fruit and Melons, the Women with their Husbands and Infants drinking to their pious Memory, freely taking off their Cups, and weeping plentifully with a sad La∣mentation and mighty Outcry; till the Wine make them have a Light Heart and a Merry Countenance; which course they take till the Ascension, Weeping and Wailing, Drinking and Quaffing. Easter and Whitsuntide they keep as the Primitive Christians did. From the 28th of May they castigate themselves with cutting Disciplines; for that Constantine the Great when Emperor, marching out to fight, breathed nothing but Slaughter against the Christians, till convinced by an Apparition of the Sign of the Cross in the Hea∣vens, with this Advertisement, In hoc Signo tantum vinces, where∣upon he became the first Christian Emperor, defending that Religion against all its Adversaries: For which miraculous Conversion, they find now, as the Christians then did, Matter for Thanksgiving. For their Patriarch and Martyr St. Gregory, on the 9th of June they afflict themselves for his being soaked, Six Days, and on the Seventh they magnify his more than Human Patience. Before the Transfiguration of our Saviour on the 19th of June, they Fast, and end that Day with a Feast. From the 18th of August, for the Death of the Blessed Virgin, they have instituted six days of Mourning, and the next after is a Thanksgiving for her being translated from this Life to a better. On the 17th of September they reiterate their Devotions for the Dead, which is preceded by six days of strict Penance. On the same day they commemorate St. Helen's Invention of the Cross at Jerusalem, being Empress to the forementioned Constantine. St. Guywark has a Fast of the same length, and a Feast at the end of it, on the 26th of the same Month. The 17th of November they put themselves on distress for the Health and Safety of their Cattle, to free them from Rot, and pray for their Increase; this at first lasted but seven days, but it is now so many Weeks, all which time they keep Lent. Last of all for St. James they are grievously concerned six days together, and are content with one day only to Feast on: So that the Year round there are more Fasting than Feasting-days.
Through all these Scenes, Time keeps jogging on, and it is ap∣pointd for all men once to dye; at which Article the Neighbours and Acquaintance,Their Fune∣rals. especially those of the Blood, come to bewail and weep for the loss of their Friend or Relation; when, and not till then, the Parish-Priest is sent for, that he should pray by him, and put him into an happy Posture of Departure, by minding him of his Soul's Health, notwithstanding his Bodily Indisposition; which being recommended into the same Hands that bestowed it, and having ta∣ken its Flight from Earth to its assigned Place, there are no Words made of Anatomizing or Embalming the Body; but washing it often with Aromatick Waters while it is purified and kept clean, and then apparelling it as when alive, in its best Cloaths, it is wrapped about with a Sheet, and bound with Swathings to the Bier, his Arms being first placed across, over which is thrown a Pall of divers Colours. The Parish-Priest with his Collegues and others bearing Ensigns of Saint, and the Chanters singing, manage the Solemnity, and lead the Way to the Church, no matter whether before or after Noon; immediately after these the Bearers bring the Corps, when many of the Funeral Train with Heads hung down, and smiting of their Breasts, make a dismal Cry: Being entred the Church-Porch, the Prior of the Convent with his Associates receive the Procession, a Vortobeed being present, who leads the Choir up to the High Altar, the Body being left on the Bier among the Women, while they say High Mass, and perform the Office for the Dead. In the mean time the Relict or next of Kin to the Defunct, uncovering his Face and throwing by the Burial-Cloaths, with neglected Dress and dis∣shevel'd Hair falls on the Face of the Dead, deploring the Loss of her Father, Husband, or Relation, by often kissing his cold Lips, and piteously lamenting; which is seconded in so mournful a Consort by all the other Women, that one would think the Shades themselves could not entertain their new-come Guests with a more doleful Dirge: Thus she continues, and hardly suffers her self to be pulled away, till Mass is said, and the Vortobeeds are turning towards the Coarse, when all the Women are driven out of the Church, and Candles lighted are given to every Man there: The Vortobeed stand∣ing at the Head, the other Clergy possess the Sides, and the Prior with his Fellows enclose the Feet. At the Reading the Epistle and Gospel, they change their Cope, Mantle, and Hood, and Whine them forth; as also does the Prior when he chants the Liturgy, to whose Key the other Priests tune the Responses: In the Interim they Fumigate the Body with holy Incense, and sprinkle it with holy Water; which Ceremonies being ended, the Bearers are ready to carry the Body to the Burial-place, far from the Town; before which only one Vortobeed with the Parish Priests in course, and their Clerks with Tapers lighted compleat the Exequies, and commit it to the Ground: As if they had respect to the Law of the Twelve Tables, Mortuum infrà Ʋrbem ne sepelito, neve urito: Though more truly to the Emperor's Commands, who has granted them Ground for that purpose, with a strict Injunction to bury no where else.
Those whose Cowardice has made their Lives uneasy either by Temper or Misfortune, and thereby precipitated their Deaths by laying Violent Hands on themselves,The Burial of Self-Murder∣ers. are reproached with this odd distinction in their Funeral from other Mortals; in what part of the House soever they are found to commit this Self-Murder, there the Wall is broken down to make a Passage to their Graves; signifying thereby, That if they would not expect the common Period of Life with other Men, they ought to be carried forth by an unaccustomed Way, and not through the Doors of the House, throwing them un∣concernedly and unpitied into any Pit, like the Burial of a Dog, without any Solemnity. Thus having dispatched the Formalities attending every Stage of Life, something ought to be mentioned of the Excellencies of their Minds and Faculties, and how far qualified in common with the rest of Mankind. In order hereunto first may be considered their Pro∣pensity to Languages, they making Syriac, Arabic, Turkish, and Persian, their own at Home; and by Lingua-Franca become conver∣sant with most of the Western Foreigners; which Language is a Mix∣ture of Portugueze, Italian, French, and Spanish, and thereby made intelligible to European Traders as universally as Latin to the Gentry and Scholars: So that it has often been Matter of Wonder to hear a Merchant disown any Skill in the above recited Speeches, yet con∣verse severally with those of each Nation. They as much hate the Greek Language as their Church, although they derive their Armenian Elegancies from its Themes. But what cannot Religion persuade? Because they have dissented in Opinions, therefore do they abhor the very Words of the Greek. In Philosophy they utter some Specious and Trifling Things, but nothing Pithy or Nervous. Some things they boast of Antiquity:Their Anti∣quity. For Armenia, famous here∣tofore for many notable Transactions, owns Japhet as its first Foun∣der and Planter; or, as others will have it, to grow from Aram the Son of Sem: However, it is certain that after the General Deluge it was inhabited by the Sons of Noah, and it afforded Landing-place for all Living Creatures after their Transport from the Ark, accord∣ing to the Literal Sense of the Divine Testimony;Gen. 8. 4. And the ark rested on the twenty seventh day of the seventh month, on the mountains of Ar∣menia; that is to say, on the Mount Ararat; which we know admits of a large Interpretation. It contains in it Iberia, Albania, and Colchis; which latter, as it abounded in the days of King Aegeas with Massy Treasures, which occasioned that perilous Voyage of the Argonauts under Jason, for the Golden Fleece; so now it remains fruitful in all manner of Na∣ture's Riches, flowing with Milk and Honey, and stored with Pa∣stures, Corn, Woods, and Cattel; but I hear of no other Discove∣ries either of Gold or Silver made there since. Their Country formerly enjoyed mighty Kings and Potentates, and some the most Pious in Story; among whom Abagares is related to have wrote an Answer to an Epistle of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; which thing, whether a Figment or no, is not in my Power
to determine: Yet thus much I am sure of, that neither Riches, Ho∣nour, or High Birth, make any either happier or better, unless this World's Goods be seasoned with a Mind endued with Virtue, and Moderation suitable to such extraordinary Benefits. The next Neighbours,The Georgians if not the same with the Armenians, were the Iberians, now called Georgians, who underwent the same Cala∣mities with them; but with a contrary Disposition of Humour, be∣ing a Martial People bred up to the Wars, and now serve the Emperor as his best Infantry; of these, Forty thousand are at present in Arms under Military Pay, in and about Spahaun. Their Country at this time bears the Name of Gurgestan, from whence they are Christen'd Georgians; not from the famous St. George, but because they follow Husbandry, . They were converted to the Christian Faith near the same time with the Armenians; which they still retain, and maintain their State and Country; but both Christianity and their Country are past their Vertical Point, and are upon their De∣clension. Their Princes, to uphold their Prerogative, are inclined to submit to the Persian Yoke with the Ignominy of Apostatizing, ra∣ther than by a stout defiance resist the Temptations and Allurements of Government under the Mahometan Bestiality: Such Power has the Ambitious Thirst of Rule. They are Proper, Fresh-colour'd, Well-limb'd People: Their Wo∣men so Fair and Beautiful, that the Queen-Mother is always of the Family of the Georgian Princes; and for that reason is it their Chil∣dren are so often sold to Insidels, because they make good Markets of them. Mars has the Ascendent over this Nation, as Mercury has over the Armenians. There is therefore an inveterate Contrariety of Tempers between them;Of a different humour from the Armenians. and since the Armenians deserted the Greek Church, this Breach is widen'd; being impatient at the performance of each others Services in the Churches, the Georgians frequently interrupt∣ing them in their Devotions, and doing despite to their Altars on their most Publick Solemnities: Such Absurdities does Religion in∣troduce, which should be the only means to cement and unite Man∣kind in the Bond of Humanity. The Blame whereof must chiefly lye at the doors of their Pre∣lates, whose Obstinacy and Perverseness, abdicating all Force of Reason, are guided by no other Impulse than the present Enjoyments of this Life, and keep on foot particular Piques and Animosities, purposely to distract and vex the Church, thereby to carry on their own Interest or Ambition: Otherwise, how should it come to pass that those baptized under the same Symbol, and in many (and the most difficult) Points of Religion are agreeing, should not be all of one Mind in every respect, unless the Idle. Dreams and Malicious Practices of the Inorthodox should inculcate Debates and sow Divi∣sions, only to be Head of a Party? On which occasion,How far the Pope is con∣cerned here. whether the Pope hath been aiding or studi∣ous to compose these Differences, I know not: But sure I am, as it is the Duty of a good King, that would avoid the Imputation of a Tyrant, so to govern, that the Laws as well as Arms should be a Safe∣guard
to his People that have intrusted themselves to his Protection, not only to defend them in time of War, but conserve them by those wholsome Sanctions in time of Peace; so is it the Office of the Chief Pastor to instruct the People committed to his Charge, with the saving knowledge of sound Doctrine, and then by an Ex∣emplary and Christian Conversation, to pray for the Expiation of their Sins by the Death and Merits of our Saviour Christ, the only acceptable Sacrifice on that score, incontinently imploring an happy and perpetual Union of the Mystical Body of the Church Militant here on Earth, and persisting in an holy Presidency all the days of his Life: By which method they will clear to the World what is their end, as the Apostle did, 2 Cor. 16. when he told the Corinthians he sought not their Earthly Substance, but their Eternal Welfare. And were this the design of either the Pope or their Pa∣triarchs, we could not find fault with the Emissaries of the one, or the Conduct of the others compassing Sea and Land to make Prose∣lytes, but for having gained them they become sevenfold worse Children of the Devil than before. Nor, to speak truth, are the Popelings slothful in these Parts: At Jelfa is a College of the Jesuits; and both in Georgia and Armenia they have had many Monasteries beyond the Euxine Sea, as far as the Chersonese, looking towards Scythia, at the City Theodosia, now cal∣led Caffa; but these Places being over-run with the Turks and Per∣sians, they were expelled thence by the Cruelty of the Heathens on one hand, and Persuasion of the Hereticks of the several foremen∣tioned Sects on the other, that they were at last crowded into the Province only of Nockshuan in the greater Armenia, three days Journy from Erewan; where are only left in Ten poor Villages as many starveling Convents of the Order of the Dominicans, settled by Bishop Bartholomew, sent out by Pope John the 22d, to reconcile the Armenians to that See. But he could obtain no more than the reducing his own Order to that Obedience; which lest they should be wholly extirpated, the succeeding Popes provide for them Eleemosynaries by way of Goa: Besides these, some say the Pope defrays the Charges of those at Spa∣haun, of whom we have spoken before; from whence it is needless, if they be content with what may serve to be instrumental to honest Studies, for the King is their Almoner. And as he is bountiful to these for their seeming Integrity and pious Behaviour, so he is muni∣ficent to the Handicrafts-men which come from Europe; to these he has given large Salaries, and graceful Houses in Jelfa, besides their peculiar Offices at Court, where they attend when in waiting. All these when they encounter one another,The way of Salute. pay the Civility of uncovering the Head, but salute the Moors after their own manner. Besides these Christians in Jelfa,Nunneries at Jelfa. St. Rhipsima has her Devotes, who live in a Nunnery, and vow Virginity all their Life; they are about Forty, and profess Poverty for Christ's sake, having nothing but what they get by begging; they go in Black Hoods over a Blue Vest.
Here are two other Orders that are more recluse, resembling San∣cta Monacha, and Sancta Clara. And thus I have run through all the Degrees that live in Jelfa, with what Brevity and Faithfulness may be expected in so transient an Account. CHAP. VII. Gives us a Sight of the Palace, and Rarities there; our Enter∣tainment by the French Artisans in the Emperor's Service; the Diversions of the Place, and its Product; and the Close of the Year, with its Seasons. HAving been taken up thus long among the Armenians, we in our Return cannot but take notice of the famous Walk be∣tween the two Cities of Jelfa and Ispahaun: It is planted with two Rows of Sycamores (which is the tall Maple, not the Sycamore of Alkair) upwards of two Miles: It is called the Chaurbaug, from Four Gardens belonging to the Palace, opposite one to another; these take up all the Ground on the side of the Bridge towards Spa∣haun; on the other side, Seats of Noblemen and Great Ministers of State grace the Way up to the biggest of all, the Emperor's, which is at the End of this Stately Place, over-looking with a pleasant Pro∣spect all the rest up to the Palace-Gates, which are directly answer∣ing the Majestick ones of this Garden, they fronting one the other. Over the Portal are curiously painted Men and Women in European Dresses:The great Garden at the end of the Chaurbaug. From the Entrance up to the Mountains, Marble Steps make the Ascent easy, which Nature had framed difficult enough other∣wise; up which the Limpid Streams are forced to send their Currents through Five several Channels laid with Marble, two at the feet of the Sycamores, which railed in two Foot pads, and ran immediately to the River; the other three emptied themselves into the Tanks, to which two Stone Causeways gave an Even Walk to Foot-men, by the middle Channel parting them, and at every Tank ascended or descended by Marble Grades, while the Horse-way was sloped for their Passage, entring on one side, and coming back the other; and every Two hundred Paces, Bathing-places of a large Circumfe∣rence receive great plenty of Water from the three Channels in the middle, into which the Marble Steps go down to the Bottom, which is paved with a cleanly Floor of the same Polished Stones; and this is begun from the beginning of the Chaurbaug, whence it descends to the River, and thence rises the same height to the End of the Gar∣den: In the Garden its self, variety of Green Trees flourishing, sweet Odors smelling, clear Fountains and Rivers flowing, charm all the Senses; nor is there less surprizal at the ravishing Sight of the delicate Summer-houses by each Pond's side, built with all the Advantages for Recreation and Delight.
In a Wilderness beneath this,Chap. VII. are kept the Bears, Leopards, and Lions,Wild Beasts for the Empe∣ror's Diversi∣on. belonging to the Emperor: And from this place up to the Palace Gate, are seen every Evening all the Gentry of the City Riding to and fro with Hawks on their Fists; managing their Steeds, making of Matches for Shooting, Hunting, Coursing, or Hawk∣ing; shewing their Gallantry in Apparel and Retinue, as well as disposition to Sport; being as much frequented as our Hide Park, and for as little purpose, only to fee and be seen, though the whole pretence be to take the Air. Near these Ponds, or Tanks, are Coffee-Houses, which furnish them when they dismount, with Coho, Tea, or Sherbets; while they sit in State, and smoak Tobacco with their Attendance about them. The adjacent Houses, Orchards, and Gardens, may be truly said to be in the Virge of the Court, many of them serving only for the Emperor to shift with his Seraglio, while the other Apartments are Aired; though the great Divan, or Council be always held in that place respecting the Midan, or Pomoerium, in the heart of the City; and the rest are but given during Pleasure, to the chief Officers at Court: Wherefore reckoning all these Dwellings as Appendices (which indeed they are) few Monarchs will appear to have a larger extent to hold their Court in, it being above a Third part of the whole City; which being granted, it will not be hard to imagine so Great and Absolute a Potentate should be Courted by all the World, and from all the parts of the Earth the wonderful Works of the Creation should be brought as Honorary Presents; nor can it be sup∣posed that so wide and spacious a Palace should not afford room for more than the ancient Ark, though not freight with Pairs of all the Species, yet more of several. Whence it is, that here is to be seen more readily, and with less hazard, the Offspring of most Soils, except Human, and the Creatures of every Nation, rather than the Women of this Court, which are at less liberty than the Beasts, being Cooped up in their Sties, more strictly than these are kept in their Dens; many of the fiercest and untamedst of these being allowed only to breath in the open Air as Nature Ordained them: But not to tire my self, nor you with Parti∣culars, I shall only mention what were strange to me. The first whereof was the Rhinoceros,The Rhinoce∣ros, not the Indian Ouager. who is a Cruel Beast, of a large Size, there coming from his Nose an Horn a Cubit long, (Brown towards the Bottom, Whiter near the Point) and Six Inches Diameter, whence the derivation of his Name from Pìv, Nasus, a Nose, and , Cornu, an Horn; between this Ani∣mal and the Elephant, is a mortal strife, for which Nature seems to have armed it on purpose; it being a Four-footed Beast, with Three Partings of the Hoof, built on thick strong Thighs, but short, con∣sidering the great bulk of its Body which presses them; it is Tall enough to reach the Bowels of its Antagonist with its Horn, with which it Gores him to Death; nor has she given him less firm Bones to the Trunk, if by chance it should be crushed by the Elephant, de∣fending its very Hide with a Coat of Mail; wherefore before on the Neck and Shoulders, and behind in the Quarters, the Skin lies in Folds, like Fish Scales, over one another; the Face bears much of
an Hogs Countenance, unless the upper Lip, which resemble a Cows, and the lower, the form of a Whales; the Mouth discovers a mishaped Tongue, set about with Two rowes of Teeth; it is of the same Mouse Colour, and Tailed as an Elephant is, and Feeds of the same Fodder, and is kept facing Two mighty, but lean Elephants. Whether the Rhinoceros be the Unicorn, I suspend my belief, since I have seen an Horn turned with Furrows and Ridges from the Basis to the Point, and Tapering like that of our King's Arms: But what Petrus Angelius relates concerning the Onager, or Indian Ass, can have no congruity with this, unless in respect of the Virtues; for though his Verses are most Elegant in his 5. lib. Cyneget, yet the description is very wide: —Quos India pascit Onagros, Jam primum niveo corpus candore teguntur, Infecti Assyrio circum caput omne colore Caeruleis oculis, unoque in fronte superbi Cornu, &c. His words in Prose are these; The Wild Asses of India are as big, or bigger than Horses, whose Heads are of a Purple die, their Eyes Blew, the rest of their Body White; on their Foreheads they have an Horn a Cubit in length, whose lower part for Two Hands breadth is White, and the Top, which is sharp, inclining to a bright Red, but the Middle part is blood Red; of these they make Cups, out of which whosoever Drinks, neither Cramp nor Falling Sickness seizes them; nor has any manner of Poison any force, if that immediately before or after taking of the same, either Water, Wine, or other Liquid thing be taken out of these Cups. That this Opinion is taken up upon the account of the Rhino∣ceros his Horn, I can certainly verify, and that great Prices are of∣fered for those that are inadulterate; which they in India pretend to try by the Liquors presently fermenting in them; but notwithstand∣ing that Experiment they are often deceived by false Horns made into drinking Cups; thus much is true of the Rhinoceros, but the other part of it holds not Water; they come from Bengala, and are esteemed terrible and indomitable Creatures: And these must be (or none) what this Author calls Asses, there being no other Beasts in these Parts with but one Horn; and I am afraid he is mista∣ken as to the African Ass also, some Writers having called Africa India, which might have been urged in his excuse, whose Skin I having formerly admired when in India, you will easily be convinced it is no such Creature, it having never an Horn; Two Live ones were sent hither from the Abassin Emperor, as an Expression of Re∣spect to this Court; which, with other valuable Rarities brought by his Ambassadors, were lately graciously received. They are as large as a Mule,The Abassin Ass mistaken for the Sabean Wild Ass. but for the exact Symetry of the Lineaments, Zeuxis his Pencil would but faintly shadow over the lively Portraicture of their Skins, the ground whereof was of a light Ash Colour, over which along the Back strait black Streaks in Rows at length reached to the Tail; the Shoulders, Flanks, and Haunches
had the same waving towards the extremity of their several Mem∣bers; but that which was the oddest was on the Forehead, they had so many Geometrial Figures, like the Trapezium, or Square, in which the opposite sides are parallel one with another, so distinctly painted, as at last to fill up a black spot of a Diamond cut in the very Centre of the Face. What Family to mix this Kind with, I am at a loss, unless they be a-kin to the Onager, or Wild Ass, mentioned by Xenophon in the Expedition of the Lesser Cyrus; the same we read in Pliny in his 8. Lib. and 4th Chap. where he ascribes them to Phrygia and Lycao∣nia; but the Words of the before-recited Author have it thus; The Onager is a Wild Ass, excelling at pleasure the swiftest Courser; whose Flesh differs not much from Stags Flesh, were it not some∣thing tenderer; Arabia, says he, abounds with Flocks of them. Now nothing can be Tamer than these before us, and therefore un∣likely to be the Wild ones of Xenophon in Arabia, but are most assu∣redly the Breed of Africa; however Petrus Angelius Bargaeus comes pretty near the Mark in this, though not the other; however he is mistaken in the Place, as well as the Race of both: At sonitu ingenti putrem quatit ungula campum Cornua, venantem quoties fugiêre; suisque Temporibus stant longae Aures, tum Corpora Crvos Exsuperant; nec Lana nitet non albo colore, Mixta Nigro, ceu cum Nubes densantur opacae Et totum eripiunt oculis coelumque diemque. Nigraque per medios decurrit taenia lumbos Linda, quam clunes tractim comitantur adimos, Ʋtraque distinguens niveo sua tergora ductu. The Horny Hoof with mighty sound, As oft as Hunted shakes the ground; Upon their Temples stand long Ears, Bodies bigger than Stags are theirs; A Woolly Hair, of colour White, Out shines the mixture of black Night. Along the Back, and down the Loins, A List of Black the White disjoins; The same accompanies the Haunch, Distinguishing the Flanks from Paunch. Hence we were carried to the Ducking Ponds, where Swam Out∣landish, as well as Native Wild Fowl; and thence to the Aviaries, where Nature presents not only divers Species, but she has plaid the Wanton, even in diversifying those of the same Kind, either adding or diminishing, as she was provided with Matter; some Birds having more Feet, Wings, or Bills, than belongs to the wonted Frame of the same sort; others again, are deficient in the Parts usually be∣stowed on the Individuals of the same Race, some exceeding, and others wanting in Stature. But these being accounted Monstrous and out of the Road, I shall forsake them to follow a Couple of long
striding Ostriches robbed of their Feathers, which must be certainly very Glorious; they are of the largest size of Birds, wherefore by an Irony called ,The Ostrich. as if one should say of a Giant, such an one is an Infant, or a Camel-Bird to be a Sparrow; their Heads, or Crowns, are perfectly Bald, a Palm in Circumference; which Pliny avouches in express Terms, Quaedam animalia naturaliter calvent, sicut Strutho Cameli; some Creatures are naturally Bald, as Ostriches; their Feet have Two Claws only. Night drawing on,The Flower of Spahaun meet a nights in the Walk belonging to the Palace. we unwillingly left these Spectacles, and fell into a lovely one between these Groves; for now all the Pride of Spahaun was met in the Chaurbaug, and the Grandees were Airing themselves, prancing about with their numerous Trains, striving to outvie each other in Pomp and Generosity; but come short of those Incentives to Chivalry that spur on our Gallants; the Graces Adorn our Parks and Malls Crowned with Virgin-Garlands, whose loose Garments wave with the flowing Wind, and provoke the Amorous Spark to list himself a Volunteer under those Banners; whose Maiden Faces bear the fresh Colour of the blooming Roses on the Lilly White of their natural Complexion, being wonderfully taking both in their Shape and Meen; Chearful and Free in their Discourse, but with an awful Comeliness; Facetious and Pleasant, but with an un∣spotted Innocence; enough to make Cato shake off his Severity and reconcile himself to Good Nature: Such Daphnes as these (worthy the great Apollo) alas! this Cursed Soil knows not the Blessing of, nor dare they trust them out of Doors; for their fiery Spirits (like Water cast on Sea-Coal) by the Society of such Nymphs, would render their Heat more intense by intemperate Jealousies. After the Armenians had treated us,The French Artisans di∣vert us. the French Artisans thought themselves concerned to do the like; that they might not be thought to live here in Slavery, but in a Condition to Entertain, not only their Friends, but to equal the highest Flights the Armenians could pretend to; and for the Honour of their King and Nation, we were called on St. Lewis his Day, which they Solemnized with fresh Devices of Fireworks, Illuminations, Interludes, and Farces; besides the Extravagances of Banquetting and Carowsing, Drink∣ing the Sophi's Health, and their Master's, after all the European Monarchs. The next day,River Fishes. with the Noise of loud Musick, we were Invited by them into the Country to a Fish Dinner by the River side, as of Mullets, Crey Fish, Pickeril, and the like; for it is not for every one to feed on Lampry, Turbat, Goldney, or Sturgion, formerly held as dainty Bits by the Rich Roman Gluttons, as Apicius, Vitellus, and Lucullus. However here are Salmon from the Caspian Sea, and the Urchin (though not that admired one of the Ocean for its de∣licious Taste) this being not for Food but Diversion, under the Hedges and Trees of an Orchard by the Bank of the River. The sly Nature and cunning Thefts of which Creature,The Hedge-Hog. though they are made famous by many of the Learnedst Philosophers, yet none more Graphically expresses them than these Facetious Verses:
Ergo ubi lapsa jacent sua quisque sub arbore poma Accedunt Laeti, seque in sua terga volutant, Denec fixa rubis haerentia mala supremis Exportent; implentque penum liventibus uvis; Quorum acinis quoties sentes onerantur acutae Perjucunda sui praebent spectacula nobis, Quippe humeros tecti sic ingrediuntur, ut ipsâ Ire putes totos avulsos vite racemos. Ah! tibi ne cupidos sensus tam tangat habendi, Tantus amor furem ut tentes arcere jocosum, Atque oculos durus jucundo avertere Ludo Eripere, & natis dulcem expectantibus escam. Under the Trees where Apples lye, They come apace, full fraught with Joy; And rowling on their Backs, they six The tender Apples to their Pricks; Which carrying off, they come again, And with ripe Grapes their Store maintain: Whose Thorny Bristles fully stuck, A pleasant Sight it is to look, And see them march, lac'd o're with Fruit, As if they'd stole the Vine to boot. Ah! let not Covetous Intent, The Waggish Thief at all prevent; Or Surly drive him from his Prey, Who bears them thus to's Young away. It is called by the Latins, Echinus, from the Greek, , seu , because it contracts its self, being touched; by some Erinaceus, of which there are two sorts, and in our Tongue are called Hedge-hogs, the one with a Snout like an Hog's, and the other a Nose like a Dog's, both which are beset with sharp Thorns or Prickles on their Backs; and when they fear any harm towards them, gather themselves into a round Fuz ball. In some few places where the Water was purposely pent in,Water-Fowl. we saw some Flocks of Water Fowl, which the Persians are skill'd, by their long▪ Case-harden'd Guns, to shoot flying. The best Hawks of Muscovia are purchased here at great Rates, nor undeservedly, for they will strike down those Colum that are as big as Wild Turkies, and visit India in the Cold Season, eleven or a dozen one after another, as they fly in Trains like Wild Geese, and come down with the last themselves: Some of these we saw tried, which was pleasant Sport: They have some Hawks of their own, but they are of a Cowardly Breed to these, they teaching the Crows of the Country to be too hard for them; whereby it is familiar to give an Hundred Thomands for a right Muscovia Hawk; of which they are so great Lovers, that they seldom appear abroad without one of them on their Hand.
Some of them in their Swoops are so couragious, as to seize the Heads of Deer or Antelopes, and seating themselves with their Ta∣lons between their Horns, pick out their Eyes, or doze them with their Beaks, or stupify them with their Strokes; so that no Hunting in the World is like it, to see them soaring in a wide Plain where Herds of these are, (especially if there be these Water-pits for the Courses under Ground), at once to observe them guarding their Fronts, scampering with their Heads to the Earth, to avoid the tow'ring Enemy aloft; sometimes unawares to fall Captives into these Wells, not suspecting the Danger under foot, so much as avoiding that which threatens them over head, whereby they run into Thickets, or against Shrubs and Stumps of Trees, tumbling and leaping unadvisedly, so that Greyhounds being set upon them, easily overtake them. Not by this Stratagem to derogate from their Greyhounds,Greyhounds. which are as good as most of that kind, well-shap'd and swift, but shagged with long Hair, yet for all that are kept cloathed as their Horses in Winter, and all the Year besides rubbed, dressed, and covered with lighter Cloaths: The other Dogs are but Curs; they are Strangers to our Bloodhounds; but have many English Mastiffs in good Repute, which breed, and are very serviceable to keep their Houses, stri∣king Terror into the Assailants more than a Guard of Watchmen. Here are no Parks,No Woods or Forests about Spahaun. Forests, or Chaces for Sport, nor Meres or Decoys for Game, nor indeed Medows yielding Hay for their Cat∣tel, their Fodder being chopped Straw, and Barley their Provender all over the Empire; nor are here any Woods more than inclosed in Gardens, which is unfit for Building or Firing; yet of the tall Ma∣ple or Sycamore they have slit Boards for their Chests for Wine and Fruit; neither is there any Turf or Coal, so that Firing is more worth than Food, being forced to send Camels to fetch it many days Journy hence, as has been said at our first coming hither. In our Return we observed several Tombs of the Ancient Gabers, after the same manner as the Parsies in India; and at top of the Mountains such Monuments as are on the sides of the Plain of Per∣sepolis, and one more eminent, in Honour of their great Champion, Rustam; but who this Rustam was, both their Annals and Tradition give an unsatisfactory Account. On the 19th of August an Eclypse of the Sun made us take notice of the Alteration of the Weather,An Eclypse of the Sun. which was stormy and tempestu∣ous; as well as the lamentable plight all the Mahometans were in, they supposing that Orb to be in Labour, and therefore by Pray∣ers and Incantations concerned at its Delivery, all the time beating Pots of Brass, making a Noise as dreadful as the Day of Doom: The Eclypse being over, the Weather cleared up again, as also the Madness of the People was allay'd. All September the Mornings and Evenings were sharp,The Suburbs. and the North-West Winds began to bring the Winter's Cold, though the Day-time was Hot and Serene; wherein we made another Excursion through the Suburbs on the farther side of the Court, to Jelfa, through new Buzzars, finer and better Arch'd than those in the City, terminating in the Squares of divers Noblemen, who had reared
them at their own Charge and Advantage; whereby they were more Costly and Neat, broad enough for two Coaches to pass abreast, though this City is unacquainted with those Carriages; nor indeed would they be convenient, by reason of the Narrow Streets within, and Mountains without. These brought us a long way to the River-side,A Third Bridge. adorned with Dwellings of their Great Men, over which, to the Christian Town, lay another Bridge, inferior neither for Length, or Elegancy of Structure, to either of the former two, but much later built. At the Foot of it is a large Coppice of Willows, reaching a great way by the Water-side; here the Jelfalines met us with their usual Noise of loud Musick, and led us directly up to a Mountain, where the Emperors have digged a Grotto overlooking all the City, at their Retirements hither shading them from the Sun's Violence: This is fabled to be also Solomon's Throne, as we remarked before in Duccan; others pretend it was projected by Darius, but for what end, unless for a Prospect of this large place hid in a Wood, I cannot guess. Hence in two days we compassed the two Cities of Ispahaun and Jelfa,We were two days encom∣passing Spa∣haun. taking more Ground by far than London and Southwark with their Suburbs, but then the most part is filled with Gardens; how∣ever I believe them not to be so populous: Yet the Frenchmen here avouch, That more Melons, Cucumbers, and other Horary Fruits are consumed in this Place in a Month, than in Italy, France, and Spain, in half a Year, estimating by Balance of Six thousand Ass or Mules Loads of them expended every day: For though they have good Butchers Meat and Poultry, their chiefest Diet is on Fruit; and if such vast Quantities be brought out of the Country daily, besides what may be planted within their own Walls, it may be concluded some Thousands of Inhabitants contribute to the devouring of them; though it must not be credited what is spoken hyperbolically by these Citizens, That it is the biggest City in the World, and therefore by way of Excellency called, The World. It is not fenced by Walls, nor has it more than one strong Tower with Mud Walls, fitter for Butts for Bows and Arrows, than to re∣pulse a Cannon-Bullet; only serviceble at present to be the Exche∣quer of the Emperor, where are laid up great Treasures, the present Sophi being an intolerable Hoarder, beneath the Majesty of so migh∣ty a Prince, repining even at mean Expences. But leaving him to his Covetous Humour,Changes of the Weather. it remains only to take notice of the Season at the end of this Month, inasmuch as Bodies undergo herein the Autumnal Changes, which afflicts them with Pleurisies, Catarrhs, Hoarseness, Consumptions, Coughs, Ma∣lignant, Putrid, Intermitting, as also continued Fevers, under this Fifth Climate: To which the Aphorism of the Medical Divine has regard, when it says, ; Dispicere oportet regionem, tempus, &c. The Regions and Seasons of the Year ought to be enquired into; for the Alterations and Deviations from the usual Seasons are chiefly productive of Diseases; for from Hot and Dry, the Air now passes into Cold and Dry, and at last into Moist; for which reason the Persians begin now to put on their Furrs; and the Sky, which hitherto had been clear (except a little
at the Change of the Moons), near the middle of October, wears a frowning Countenance, and at the end of November sends some Showers, according to the Wish of Virgil's Husbandman, to fatten the Earth. Humida solstitia atque hiemes optare serenas. The Solstice of the Year let them be moist, The Winter clear, and curdled o're with Frost. But before that Barren Time approaches, take a small Catalogue of what the other Seasons produce. FRUITS, Apples.A Catalogue of Plants growing at Spahaun. Cherries. Jujubies. Mulberries, White and Red: On the first of which only the Silk-Worms are fed, despising the Leafs of the other. Pears. Prunellaes. Sebastans. All those we call Wall-Fruit, without that help. HERBS, Balm. Burdock. Betes, White and Black. Borrage. Cabbage. Coleworts. Colliflowers. Cichory. Clary. Hyssop. Lactise. Mustard. Marjoran. Mallows. Minth. Nettles, Alive and Dead. Parsley. Plantain. Purslain. Pennyroyal. Pimpernel. Savory. Spinach. Thyme. FLOWERS, Clovegilli flowers. Blewbottles. Jasmins of all sorts. Lillies of all sorts. Holyoak. Marigolds. Roses. Poppies, White and Red. Primroses. Saffron. Violet. ROOTS, or Bulbu's, Asparagus. Artichokes, not in the Leaf as ours, but from the Root and Stalk. Carrots. Eringoes. Garlick. Hermodactyls. Liquorice. Madder. Onions. Parsnips. Rhadish, Wild and Garden. Rhubarb. Turnips.
SHRUBS, Berberies. Cotton. Coriander. Faenicle. Fenigraece. Sena. Rosebriar. TREES, Sycamore. Ivy. Maple, the Lesser. Poplar. Ʋlmes. Willows. Which I mention only to see what relation it has to what grows in England, and have set down thus to avoid Tautology. To shut up therefore this Discourse, I shall borrow an Indication from the Tall Trees growing in a free Air; for from their bending towards any Point of the Compass, thence is collected from what Quarter of the Heavens the most forcible and frequent Winds do come, in what Region soever they blow; so Trees growing near the Sea-shore, incline towards the Land, but up-land in Persia they grow upright, which shews no constant Winds to have any such In∣fluence; though from the Autumnal Equinox, the North-West ushers in the Wet Weather, to make way for the Frost and Snow till Decem∣ber, yet it is often variable, and veres to the East, when it is pinch∣ing Cold, from January to the middle of February. The first New Moon in October brings the Musslemens Lent of Ra∣mazan, which hapned on the 10th this Year, and was the same day our Agent set forth for Bunder, leaving me sick behind. The 16th of November put an end to their Fast, and began a Day of Jubilee; when the Leafs were all dropped off, and the Earth and Trees were naked; after which, Bodies indisposed sue for a Writ of Ease, and as the Winter is more piercing, they recover Health. December locks up all in Ice and Snow,Sharp Winter here. and constipates the Pores of the Earth that it cannot be tilled; the Tops of Mountains are all capped, and the Sharp Winds and Serene Air make it less tolera∣ble than in Great Britain, it being ready to cut you through; though then in the Sun it is so warm, that the Poor are beholden to it for their Stores: It seldom snows above three or four days together, but that is sufficient to load the Mountains, and to fill the Valleys for many days, before it be dissolved. And then it proves fatal to the Houses built only of Mud; for whilst they seek to secure the Roof, many times by sweeping it thence, the Snow melts at the bottom, and undermines their Foundations, that oftentimes they become mixt with the Dirt in the Streets. In this Season Stoves are no less in use in Persia,Use of Stoves in Persia. than in the ex∣tremest Cold Parts of the World, by which they cherish the innate Heat, otherwise like enough to be opprest; which they do after a peculiar manner: In the middle of a Square close Room, they dig an Hearth Foursquare (not raised, as in our College-halls), over which is set a Square, Low, but Large Table, whereon is thrown a Quilt, and upon the Hearth is only set an Earthen Pot of Char∣coal;
all the rest of the Room is spread with Beds and Quilts, into which, whoever comes (after his Slippers are put off) he thrusts his Feet under the Quilt covering the Table; which way, though it keep them warm, is prejudicial to the Nerves and Brain, by rea∣son of the Mercurial Fumes arising from the Charcoal; being obli∣ged to use that for want of plenty of Wood to Burn in Chimnies; the Conveniency whereof they are unacquainted with, having ne∣ver seen any Chimney but what is in the English Factory. Their Kitchins are all over of a Smoak like our Malt Kills, with such ventilating Tiles as they have, they rounding their Cook Rooms with small Furnaces, such as our Chymists make in their Laboratories, setting their Earthen, or Copper Pots thereon, not hanging them on Pothooks as we do. And last of all,A pure Air without Soil. for a final and undeniable Experiment of the Pureness and Clearness of the Air here, let a Sword, never so well Polished, (and they have the best Damascened Swords) lie un∣sheathed a whole Night, or longer, in Snow, or Water; take it thence and never wipe it, and it shall not Rust: Besides, now at Christmas time the Grapes sold for Food in the Market are so dry they may be powdered; Carry these individual Grapes down to Port, and you shall in Four or Five days (short of the Bunder) sensibly perceive them to imbibe the thicker Air, and contract a Clammi∣ness; which proceeds from the remoteness of Spahaun from any Sea, Navigable River, Lake, or Fenn; the Caspian Sea being the nearest, which is Five hundred Miles off; besides its being environed with dry barren Mountains, whence come fine, rare, and thin Blasts; insomuch that could Bodies ever be in an Equilibrium as to their Temperament, certainly it might be preserved here rather than in any other place; for whatsoever Stranger comes hither with an Healthy Constitution, it is very lasting; and the Natives who live Temperately, witness a good old Age, with a continued state of Health; the Endemial Diseases of this Country being rather Acute than Chronical. We must close up this Year with the sad News of the Death of our President at Surat;Death of the President. He was a Mecaenas of Honest Studies; a great Cherisher of Ingenuity; of a Generous and Free Access; Masculinely Candid; a Master of all Languages and Sciences, as well as Skilled in Military Virtues; as if Mars had undertaken the Protection of the Muses: But so envious are the Fates, that the best things are snatch'd away first. To this lover of Arts and Learning,This Agent Succeeds in the Chair at Surat. our Agent, now at Port, by the Appointment of the Honourable Company, is to Succeed, and accordingly he is preparing for his departure to supply that Vacancy. And,Artifices of the Dutch. as if it were not fit one Mischief should pass unattended; at the same time we had an Account of the Villanous and Barbarous Attempt of the Molagans at Bantam, on the English Agent and the Factors there (who were only supposed to Espouse the Old King's Quarrel against the New) as they were in their Boats diverting themselves with their Ladies, unawares were set upon and Assassi∣nated by Ruffians hid in the Flags and Osiers on the Rivers sides, and
all Cut off;Chap. VIII. not without some reasonable Reflections that the Dutch were Accessaries, being but false Neighbours to them at Batavia, having a jealousy of the English Trading for Pepper in those Parts, and for that cause have promoted Animosities betwixt Father and Son; taking this opportunity to send Forces to the Son's Assistance, but in reality to secure Bantam for themselves, while they have for∣ced the Old King up the Country, to expect his Majesty of Great Britain's Strength in vain, by Embassador's sent thither to Reinstate him. Thus watchful and vigorous are the Hollanders to get all the Spice Trade of East-India into their own Hands, that they may solely enjoy it without any Competitors. CHAP. VIII. Brings us in the midst of Winter from Spahaun to Gombroon; The Caun's Pranks there: The Hot Baths at Genoe: The Equinox and Seasons attending are somewhat parallel betwixt this Coast and the Indian: A New Agent arrives. THE Agent of Persia having left Gombroon to go to fill up the Chair at Surat, the Second at Spahaun was obliged to re∣pair thither to take care of the Company's Concerns there; with whom, I being now Recovered, on the 10th of January, with a French Chirurgeon in our Company, in the depth of Winter we set forth for the Persian Gulf. We return'd the same way,Valleys filled with Snow. Travelling only in the Day time till we came to Esduchos, where because the Snow had shut up the Valleys, we were forced to leave it on the right, and go about by the high Road, not frequented in Summer time so much by light Horsemen, as now, there being no Passage the other way; wherefore our Entertainment this Journy is less Hospitable, and the Caravan generally more rude, it being the usual Tract for Camels and their Drivers (they most an end providing only for themselves) and better Guests being seldom or never expected; so that in all probability we might expect to encounter Hardships; but the Silver Bait procu∣red all things that Man could furnish us with; and we met with no other Difficulties than what the Weather created us. Against which we guarded our selves by good warm Furs,We defend our selves with Furs. which are some of Sables, Fox-Furs, or Sheeps-Wool artificially Crisped, and others for Servants of Sheep Skins undressed, and their Coats lined therewith, the shaggy Fleece remaining untouched; and over all, to prevent the sharp Winds deglubating us, we Housed our selves Cap-a-pee under Felts, or Yaupengees, kneaded into Coats with Sleeves, with a Scapular to pull over our Heads and Face; a well fixed Nose being hardly Proof against such cutting Cold. Whether these Coats we wore against this Season, might not be such as our
Saviour is said to have on, (these being Seamless and the Wear of the Poor People) I remit to our Casuists. From Esduchos to Chuldestan,At Chudestan a Camel Mad with Lust. is Eight Pharsangs, whither we came in a Day, by the help of our Shooters, or Poomen guiding us; whose Bells our Horses followed, when we durst not peep out to di∣rect them. Here a large Camel, raging with Lust for the Female, as his Keeper was eeding him, with Past of Barly Meal made into Balls, he got his whole Arm into his Mouth, and had not there been present a great many ready for his Relief, he had been de∣stroyed by him: This Fury lasts Fcy Days, when they Foam at the Mouth, and are very Unruly, at other times nothing being more Governable. From hence to Obedah are Six Pharsangs;Obedah, a Town of Vineyards. it is a large Village abounding with Vineyards, which reach as far as Zermaw, Four Pharsangs farther; hitherto we Travelled Carpet-way, all the Ground being covered with Snow, and most an end the Sun obscured, and sometimes the Clouds falling in flecy White Rain, as the poor Indians express it, who were almost starved to Death by the exces∣sive Cold, and stormy Blasts from the Mountains. At Conaaw,Conacaraw and Dhid. Eight Pharsangs more, it began to clear up (though we seemed to carry the Winter with us, there having been little afore our Arrival); and at Dhid, Six Pharsangs more, we left the Plains on the Hills all along Planted with Vines, to ascend the piled Pcae, now covered with Snow, horribly bleak, and pe∣rilously cold with frosty Winds, that either Pole might possibly be more tolerable, they being fenced with Thicker Air, this being so sharp that it passed our skill to keep our Skins whole; for if the Sun did favour one side, the other side was shaved with cruel Blasts; nor did that fare better which was exposed to the scorching Beams; that had we not been provided with the Pomatum mentioned before (the Butter of the greater cool Seeds) we had been in a sore con∣dition; but Anointing our Hands and Face going to Bed, the next Morning healed them. At Conacurgu we found a Bridge necessary to pass upon the dissol∣ving of the Snow from the Ridges of the Hills,Conacurgu and Mushat. and tracing the Mountains, we came in Eight Phsangs  Mushat; notable for the Scpulchre of one of their Twelve Apostles to their false Prophet; here we were glad to take up in a Farmer's House, in an Apartment whereof having caused a Fire to be kindled, where I was to lie, my Servant, after I was in Bed and asleep, hulking about the Fire, fell with his Felt Coat, being Drowsy, upon the Embers; which Burn∣ing made such a smother, that I was almost stifled in the close Room before I could find the Way out; yet he lay Snoaring and unconcerned, when I could not get rid of the stench in my Throut some Days after. The Day following, we by Two Bridges crossed Two Rivers more, or it may be the same that run to Bindamire; and in a rainy wet Day took up our Lodgings at Zevan, but Five Pharsangs, and the next Day saw Perspolis again; entring the Plain by Two Pillars, upon whose Cornish was delineated double-headed Horses as far as the Chest; leaving those Ruins Quintus Curtius so much Celebrated,
despoiled of their Riches, we went through Meergoscoon, at the back∣side whereof the Plain was covered all along with Wild-Fowl, which were so Tame they would almost permit us to knock them on the head with our Sticks, not offering to stir till we came on them, they being not used to be disturbed. At Night we reached Zergoon, through slippery and slabby Way, and the Day after we brought with us the first Snow to Siras. Here we rested Five Days,The Cold Weather makes our In∣dian Servants useless. having lost Two Mules and One Pack∣horse out of Seven and twenty, and One Houshold-Servant out of Ten that attended us; another we left behind at Moxutebeggy, who was our Cook; and had it not been for the French Chirurgeon, we had been put to our shifts, he both shooting and dressing most of our Victuals after the most exquisite French Way of Cookery: Nor must any of us at this time take State upon him; for our Servants, not used to such Weather, became rather an Impediment than Help to us; listless, and loth to stir, but always crowding in among us, cringing, and never at ease but when about the Fire; not to be rowz'd on any occasion; rather looking for Service from us; by whose Slothfulness we became as lowsy as Beggars, their huge Shags har∣bouring such Vermin, and they by no means being to be drove out out of our Company, but laid themselves a-nights on the same Floor with us. In this short space the Sun began to recover Strength, dissolving the Snow as fast as it fell. Having shifted our Lowzy Companions, they began to brisk up by degrees, as they felt the Warmth to increase upon them: Here our Interpreter, a Georgian Soldier, and a Carmelite Friar, joined us; (the French Chirurgeon being bound for Bunder Reek, left us): And the 29th of January, shaking off the hospitable Impertinencies of such as followed us out of the City, we gained that Night Bobba-Hodge; and the next Day travelled Fasting, for the Execrable Death of the Martyr Charles the First; which something discountenanced the Carmelite, seeing a Table spread, as Customary, at Noon, and not an Englishman to eat a Bit, or drink a Drop; but being informed of the Reason, he was more amazed, saying, He wonder'd at our Strictness, since on their Fasting-days they were allowed a Buccado of Sweetmeats and a Glass of Wine before Noon, and at Noon a small Repast, and so likewise in the Afternoon, but at Night a good plentiful Supper: With the latter part we promised we would agree with him, but for the other we thought there was no great Restraint put upon Nature. On the last Day of the Month we found Caifar, a pleasant Village, bearing the first Fruitful Palm this Way, where the Myrtle and the Orange-Tree is always Green, yielding Flowers in Blossoms, Ripe and Green Fruit all at one and the same time: Here springs up the Bell-Flower, Violet, and Primrose; so that we may now sing with Horace; Solvitur acris hyems gratâ vice veris & Favoni,Ode IV. ad Sextium. 'Ac neque jam stabulis gaudet pecus aut arator igni, &c.
Favonius Breath sharp Winters Ice doth thaw; Beasts leave their Stalls, Plough-swains their Fires forgo; Nor are the Meadows White with Drifts of Snow. Now Cytherea under Cynthia's Shine, Danceth around, and lovelyGraces join With Nymphs, the Earth in measured Strains to beat, Whilst Vulcan in his glowing Forge doth sweat. Now with Green Myrtle crown thy sleek oyl'd Head, Or Flowers, which the mellow Earth doth spread. To Faunus now in Groves I do advise, Either a Kid or Lamb thou sacrifice. Which Counsel we took, not out of an Epicurean Fancy, to live merrily, because of the common Necessity of Death, as in this Ode he exhorteth Sextius; but to compensate for our past Labours, and enable us the better to undergo this troublesome Journy: Here we indulged in a never-dying Green Orchard, mixing the Flavour of the Oranges, which are as good as grow, with our new Siras Wine, exhilarating our selves with the true Relish, and Natural Sweets of this delightful Rural Seat. But the Checquer-work of this World prepared other Business for the succeeding Day, bringing us over high Rocks, made plain by Cost and Pains: Here on the Tops of Mountains we only saw the Snow; however, the Winds blowing off thence, made us feel our quaking Joints struck through with horrid Numbness; by which means nothing more frequently happen'd, than one quarter of an hour to be seized with shivering Blasts; and when they were over, the Sun by its powerful Heat another Quarter to scorch our Skin, exposed to his Rays; by which sudden Alterations, not only our Hands and Faces were vexed, but our whole Bodies suffered Lan∣guishment, as Ovid before us had tried in his Exile. Cum modo Frigoribus premitur, modo solvitur Aestu Tempore non certo, corpora Languor habet. After we had run this Gantlope,We begin to lose the Win∣ter. the West Winds setting in, the Season grew more mild, and the 5th of February we set out long before Day, which hitherto we had not done; and in our way found sprouting between Bonaru and Rhadar, Sanctonicum, Wormwood, Maudlin, Tansy, Sowthistles, White Horehound, or rather Hermo∣dactyl, bearing such a Flower as Saffron, on which the breeding Bezoar-Goats do feed; the Lilly of the Valley, as also, which is rare, Grass, or rather a kind of Grass like our Moss, or such as we see grow among Pavements after a Shower of Rain with us: This was admired by our Interpreter, as if no Place in the World ex∣celled this; which must be imputed to the home-bred Temper of those Persians who never stir abroad, or the nescio quâ dulcedine cun∣ctos, which adopts a Fondness of their own: In which I pronounce these People happy; for they have small regard either to Foreigners or their Countries, in respect of their Native Soil or Abilities, con∣ceiting
themselves superlative in every thing: And from this Habit of Affectation, I have often, I confess, declared them the French in these Parts, though they raise themselves a small degree from the Traditions and Rudiments of the Old World. In the middle Way between Pokutal and Bury, we were threatned with Showers, but got in before they fell: This Caravan Ser Raw, since the time of our being here, is almost Thunder-struck a-pieces; and Lhor has endured the shock of two terrible Earthquakes. From whence the Air daily thicken'd in the Atmosphere,The Air grows thick. and the Sweat began to pour through our Pores, which in a more subtle Air we could not perspire, though Urine flowed there more plenti∣fully; for a Thin Air gathers and contracts the Pores, forbidding the Efflux of Heat or Spirits, constraining the Matter which otherwise would gently breathe forth, precipitating the Serum through the Urinary Conduits, and separating it from the Blood, either by Colla∣tion in the Reins, or by virtue of some particular Ferment, accord∣ing to the Doctrine of the Learned Willis. At Cormoot we met a Lion and a Spotted Deer carrying up as Pre∣sents to the Sophi from the Mogul:Our English Mastiffs ma∣ster their Li∣ons. The Lion seemed rather a Cata∣mountain, than such a Majestick Creature as ours in Europe, being nigher a Dun Colour than a Dark Red, without Beard, nor haired all from the Head down to the Crest and Thighs; about the Lips it had Bristles like a Cat, and when the Keeper streaked it, it would make a Noise much the same as a Cat when she purls: These are kept to set upon Bulls before the Emperor, which they do sneaking∣ly, coming behind them to leap upon their Quarters, which one of our right bred English Mastiffs would scorn to do; a true Bull dog being too hard a Match for one of these Lions, which has often been proved at the Court of Persia, to the Commendation of their Courage. Hereabouts the Locusts have for these Three Years successively made such waste, that they are almost famished for want of Dates; and though this Town used to supply other Parts, they are forced to seek Sustenance elsewhere for themselves. On Valentine's Eve, two Days before we could see the Sea, we per∣ceived its Stench, the Sun being up some time every day, before he could dispel the Vapours raised thence. The French Agent came to us at Band Ally,Returned to Gombroon▪ before the Cock∣crow on the 15th of February, and at Noon the Dutch Commodore welcomed our Return, and conducted us to Gombroon from the Caun's Garden; as did all the Merchants congratulate our Arrival, as well as all the Ships in the Road saluted us upon our entring the Factory. Since our Departure from Gombroon,The English President af∣fronted by the Caun. the Caun has been playing his Pranks, having expended vast Sums to buy off his former Offences and Rapins committed in his Government, and endeavouring now by unjust means to reimburse himself: Wherefore no sooner was our Agent come to Port, but he caught our Broker, a Rich Banyan, and clapt him into Prison, contrary to the Royal Mandat granted him, extorting from him Five hundred Thomands, denying Leave for our Agent in the mean time to go Aboard Ship, in order to embark for his Presidency at Surat; begirting the House with Soldiers, lest he
should clancularly get away, as he had plotted, and which at last he did, adorning the first Step to his new Province with a foul Dis∣grace; when he might have done more honourably as the Dutch did, by defending their House, and driving away the Guards, keeping their Broker safe in their House, sending a Courier on purpose to ac∣quaint the Emperor; with Orders to let him know, That if this Caun were not removed, he must give them License to be gone. Whilst these things were transacting, Two Stout Ships from Ba∣tavia, well appointed with Men and Arms, came before Gombroon, when the Caun began to comply; and our Two Ships sent to fetch the President, sneak'd away, doing nothing. Upon our Arrival at Port the Flemish Ships were braving it in the Road, and the Caun, to hinder our protesting against his Proceedings, was very humble, and sent to let us understand he would upon the English Account submit to any thing: Wherefore to avoid being deluded by his pre∣tended Friendship, which we were not strong enough to affront; and fearing we should have been used as Properties to an Arbitrament, we feigned Excuses to leave the Town for Asseen. There was not in this Contest a Banyan left in Town,The Banyans fly. they shifting for themselves as soon as they foresaw the Storm a coming, removing all to Congo, under the Caun of Lhor, for Refuge, when they saw the Death of the Laws, when no Sanctuary could be had, nor no Pro∣mises nor Oaths were obligatory, Religion made a Stale, and their Houses likely to be made a Prey: Being invited to return, and asked a reason for their Desertion, they gave the Tyrant the same Answer the Fox did the Lion. —Quia me vestigia terrent, Omnia te adversum spectant sed nulla retrorsum. For the Caun in his Cups (which indeed being sober he has more thanHis Tyranny. once repeated) transgressed not only the Bonds and Ties of Govern∣ment, but even of Humanity, perpetrating those Wickednesses which are only essential to Salvages, though never but once called to reckon for them; which once had like to have forfeited his Head as well as Place. The Story is this: Having cruelly butchered one of these Hea∣thens to possess himself of his Wealth, by ripping up his Belly, inso∣much that his Entrails issued forth with his Blood, he was so brutish and hard-hearted as to sport at the Misery of this helpless Wretch, fallen into the bloody Hands of this Merciless Hellhound: His Friends not being able to deliver him by Force, made use of a directer way to Revenge, and engaged by their Money the great Favourites at Court; thinking no other means so proper to restore to them the Loss of their Assassinated Relation, as by procuring the Overthrow of the Caun: Which while they were endeavouring, and had cast him under a Cloud, yet they failed in that Power, whereby he was able to fight against them with their own Weapons, he squeezing them here, while the Great Men drained them like Courtiers, let∣ting their Suit fall in the Mid-way; so that while they flagged in their Bribes, he recovered on their Ruin: The King being only in∣formed
of some Misdemeanor, but never instructed with Truth enough to ordain a total Deprivation, or a Punishment equal to the blackness of the Crime: On which score it is the Banyans at this time shun his Dominions, as a Pilot would Charibdis, or any ock he is certain to split on. We being at Asseen,Going to Asseen. the busy Birds in Rearing and Contriving their Nests and Tenements, became Emblems of Self-preservation; nor were we less taken with productive Nature, that lets not the most unfit Soil want her influence as far as it is capable to bring forth, she not being Idle, even in this place; which as it delighted our Minds, this being the moderatest Season, so we had some pleasure afforded for the exercise of our Bodies, as Hunting the Wild Boar, which fatten themselves chiefly on Dates, and are therefore worth the Toil and Danger of Assailing; and for to secure the Flcks, it is no less meritorious to Chase the Wolf, for which, not only Bows and Arrows, Sword and Gun, but Spears, Pikes, and Dogs are called in to gain the Conquest; these are Martial Explos▪ the Timerous Hare and Antilope require not all these Weapons, but only giving them the Law of the Field. At Genoe are wholsome Hot Baths,We Visit the Hot Baths at Genoe. whose Fame made us pierce Twenty Mile nigher the high Mountains than Asseen, yet seeming to overshadow Gombroon; these Baths arise between the Promontories facing India, half a Mile out of the great Road to Carmania, out of several places in a deep Bottom rather than a Valley, and where they have their source also: As they slide along they Line the Earth with a Mossy Slime tinctured with a yellow Sulphureous Green; under which are Stones of live Brimstone exhaling a Nitrous Scent, stinking like that Water the Mariners call Bilge Water; their Taste was a Brackish Sweet, not Nitrous; to the sight they are Clear and Perspicuous, of a Citrine Colour (or like Lie well Boiled) from their Transparency, by the reflecting of the slimy Matter at the Bot∣tom; for otherwise taken up in a Vessel not subject to be tainted by them, they are Diaphanous; Extracted by Fire there remains a Salt, both Vomiting and Purging, more violent than Vitriol or Antinomy. For as Galen Teaches, Lib. Nat. fac. 2do. Salt things Elaborated by immoderate Heat, are troublesome to the Stomach: They are not so hot as Boiling Water, but rather by the mildness of their Heat they cause Transpiration, that if you please to stay longer in them, Sweat may be raised to the highest degree: The most usual space of tarrying in them, is from Half an Hour to an Hour, and then betaking themselves to a Warm Bed, lie an Hour o Two longer well covered, or as the Spirits serve, which is repeated, Three, Se∣ven, or Nine times; as if God delighted in an Odd Number, as may be observed in the Pool of Bethesda, or of Naaman's Washing in Jordan. They are held good against all humoral Chronical Distempes,Their Virtues. and Remedy inveterate Ulcers, Cleanse and Hea Old Sores, Ease Aches▪ and Pains of the Limbs, Joints, and Membrances for which they are much frequented: In places where they bubble up they cast a Spume of many Colours; which those troubled with Scabs, or
the part affected; which, they say, works Miracles. If Silver be cast into it, or receive the Vapours, it looks like Cop∣pers which  like the Steam from a Pot of Water sthing over the Fire;  chief Spring seems to flow out of an hollow  the Earth; which whether it be required to make it so, I  height, capable of  but the ides are jagged and always cautioned to have a Hole,  Well, a Square that are most rapid and pellucid Saltness and swift Stream. On its Banks grow Palm-Trees, not so long liv'd as elsewhere, if by the decayed Trunks any guess may be made; Hounds-Tongue, and little Fishes live in them. Nokada Biram,Two Hospi∣tals Built at the Charge of Two Banyans. the  Broker, and Tocsey, our Banyan, have  an handsome Hospital: That of the  Square▪ Capped with Four round the middle, with Two Rows made his more close, upheld by Nine  in the middle, with a stately a close Gell behind, commodious to in,  for Rain Water; they being both neat and durable Wor. Here  large  of Discourse, which we will only touch upon;  that little leisure afforded us before our Re∣turn, concerning these Natural Baths, and those Artificial ones every wherein use among the Eastrn People: As for the first Principles of things, though among the  Contentions of Philosophers there be  we shall at present insist on the Four∣fold one of  nor can  from hence apprehend any of them , but as the Searchers into Nares Secrets have delivered it defined unto us. Water  Cold  Moist Body,All Waters partake of the Conditions of the Earth they pass through. in which principally living Creatures Swim and have their Being and receive  much Glearer and more Lympid it is, by so  it is the  to all . From whence the Approbation of , Aph. 24. Lib. 5. the lightest Waters e soonest ; whence he concludes them the Clearest,  since all Waters (except ain-Water, which also is the  exhaled) are inclosed, or at least by the Earth, they are subject to a perpetual agitation of Particles, in greater or lesser quantities▪ or in different places,
as they flow through the several Caverns or Cavities, so they partake of several conditions in their passage; which distinguishes them, as Sea-Water, River-Water, Rain-Water, Spring-Water, Well-Water, Salt, Bitter, Vinous, or Warm Waters, deriving their Name , constantly arising Hot out of the Ground from the nearness of some Hot Minerals; and for this reason it is almost all of them have an Hot and Dry quality, whereby they help Moist and Cold Tempers most of all; which Faculty Platerus at∣tributes to the nature of Lime; which leans on the Sentence of Aristotle, who in his Second Part, Chap. 2. says, there is left in Lime a kind of Mother, , Adusta fere omnia habent aliquid cali∣ditatis, ut calx, cinis, &c. Almost all Burnt things have remaining in them something of Heat. But to let that pass as not being much to the purpose: All Waters, in general, participate of the Mixture and Nature of those Places through which they take their Current, though all do not alike strike the Senses, because some have a lesser Tincture than others; and Heterogeneous Particles confounded, or confused, in a larger Vehicle, are not so easily perceived by the Tongue; which proves no more than this, That whatever Water has a singular propriety from the common Water, must come under the denomination of Mineral Water. Which,Mineral Wa∣ters distin∣guished from Common. with Varenius, we draw from a threefold Fountain, viz. from Corporeal, Spiritual, and a Mixture of either; those which run through Subterranean Meanders, in which the Metalline Earths are not over dense, they carry with them the Grains of those Mi∣nerals, and therewith beget the first Corporeal Waters. If the Ores are less dense, as Vitriol, Sulphur, and Salts, which dissolve of themselves in Water, these create the second Class of Cor∣poreals, or Mixed. And those in their passage which are impregnated with the Fumes of these Minerals, are, as it were, rectified Spiritual Waters, and make the most refined Order of them all. Out of these Three proceed Mineral Waters, which are either Golden, Silver, Tin, Lead, or Iron, Waters; Waters of common Salt, Aluminous, Vitriolated, Bituminous, Sulphurious, or Anti∣monial: Waters of several Earths, Stones, Lime, Chalk, and Ochre, Cinnabar, Marble, Alabaster, and last of all, Mercurial Waters. The differences are to be referred to the individual Species of every Water,Their differ∣ences. as far as relates to their Essence; but because to inferior Capacities such do not so readily occur, they are made more familiar by Sower, Bitter, and the like: The Explanation whereof, both as to their Causes and Generation, is the Business in hand. Sea-Waters, Salt or Bitter (Bitterness being only an exalted de∣gree of Saltness) come rather from the Pores through which they are strained, than from the grosser Particles remaining after the heat of the Sun has Boiled off the Flegmy parts: Rain-Waters extracted by Rarefaction, are again Condensed, and become Sweet in their falling: River-Waters vary according to their Colour and Taste from the Qualities of those Conduits through which they take their Course, as do Spring-Waters, which have a double Origination;
either from the Deep, or from Above; the one from the Ocean, the other from Snow or Rain; for by an obscure Conveyance, the Wa∣ter of the Sea issues through the Bowels of the Earth, leaving both Salt and Bitter Taste behind, and forces it self in nature of a Syphon up to the highest Clifts, as is demonstrated by those Hydraulick En∣gines commonly known among us, supposing at the same time the Sea to equal the Tallest Peak the Land can brag of. Sower Waters have for their Progenitors Vitriol and Alum, (not the Smoke of Sulphur) either of which are imbued with Acidity or Acerbity, whereas Sulphur enjoys neither; which is found true, however the Chymical Spirit of Sulphur drawn off, as also of Salt, become so sharp. But to obviate that, If Sowerness must be beholden to the Sulphurious Vapours, how comes it to pass that all Hot Baths have not that very Taste? Which both sufficient Authority and Ex∣perience prove to have their Entity from these Two Causes. 1. By the Admixture of Sulphurious Effluviums, while the Water creeps through these Mines, for to break out of the Fountains from which they are strained. 2. From Fumes, Vapours, or Exhalations, within the Earth, where the Brimstone is Pure or Impure, as from Pit-Coals, Am∣ber, &c. But these Waters of Genoe, as far as I could gather by Spagyrical Solutions, have to their Sulphur an Addition both of Antimony and Nitre, whence arise their sweet Salt, and fore-recited Operations. Besides these Baths,The Medical Benefits of their Baths or Hummums. which are rare, there are more commonly Balneo's to be hired at easy Rates; of which I shall say no more than of the Benefits received by them (not to note the Injunction of their Law); when Bodies are parched by intolerable Heat, and the Dust galls and frets the Skin by Travel, then are they not only cleansed, but highly refreshed by bathing in sweet Water; so that they are convenient both in Dry and Moist Airs; for in Dry, without these they could no more breathe, than those Aristotle testifies of, could with∣out Bags of Water on the Top of Olympus; and in Moist, they are as necessary to wash Dirt and Sand out of the Pores of their Bodies. As for the Medical Intent, many Distempers caused by Fulness of Humours, or ill-bred Chyme, are expelled by this Exorcism; but the Grand Expectation relating to Venereal Diseases, is baffled and defeated by a groundless Fallacy. On the Day of the Vernal Equinox,Noe Rose. we returned to Gombroon, when the Moors introduce their New-Year Aede, or Noe Rose, with Banquetting and great Solemnity. The Air,The Air moist. which at Spahaun is o Serene that it leaves no Impurity upon Metals, is of another Temper here, all things contracting Soil and Tarnish, be they never so carefully preserved from the daily Increase of a thick corrupting Air. Which proceeds from the Reign of the South Wind usual at this Season, from whence the Brain and Nervous Offspring suffer under an unnatural Moisture; ; Capiti aqua est perniciosa, Hern. Paraph. in Part. Hyp. Aph. 22. Lib. 5. Sicut Aph. 5. lib. 5. The South Wind dulls the Hearing, and Quick∣ness of Sight, brings Listlessness and an Unweildiness over the whole Body: To which Inconveniences, not only of the Wind,
Sand, and eating of Dates, we may add the constant feeding upon Fish also, as an Enemy to the Eyes; for by such Food the Body is filled with putrid Humours, whence proceed Malignant Fevers, Gout, Falling-sickness, and an Iliad of Distempers. The reason to be ren∣dred for all this, may be, Because the Strength of the Nerves con∣sist in a Mediocrity of Heat; for what comes nearest to Heat, agrees better with their Constitution; but what brings Moisture is most pre∣judicial, according to the Mind of the great Author of Physick, Aph. 16. lib. 5. Which notwithstanding, as every Nature is disposed, so it is affected with this or that Disease: For the Fountain of all Maladies, with their several kinds, spring either from the Irregu∣larities of Air or of Diet, since we are nourished by both, and can no longer live than while we breathe and suck in Air, than we can subsist without Food: Such therefore as the Air is, such are the Spi∣rits and Humours generated thereby; such as the Humours, such are the solid Parts of the Body, and in general the whole Microcosm. By Repletion therefore of the Brain, the Optick Nerves are debi∣litated and clouded by the Impurity of the Innate and Adventitious Air: The beginning of the Nerves being filled with Humidity, not only the forementioned Sicknesses, but Ulcerous and Foul Sores, by the aptness of the Air at this Juncture combining with other con∣curring Accidents, make an open Way for their Procreation. Hence the Maritime Coasts, from the filthy Exhalations and nasty Vapours diffusing themselves, impress a Dyscrasy, or undue Mixture over the Mass of Blood: To wit; As if the Sulphurous Saline Particles should be exalted, a Rankness of Temperament follows; by which means the Spirits are depress'd, and the Blood alter'd into a sickly corroding Habit, for want of liberal Evacuation through the Emunctuaries, and so are quite degenerated. As we see, for instance, now daily, the Clouds hovering about the bottom of the Mountains, so the Hu∣mours profligated no other way, settle in the extreme Parts, till they break out into ungovernable Ulcers, Scurvy, and the like. To avoid therefore the Stench of the Port, as well as Commu∣nication with the Caun, we often exchange Gombroon for Asseen, which now is perfumed with Jasmine of all sorts, Roses, Violets, and Prim∣roses, with other fragrant Flowers; here grow also the Black Hore∣hound, Spurge, Catminth or Nepe, Liverwort, the lesser Centaury, Hedg Mustard, Wintercress, Grunsel, Field-Poppy, Broom, Goose∣foot, Arach, Cichory and Dill: The Barley growing here is now fit for the Scythe, being their first Harvest. In this Place as we rode to take the Air through Stony and Barren Places, we met a Channel of living Waters, brought from the Mountains (whence it breaks forth) by an Aquaduct, sometimes over little Bridges, some∣times piercing the very Mountains, at the Cost of the Dutch Banyan (the first of this Tribe of Men that deserves Praise for his Contempt of Money, lavished in many Places for the Publick Utility), to the Dutch Garden, where it disembogues its self into a great Stone Ci∣stern, for the use of the Farms on that side of the Town. All these Plains bear Indian Shrubs,Indian Plants grow here. such Milky ones as we have described there; but near the Head of the Channel, in an Hollow made by the falling of the Water in the Rains, grows Willow-wort;
Lysimachia cum flore albo quinque foliis expanso è rubescente calice prognato floret; which discovers a Participation or Communication of this side of Persia with India: But that which farther confirms it, is, that as in our Way home we made Nabond our Road, a Fishing-Town a Pharsang to the Eastward of Gombroon, on the Brink of the Gulph, we found two Temples after the Custom of the Idolatrous Indians, where a Devote of theirs had drawn a great Concourse, at the Re∣port of his Fasting Nine Days; which being ended, the rich Bany∣ans made a Feast and Presented him with Gifts; for which he return∣ed them an Ear of Grain spiked, in that time Sown before their Mammon, or God, with a Silver Head, which they bore away as a thing Sacred. Here are many Tombs of their Religious Men, who are wholly devoted to their Superstitions; and because of the diversity of in∣huming them, I shall give you the manner as I received it; A round Pit, in fashion of a Well, being made, they place a stone of Ormus Salt for him to stand on, and another weighty one is put on his Head; a Lamp being lighted, they lay Bread and a Jarr of Water by him, and give him a Staff in his Hand with some Deneiros for his Journy; then they cover the Hole with Molds, and build a Turbi∣nated Tomb, without any Hollow more than for a burning Lamp. Thus as this part bears the fruits of their Superstition, so the Earth brings forth the Weeds of their Idolatrous Worship; the Arbor de Rais by the Portugals; by the Banyans , for the Reverence paid by them to it, the Banyan-Tree: Besides this, this Soil yields good Mango's, Water Melons, and Sweet Onions, with that rank Poyson Dutry, nighest our Solanum Lethale. At our return from our Country Delights to Gombroon, we found it clear of the Caun, he being absent, otherwise no Grist was like to come to the Shaw Bunder; for during his stay no Banyans could be invited hither; but no sooner was he gone, than they came to their Stalls, as Sheep do after the fear of the Wolf is over, to their wonted Pasture. About the beginning of April Fifteen Tall Ships,The Portugal Fleet and our new Agent arrive. with Gallies of the Portugals, appeared in this Gulf to terrify the Arabs; and about the middle of the same Month, the same Ship that carried off the President, brought us a New Agent; who being sickly, was willing to leave the Port with all expedition, to be at Spahaun before the Heats; which Journy commenced after an almost total Eclipse of the Moon, notified to us by the loud Musick and constant Hubbub continued all the while.
CHAP. IX. We go up in the Spring with our New Agent to Ispahaun:Chap. IX. Two Irish Greyhounds sent for a Present to the Emperor: We leave the Agent there, and return in the Fall. WE set out the Last of April,The hasty Re∣moval of the Agent, the Cause of the Sickliness of him and his Followers. and reached Lhor the 8th of May, which City was vehemently warm; through which Intem∣perance, whatever we eat, turned into Choler; for the Air being Hot and Dry, in respect of that we left at Gombroon, rendred the Bile thicker and sharper, whereby most of us fell sick of Cholera Morbus; and Three of our Company were taken from their Horses, not being able to sit them, and carried on Indian Litters: Others in Kedgways, or Wooden-Houses, one on each side of a Camel, tied like Panniers; by which Conveyance we carried two Irish Buck∣hounds for Presents to the Emperor, a Dog and a Bitch, as large as ever I saw; but they being cramped by this Contrivance, we were persuaded to let them loose, after we had conquered the Soultry Sandy Ways; but then it was as irksome to them to foot it over the Rocks and Stony Paths; for this, the Company had provided Shooes for them, which they found more troublesome than is reported of the Jackanapes's caught by such Apishness; so that at last they were left to their Liberty: These are such Carriages as their Women tra∣vel in, and those Passengers that wander the Deserts of Arabia. —Queis tentant & arantes arenas Littoris Assyrii viatores.— Several new Caravans on this Road have been lately overturn'd by Earthquakes, and all along they cry for Rain, both to fill their Wa∣ter-stores, and to bedew the Earth; which is most miserably parch∣ed till we come to Bonaru; in whose Plain, Wheat and Barley are newly mow'd; but the Oyl-Seed for Lamps were standing. In the Thickets along the Brooks sides grew Bitter-Sweet, and among the Corn such Weeds as choak ours in England. Chawtalk is become famous,A notable Robbery at Chawtalk. not only for its new and spacious Cara∣van, but for an Exploit lately committed on the Rhadars or Watch by half a dozen Highwaymen, who had certain Intelligence of a Prize of some Merchants having a great Charge of Money: Where∣fore they set upon the Rhadars as they were on Duty in the Caravan Gate, and beheaded their Captain, and the Caravandar, or Warden of the Caravan Seraw, and assaulted the rest unawares, slaying Eight more outright, but promised Mercy to the rest if they did not resist; Four more were wounded in making their Escape, and died of their Wounds, before they could gain Gerom. Thus having secured their Prey, they carried it off in the sight of Four hundred Men, faint-hearted and timerous Companions, only one Armenian discharging a Gun; not one else, either Merchants or
Cowardly Drovers, daring to make any Defence, but resigned themselves tamely to their Wills, while they rifled and took away above a Thousand Thomands, which amounts in our Coin to Four thousand Pound in Silver, and are hitherto undiscovered. I cannot but reflect on this Faint-heartedness with some Astonish∣ment: Only when I consider the Merchant is Insured by the Shaw∣bunder, it abates something of the Wonder; for he must restore the whole Sum to the right Owner, it being his business to find out the Thieves, and recover the Money. Hence we came to Gerom,Diary Fevers. and by labouring in the Heat of the Day to get over the Mountains, we were persecuted with Diary Fe∣vers: In this Munsel we found Aven's Mother of Thime, Mullen, Ro∣man Wormwood with a Scarlet Flower, divers sorts of Thistles, espe∣cially the Holy Thistle, a Remedy for the now raging Diseases; as I am of Opinion, Nature has provided all Regions with Medicines peculiar for their Distresses. ColoquintaColocynthis. Apples grow like a small round Gourd on the Ground. Here in the Gardens were the first true Beans and Pease I saw since I left England. The old Caravan Ser Raw at Mocock Sugta is deserted by the Cara∣van Dar,The Taran∣tula. who has shifted to a new one built by the same Hand as that lately at Chawtalk, and abandoned the declining one to Serpents, Chameleons, and Tarantulaes (which are not so venomous as in the Straits), Centipedes, and Scorpions, it lying an open Receptacle for all Wild Beasts. The North Winds about the middle of May raised many a Whirl∣wind;Pains in the Joints, and Putrid Fevers and before we came to Caifar, we found a sensible Alteration from scorching Heat to a searching Cold; by which Change, our Garments that before hung loose about us, are gathered together to wrap us close; for all which, few escaped without complaining of a sudden Pain in the Joints; and many were incident to putrid Fevers, who had indulged too largely on Raw Fruits. This sudden Mutation of the Air,Occasioned as well by the Water as Air. brought not only on Mankind, but Beasts also, Catarrhs, and Defluctions of all sorts; to wit, from Hot and Moist (whereby we were bedew'd all over with Sweat) into Hot and Dry in the Day, and at Night Cold and Dry, by rea∣son of Impetuous Blasts from the North East, by which the Pores being shut, the inclosed Humours are put into a Fluor; there being not a Man among us, nor hardly an Horse, but ran freely at the Nose: Here, as the Air varied, we left off drinking Rain-Water; which might have some Influence upon us, it being preferred before all others, as having the Sun and Ocean for its Parents: The River-Water here is muddy, and is often carried under Ground by Pits, wherefore it passes not, without leaving some Putrefaction behind; but the most indigested is Well-water, which is wholly deprived of the Sun. Nor must we slip without Remark what happen'd in our Winter-March; as we there carried the Winter with us, so now we bring the Summer; for Harvest is beginning every where, where we arrive: Though here the Barley be mowing, yet the Wheat stands, to en∣dure a farther ripening, being kept back by the Chill Winds, which
still attend us; whereby we found Fevers of all sorts (except Pe∣stilential) at Siras; Rheums distilling from the Head, Falling down of the Ʋvula, Aches and Pains, Hoarseness, and violent Coughs; as Hypocrates foretold from this Quarter, 5. Aph. lib. 3. Si autem Aquilo terram perflat; if the North-wind blows on the Earth (which it has done a long time) it brings Colds, Swelling of the Face, Sore Throats, difficulty of Breathing, Stitches, and Pleurisy; the Body is bound, and Urine flows, with cold shaking, which are constantly to be ex∣pected while this Wind rules. The Water of this Place also contributes to the Endemial Distem∣pers,The destru∣ctive Custom of drinking Ice. for it is weightier than other, which by Experience is found to offend the lower Belly, or Hypochondria, breeding Obstructions, and the Ills arising thence; nor can I excuse that destructive Custom of drinking Ice with their Liquors; which the Old Gentleman takes notice of to be of no good Consequence; Aph. 24. lib. 4. Frigida, cujusmodi sunt Nix; Cold things, such as Snow and Ice, are Enemies to the Stomach and Lungs; and so on: On which the Learned and Skilful Heurnius makes this Paraphrase, Those People that use these, are troubled with Swellings in their Throats (as on the Alps), are afflicted with Catarrhs, and live not long. But the most per∣nicious of all is the cramming themselves with much Fruit; which is a Temptation hardly to be denied, where such Plenty and so Ex∣cellent are offered; however, they fill the Body with crude and re∣bellious Humours. From all which therefore to come home to what concerns us, who had undergone some part of a Southern Winter (if it may be so called, at Gombroon), the Author of Salt Phlegm, the subsequent Spring entring with the North Winds, which are Dry, made us re∣tain that Phlegm; by which means we are followed by pertinacious and continued Fevers, as well as those that accompany Catarrhs, from the Intemperament of the Spirable Parts, whereby the Hu∣mour expressed from the Brain, distills upon the Lungs, by translati∣on of Evacuation from the Habit of the Body, where it was wont to perspire; but now those Channels being stopt, it drops from the Head, to the disturbance of the whole Frame. This Comment relates only to us; for the Natives make light of such things as we call Colds, though they are affected with them this Season, but not to so high a degree as we; for they eat and drink rather the more for them, and slight them at this time of the Year, but towards the Winter Quarter they are more cautious. I must confess it was al∣ways my Opinion, Colds were not hurtful, so long as they keep within the Bounds of a simple Cold, but rather a means to rack off the Impurities from the Blood, as the Fermentation of Wines is of the like Advantage to them; but when instead of clarifying it con∣founds the Humours, it is then to be taken care of, which daily Experience teaches it transgresses often; as almost all our English being now down, can witness. The 29th of May,The Agent leaves Siras. the Agent, weary of these uncertain Turns of Weather, proceeded to make Trial of more steddy at Ispahaun; but most of the rest being sick, and the Father Visitador of the Carme∣lites, a Spaniard, and a good Scholar, having been long grieved
with a continued Fever, and finding no Relief from the Country Physicians, persuaded the Agent to leave me at Siras, which he com∣plied with, perceiving an urgent necessity on the part of the English. In which Stay I fell sick my self,I fall sick. after the Father was recovered; and before I was got up (for this Sickness had well nigh cost me my Life, being one of these peevish Fevers), a great Saint, because Rich and one of Mahomet's Kindred, prevailed with the Father, who he heard was restored to his Health by my means, and their Convent being seated here by his Permission (he being Treasurer of the Pro∣vince, and as wealthy, though by unjust means, as any in the Em∣pire, next the Sophi), to speak to me to give him a Visit, being laid up by Debaucheries both of Wine and Women. The Respect I had to the Padre, made me yield to be carried to his Court in one of his Palenkeens or Chairs, at a time I was more fit to be kept at Home and in Bed; for that all the Armenian Chri∣stians, as well as Foreign, seemed to be concerned, not out of Love, but fear of this powerful Man to mischief them: Whereupon my Attendance is engaged, and a Million of Promises, could I restore him to his Health, laid down from his Wives, Children, and Rela∣tions, who all (with the Citizens, as I could hear going along, pray to God that the Hackin Fringi, the Frank Doctor, might kill him) play'd the Hypocrites, wishing his Death; the first to com∣pleat their Expectation of what he might leave them, the other for his being a Plague to them; as it proved after his Recovery, for they performed as much as he, dismissing me with a Compliment, and no other Reward. After my Strength came again,On my Reco∣very I set for∣ward for Spa∣haun. though this Blade had provided for my Diversion at his Summer-houses, (which are built (as the en∣slaving Friars do on Penances their most stately Buildings) by his usurped Authority, of the Obligation they had to serve him, as Ma∣homet's Kindred, and the meritorious Tye he had on their Conscien∣ces that way, by which means the Emperor has not more stately Palaces;) yet I refused his Offer. Tarrying here from the 23d of May till the 6th of July, I am ca∣pable of giving some Account how the Air proves so fatal to Stran∣gers: It seems to enjoy a Mean between Lhor and Ispahaun; not so hot as the former, nor so subtile as the latter; for which reason it would be generally more healthy, were it not for these North-Winds, which set in every Afternoon, and continue till the Sun is a good height next Morning: Insomuch that in the space of Twenty four Hours, there is a Turn from the highest degree of Heat into the ex∣tremest degree of Cold, which infers the former Diseases (ad Aph. 1. lib. 3. , &c.) these last Three Months together mostly. After these are spent, the Heats bring Health, for no other reason but because they are constant; which lasts from June till Sep∣tember, when these Winds begin their Reign afresh; and according to the Observation of the 4th Aph. in the same Book, In singulis an∣ni partibus cum eodem die modo caloris modo frigoris dominatu Coelum tenetur Autumnales morbos expectare oportet, hoc est, : Diseases are unequal for Matter, Symptoms, Invasions, Judgments, and Determinations; which I experienced to be true all this time,
both in respect of Judgment and Ill Habit; for if it happen'd to be a Tertian, Quotidian, or Quartan, they were all uncertain; the uncertainty of the Season broke that Vicissitude of Motion and Rest belonging to the Humours, which interruption occasioned the diffi∣culty of their Cure. And now taking the direct Road for Spahaun,Polygore and Aubgurrum. I had joined with me an Armenian▪ Frenchman (a Wealthy Trader), a Dominican and a Carmelite Friar. Early in the Morning of the following Day we had forsaken Siras, we made Polygore, Six Pharsangs; it is a famous Cara∣van without Entertainment, by reason of bad Water; wherefore at Night we reached Aubgurrum, an old Caravan Ser Raw, better provi∣ded with Water, though the Name of the Place would intimate no∣thing less, being called the Hot Water; this is Three Pharsangs be∣yond Polygore. Hence we entred a Fenny kind of Ground, occasioned by the Overflow of Bindamire; over which, Stone Causeways and Bridges were laid, where convenient, for half a Pharsang: In this Way, though we met not with Towns so frequently, yet we found the Plain overspread with Husbandmen and Shepherds, dwelling in Tents made of Hair-Cloth, at the End of the Plain of Persepolis, which we could discover plainly with our naked Eyes, but came not near it, cutting a shorter Way to Maijm, over a Bridge almost con∣sumed with Age, and Force of the Waters; at which Town, after sufficient Thunder and Lightning, it shower'd apace. The Harvest is backwarder in these Fruitful Valleys than whence we came from; but these kindly Rains plump and clear it for an hopeful Crop. Two Days after, we took Imaum ZadahImaum Zadah. in our Course, where Ma∣stick is made; the Mountains hereabouts are productive of Wines. Imaum Zadah was another of their adored Prophets or Successors to Mortis Ally, who lies buried here in a Neat Stone Sepulchre; all the Town therefore belongs to the Mullahs or Priests attending here, and is surrounded with a Wall, having only Admission at one Gate. In the Medows between Ogoan and Asspass, we met with two Troops of stroling Shepherds, moving with their Families, Flocks, Herds, and Substance, with their Hairy Houses on their Camels Backs. As also huge Droves of Horses for the Emperor's Breed: But the most surprizing was to see Corn mowing and newly sprung up at one and the same time. Arriving at Cuscusar as soon as it was Day,The Reproof of a Goloomy Shaw. and having laid my self to Repose, a Courier, or Goloomy Shaw, from the Emperor, wait∣ing the coming in of our Caphala, to press the best Horse he could lay his Hands on, seeing my Sumpture-horse come in, seized it for the King's Use; which alarmed the whole Caravan Ser Raw, desiring my Servant to wake me, and inform me I was in danger to lose my Horse, and withal beseeched my Protection for theirs, some of them being high priz'd: The thing was new to me, nor did I under∣stand till then my Authority; for none of them durst oppose a Chu∣per or Horse-Post sent from the King on an Errand (which Privilege is granted only to Europe Nations), they being wholly at the Devo∣tion of their Sovereign, (Foreign Ministers with their Retinues be∣ing exempted); but seeing me refractory to his Proceedings, he
came to me full mouth'd in the King's Name; I returned Answer, in that Name I refused to obey him: He persisting in his Demands af∣ter it was made known who I was, the Servants and People there were ready to beat him, had I encouraged them; I bad them only inder him from taking any manner of Beast belonging to them, and do no manner of Violence to him. He finding no good to be done with me, began to terrify the Caphala Bashee and his Crew; but I undertaking their Quarrel, he departed, not without some bouncing Curses in the Turkish Language, finding himself defeated of his ex∣pectation, and was content to make the Villages find him one; which indeed he should have done at first, had he not hoped to have been brought off by their mollifying him with Gilt; but missing that End, he went away with Shame and Fury, while I staid gratu∣lated with the Thanks of all the Travellers, and on the 19th of July was handsomly conducted by them into Spahaun. For the defect of Rain-water this Year,Want of Rain. this Woody City suffers, the Trees decay, the River is dried up, Corn is scarce, and a general Drought invades all things, so that a Famine is mightily dreaded: For to supply these Wants, Well-water is made use of; which not being so familiar, by its deadly Coldness defrauds both Men, Brutes, and Plants, of their Natural Nourishment; whereupon Diseases ensue. Nor is the winding Quarter of the Year less contributing, the Ra∣ging Dog having not only shewed his Teeth, but bit hard, the latter part of August passing into Autumn with unsteady Heats and Colds; introducing sore Eyes, Lasks, spitting of Blood, dejected Appetite, ill Concoction, Fistulaes in Ano, Leprosy, St. Anthony's Fire, creep∣ing Ulcers, Tetters, Morphew. Last Years Honour is not paid to this, for the Trees every where shed their imperfect Leaves, not bringing their Fruit in due season; so that the Autumnal Tribute falls short, the Summer going out without bringing things to Matu∣rity, by reason of the too hasty approach of the blustring Fall; though the Skies clear up to a Misfortune, whereby , from the Summers Heat, and dry Autumns, Dysuries and Stranguries among Children, Hyp. Aph. 4. Sect. 3. as also Empyemaes. This notwithstanding,Heste Behest, Paradise upon Earth. we are tempted at the Fame of one of the Emperor's Gardens, called Heste Behest, i. e. Paradise upon Earth, in Imitation of Cosroes, their former King, to make a pleasant Pilgri∣mage: It is a sweet Place doubtless, were it cloathed with its Glory; but as it is, it is a Rich Piece; the Summer-house in the middle is sa∣luted by two Channels, in which are Ships and Boats to represent a Naval Scene of War; Swans and Pelicans find here their diversion; the Summer house is built entirely of polished Marble, the Arch of the Cupilo is Inlaid with Massy Gold; upon the Walls are depainted the famous Actions of their Heroes; the Tank in the middle is all of Silver, the Posts are stuck with Looking-glasses, reflecting the Po∣stures of the Body, and the Figures of the whole Fabrick; an Hemi∣spherical Turret presses on Four Pillars, which are the main Sup∣porters. For all this Excess the Poor do murmur,Murmurers a∣gainst the Go∣vernment. who have not any Care taken for their Subsistence; and not only the Inferior Rank, but
the Patricii, begin to exclaim against the Negligence of the Govern∣ment, while those who should provide for them in this Exigency, (from Provinces blessed with more Increase) instead thereof squander or sell abroad what should be applied to their Maintenance at home. In these Straits they find Pretences to cast an Odium on the Divan or Council; and to that purpose have recriminated the Chief Favourite at Court, laying to his Charge not only the Miscarriage of his Ma∣ster, but the effeminating and debauching him with Wine and Women, and enervating him by Witchcraft, (he being neither able to Stand or Ride); and for Proof of this latter, they had taken from his Surcoat a Paper wrote in the Hebrew Tongue, full of Magick: Which whether true or false, half a dozen Jewish Levites, accused as Accessories, were ripped open; but not confessing in their bitterest Torments, any thing against the Steward of the King's Houshold, he was again received into Grace, and intrusted with the Manage∣ment of Affairs; they having no Redress by this Complaint, but ra∣ther a Continuation of their Miseries, a sad Cry for Want of Bread continuing. Although the Emperor espoused this Great Man's Cause,The Steward restored to Fa∣vour, the Phy∣sician hang'd. at once to assert his own Authority, and skreen him from the Fury of his Persecutors; yet another Menial Servant in Disgrace never recover∣ed, till he had given full Satisfaction to his Revenge; viz. his Chief Physician: He being dismiss'd the Court, lived in Repute some time in the City, till the Emperor discarded his Chamberlain; when being informed that this imprudent Physician was entertaining at a Feast the Eunuch he had turned out of his Service, sent a Messenger to call his Physician; who supposing it was to be readmitted, spruc'd himself, that he might be the better accepted before the King, and went on chearfully, till coming under the Palace-Gate he saw a Rope prepared to tye him up; which was the Reward he received for his Unadvisedness. Amidst these Distractions and Heats, it was no time for our Agent to move for an Audience; and the Time of Shipping drawing on, it was convenient some should appear at Port; whereupon I am again commanded to Gombroon, the Agent staying for the Benefit of the Air, as well as to watch a Time to appear before the Sophi; which was a thing of great Difficulty and Expence to the Company, by reason of the several Officers of different Interests, employed as Instruments to procure it, besides the little Leisure the Emperor af∣fords himself for Business; it seldom costing less than a Thousand Thomands in Fees and Presents. The Irish Buckhounds brought up for that end, were admired and talked of by all, and represented to be as big as Camels; and though they were young, proved swift Creatures, I seeing the Bitch in our Journey turn an Antelope, which none of their Hounds ever came near; and had the Dog been yare, no doubt but they had seized it. The Rarity of them is a thing of Moment for the Emperor's De∣light;Irish Grey∣hounds a Pre∣sent for the Emperor. nor may we be less assured of the Terror they strike on their Fancy, when I shall relate what passed at Mussaferry in the Caravan Ser Raw there, as they were bringing up to Spahan: The Dog, which was the biggest, and at other times less voracious, and better con∣ditioned
than the Bitch, being let loose, rambled about the Caravan for what he could get to satisfy his Hunger; whilst an Hodge (one of their Pilgrims to Mahomet's Tomb) who was at his Devotion on the most conspicuous place of the Ser Raw (they loving to be seen of Men), had placed a Bowl of Buttermilk tempered for his Tooth, ready by him, to fall to after his Prayers; he bowing his Face to the Ground, as their Custom is to worship, and there lying prostrate: The Dog scenting the Bowl, mounted the Quadrangle, and clap∣ping one Leg on the Neck of the Hodge, kept him in that Posture, while he had made cleaner Work than the Pilgrim, who for fear durst neither stir nor cry out, lest he should provoke so terrible a Monster to devour him; but silently passed by both the Affront (for if a Dog touch them they are Nigess, i. e. defiled) and the Loss; while in the mean time it was occasion of much Laughter to the whole Caravan Ser Raw, to behold the Man of lofty Thoughts of his own Purity, thus handled by the Beast, and none offering to step in to his Rescue, till we had called him off; for which the Hodge thought himself obliged to return us Thanks, for delivering him from so great danger. At Moxutebeggy,A Robber. as we were returning to Gombroon, we met with one of the Robbers (or one apprehended as one of them) that so boldly set upon the Caravan at Chawtalk, being under a Guard of Soldiers, pinion'd, and loaded with Chains: He is a long-hair'd Black, of the Province of Ketchemacroon, formerly Hyrcania, lately reduced by the Valour of the now-imprison'd Caun of Siras: They are carrying him to Ispahaun, to receive his Sentence and Judgment from the Emperor; it being an Enterprize of that Fame, and so much in every one's Mouth, that the Punishment is to be as Exemplary, as the Fact Notorious. Some people more than whisper, as if the ne∣cessitous Caun of Bunder were not only an Abettor, but an Accom∣plice in this Villany: But a Man had as good be out of the World, as lye under the Scandal of an Ill Name. In this Passage the Evenings and Mornings were so intensely Cold, as to fix Icicles to our Metarrhaes, as they hung under our Horses Belly; although from Nine in the Forenoon until Three in the Af∣ternoon, it was extremely Hot. When we left Spahaun; Cotton had just broke the Cod, and an imperfect sort of Barley, sown only to soil their Cattel, was crept out of the Hose, being as Green as Grass; but as we drew nearer Siras, all was mowed, and the Vintage being over, they were left common to the Cattel, who fatten on these Shrubs; so that what once tickled the Spleen of a Philosopher, might here hourly give him the Diversion, Thistles being their choicest Fodder. The Forerunners of the approaching Cold are the Colums,Colums the Forerunners of the Colds. who fly in Flocks daily over our heads; these, impatient of the Extremity of Heat or Cold, take now their Flight towards the Warm Coun∣tries, and when the Ram ends his Reign, return to their Northern Quarters. Bartholin Junior relates something of the Swan, agree∣able to what I observed in India of this Bird, concerning the Aspera Arteria, from whence is conceived the reason of its obstreperous and loud Note: His Words are these, Diversum tamen esse situm in
Cygno & plane singularem; longior enim cum sit, in sterni capsulam in∣curvo flexu se insinuat, moxque ex fundo capsulae sursum regreditur & claviculis ascensis ad thoracem se flectit, &c. De fistula pulmonari verba faciens. It's of a different Make from other Fowls, and is wound up, as has been said, in the Breast-bone as in a Case, sometimes single, sometimes double, like a writhen Trumpet; they have long Necks, and long Feet, of an Ash-Colour, and great Bodies as large as a Wild Turky; their Flesh but course. The latter end of October we departed from Siras, not before my Customer the Siad had sent for me, to desire those Medicines where∣with he had been so unexpectedly recovered: I delay'd going to him till I was certain the Caphala was out of the City, when waiting on him I reaped the same fair Promises and Expressions I had done be∣fore; wherefore I told him my Physick was packed up, and my Ser∣vant gone with the Caphala; he told me he would send a Couple of his trustiest Domesticks, which were a Priest and another, to the end of the Munsel, which I told him he might do: At my Return to the Factory, there being present a Number of Christians and others to attend our Motion out of the City, most thought I had received a Rich Reward, therefore they demanded how I had sped? I answered, As I had before; at which one that knew the Temper of the Man, replied in Linguo Frank, Foi multo ben ill non tenho terardo voso Chapeo; It was very well you came home with your Hat, and that he took not that off your Head: However, at the end of the Munsel I was not at Leisure to speak with his Messengers, who understanding the reason, had Ingenuity enough to blush at their Master's unhandsome dealing with me. This Varlet, of the Race of Mahomet, two or three days before our Arrival at Siras, at the Funeral of one of his Wives, sent Fifteen hun∣dred of his own She-Slaves to attend her to the Grave, out of his own Family; so superfluously abounding is he in all manner of Luxury. We came into Siras with frowning Weather: Horrida tempestas Caelum contraxit & imbres. But parted thence with a suitable Remainder of Autumn; for the Grapes were in the Press, and the new Wines in the Ferment, yet the Pomgranats were on the Trees, nor was the Fall of the Leaf set in: In the Fields were Millet, hurtful to Pullen, but Food for the Poor for Bread; in the Garden, Wall-Flower, and Violets, Garden Mallows, and Crocus: For all that, at Night the Cold was severe; the reason whereof (besides the length of the Nights) is, the Moun∣tains about Siras are rather Stony than Sulphurious; for which cause we find the Winds blow as sensibly as at Spahaun; whence may be collected, that the Seasons depend not so immediately on the Sun and its Motion, as from the Specifick Determination of the Winds, the Aspects of the Stars diversified, the Innate Quality of the Coun∣try, and peculiar Site in respect of the Heavenly Bodies. As for the difference of Stars, none here could be observed, distinct from those in  Temperate Zone, by reason of the indeterminate Horizon, every where occasioned by the interfering Mountains.
The Crows here are like our Royston Crows, Grey on their Backs and Wings;Crows of se∣veral Colours. at Jerom their Beaks and Feet are as Red as Vermilion; where also at our appearance Barley is ripe, and new Barley sow'd; and as we travelled, we now and then let fly an Hawk at Hoberaes, a Bird larger and of the same Colour with our Kites; at first being brought to the Ground by the Hawk, it parries, and makes some false Shew of Defence, brisking up its Plumes about the Neck, as a Cock does when going to engage; but the Controversy is soon deci∣ded, after the Hawk seizes it with his direful Talons, and instead of denouncing farther War, it resigns its self an humble Victim to the Conqueror: The inward Coats of the Gizzard are stuffed with Wormseed, of which it smells strong, which dried and beaten to Powder, and given with Sugar, is a Panacaea for an Asthma, or dif∣ficulty of breathing, and the whole Body is delicate Meat. On the right hand of the King's Highway, between Siras and Gerom, at Derab, on the side of a Mountain, issues the Pissasphaltum of Diascorides, or Natural Mummy, into a large Stone Tank or Storehouse, sealed with the King's Seal, and that of the Calentures, and all the Noblemen of that City, and kept with a constant Watch, till at a stated Time of the Year they all repair thither, to open it for the King's Use, to prevent its being stole: Which notwithstand∣ing, though it be Death if discovered, yet many Shepherds follow∣ing their Flocks on these Mountains, by chance light on great Por∣tions of the same Balsam, and offer it to Passengers to Sale, and sometimes play the Cheat in adulterating it. The First of November entring upon the Plains of Dedumbah, we found it all frosted with Salt; for the Waters from the Mountains mixing with the Superficies of the Earth, together with the Sun and drying Winds, incrustate; nor have I met with sharper Colds than here, for that the invironing Hills as well as Dales are full of Salt, and the Sun rising with horrid Winds presses the Ambient Air from the high Tops by its Circular Motion; so that it hurricanes us with such dismal chilling Gusts, that had we not been active here in cour∣sing Hares and Wild Goats, we might sooner have frozen than kept our Innate Heat entire; the Sun being constantly attended all the Day with blustering Weather, leaving a quiet Calm at setting. From this Plain to Lhor, both in the Highways, and on the high Mountains,Monuments of Robbers. were frequent Monuments of Thieves immured in Terror of others who might commit the like Offence; they having literally a Stone-Doublet, whereas we say metaphorically, when any is in Prison, He has a Stone Doublet on; for these are plastered up, all but their Heads, in a round Stone Tomb, which are left out, not out of Kindness, but to expose them to the Injury of the Weather, and As∣saults of the Birds of Prey, who wreak their Rapin with as little Remorse, as they did devour their Fellow-Subjects. Beyond Lhor,The Air as well as the Food, the Cause of Birds keeping one place. Water-Fowl that make not their Abode on the Sea, are seldom seen, for want of Fresh-Water; nor do Hoberaes fly on the other side so far as Siras; whether for the sake of its beloved Food, or by reason the Subtilty of the Air may fail them in their due Poise, making them delight more in one place than another, I know not; as it is evident in the Nature of Fishes to pone
Water before another, as being better fitted for their freer Respi∣ration. We set out of Spahaun the first day of their great Fast,The Old and New Moon visible in twelve hours time. which was the 8th of October, all which time it was grievous to the Moors to Travel, because they might not eat, nor swallow their Spittle in the Day-time, it being denied the Muliteers, and those accustomed to Labour; but the Hodges, and those who lead a delicate Life, are permitted to eat; for which they plead their being unaccustomed to Labour; which exempts them from an Imposition they lay on the more hardy, not touching such heavy Burthens with the least of their Fingers: Wherefore the poor Mule-men made hard shift to get to Lhor the Morning before the Evening the New Moon appeared on, viz. the 4th of November, when I saw the Old Moon go out on the Hills at Lhor, and the Night following, the Horns reversed, the whole Body or Circumference having only as it were a dark Veil or Curtain of Air drawn over it, that part alone which was Crescent, being illuminated. But it was some Damp to their designed Mirth, when by too much haste to come to this Capital City, they perceived they had lost a Mule with its Lading, by driving in the Dark all Night; whereupon I was employ'd to inform the Caun, who immediately dispatched the Rhadary in quest, and before Night restored the Lading, which was Shagreen Leather, such as they make their best Boots of, but the Mule was found dead under its Burthen, strayed a little way out of the Road; such Care is there taken to satisfy Merchants. This Night passed with great Rejoicing among the Musselmen, and retarded us three Days, before we could make our Muliteers settle to their Gears again. Here the doubtful Autumn inclines towards Winter, resigning the Dates, Citrons, Oranges, and Lemons, to the expecting Planter: Here grows the Emblem of Peace, the Olive-Tree; and though the Leafs are fallen, yet here is an uninterrupted Spring, all things keep∣ing a perpetual Green, though they observe the appointed Times of bringing forth their Increase. And now we begin to enjoy Temperate and Shorter Nights,In Hot Coun∣tries to the North the Year centers in our Winter. in exchange of Cold and Longer; and although the Goat is not yet ascended with his Constellation, yet I pronounce it Winter, since all Terrestrial Things move with a Pace as if they were just almost at the Centre of the Year; but after the Sun, carried by the rapid Course of the Heavenly Impulse, in order with the other Glorious Stars, has reached its utmost Southern Bounds, then a new Face of things re∣turns, and the alternate Accretion and Diminution render an Ever∣lasting Constancy; which with the admirable Frame and manifold Courses of the Celestial Spheres, witness and declare, That the Praise of so great and wonderful Works, are not to be attributed to Chance and Fortune, but to an All-wise Creator, who constituted the Uni∣verse from the Beginning, and will govern and preserve the same to all Eternity; who also brought us safe to Gombroon the 13th of No∣vember: To whom be Honour now and for ever.
CHAP. X. A Voyage to Congo for Pearl; a Discourse of their Generation; Departure from Persia, and Return to India. TWO days after our Arrival at Gombroon, I went to Congo, lea∣ving only the George, a Ship our Agent had built, in this Port; I was rowed in one of their Boats till the Wind grew strong enough to Sail: These Boats have been in use time out of mind; the Keel is made of one piece of Timber, and the Planks are sewed to∣gether, with an high Prow and a low Poop. The next Morning we had brought Loft on the left hand of the Island Kismash, leaving a Woody Island uninhabited between Kismash and the Main: At Noon we came to Bassatu, an old ruined Town of the Portugals, fronting Congo, where we touched till the Turning of the Tide and the Sea-Breeze were forcible enough to deliver us to that Port, where were Five Merchant Ships, and Two Trading to Mocha for Religion. Congo is something better built than Gombroon,Come to Congo. and has some small Adantage of the Air, and is about Twenty Leagues nearer the Mouth of the River Euphrates. As upon Land we have observed the Fruit and all things flag for want of Rain,A Dearth in the Water as well as on Land. so we found the same Cry to respect the Sea for want of frequent Showers, the Oysters neither bringing forth, nor are any Pearls produced; such Influence does common Fame allow the Hea∣venly Moisture to have in their Generation; insomuch that little Choice is to be had, and whatever is of any Value, is very dear. Here is great Plenty of what they call Ketchery, a Mixture of all together, or Refuse of Rough, Yellow, and Unequal, which they sell by Bushels to the Russians, who carry them over Land to Archan∣gelo, and disperse them through the Northern Coasts, for Ornaments to their Furr Caps; which being no Purchase, I returned. Sailing abreast of Kismash,Come again to Bunder Abassee. I put in at Loft, the chief Place of the Island, and loaded with Oysters, which were the nearest our English I had yet tasted; here are Creyfish, Crabs, Shrimps, Place, Soles, and Smelts, besides Mountains of Salt-fish for Sale: From hence Gombroon is furnished with Wood; where arriving, we saw the Phaenix, another English Ship; on which before I embark, I shall premise somewhat material, according to my Promise, of Pearls in general. The Pearl is a Jewel supposed to be the Geniture of a Shell-fish cal∣led Margaritifer,The Pearl. congealed into a very fair, transparent, Diaphanous, beautiful Stone, which is the Partus or Birth of this Fish. As con∣cerning their Original and Conception, there is some difference among Authors, as betwixt Pliny and Anselmus Boetius, and between them and Cardanus: Pliny saith that they are conceived in Oysters, by a certain Maritime Dew, which these Fish (and so likewise Scol∣lops) do at a Set Time of the Year most thirst after; and according as the Heavens are more Cloudy or Clear in the time of the taking
in of this Dew, so they are generated more Fair, or Obscure; as may be seen in his Book, where he speaks of those Pearls called Ʋnions, and of the Shell-fish in which they are found, lib. 9. c. 28. But this Opinion of Pliny concerning their Conception, is not, by Anselmus Boetius, thought consentaneous to Truth: For, saith he, I have ta∣ken out of these Shell-fish many Margarites, and they are generated in the Body of the Creature, of the same Humour of which the Shell is formed; which Viscous Humour is expelled sometimes (not always) for the Fabrick of another Shell; for whenever this little Creature is ill, and hath not strength enough to belch up or expel this Humour which sticketh in the Body, it becometh the Rudi∣ments or beginning of the Pearls; to which, new Humour being ad∣ded and assimulated into the same Nature, by concreting and con∣gealing begets a new Skin or Film for the former Rudiments; the continual Addition of which Humour generates an Ʋnion, or Pearl; even as Stones are generated in the Gall or Bladder of a Man; and after the same manner the Bezoar is generated in the Persian Goat. Cardanus, lib. 7. de Lapidibus, saith, It is a Fabulous thing that the Pearl should be generated by the Dew of Heaven, seeing the Shell∣fishes in which they are conceived have their Residence in the very bottom of the Deep. That which is reported of them, That they are soft in the Water, and grow hard, like Coral, as soon as they are taken out, is not true, saith Boetius, p. 84. For the first, not only common Fame, but common Experience avouches; for the latter, I know not why it may not be as probable, as for an Egg newly laid, to have the Shell harden'd as soon as dropped into the Air, when before in the Ovarium it participated of a Slippery, Tough, Glewy Sub∣stance; not otherwise to be supposed to come forth, than by endan∣gering the Foetus. Ʋnions are so much the more esteemed,Its Adultera∣tion. because they cannot easily be adulterated. There are fictitious Jewels made of double Glass, which being set in Gold, Jewellers cannot discern from Pearl, except they take them out: Some will adulterate them with the Powder of the Shell of the Margarite, and others with Chalk covered with Leafs of Silver, and then anointed with the White of an Egg. Some adulterate them with the Powder of Pearl mix'd with the White of an Egg, and dried, and then polished; but these will easily be disco∣vered from the True, by their Weight and Colour. The Ʋnion is in Hebrew called ,Its Names. as Job 28. 20. And so the Word Gabish is interpreted by Rabbi Sevi Gerson: It is also taken for Margarita, ; but in the Proverbs it is interpreted by Junius, Carbunculi, Prov. 11. If they be great, they are called Ʋnions, be∣cause then they are found single in a Shell. If they be small, they are called Margaritae, many of which may be found in one Shell to∣gether. In Greek they are called , & . In Latin the great Pearls are called Ʋniones, & Margaritae simplicitèr. Lucian calleth the Pearl, Lapis Erithreus; Arrianus, Lapis Indicus; Statius, Erithreus Lapillus; Virgil, Bacca, & Bacca Conchea; Pliny, Ʋnio; Ccero, Margarita; St. Jerom, Granum maris rubri; and others call it Perla: The Germans call it Perlin: In Italian, Perle: In Ara∣bick, Indostan, Phursistan, Sulu: The Indians call them Moti; in Ma∣labar,
Mutu:Letter V. The Lusitanians call it Aljofar, which in Arabic sounds as much as Julfar, the Port in Sinu Persico where the most excellent Pearls are caught. The kinds of Pearl are no otherwise distinguished,The kinds of Pearl. but either first from their Greatness or Littleness, that is, either as they are Ʋnions, or Margarites, or Seed-Pearl; and secondly, as they are of tran∣scendent Purity, Beauty, and Glory; or Cloudy, Reddish, and so less beautiful. The best are found in the Persian Gulph,The Places where caught. (shared between the Persian and Arab, they farming the Fishery yearly to those that bid most), between the Island Ormus and Byran; and were heretofore brought into the Island Ormus, while the Portugals were Lords there; whence the Distich; If all the World were but one Ring, Ormus should the Union bring. They are also found between Cape Comory and Ceilon, as I for∣merly declared; but these are not to be compared with the Persian, which are the true Oriental ones: There are of them in the Island Sumatra, by those that place the Golden Chersonese in Java, disputed to be the Ancient Taproban. Betwixt the greater Java and India there are very many; between Panana and Cochin are good store, but very small, as also all along the Coast of Malabar. In Borneo and Anian, there are great ones. The Occidental are of a Milkish Co∣lour, and of a Silver-like Splendor, and therefore not so commenda∣ble as the Oriental. It is consented to by some, That by how much the deeper the Shell-fish resides, by so much they are Parents of the lesser Mar∣garites. The Indians call the brighter,Cheripo, or Seed-Pearl. candid, or splendid Shell-fish, Che∣ripo, which is a kind of Oyster, of which they make Spoons, or little Cups: These Fishes do generate excellent Margarites, or Seed-Pearl. There are others they call Chanquo; the Shells of which are the Mo∣ther of Pearl:Chanquo, or Mother of Pearl. These bring not forth so fair Pearl as the other, be∣cause their Shells are very smooth and bright within; they are used to adorn Tables, Escritores, and other things with; they are brought to Bengala for Bracelets and other Embellishments; the Custom there was to have the Virgins Arms to be set off with Monelaes of this kind, lest they should be corrupted. They are also found in many places of Europe,Scallops. as in Scotland and Ireland, there having been very excellent ones found in Scallops and common Oysters, as I my self have found at Sheerness in Eng∣gland. They are no Strangers in Silesia, Frisia, and Bohemia. About the Promontory of Comory they are found of the Weight of an Hundred Grains of Wheat, and near the Island of Borneo, of the Weight of an Hundred and sixty Corns of Wheat, though not so fair as the other.
It is delivered from Authentick Authors,Chap. X. That Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, drank one dissolved at a Supper, of which Draught she boasted she had a more costly Supper than ever Antonius had; the Value of which Draught then must amount to, according to Bu∣daeus, an Hundred and fifty thousand Aureos, for thus much did one Supper of Antonius cost him, as related by Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 35. & Macrob. 3. Saturnal. c. 27. The same Budaeus doth also mention an Ʋnion of the Bigness of a Filbert, which was bought in France for Three thousand Aureos, and another for Four thou∣sand. Solinus,Its Properties. and Scrap Hager Alkali, say that these Stones are cold and dry in the Second Degree, and that they are good against Syncopes and Cardiacal Passions; that they comfort the Spirits, stop Fluxes of Blood, cure Lienteries and Diarrhaeas, and that they are good for the Sight: The same say Cardanus, Rulandus, and Baceius, in their Books de Gemmis. But the more Mechanical So∣lution of their operating, is (as all Conchous things do) either by precipitating the Saline or Acid Particles, or else as all Alkalies do, by imbibing the same, obtund their Fury by sheathing their sharp Points, and so render them capable of assisting such Diseases. They are of great Worth for their Sacred Use:Its Dignity and Value. St. Austin in his Explication of the Psalms, speaking of the Twelve Stones men∣tioned in the Book of the Revelations, Rev. 21. 21. and of the Gates of the New Jerusalem, which were every one of one Pearl; saith, That the Twelve Apostles are signified by the Twelve Stones, and Christ the Spotless Lamb by the Pearl. Their own Glory, Beauty, and Excellency, surpass their In∣trinsick Worth: If they be of the Weight of Four Grains, they are worth Three Crowns apiece; so according to their Bigness, Weight, Roundness, and Fairness, their Price is raised, doubled, or trebled, according to the following Scale.
Directions for Oriental PEARL; viz. Pearls Round, of a White Water, worth at London,   s. d.   1 Grain, 0 6 1000 0 ¼ 0 10 500 1 ½ 1 06 300 1 ¼ 2 04 200 2 3 04 200 2 ¼ 4 00 160 2 ½ 5 00 150 2 ¾ 6 00 140 3 7 06 140 3 ¼ 9 00 120 3 ½ 11 00 120 3 ¾ 14 00 100 4 Grains, or a Carrots, 18 00 100 4 ½ 23 00 60 5 30 00 60 5 ½ 40 00 60 6 40 00 55 6 ½ 65 00 55 7 80 00 55 7 ½ 90 00 50 8 100 00 50 9 130 00 50 10 210 00 45 11 220 00 45 12 Grains, or 3 Carrots, 280 00 40 Seed-Pearl for Apothecaries, worth from 8 to 14 s. or 15 s. per Ounce, Troy. The Numbers on the Right Hand are set down to shew what fit Num∣bers are used in the wearing such siz'd Pearl; yet a few more or less make no difference. Ascending the Phoenix the last of November,We undergo Difficulties in our Passage back to India, through Ne∣gligence of the Pilots. after a formal Vale∣diction ashore, the next day we passed the Straits in a gloomy Even∣ing, designing to repeat our Course to the so long forsaken Coasts of India; but the Wind being strong at East South-East, it blew directly in our teeth, that very Line we should steer. This contrary Wind detain'd us some days, but the continued Calms more; for in Seven and twenty days we gained but Nine Degrees out of Thirteen East, and but Three out of Seven in Latitude; nor could we reach any Shore, or meet with any Ship, whereby we began to want both Wood and Water; being Twelve Europe-men, Seventeen Lascars, Two Armenian Servants, and as many Black Slaves, with one Moor-man Servant; Ten Sheep with large Tails, and as many Carmania
Goats, for to waft to the Company's Island at St. Helena, to create a Breed; (which could it be effected, might prove of as great a Bene∣fit, as Cotswall Sheep imprudently sent a Present into Spain for the Im∣provement of their Wool,) besides store of Cocks and Hens for the Voyage, and four Persian Greyhounds: To serve these we had no more than Three Hogsheads of Water left, and Wood for Firing no more than for six days; nor yet (Christmass-day being past) had we any Hopes of a favourable Wind. This made us melancholy, since we were already put to Allowance, and all through the Negligence of the Master and his Mate, who lay Revelling ashore, when they should have provided better for their Voyage. Nor had they taken other Care in loading their Vessel, which being most Carmania Wool and light Loading, had required a suffi∣cient Ballast at Bottm; but on the contrary, the heavy Goods were upon Deck; which Error when it was too late to remedy, they perceived, being out at Sea; & jam seriò de lanâ caprinâ controver∣sia fit; and now that, whereby we used to express a thing of no Va∣lue, or not worth our discourse (Goats-wool) becomes a thing of serious Controversy; therefore it was God's Mercy we were not try'd with Stormy Weather hitherto: But now we were dilemma'd, not knowing what to wish, when the Divine Providence sent us a West North West Gale, which after we had measured the whole Coast from Persia, round the Bay of Cambaia, to Sinda, we were drove to Diu, where sounding we had Eighteen Fathom Water, and bending to the South, we were directed a-nights by the Light-houses; and at last out-stretching the Flats, we fell in with the High-lands of St. John's in India. The Head-land of Diu is the highest Land there in view, the rest of the Ground being low, nor is Gates to be seen there; it lies in North Latitude 21 deg. 10 min.; but St. John's in 10 deg. being a notable high Peak on the Gaot. On the first day of the Year 1978-79, and the last of the Moon, the Gusts blowing horribly from Shore, we were again drove to Sea till Night, and anchored very uneasily while Two the next Morning, when the Tide horsed us towards the Shore, we not being able otherwise to prevail against the Wind with our Sails; but anchor∣ing another whole Night and Day; Tollimur in Caelum curvato gurgite, & idem Subducta ad manes imos descendimus unda. By th' rising Waves we're lifted up on high; Descending down we in the deep do lye. Where we had remained, had we offer'd to unfurl our Sails, for the aforementioned Reasons. But from our Want there sprang this Commodity; our Water being well nigh all spent, the Ship was better able to live, her Bur∣then sinking aloft, and thereby gave occasion to bear a steadier Poise below, while we expected the abating of the Tempest, in order to our happy Deliverance; which at last permitted us to come more under the Land, where struggling every Tide, though the Water
continued still troubled with foaming Billows, yet observing when to gain, we passed Surat River's Mouth, where rode thirteen Moor Merchant-men, and two great Belgians, and so came to our desired Haven in Swally-hole on Twelfth-day, where I remain, Your Humble Servant, J. F. Sending you with this the General Account of Persia, which I had time to write during almost Forty Days floating upon these Waters; which had like to prove as fatal to Us, as the great Deluge did once to the Old World in that space of time.
THE Present State OF PERSIA. CHAP. XI. Of the various Names, Situation, and Bounds; the Temper of the Air; of the Seasons and Winds; of the High and Stupendious Mountains, their Advantage and Conveniency; of the Fruit∣fulness of the Valleys, occasioned by Snow upon the Hills: Of the Vegetables, Plants, and Minerals; of their Fowl, Four∣footed Beasts, and Fishes: Their Caravans, Mosques, Hum∣mums, Buzzars, Houses, and Bridges. The City Suffahaun proposed as a Patern of their Government. PERSIA by Classick Authors is fabled to have its Name from King Perseus,Its Names. Son of Andromeda; it was anciently called Elam by the Hebrews, and now by the Inhabitants, Phursistan. It is sited in the Temperate Zone,Situation and Bounds. under the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Climates: In time of Yore the Monarchy of the whole World devolved upon it, and which is miraculous, is not quite ex∣tinguished to this day; although the Bounds of the Empire were straitned or enlarged, according to the ebbing or flowing of Fortune. In its Infancy it was mighty, for Nimrod was a Powerful Hunter, that is, a great Prince; and as it grew up it increased in Strength; but from the Grand Cyrus to Darius the Mede, it seemed to be in the Flower of its Age, when it was Mistress of all the Earth which the vast Ocean washes on this side, and the Hellespont on the other. After the Death of Alexander the Great, it was miserably divided by the Contentions of his Captains; and long since by the Incur∣sions
of the Saracens it has been declining, unless where it has healed its self towards those Parts bordering on India; by which means it has not lost much of its Modern Greatness, though the Turks within this Century have forced the Low Countries of Babylon and Mesopo∣tamia, which the Persians were as willing to resign as they to take, they being a continual Charge to defend, and no Advantage to the Persians, but rather an unnecessary Trouble: On which Reflections there is nothing forbids, but that with the Judicious Boterus we may state its Limits between the Caspian Sea, the Persian Gulph, the Lake Stoke, with the Rivers Oxus and Tigris, and the Bay and Kingdom of Cambaia; which Tract contains in it from East to West more than Twenty Degrees, and from North to South above Eighteen, whereby the Days are prolonged or shortned three Hours. Under this Account is to be reckoned the greater part of Georgia, with the Islands in either Seas. It is distinguished into Provinces; the exact Number whereof, as divided at present, (they as often changing Names as Governors), I have not been certainly informed. Quintus Curtius erred something when he said,Temperance of the Air. Regio non alia in tota Asiâ salubrior habetur, temperatum Coelum; hinc perpetuum jugum opacum et umbrosum, quod Aestas laevat; illinc Mare adjunctum quod mo∣dico tepore terras fovet. There is not a Region in all Asia esteemed healthier, the Air being temperate; on this hand the Heaven is shaded and the Vales defended by the Tops of Mountains, which qualifies the Heat; on the other, surrounded with Seas and Rivers, which by a friendly Warmth cherish the Land; for that Places near the Tropicks make some Exceptions, where in the Summer they en∣dure great Heat, not only from the nearness of the Sun (because we often observe strange differences to happen in the same Climate), but from the Sands, and Sulphurous Exhalations steaming from the Mountains, which are impregnated herewith; whenas Reason per∣suades, the Time must be hotter than in other Seasons of the Year: As also in the Midland Country the Cause holds good for its intense Coldness in Winter, and almost through every Quarter at Nights; the Penury of Vapours where the Earth is Rocky and Mountainous, the Rivers are scarce and small, the Snows lye undissolved, nor are there any Woods of that Bigness to hinder the freedom of the Blasts descending pure upon the Vales: On which account immoderate Driness invades the Mediterranean Parts, the Air is Serene and Vo∣latile, which as it is highly serviceable to the Respiration of all Li∣ving Creatures, so it mightily contributes to their Preservation as well as Generation: Moreover, from this Rarity of the Air, follows an undeniable Argument of its Frigidity, and thence a farther con∣comitant of its Siccity; from all which results a Dry Constitution; for ; Siccitas hu∣mores facit qualitate sicciores; Driness of the Air makes the Hu∣mours drier, which the Inland of Persia enjoys from a Concatena∣tion of Causes both of Heat and Cold. The whole Region is very fruitful of Barren Mountains,High Moun∣tains. inclosing the Valleys, being Excrescencies of the Mountain Taurus; nor can I disbelieve in many places, but that the Plains do more than enough
abound with Plenty, since no Place is unprovided with store of all good things; but on the contrary, like the Promised Land, it over∣flows. What Archiseles relates of the Island Ithica, may be applied to this Country, ; fragosum esse quidem, sed juvencularum optimum nutritorem: That it was craggy indeed, but an excellent Breeder of Cattel; the Sheep it brings forth are prodigiously large, trailing Tails after them, of the Weight, some of them, of Thirty Pound, full of Fat, they being stalled to that pitch, that Hogs fed among us with the most Care and Skill, cut not thicker than these do, especially after Vintage, and the Cotton-Harvest, when they are turned in to crop the Leafs and tender Branches of the Vine, and gather up the scattered Seeds of the Cot∣ton, with which they thrive so infinitely, that little Flesh is to be seen, it all being converted to Suet: At other times, for want of Pasture they brouze on Shrubs and Thistles spread to and again, and in Winter are foddered with Barley-Straw, and now and then with a little Barley. Their Neat, though small, are sleek and well-liking, whose Milk is very good for present spending, but it's better to make Butter on than Cheese. This Country has Goats in Herds, Tame ones, as well as both Sheep and Goats on the Mountains, which are Fierce and Wild, producing Bezoar; which together with Stags and Antelopes are caught by Hawks instructed for that purpose. Their Horses,Their Four∣footed Beasts. though they have degenerated from their Primitive Race, (inest enim Equis patrum virtus; for even in Horses the Vir∣tue of their Sires are communicated to their Breed;) still are they the best of all the East, unless the Arabian be preferred for swifter Coursers and light Horses: However for Charging Horses, and Stout Warlike Steeds, they are valued above all others. The Asses, though little, yet will they amble with a quick Pace over Mountains where Horses cannot pass, and those used to Packs are such as no other Nation can equal. The Mules and Camels are their over Land Ships, by which they transport their Merchandise over all the Earth. Hyrcania brings forth Wild Beasts, such as Foxes, Wolves, and Tygres, but for want of Dens and Lurking-places, and by reason of the untilled and waste Desarts being devoid of Food, is less in∣fested with them than other places; wherefore in long travelling here they go more unconcerned than in those parts where they are constantly alarmed by them, and are forced to be on their Guard, lest at unawares they should be surprized, they snorting every where securely under the wide Canopy of Heaven; and those that set upon the Flocks by chance are easily mastered by the Shepherds Curs, which are sharp Biters. Wild Fowl, both for Wing and Water,Wild Fowl are brought forth in great Plenty of all sorts, near the Fountain-heads, and Inundations of the melted Snow, falling not into Channels, but overspreading the Bot∣toms, where they dissolve, whereby they seldom stretch into Rivers at length, but stagnate in the Low Grounds, which they wash. In which Washes sometimes are spawned Mud-Fish,Fishes. and such as Fens and Lakes are famous for. The Caspian Sea nourishes Salmon,
Trouts, and Sturgion, and the Persian Gulph sends abroad much Fish for salting; the Rivers are not very full, nor are they stocked with great Variety. BreadCorn in many places admits a threefold Crop,The Valleys made fruitful by the Snow from the Hills. and generally without that Toil by Water-Courses as between the Tropicks, the Rains in most places bestowing a more welcome Nutriment; but more especially from the white Spume of the Celestial Waters (with which the Hills are coated all the Seasons of the Year), in Winter crusted by Frost, in Summer (by reason of the Sun's Heat, and more exalted Motion) thawed, thereby constantly distilling on the humble Vales an inexhausted Store, as wealthy as what flows from Aemus Tops to enrich the Thessalian Fields. Where these Supplies are not so lasting (or altogether wanting) as nearer the Zodiac, there often under Ground a Vault is continued for many Leagues, with open Pits at a fit distance to let in the Air, and the Water carried deep to keep it from tasting of the Salt Sur∣face (after the manner of common Sewers in our great Cities), which it would do, were not the Wells Mouths left open: For Houshold Service Rain-Water is only used. In all this Country neither Oats nor Grass are found, because lon∣ger Time is required to their springing up, than either the Intervals of Heat or Cold will grant; for no sooner does the Spring enter, than the Sun defaces their Verdure by parching up the Blades of either; and when Autumn claims Preeminence at its Equinox, then no soon∣er do they peep out, than they are nipped by the Recess of the Innate Heat: Wherefore no Green Meadows or spangled Fields are here ex∣pected, but such as are created by indefatigable Labour, unless they be hoped to be seen in Vintages, or under Groves or Orchards, or by Rivulets sides gliding from the declining Hills. The first are set generally on Fruitful Ridges of the Eastern Mounts, —Denique apertos Bacchus amat Colles—Virg. Georg. 2. The latter are the frequent Advantages to Villages, and the sweet Pleasure of the larger Towns; where Trees and Flowers grow up together, that the one may yield a safe shelter to the other, against the Extremes of Heat or Cold; in both whose Prime a fragrant Blandishment conspire no less, than to entice the willing Senses: But for Elegancy of Culture and choice of Slips, I see them not over emulous; which Neglect gives just occasion of Wonder, since their Worldly Happiness is placed in fine Gardens, which no Nation ap∣pears to me more to Idolize. For Fuel,Plants. the combustible Heath is more common than flourish∣ing Trees for Timber; but for Sallads it yields all that are desirable, both Herbs and Roots; and some of the most Medicinal Plants are of the Natural Growth of this Country. There is an heavy Tax laid upon Tobacco,Tobacco. though it be the choicest in these Parts. To these Blessings for Pleasure,Manufacto∣ries. Necessity, and Physick, are added others for Profit: Gums, the most Rich, distil every where: From Carmania, Goats-Wool (as much to be prized as Jason's Golden Fleece)
with which our Hatters know well how to falsify their Bevers; and the Natives how more honestly to weave both Cloth and Carpets very fine, which they sell at dear Rates. The Flocks and courser Wool of their Sheep stand them in some stead, they kneading it into Felts, for Seamless Coats for the ordinary sort of People, for their common wearing; and their Skins with the Wool on, are both an Ornament and Safeguard against the roughest Weather: But Lambs-skins with their crisped Wool are of more Credit, (they being excellent Artists to make them keep their Curl), and not disdained to be worn by the chiefest Gentry; of whose Leather they make good Merchandise, it being esteemed better than Turkish, their Tan∣ners being expert at dressing, not only these and Kid, but other Hides of larger size, which therefore are bought up with Greediness by all Foreigners, for their real Excellency. Goats and Camels, after other good Services performed, be∣queath their Hair to their Weavers, of which they make water'd Camlets. But above all, the Wool-bearing Cotton-Shrub renders by its Wealthy Down those Riches which are deeper digg'd for. Nor does the Silk-worm lay it self out less for the Publick Weal, while it spins out its own Bowels, until nothing be left within its Cask but Air; contrary to the Trite Saying of Aristotle, Ex nihilo nihil fit; Out of Nothing comes Nothing; for by the Industry of this Infect, the first Foundation of the Persian Silks, Velvets, and Rich Embroider'd Carpets, are laid, with which the greatest part of the habitable World do Pride themselves. And since we descend to these busy Tutors of Mankind, who up∣braid the slothful and oscitantly idle, let us step through the Mo∣narchy of the Bees, and taste the Sweets they suck from Nature's ample Storehouse, and see how they return with Thighs laden with Honey, to stock themselves, and build their Mansionss to nourish their young, and enough to spare to feed Mankind besides; and in their Last Testament make the Persians Legatees, by leaving them huge Cakes of Wax. Let's look a little lower,Persian Pearl the best. and ransack the Deep, and we shall find the Persian Pearls excelling all others that are generated in Sea-shells, from which Beds are brought forth Ʋnions, adorning the Necks and Ears of the greatest Princesses, and the Crowns and Diadems of the mightiest Emperors, begot at certain Seasons of the Year in the Flesh of Oysters, as the Concrete Grains or Hardness in Swines-Flesh (I suppose scrophulous Tumors), by the Dew of Heaven, says Tertullian. Whence if it Thunders or Lightens, says Pliny, the Oysters are straitned, or miscarry; but others render it quite con∣trary: So that I should leave their Original as disputable here as ever, if no Belief could be fixed on Experience, which confirms their Increase to be chiefly owing to the Virtue both of Showers and Thunder. Before we launch too far,Gombroon Ware made of Earth, the best, next China. let us examine with what Faculties this Land is endued: Indeed it is blessed with many more than at first landing the Superficies does promise; for besides the already enume∣rated Excellencies, it is not altogether a dead Soil, though it be
right enough termed so by Paracelsus, speaking generally; for it is not to be understood as comprehensible in the Element, but as it subsists and lives impregnated in the Microcosm, it receiving its Foe∣cundity through its Virtue, whereby it vegetates, and takes upon it the Nature of Minerals, Stones, Gaults, or Clay, and of Animals, as well as Plants. We having yet but lightly turned up the Glebe, have hardly given the Potter his handful of White Marble to form into Vessels without Fucus, deservedly challenging the Superiority; unless the Ancient Chinese would restore the true Porcelin, which they cannot, it requiring the Growth of some Ages, which their late Civil Wars and Tumults has forbidden to be effected, while they wreak their Anger on these Treasuries, to the Ruin of their Enemies, and the utter loss of their own Reputation in that Point. Lapis Tutiae & Manatae from Carmania;Lapis Tutie & Manatae, and Brimstone. Bole. and the best Brimstone from the County of Lhor. Bole, famed for its Power by the general Consent of all the Phy∣sicians in the World, is carried from Armenia and its Neighbouring Territories, for their Use. Deeper in the Bowels of the Mines,Turquoise Stone. the Turquoise (the most lively of any) endures the Rape of those that search for it. But the Lapis Lazuli,Lapis Lazuli. vulgarly called the Armenian Stone, is imputed to be a Native of that Region; for the true Lapis Lazuli is brought hither only by the Tartars inhabiting beyond the Caspian Sea; and then, but when they come on Embassies to the Suffee, (for others of their Nation are not permitted to expatiate the Uni∣verse, or wander from their own Homes, nor for Strangers is it law∣ful to enter their Dominions): Wherefore neither can they trans∣port it on this side, nor on the other side will they hold any Cor∣respondence with these: However it happens, under these Difficul∣ties and Restraints the Armenians sometimes do attempt to acquire it, leaving no Stone unturn'd to purchase it; and having once gained it, they suck thence as much Profit, as they please to value the Hazard of the Enterprize at, wherein they use little Conscience; whence it comes to pass it is sold for such vast Rates to the Europeans. From this Stone is made that Colour they name Ʋltra-marine Blue, though the Azure be made of the German Stone: It is besides com∣mended for purging all Melancholy Affects. The Mountains produce Marbles hard enough to endure the Polish,Marble. if they knew how to bestow it; yet besides the Monuments of Per∣sepolis, where Statues and Columns are beholden for their Splen∣dor to that Science, and the Dens and Caves Mouths of the old Gaurs bear some deformed ones, (unless the King's Palaces have some Tanks, and the Princes and Great Men some Gate-Posts and Lintels smoothly polished), few others are seen; for what reason I know not, unless their Religion prohibit, or they delight more in Brick and Muddy Walls, though less durable, or that it is so decreed by Fate, even as Things or Times naturally decline from bad to worse: Thus it is, from Marble Cities they are now become hardly Brick; by which means the most sumptuous Tombs of the foregoing Emperors hardly declare to the succeeding Generation in whose Memory they were intended.
As the Mountains bring forth Marble, so the Earth dispenseth Hot Baths and Mineral Waters for their Commodity;Naphtha. in like manner, Natural Mummy, and a Liquid Bitumen in the Lake from whence Semiramis took Cement to unite the Wall she built round Babylon; and from about Thirty Mountains near the same place about Scha∣machia, as it is conjectured, springs the famous Naphtha. At the Foot of the high Mountain Barmuch are found several sorts of Minerals,Minerals. with which its prodigious Womb is pregnant: But at finding of these, as their Ingenuity is slow, so for certain they are less apt to put themselves upon extraordinary Labours in Spagyrical Ope∣rations; having hitherto been content with the dull Metals of Lead and Iron, had not lately Hermes Wand directed them to the Scru∣tiny of a Copper Vein; from whence they reap not greater Emolu∣ment than the Hollanders do Detriment: For formerly as they brought great Quantities from Japan, that turned to good Account, now that Trade falls off; and whereas before it yielded them besides Cloth of Gold and Silver, Silks and Velvets, Carpets and other Ma∣nufactories, which they are obliged by Compact to take off their hands every Year, to the entire Sum of Fifty thousand Thomands, all which they more than cleared, carrying away moreover several Tuns of Gold and Silver in Coin; at present they can but just pay, and make even the aforesaid Indenture. About Siras are to be digged Mines of Gold and Silver, but they quit neither Cost nor Pains, wherefore they have laid aside the far∣ther Inquest into them. Hitherto we have run through a spacious Field, though perhaps not every where equally fortunate in every thing; for, Hic Segetes, illic veniunt foelicius Ʋvae Arborei foetus alibi.— Here Corn grows best, there Vines do flourish more; Woods in another place produce their Store. Though for the most part this is an hospitable Soil, cherishing in its Matrice whatever is kindly sowed. And this Increase is continued without any notable River,Rivers. that hath either Breadth or Depth for to bear laden Vessels of any Bulk: For, as Varenius writes, the manner whereby any Rivers of conside∣rable or indifferent Bigness exist, are twofold; either from the con∣junction of many Rivulets into one Stream, or that they flow from great Lakes; the former of which every one hinders, while they draw every Brook to their own Use; so that instead of filling large Channels, they almost drein them quite, which might otherwise merit to be called great Rivers; to wit, that of Siras and Persepo∣lis, which washing its Plain, makes a long Journy before it mixes with the Salt Sea: And lastly, the River at Suffahaun, which never runs with a full Current, only about the Autumnal Quarter, when sometimes by Rain, but always by the dissolved Snows after Summer is over, the Husbandmen breaking down their Dams, purposely rai∣sed to keep the Waters up for the sake of the Rice, the Waters being
let loose, return to the Main Channel, and raise themselves to the Brims of its Banks, otherwise passable in most places: This first way failing, we shall see what Supply is to be expected from the Lake Stoke, which lies too low to ascend the High Countries; and for the Caspian Sea or Lake, I doubt not it will appear as impossi∣ble, if it be true what is said in behalf of it, That many mighty Rivers empty themselves into it, which it receives without the least Augmentation, and therefore cannot return their Kindness recipro∣cally. Which being consider'd,Springs. this Land is chiefly beholden to whole∣some Springs of Living Water, to quench the Thirst of Plants as well as living Creatures, which are to that End bestowed on them apart by a more Liberal Providence, than either of the former by a joint Consent. Notwithstanding the impending Clouds,Little Rain. they are mostly without Rain; and though they lowre some Weeks together, they rarely drop Moisture. The sudden Gusts and impetuous Blasts from the Mountains hin∣dring them,Showers of Sand. oftner cause near the Maritime Coasts, Hurricanes of Wind, and wonderful Tempests of Sand, so Thick and Black, that the Clouds raised thereby benight the very Day, and while the Storm lasts (which is not long) induces a Darkness to be felt; and the Fury over, it leaves the Effects of a Fired Air: Unless when the Seven Stars arise on this Horizon at the beginning of Spring, when a mellifluous Dew lies not long on the Trees and the Plants,The Dew turned into Manna. before it be concrete into the choicest Manna. And although at stated Times the Snow does furnish them with Water, yet it suffers in nothing more than in extreme Drought. Which is the reason Eminent Cities and Market-Towns stand not thick, but are at vast distances one from another; nor are the Villa∣ges less straggling, two scarcely falling under the Eye from the Tops of their highest Mountains, excepting in some few of their Wealthi∣est Plains. The most principal Cities I have seen, are Gombroon, and Bunder-Congo, two great Ports in the Gulph of Persia, famous for Traffick on that side of the World. Lhor, the Granary for these Ports. Je∣rom, excelling in Dates. Siras, like another Phoenix-sprung out of the Ashes of Persepolis, which still retains the Dignity and Majesty of the Metropolis of Persia, strictly so called; after the same man∣ner as Ispahaun, Spahaun, or Suffahaun, most properly is of Parthia; only so much the more Honourable, by how long it shall please the Emperor to fix his Throne there. Those Cities which Fame has brought to our Ears,Cities. are Casbin, ano∣ther Royal City, bordering on the Caspian, sicklier than Spahaun, tho it exceed it in Plenty of all things. Taberez, i. e. Taurus in Arme∣nia, not far from Mount Ararat, now the Seat of the Chief Pa∣triarchate; it is conterminous to the Turks, and the most Trading Empory on that side. For weaving and transporting Silks and Vel∣vets, Gillan stands in the first Rank; in the second, Sherwan. Jouscan sells excellent Wool, and from Mushat is brought the best Iron and Copper, these being Cities in Carmania. At Derab is the true Pissa∣sphaltus:
At Nerez, Assa Foetida: At Shabanat are the best Bezoar-Stones. The Buildings of their Cities are of Three Sorts,Houses. the Houses being diversified in respect of the Place, Time, and Persons; for the Forms of those of the Citizens, Nobles, and Peasants, are not all alike: As those in Sandy and Hot Places are of one Shape, and those in Rocky, Stony, and Cold Parts of another: So likewise the Anniversary Mu∣tations in any of these, make them fit their Habitations for those Quarters. The Palaces of the Potentates are built mostly after this manner: Towards the Street appears little or no Frontispiece, more than the Porch, which makes a square stately Building, arched at top, under which is a stately Balcony, open on every side, over the Hastle, which compasses neat Apartments, and are defended from the Sun's Heat by large Umbrelloes or Penthouses, stretching themselves wide to draw in the cool Air, the embowed parts whereof are fretted, and the out-parts shine with Blue inlaid with Gold: The Casements, or Folding-doors rather, sparkle with Glorious Panes of Glass of several Colours, and declare the Workmanship of the Carvers; as does the outside Slates the Skill of the Tilers in Glazing and Painting, as well as the Marble Facing the Ingenious Design of the Surveyor. From the Portal runs on each hand round the Garden a Mud-Wall very high, though not very thick, which another Wall thwarts just in the middle, from the Porch to the main Building, thereby to part the Mens Quarters from the Womens; the latter whereof encloses the Kitchen-Garden; the other is destined for Fragrant Plants, Aro∣matick Flowers, and outstretching Trees for Pleasure, as well as bearing Fruit for Use. The Houses are so contrived, that in the Summer they are open Banqueting-Houses, refreshed with Fountains as they sit in Frisco, which descend thence to all the Quadrangles by Water-Courses. Since the greatest part of this Empire is not far off the Northern Tropick, it is therefore no wonder it should com∣plain of Heat, especially in the Summer, at which Season the Sun strikes the Earth more directly with its Rays; for which cause, amongst all of them, Aquaducts and Fountains in the very Rooms below Stairs, are mightily prized, with Water-works playing to cool the burning Particles of the incensed Air; and the whole Structure is constituted so, that it may receive these Refreshments every way it is capable: Wherefore they defend their Dwellings from the Sun, and are constantly sprinkling Water around their Seats from these Currents; and from their Tops have many Breathing-places to re∣ceive the Wind, which are so fixed, that whatever Breezes stir, they shall suck them in, and transmit them to all the Rooms of the House, as they list. In Winter, if they be remote from the Sea, they shut up their open Halls and Parlours, and make them close Apartments, by let∣ting-down those Umbrelloes that shaded them in Summer, to keep them warm in the cold Winter, till its Severity be past, spreading all the Floor with Quilts thick and warm, and kindling Stoves in all their Bedchambers: These also are of a different Model from those nearer the Sea, They being mostly flat, These arched: Their Roofs
are made of Wood fetch'd from India, with transverse Beams upon Clay walls, or Stone with untempered Mortar, till they come to the just Altitude of their Houses, when the Interstitia or Spaces be∣tween Beam and Beam are filled with Palm-Leafs neatly laid and painted, which serve for Cieling. It is universally common to Spherical, Arched, or Plain Buildings, to lay vast Loads of Mud at top; and what is more wonderful, only with Mud and Clay, they will rear most spacious Arches, without other matter of Assistance; whereupon either against Snows or Rains, should they continue (which they never do long) they would make but faint Resistance; for being soaked thoroughly, they would re∣solve into their first Entity: Whence in great Snows, to defend and keep their Dwellings standing, they shovel it all from the Tops of their Houses into the Lanes, and thereby obstruct the Passages of their most Publick Streets, when the Snow has not fallen above two days, and also endanger the Foundations; which the Rich bet∣ter secure by Brick Bottoms, than the Poor, whose Fabricks often totter on such occasions: However, they have a better Opportunity against Fire, their Mansions affording little combustible Substance for that to feed on. The Citizens are not so sumptuous as the Nobles; and the Villages are content with Cottages, with either Plain or Arched Roofs, nei∣ther presuming to exalt them to an unbecoming Height, in regard of either of their Stations: Their Casements are latticed, not going to the Price of Glass, which is Foreign, and for that reason scarce. Concluding then with these Tenements, we are brought to view on what Basis their Government stands: For the Welfare and Support of Cities, are the Observation of their Laws; Salus Civium in Legibus consistit. Wholsome Laws the City's Safety are, Against all Violence the surest Bar. Justitia una alias virtutes continet omnes. Justice alone all other Virtues holds. And as a Patern of all their Politicks, I shall propose Spahaun (or rather Suffahaun,Spahaun pro∣posed as a Pa∣tern of their Politicks. as by and by shall be declared), not only the Head of Parthia, but of the whole Nation; which Region by Mercator is named Arac, placed between Media, Persia, Carmania, and Hyrcania: By some is is called Charasan; by the Inhabitants, Airoon; it lies al∣most under the Fifth Climate, in Thirty seven Degrees of Latitude North, and Eighty six of Longitude East; the Days differ Three Hours in the Course of the Year: Nor are the Seasons so calm and sedate, that they should be esteemed temperate, so as not to exceed in either Extreme, where in Summer they must use Caves, Vaults, and Grottoes, and in Winter Stoves and Hot-houses. The Air is very rare at Spahaun, and the Wind drying: The City has no need of Walls, where so many Marble Mountains stand as a
Guard, or Bulwark of Defence; it has indeed a Tower, but it is a Mud one, rather serving as an Armory, than to be relied on as a place of Strength; so that I shrewdly suspect whether ever this were the Hecatompylos of Ortellius, as is related by more than one. The Circumference of the Body of the City I guess may measure Seven Miles; but if the dispersed Gardens and Seats of the Great Men, with the Palace Royal be brought into that Computation, we must allow it as many Pharsangs. The Journy to it is difficult in Bands, Troops, or Companies, by reason of the uneven Way encompassing every side for many Miles together; therefore to attempt coming to it with an Army or Warlike Force, must not be ascribed to Prudence of Conduct or Valour, unless there should arise another Alexander (which must be imputed to his good Fortune, rather than Prowess or Virtue) hairbrain'dly resolute to undergo no Repulse, tho the Exterprize sur∣pass all human Probability: For it must unavoidably fare with him literally, as it did hyperbolically only with Xerxes his Host, who are reported to have been so numerous as to drink whole Rivers dry as they passed; what then would Cisterns of Rain-water do, or now and then a small Brook, to quench the Thirst even of an ordinary Detachment, not likely to put so Populous a City in the least Con∣sternation? But to find Food in such Bye and Desolate Paths for any considerable Force, would be past possibility, unless at the Expence of a Miracle. By these Bars, whereby the Passes are easily secured (an Handful of Men being able to withstand an Host) and the Avenues inaccessible, the Hostile Arms of the Turks have been put to a stop, who otherwise would have set no Bounds to thr Desires, could they have conquered these Obstacles, whereby they would at the same time have carried the Empire too. The small Attendance we carried up to Spahaun, was demonstra∣tion enough of this Truth; for though we fared well, yet it was tiresome, and few else meet with the like Conveniences, they being assured that we would more than reward their readiness to provide for us, whereby we the better overcame those Straits, which prepa∣red an Entrance into the large Field where this invincible City lay open to us; deriving its Annual Nutriment from a clear River, which it bestows plentifully from its hollow Womb: But that which it bears the Bays away for, is its being seated in the very Heart of the Empire. For sake whereof,Shaw Abas well advised in his Choice of Spahaun for the Imperial City. its Founder (or at least, Adorner) Shaw Abas the Great, advisedly chose it for his Imperial Throne, that thence he might more readily disperse his Mandates, and be assisting by his Auxiliaries, to any suffering Part, assaulted by the bold Incursions of his Enemies; irradiating like the Sun in the Firmament (by the In∣fluence of his Power) all within the Sphere of his Government: So that while the utmost of his Dominions are seasonably supplied with the comfortable Warmth of his Protection, he safely resides within, invulnerable from Foreign Strokes, and reigns in this his Capital City without Controul. And as the Founders of Old Rome promi∣sed Eternity to their Empire as well as City, in digging up a Man's Skull, and thence, as from the best Omen, were encouraged; as
not being persuaded the Capitol could be a fit Basis for the Monar∣chy of the World, unless it were built on the Foundation that was so luckily offered them: So from the same Auspicious Sign Shaw Abas presaged the like happy Event, building a Pillar of his Enemies Heads, raised as a Trophy to his Valour. What else is August in Suffa∣haun, are the remaining Products of his Brain, more truly than Mi∣nerva was said to be the Offspring of Jove. The magnificently-arch'd Buzzars, which form the Noble Square to the Palace; the several Publick Inns, which are so many Sera∣glios; the stately Rows of Sycamores, which the World cannot pa∣rallel; the glorious Summer-houses, and pleasant Gardens, the stu∣pendious Bridges, sumptuous Temples, the Religious Convents, the College for the Professors of Astronomy, are so many lasting Pyra∣mids and Monuments of his Fame; though many of them begin to sink in their own Ruin, for want of timely Repair; such is the fatal Calamity of human Structures, Time corroding the most durable: But to speak properly and truly, the Cause of so early a Decay is the slothful Nature, and disregard of their Forefathers Honour, that possesses the improvident Persians, lest any thing tending to perpe∣tuate their Memories, should by reviving their Virtues be made use of as a Reproach to their instant Supineness; and for that reason they let all fall to the Ground, never offering to underprop a decli∣ning Building. This City has Caesar for its principal Patron;The Cauns. under him the Caun, who is President of the Province, or County-Sheriff, (who is ever one of the Prime Nobility, and of the highest Rank among the Courtiers lways on Duty near the Emperor's Person, that he may be ready to give an account of his Charge upon demand, and at hand to introduce all Addresses that concern his Office to represent; being as it were a Skreen between so high a Majesty, and the meanness of the Popularity under his Protection, lest they should intrude too pro∣phanely, or be struck blind by the too bright Rays of an Absolute Power) is interposed as a fit Medium, to qualify by a suitable Intercession the necessary distance each Condition ought to be kept at, to maintain the mutual Benefit expected on both sides. Whilst he is thus employed, and receives the greatest Profits of his Lordship, he deputes his Lieutenant to the Trust of governing, who transacts all in his Name, as his Chief Vicar. But the Suffee's Vicar-General is by his Place the Second Person in the Empire,Etimundoulet, or Chancellor. and always the First Minister of State, called by them Etimundoulet, The Chief Slave; under whose Jurisdiction the Provinces of lesser Note do fall, and are at his disposing immediate∣ly next the Emperor's; whose Cauns or Dukes therefore are obliged to constant Residence in their several Districts; and if it fortune that at any time they have Business with the Emperor, they apply them∣selves to the Etimundoulet, as to the Lord Chancellor of the whole Kingdom, to whose Management they commit themselves and their Cause; who cannot be absent from their Metropolis at any time, be∣fore they have constituted a Ganizeen, which is an Under-Sheriff, who, thereby transmit their Authority to him, only reserving the Ho∣nour to themselves.
All these Prefects in their Dominions behave themselves after the Example of the Emperor himself,A Ganiseen is Deputy to the Caun. in respect of Grandeur as well as Rule, only remembring they are but Tenants at Will, and therefore fail not to present their Master and his Family with the First Fruits of the Growth of each Province; which Annual Commemoration is a Monitor of their Homage and Fealty to their Supreme Lord, which he exacts as a due Debt, and they pay as an acknowledgment of their Servitude to him; in which as long as they continue in his Grace, at every New-Year's Day he sends them a Livery, or Robe of Honour, to be retained his Slaves, which they receive as a Mark of the highest Favour; and to be called a Goloomy Shaw, The King's Vassal, is the highest Apex of their Ambition. Subordinate to the forementioned Officers,The Droger. is the Droger, or Mayor of the City, or Captain of the Watch or the Rounds: It is his Duty to preside with the Main Guard a-nights before the Palace-Gates, and thence to make Excursions through the City, to disperse, secure, and apprehend Idle and Vagrant Persons, that can give no Account of themselves, to punish Offenders of that nature, and to keep the Peace. In all their Buzzars, which are locked up in the dead of the Night, there are Watches to prevent Thieves, at the common Expence of every Shopkeeper. The next in Office is the Questor Zygostates,The Calenture. or Clerk of the Mar∣ket, known among them by the Title of Calenture; he fixes the Price of Corn, has the Oversight of all Bakers, Cooks, &c. and by his own Authority can not only confiscate their Goods to the Poor, but mulct with loss of Life such Offenders as are notoriously irre∣claimable otherwise; many times throwing a Baker into his own Red-hot Furnace, that vends poysonous Corn, or cheats in the Weight; and the Cook into his own Boiling Caldron, for imposing on the People Carrion, or ill-nourishing Flesh, found in Highways or Ditches: Thus deals he with Malefactors of this Batch. Besides, he is Receiver of all the Rents of the City, and pays it into the King's Treasury. The last Person to be treated of is the Cazy,The Cazy. or Publick Justiciary, who will deserve a special Treatise by himself, and therefore is to be reserved for a fitter season. But in the mean time we may observe,Spahaun the chief Empory. That by such Cyclops as these are formed the Thunderbolts of the Almighty Jove, whereby he both makes the whole Olympus shake, and preserves the Laws of every private City as well as Country to which they belong. As all things by a Natural Tendency move from the Circumference to the Centre, so from the Confluence of all Nations of the World hither, it becomes the Chief Empory, as well as an Exemplar of their Go∣vernment; although it hath declined much since the Europeans have discovered the way by Sea to India: For long before that it was the Storehouse and general Market for Indian Wares as well as its own; and by consequence, as it was the Staple of the Universe, it was the common Receptacle of all the Money ebbing and flowing from all Parts: But this Bosphorus being stopped, from a Sea it became a
Lake, in which Riches do now stagnate, not circulate, or at least not with that Force they did before. However, as long as the busy Merchant from the uttermost Coasts, gapes after its Commodities to advance his Pelf, and for his sake the Publick Buzzars are kept in better Repair than less-frequented Buil∣dings, it must be allowed it is so far from a Total Decay of Trade, that few Cities in the World surpass it for Wealth, and none come near it for those stately Buildings; which for that reason are kept entire, while others made of Lime and Slate, belonging to private Persons, hardly last their Founders Lives, for want of timely Care. For the Citizens rather chuse to dwell in a tottering House,The Citizens humbled. than appear lavish in Costly Building or Apparel, for fear their Governors should suspect they have too much Riches, when they are sure ne∣ver to be at rest till they have dived into the bottom of their Trea∣suries; which Extortion is returned by the King upon their Rulers, whereby the Emperor's Treasure grows exuberantly great: Which is the cause the Citizens so often lay up their Talents in Napkins, since it is a Crime to expose their Wealth by specious or luxurious Shews, according to the accustomed Pride of Wealthiest Corpora∣tions among us. Whence it proceeds that only Courtiers and Soldiers in this Coun∣try,Courtiers and Soldiers live great. who are maintained by Annual Pensions, are permitted to live gallantly; whose regard of the Publick Utility is rarely so much considered, as to spare any thing from their manner of enjoying themselves, either to adorn or benefit the Cities in which they reside: On which ground it is, that their best Cities seldom have splendid Edifices to commend them, from mean or private Hands; though in the Suburbs of their Capital City Spahaun, there are many by the Rivers side, both of the Nobles and the Emperors stately Palaces. But what celebrates it most, are the covered Buzzars, or Market∣places, continued through the whole City; and the Inns of Stran∣gers, occupying them in the time of their Business; their Baths, Temples, and Convents, which have Stipends to support them from being an Eyesore and Blemish in their principal Places; all which deserve a particular Description. And therefore I shall begin with their Inns,Their Cara∣vans. or Caravan Ser Raws, which are divided into Three Species, both in respect of their Site and Form, as well as Matter, through the whole Empire. Those near the Sea-shore for Seven Days Journey or thereabouts, are com∣monly of this Figure; they are reared of unpolished Stones, on an Area Three Foot high, to keep out the Horses, and leave an out∣ward Space for Servants to lye on, whereon are erected Four Pillars, which support Four bowed Roofs, surrounding an Hemispherical Arch in the middle, where at each side over head are large open Windows (or Doors rather) to receive the Air, and at every Cor∣ner of the Square, Forms within a separate Apartment for their Men of Note, which are in open Cloysters; and without, Four more, close, for those that connot endure the Air, or for their Women; every Quarter has a wide Entrance or open Gate to add to its Airy∣ness; to which Inns are no Stables or shady Places for the Beasts of Burthen, unless there happen to be Trees, which is a great chance in
such Sandy, Wild, and Desert Places. To the most famous of these now and then happens to be an Host provided with Necessaries for Travellers, slenderly provided to furnish them at easy Rates with Cheese and Fruit, Bread and Barley, the first whereof the Poor make their Meals on, and their Beasts on the latter: But they must dress both their Victuals and their Beasts themselves, for he affords neither Cook nor any other to the best that come, no more than to the lowest; offering at no more than to sell Mans-Meat and Horse-Meat. They mostly nest in common,No Priority at Church, Bath, or Cara∣van Ser Raw. and observe no distinction among themselves either at Church, in the Bath, or in the Caravan Ser Raw; he that comes first, is first served, none give way to another; where∣by there is in the same Inn a multitude of all sorts, Footmen, Horse∣men, Merchants, together with an hideous Confusion of People within, and the Noise of Beasts, Packers, and Servants. Notwithstanding which, if a Foreign Ambassador with a great Retinue arrive, or any of their Nobles (whom they only respect as Men among them) pitch his Tent, or take up his Quarters with them, these will remove, and proffer him Room, seeking Lodgings on the Outward Lodge, or Advance-Border of the Caravan Ser Raw for themselves; but then this must be esteemed a great Mark of their Compliance, and indeed almost forced, they usually stomaching such a Disturbance with frowning Countenances, and sometimes open Revilings. This Form, after Seven Days travelling, is from an huddled Stack of Buildings expatiated into a large Square in the middle of the Area, where in the Summer-time both the Cattel and Packs are shut in by Doors lock'd a-nights, and open'd early in the Morn, to keep in the straying Troop together, and for the safety of their Bundles, lest any should be stollen: In the heart of this Square is raised a place as large as a Mountebank's Stage, where the Gelabdar, or Master Muliteer, with his prime Passengers or Servants, have an opportunity to view their whole Caphala. This Office in Turky is held a Place of Trust and Honour,The Gelabdar not so esteem∣ed in Persia, as the Caphala Basha in Turky. he being Captain of all the Troops going together, and hires Soldiers, and lists them in his Pay, being a Churlish Nabal to Christians; but he is here of no other Account than to look after his Number of Mules, Camels, or Asses, and to see they bring their Lading safe where consigned, and often becomes subject himself to Bastinadoes on the Soles of the Feet: Whereas the other in his Journey takes upon him a kind of a Bassaship, and never fails to lay any Miscarri∣age or Misfortune on the Bones of the Fringi, or Franks: But it is otherwise here, because of the Rhadary undertaking to secure Tra∣vellers; which is easily done in an entirely-subjected Empire, not liable to Treacherous Insults of Ravening Thieves in Companies, as they are to the Wild Arabs and other Outlaws. In Winter-time there are Stables capacious of holding Four hun∣dred Carriers Horses together with their Burthens, on the backside of little Chambers, fronting the Peristylium or Cloyster'd Entry, all black with Smoke when they retire into them in the Winter; lying else before them on open Cloysters, which are so many Anticham∣bers
to every one of them, and at first appearance make a Piatza, were not every distinct Arch on each side separated by a Party-Wall, being all alike, and did not the Middle Arch of each side make a diffe∣rence by a more spacious and exalted distinction, each answering the Loftiness of the Porch within, though that rises higher into an aspiring square Tower, with lightsome Summer-Chambers aloft, which makes a Magnificent Entry; and thence the Covering of the Caravan runs on a plain Terras, convenient for the whole Number of Guests to spread their Carpets, Matrasses, Plads, or Beds, for lodg∣ing in the Night time. Since the Architecture to these in View and Variety (by their alternate Chambers and Cloysters,They may make Forts of their Cara∣vans. which by distinct Arches keep their due Order) is no deformed sight, it yields besides a double Utility, for the defence of Strangers against both the Injuries of Heat and Cold: And those of them that are built of Stone or Brick, have not once only stood it out in the nature of strong Forts against their Opposers, but have many times been made tenable, being stored with Ammunition and Provision. Those nearer Spahaun have most an end the same Form or Shape below, but are oftner tubilated than tabulated above, and are made of Mud for the most part; but in Spahaun its self, where Strangers abide longer, they are more splendid, and larger than any where else; for to this lower Order we have been describing, they add ano∣ther, and sometimes a third, which bear Proportion and exact Syme∣try with each other. Their Temples represent no great Bulk to the Beholders,Their Tem∣ples. nor exalt themselves much towards Heaven, unless some Obelisks, which are sometimes joined with, at other times separate from them: But most an end they observe this Form; The Foundation being laid in a Square, the Roof is supported by four Pillars, in whose middle a great Cupilo lifts up its Head, which the Priests visit Day and Night at every Fourth Hour to call the people to Prayers; the Whole par∣ticipates more of Mosaick than any other Work. In the Dome is no Ornament, nor Seat; on the Ground Mats are strewed; any manner of Carving or Representation whatsoever is banish'd hence. From the Pomaerium to the outward Court they ascend by Steps, where they bare their Feet, alluding to the Command in Moses his Vision, Pull off thy shooes, for the place whereon thou standest is holy Ground. As soon as they have washed themselves in the Porch, where always is a Baptistery, or Tank for that purpose, they pluck off their upper Garments, especially if they be Cloth of Gold, for Gold also is to them Nigess, i. e. unclean; wherefore they cast from them Gold Rings, or whatever is set in Gold, not being suffered either to sleep or pray with them upon them; but at the same time they open their Silver Phylacteries and Rosaries, wherein in Aggat are engraven some Scraps of their Alcoran, and uncovering their Heads they enter their Churches, and fall down on the Ground, and as they recite their Prayers, often kiss the same, always bowing towards the rising and setting of the Sun, and agree with the Indian Moors in saluting their Genii, and then they depart; unless on their Sabbath-day, which is Friday every Week, the Mullah detain them by a Preach∣ment,
or with a Chapter out of the Alcoran,Chap. XI. which he undertakes to expound by a large, and, no doubt, learned Periphrasis, to whom on the South-side they have appropriated a Pulpit raised on Steps, if it may be said to be one without any Desk or Rails, on which he sits, not stands, it being placed in an Oratory apart. Sometimes they pass about by little Portals to the Door of the Temple, such an Ostle being left open, as we see in great Gates of Noblemens Houses, that he who is about to go in, must first take heed lest he break his Shins, before he stoop to make his Entrance: This Place carries something solemn about it; when it is shut up, the Pulpit receives a small Light through Grates instead of Windows. The Colleges in Spahaun are mostly founded and endowed by Royal Donation,Colleges. partly by others. There are Twenty or Thirty Fair Ones that have Incomes, and many more whose Mannors are devolved by a tacit Prescript into Secular Hands. To every College there is a President over the Stu∣dents, and another over the Fabrick, who lets out the Chambers, and receives the Rents, disposing them as he pleases, and displacing at pleasure: Every Chamber has One, Two, Three, or more Stu∣dents, where they sit and lye; to this the ordinary Door stands for a Window; there are no Forms or Benches, more than an old Moth-eaten Carpet, not fit for a Gypsy's Mantle, for to use, either for Repose or other purpose. The Number of Scholars in each depends upon the Number of Chambers, and the Constancy of the Revenues, there being in some not above Forty, in others from an Hundred to an Hundred and fifty: He who is elected into these, lives sparingly and sepa∣rately, not eating in common Halls, having no more allowed than two or three Gosbeeks a Day, which is about so many Stivers or Far∣things, from the President; if these are not enough, then he assigns the Transcription of such and such Books to his Aid, for which they are paid. There are also three, four, or more Servants in con∣stant Salary from the College, which any Student may of Right command to buy Fruit for their Food, and fetch them other Neces∣saries; who sometimes, Illiterate as they are, go away with some of the College Revenues, and are reckoned among the Students; being fitter to shooe Horses, or drive a Wain with Vespasian's Cha∣rioteer, than to share in that Character. Their Balneos or Hummums are the most sumptuous,Hummums, or Balneos. which are in all their Cities, always hot; and it is lawful for every one of both Sexes, on stated times of the Day to bath for a small Price: The Prepositor of each House gives Notice to all Comers by blowing an Horn, when the Houses are ready to attend them; of which there are innumerable destined to these uses, each striving to outshine the other; insomuch that no time either of Day or Night passes, but you shall hear perpetual Noises of Horns to invite you to them; for no sooner is the Fire kindled under them, but they let every one know by those loud Instruments. In which Places the Treatment is alike to all; for as before was said in the Church and Inns, so in the Hot-Houses all things are com∣mon to all: Wherefore if any one desire to be freed from the Vul∣gar
Rout, he must hire an House for a whole Day; which may be done, if he pay the usual Expence and Income of that Day, which Christians are always obliged to, where they have not Balneos of their own to resort to; for the Persians presume too Pharisaically on these Baths, judging thereby all their Offences to be washed away; according to that of Lactantius, Flagitiis omnibus inquinati veniunt, & semet sacrificasse opinantur, si cutem laverint; tanquam libidines in∣tra pectus inclusas, ulla amnis abluat aut maria ulla purificent: They come polluted with the heinousest Sins, and think when they have washed they have attoned by a sufficient Sacrifice; as if any River or Sea could purify their Lusts included in their Hearts. These Houses are beneath the Earth, only some little round Globes embellish'd with Painted Glass peep out above the Ground to give Light, and are well clos'd, lest the ambient Air should offend by too forcible a Ventilation through any neglected Crevise: They are built with divers distinct Cells one from another, in which Men sit, are rubbed, and cleansed: Immediately within the Porch is the greatest Cell, or rather a large Room, where they d'off their Cloaths, and being undressed leave their Garments; in the middle of this Place is a Cystern of cold Water coming into it by several Pipes: All the other Cells are so conveniently framed, that every one may breathe a different Air as to the degrees of Heat, such as may suit with the divers Temperaments of several Bodies, since every Constitution re∣quires not the same Bath: For as Galen has left it written in lib. 7. Morb. Med. Some want an Hot, others a Tepid, and others a Cold Bath, as Hectical Habits declare. The Pavements are all Marble, on which, the more Hot Water is thrown, the more it increases the Heat, although at the same time the Subterranean Fire be as Hot as it can be: On these Marble Floors they at last extend themselves, when they think they have tarried in long enough, that the Barbers, whose business it is, should wind and turn every Limb and Joint of the Body, before, behind, and on every side, with that Dexterity and Slight, that it is admirable to behold them perform it; whereby they leave no Muscle, Nerve, or superficial Joint, either unmov'd, or not rubb'd: Then with a course Hair-cloth and Hot Water they scrape off all the Filth and Sweat; and last of all by a Depilatory they take clean away all manner of Hairs growing either in Secret Parts, or any Emunctuary to cause either nasty Smells, or troublesome chasing. When they retire to put on their Cloaths, (this is to be only un∣derstood of Great Men) there waits them a Collation of Fruit, Sweetmeats, and variety of Perfumes, as Rosewater, Rackbeet, and the like, with all befitting Attendants, besides the usual Servitors, to administer either Coho, Tea, Tobacco, or Brandy, if faint. When they are dress'd, they emplaister their Feet and Hands with a Red Paste, which wonderfully helps sweaty and moist Palms, as also stinking Feet. These things being premised, the Benefits coming from the use of these are, when the Body is inflamed and dried by immoderate Heat, it is finely refreshed by sweet Water, and the Pores become moisten'd; the farther prosecution of which Advantages having been spoken of
before, I refer you thither, and proceed to the other Houses of Re∣sort, which are only for the Men, and not for the Women. Their Coffee-houses,Their Coffee-houses. where they sell Coho, better than any among us, which being boiled, has a Black Oil or Cream swimming at top, and when it has not, they refuse to drink it: Hither repair all those that are covetous of News, as well as Barterers of Goods; where not only Fame and common Rumour is promulged, but Poe∣try too, for some of that Tribe are always present to reherse their Poems, and disperse their Fables to the Company; so true is it, , Ex Otio Negotium, That their Business pro∣ceeds from Idleness. They are modell'd after the Nature of our Theatres, that every one may sit around, and suck choice Tobacco out of long Malabar Canes, fasten'd to Chrystal Bottles, like the Recipients or Bolt-heads of the Chymists, with a narrow Neck, where the Bole or Head of the Pipe is inserted, a shorter Cane reaching to the bottom, where the long Pipe meets it, the Vessel being filled with Water: After this sort they are mightily pleased; for putting fragrant and delightful Flowers into the Water, upon every attempt to draw Tobacco, the Water bubbles, and makes them dance in various Figures, which both qualifies the Heat of the Smoke, and creates together a pretty Sight. At Night here are abundance of Lamps lighted, and let down in Glasses from the Concave Part of the Roof, by Wires or Ropes, hanging in a Circle. The Buzzars having been mentioned before, I shall only add, That however Great all their other Buildings are, yet these carry away the Glory from them all; as much as the Halls of the Ci∣tizens of London exceed Noblemens Houses about the City, being the Work and Business of Joint-Stocks; and their Shews and Entertain∣ments are as Pompous as Princes, however sparingly they live at their own Homes: For these being the joint Advantage both of the Emperor and his Subjects, he encourages their forwardness in adorn∣ing these, though he suppresses all their Extravagancy of Garb, or Exorbitancy in Building, if it bears not with it the becoming Design of giving him the greatest Share of Honour in the Foundation. Their Bridges are made either of Brick or Stone, and want neither for Skill or Ornament in their Contrivance; and are chiefly built for Ostentation, or to preserve their Memories, as their other great Buildings are: They are of more Use to join divided Rocks for Pas∣sengers, than to lay over Rivers; the former of which are more frequent in the Road to the Port than the other.
CHAP. XII. Of the present Inhabitants; of the Jews being interspersed ever since the Captivity of Babylon; the Custom of exoculating their Princes; Nobility among the Persians; the Esteem they have of the Emperor's Person being Divine; his Name and Succession: Of the English overthrowing the Portugals at Ormus; the Procession of the Court; its Grandeur, and Reception of Ambassadors: Of the Suffees; of their Ca∣valry, Infantry, Seamen, and Navy. THE Inhabitants of this City,The present Persians Scy∣thians. as well as of all Persia (the Ancient Stock being, as it were, extinct) spring from the Overflow of the Northern Scythians, by whom the Native Persians were either totally expell'd, or so suppress'd, as to remain of no Ac∣count among them: These notwithstanding, by the Benefit of the Climate, have chang'd so much of their innate Roughness, as they have acquired the more coruscant Beauty inherent in the Temper of the Air; for they are of a delicate Composure of Body, Tall and Strait, especially the Women, who though not generally so proper, yet excel in Softness of Texture, and Comeliness of Form: Their Outside is no false Indication of their Natural Ingenuity, which ex∣ceeds all the Eastern People both for Facetiousness of Wit, Civil Be∣haviour, and Gallantry in Appearance, as much as they do the Bar∣barous Africans. They cohabit generally with their Relations together in one House, or at least as near one the other as it is possible. Jews are among them of the same Antiquity as the Exportation from Jerusalem to Babylon,Jews here ever since the Cap∣tivity. who live in the same Cities, though in distinct Streets, and with less Mark of Reproach here than elsewhere: But how far their Liberties extend, I pretend not to tell; only they congregate their Sabbaths, New Moons, and Feast days, in full Synagogues, without any Disturbance. Here are store of Banyans, dwelling in their great Inns, but de∣generate from the strict Indian Banyans, indulging themselves in most sorts of Flesh, and all kind of Wines. In this City of Spahaun, besides the Romish Monks, Us, the Bel∣gian Representative, and the Polish Ambassador, are no Christians suffered to live; the rest repair to Jelfa among the Armenians, unless accidentally some Strangers tarry a Night or two in a Caravan Ser Raw, which are the Receptacles of all Foreigners. These being of a lower Orb,On the Death of their Em∣peror, the new one causes his Brothers and near Relations Eyes to be put out. creep safely on the Ground, while those exalted to an higher Sphere, like Fortune its self, are set on slip∣pery Places, and are deprived of their Eye-sight. Long since that Barbarity has been exploded here, which as soon as the Witnesses of Virility appeared, to testify their being Men not of an Hours Birth, or of a Minutes rather, were delivered to bloody Villains, crueller
than Beasts,Chap. XII. (whose unrelenting Mercy spar'd not the Royal Infants Cries) to make away inhumanly, or at least suddenly dispatch them. Such is the fatal necessity of Tyrants, that least can credit those that are most allied to them; which addition to their Crimes they think is somewhat extenuated by exoculating them only at this Court; whereby they are render'd uncapable of the Throne, (being to be presented to the Supreme Government, like the Levites in the Old Law, without Blemish, being whole in every Member): But cer∣tainly those are bound up in hard Circumstances, who to avoid Disputes of Succession to the Crown, unmercifully butcher Tender Innocents, hurrying them to Execution as soon as they have escaped Imprisonment from their Mothers Womb: On this Basis the Old Monarchy of the Persians was founded, as if no other Cement could so firmly knit, as Blood. And at this Instant their Jealousy is so fervent, that they keep their Sons like Captives, till the Father's Death enlarges the Eldest; when the Younger Brothers, Uncles, and Nephews on both sides, on the Appearance of the Rising Sun, see their last: As if the Blood-Royal were prophan'd, unless they fled to the Hot Iron, as the only means to expiate for its Affinity; which being drawn over the most sensible Parts (their Eyes), strikes from the Rays of their Kinsman's Diadem such a Sparkling Lustre, as for ever after makes them irre∣coverably blind; to seek Recovery whereof, or any for them, is a Treason unpardonable. So abhorrent are they of a Partner or a Ri∣val in Empire, that they endure not any to emulate or outdo them by an overforward Strain of Loyalty, whereby they might seem obliged to their Subjects, or that they should outshine them by a Popular Af∣fection, however meritorious their Deeds have been; whereby they teach their Children perfect Obedience, before they permit them to think of Command. But whether by this way it is best; to be conversant with Toothless Old Women, Ignorant and Effeminate Eunuchs, a Tutor more ver∣sed in Books than the Affairs of the World, and all these bound in the highest Allegiance to their Liege, is a fitter Topick for the Machiavilians of our Age, than for me to handle. Although Plu∣tarch has delivered this as a Maxim to Posterity, The who are ge∣nerously and Princely instructed, let them be compared with these, and the difference will presently discover its self which is the more eligible Education: But for the Good of the Chief Ministers of State, it is more profitable, I confess, to keep their Princes Judgments al∣ways in Minority, provided they can thereby make them more plia∣ble to their Ends and Designs. Contrary to the Principles of the rest of the East,Nobles by Birth among the Persians. Nobility is re∣garded and maintained among the Persians, confiding rather in their Homebred Honesty; than entertaining Mercenary Foreigners in their Armies, to whose Fidelity and Conduct most other Countries commit their greatest Strength, while these rely on their own Sub∣jects: For though they claim Nobility of Race, yet they are not of the same Stock with the Royal Line, and therefore (content to move beneath) aspire not to the Top of Empire; nor can they stretch out their Hands to the Diadem, without apparent Usurpa∣tion,
which those of an Equal Order would oppose, as having as good a Title thereto as the bold Violator himself; which they who are of a more sublime Spirit would never brook, much less bear such an Indignity, or pay Homage and Respect to One they must have in Scorn and Contempt. On this Account it is they have ample Lord∣ships assigned them, which they possess by Inheritance and Lawful Right, with the same Tenor as our Barons, who are before others in Wealth and Honour, but are something restrained in their Power, lest they should take up Arms against their King. The Emperor often rewards these with great Offices and high Employments, where he finds Desert meet with the Grandeur of their Birth; gracing them with his Commands the rather, because (to their Eternal Renown be it spoken) they seldom desert their Sovereign, or prove unfaithful to the Throne: So innate a Sted∣diness being ingrafted in their Souls, to conform themselves to their Master's Wills, that they are always found obsequious; which if it be not altogether to be attributed to their Virtue, must admit of the Dread the Anger of their Emperor impresses (being like the Roaring of a Lion), which frights the trembling Herds among the Woods; for their Lives are immediately at his Dispose, which keeps them in Awe. They esteem their Emperors not only as Lords Paramount,The Govern∣ment Hierar∣chical. but reverence them as Sons of the Prophets, whose Dominion therefore is grounded more on Hierarchy than bare Monarchy. For as of old the Persians adored the Sun as a Deity, and celebrated his rising with Morning Hymns, and were daily employed in Sacred An∣thems to its Praise; so now from Idolaters becoming Infidels, they still espouse the Divine Right as well as Lineage of their Sovereigns: From which fond Belief, the Potentest General at the Head of a Puissant Army, or the Provincial Cauns, though surrounded with Legions of Soldiers, upon the Arrival of a single Chuper (that is, a Post with Royal Order), attended with no other Warrant than being one of the King's Creatures, and he pronouncing Death from the Emperor, they lay down their Heads without any Tumult, with an entire Resignation to their Master's Pleasure. And what is yet more ungrateful to men of their Jealousy,They refuse the Emperor nothing he commands. (it being so base and dishonest, that no Reparation can be made among the Moors for an Indignity of that kind) if he commands them on the great Festival (begun by Ahasuerus, and continued to this Day by the Persian Monarchs, an Hundred and Fourscore Days every Year) to bring their own proper Wives to Court, to remain there all that time prostitute to his Lust; this so hated a thing they are so far from refusing, that they obey him in every thing, no less than an Immortal God. From which piece of Service, no Man that is known to have an Handsome Woman to his Wife, is exempted; for after his Pimps and Panders have had the Scent, he is not long from the Hunt with a full Cry: To that end, in whatsoever Quarter of the City the Puss squats, he sets up his Crook, or Interdict, that no Man pre∣sume to stay within doors, till he be passed whither he intends; but in the mean while, the Females are permitted, nay, commanded to
stay at home, and so he comes and finds the Form, and then is sure not to miss of his Game. But to close up this; so devoted are they to him, that as the Ancient Hebrews swore by their King's Health; the Egyptians, by the Life of Pharaoh; the Romans, by Caesar's Honour; they have no more obliging Test, than Seir Pedeshaw, By the Em∣peror's Head. On these Terms it is,Whereon is grounded the Emperor's Se∣curity. that the Affairs at home, and of the Mi∣litia abroad, are so negligently treated, by the Emperor's being tho∣roughly assured of his Peoples Integrity and Allegiance; all the strong Castles and Places through the whole Realm hereupon being demo∣lished, or lying in Ruins; unless some few near the Confines of Turky, and Candahar, taken from the Indians; slighting them only as Nests for Thieves and Robbers, well knowing when it comes to the Push, the Mountains will prove the better Security: Nor is the Army at present in a much forwarder Posture for Fight, it being vilely defective in its Musters; but the worst provided of all are the Fleets in either Seas. When at the same time the Treasury never more abounded in Cash,His Wealth. holding thereby the Sinews of War in his own hands; for which reason he sleeps, while the Burthen of the Kingdom is re∣jected, and the Weight thereof lies on the Chancellor's Shoulders. He has not for these Eleven Months past stirred out of his Pa∣lace, nor on any occasion shewed himself in publick; which hath created matter of doubt to the Populacy, whether he be well, or seized with any Distemper: But those that are better informed (for even the Actions of Princes cannot escape being canvass'd, however absolute they are) suspect him to be wallowing in his Libidinous Course of Life. He lives like a Tyrant in his Den;His Course of Life. for his Domesticks and his Whores, with whom he commits Bestialities (which are innume∣rable) often feel his Cruelty by unheard of Tortures; as witness the dilacerated Bodies found after the Removal of his Tents on any Pro∣gress; in confirmation whereof are many living Examples about this City, of those that have been his Menial Servants, conversant about his necessary Affairs, who slipping in any one Point, are daily to be seen escaping with their Lives, but not without the loss of some Member, sacrific'd to the Rage of an unreasonable Master. He is a Winebibber and a Drunkard; they reporting, That he is able, after his full Dose has already made him reel, to drink a large Flask, more than a Gallon, of Siras Wine, before he can be said to finish this Ex∣ploit by a silent consenting to have had enough: Nor can Sleep heal him, for as soon as he hath outworn his Dose, he with most greedy haste returns to his Vomit before he comes to himself; or if by chance he happen to be sober, the Brute gets up, and he is lost among the Women: To crown all, he is cursedly Covetous, beneath the Majesty of so great a Monarch, repining even at ordinary Ex∣pences: Whose Name, for fear it should perish, we come next to mention. The Emperor's Name is Shaw Schelymon,His Name and Genealo∣gy. or King Solomon, the Son of Shaw Abas; not of him that was truly stiled the Great; but however, he may be called, The Good, being a Lover of Christians;
by the Father's side, of the Sophian Extract; by the Mother's, of the House of Georgia, which Illustrious Dame still lives the Relict of her Worthy Husband; so that he is sprung from Kings of long Con∣tinuance: Which to understand the more clearly, we are to unfold the Succession from Sardanapalus his Reign, the last from Nimrod: After his killing himself, the Empire was divided into the Monarchy of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Medes. Begun by Arbaces in the Year of the World, 3146. and ended by Cyrus, who restored the Ancient Honour to the Persian Sway; to whom succeeded Cambyses. After him, the Impostor Smerdis ob∣tained the Kingdom by the Craft of the Magi, until the Noble Otanes discovered him not to be the true and lawful Brother of Cam∣byses. When by the general Suffrage it was agreed, That he of Seven Competitors should be Emperor, whose Horse should Neigh first after they came to the Place appointed for the Choice; which Lot fell upon Darius Hydaspes, through the Cunning of his Groom, who caused his Masters Horse to Leap a Mare the Day before in the same Place. From him Xerxes and Artaxerxes Longimanus were elevated to the Supreme Dignity; from whom Darius the Mede, van∣quished by Alexander, was the Fifth in order; at whose Decease the Power was distracted among the Captains of the Conqueror; till Artabaces reunited it to Parthia first of all; then Artaxerxes, by Caracalla and Macrinus their Treacheries, cutting off Artabanus the last Parthian King, again Enthroned the Persians; who alternately reigned the space of Eight and twenty Kings, and then obscured by the Confluence of the Saracens; who continued till the Year of our Redemption, 1030; in which they implored Tangrolope and the Turk to accept the Royal Seat; from whose Promotion Cussanus was the Third, who was expelled in the Year 1202 by the Great Cham. Haalam was the first constituted King of the Tartarian Race: From him Abuzaid was the Ninth, who dying, they strove among them∣selves for the Kingdom; when Gemsus delivered himself and his Countrey from the Slavery it groaned under; whose Progeny at last Tamberlane,The Suffees in∣troduc'd, from whom Spa∣haun is called Suffahaun. or Timurlan, extirpated. Timurlan's Dynasty being soon spent, Cussanes the Armenian presently put an end to that Stock, in the Year 1471; who gave his Daughter in Marriage to Adir Sophi, or rather Suffee, which signifies White; in Arabic, Suffet; wherefore Spahaun is corruptly so called, it being in the Persian Language Suf∣fahaun, or the City of the Whites; which since the Irruption of Tamerlane, the Scythians affect as well here as in India, (Mogul, as we have said, signifying no more in Indostan); which I purposely insert, having promised before to give the reason why this City should be called Suffahaun, as the Persians now do call it, and not Spahaun, or Ispahaun, as Strangers pronounce it. Craving leave for this Digression;Oppositions made by the Turkish Sect. Adir Suffee, the Son of Guin Suffee, receiving Cussane's Daughter as his Wife, was enabled to re∣vive the lost Caliphship, a long while continued in his Family (tho obscurely), deriving it from Musa Cerasa, one of Hali's Twelve Successors; from which time till then it lay buried, as well by their own Divisions, as the Malice of the Turks, who disown that Extract of the Caliphship with the same Inveteracy to each others Claims,
as among us Papists and Protestants we dispute about the Lawful Suc∣cessor of our Saviour; for Haly took the Daughter of the false Prophet Mahomet to Wife, and thence took upon him and bore away the Suc∣cession of the Caliphs amongst the Persians; Repudiating Abubequer, or Abubezar, Omor and Osman, in right of Mahomet's Brother, with all the Turkish Followers; and thus the Suffean proclaim Mortis Haly the next of Kin, being Son-in-law to Mahomet, and in that Right Lawfully inducted into the Caliphship; and though hereby in pro∣cess of time the Caliphship and Empire were united, Adir Suffee maintaining his Claim and his Sons, at last got honourably enough into the Throne; yet here arose matter of perpetual Animosity, ne∣ver to be extinguished, while the Omerans, whence spring the Otto∣man Family and Sect, still Oppose, Contradict, and Persecute the Suffean Sect. Insomuch that the last Imaum, or the last of the Twelve false Apostles, from Haly, by Name Mahomet Mehdi Saheb Elzamon, i. e. The Lord of Times, being taken by the Snares of the Omerans they would have slain him; when (say the Persians) God rendred him Invisible, and retains him out of harms way, and Alive, till Beggage come; which with us is rendred Antichrist; then the Lord of Times shall appear and shall reduce all those that are led away by Magical Inchantments, into the right way; declaring moreover, Christ Hazare Taissa at that time shall be restored to the Living, and be received by Mahomet Mehdi into his Service; that by his Prayers and Meritorious Intercession, he, with all the Faithful Mahometans, may be partakers of eternal Glory at the Day of Judgment. Not under∣standing in the mean time, that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things above and things below; and that there is no other name given in earth or heaven whereby we can be saved. And while the Turks and Persians contend at this rate, it is alone the pretence of an everlasting War, while the Persians Espouse the Suffee, being uncertain where to place the Caliphship after the As∣sassination of Mahomet Mehdi, and the Inter-regnum thence ensuing, better than on this Adir Suffee, who though he was slain by Cussanes his Successors, was afterwards revenged by Ismael his Son, who was first saluted King of Persia, as well as acknowledged Caliph by right of Consanguinity; obtaining the first by right of Conquest Two hundred Years and more, after the Caliphship was covered in the Embers of Oblivion raked up, and in the Persian Annals is set down; Shaw Ismael Mossy; whom follows Shaw Tomage; after him Shaw Mahmud Condubad; then Shaw Abas the Great: Who when he had enlarged his Dominions from the Persian Gulf to the Caspian Sea;The English Sack Ormu by surprise. and lastly, when he was about to wage War with the Sea it self, in the Year 1610, or thereabouts, having not one Port in the Bay of Persia before the Arrival of an English Ship, sent out by the Company of Merchants Trading then to this Place,
Commanded by Captain Joseph Wedal, when England was at Wars with Portugal, and Imaum Cooly Caun, the famous Warrier-General of the Emperor of Persia's Forces, was then set down against Ormus, and all the Harbours the Portugals had in Possession on this side the Gulf; which Ship of our Nation coming in, the Captain was im∣plored to Assist the Persians against his and the Emperor's Enemies, which the General asking, the Sea Captain consented to. First Stipulating,Articles of Agreement between the English and Persians. That the Persian Soldiers should not meddle with the Spoils before the English Mariners were satisfied; (which were such of all sorts of Jewels, Gold and Silver, that they refused to carry off any more). Secondly, That Bunder Abassee, now Gombroon, should Yearly divide Half the Customs between the English and Persians, and that whatever English Ship should enter the Port should be free from any manner of Tribute. Thirdly, That it should be Lawful for them to Transport Twenty Horses, of which Number Two might be Mares, Yearly. Provided First, That the English should keep Two Men of War constantly to defend the Gulf. And, Secondly, That they should deliver the Portugals Forts into the Persians hands; in doing which the English should always be esteem∣ed the Emperor's Friends. And, Lastly, Should have the First Seat in the Council, and their Agents be looked on with equal Grace to their Prime Nobility. The Articles being Ratified on either side, the Enterprise is under∣taken; though of it self it was too great an Action for one Ship to perform, or even a well-appointed Navy, had they been upon their Guard (or any Commander to Promise without the Consent of the King his Master) wherefore the English betake themselves to Stra∣tagem, and gaining leave to Careen their Ship under their Guns, whilst the Portugals dreamt nothing less, they poured in Men (the Persians being hid under Deck) at unawares, that they were put into a Consternation before they could think of their Defence; whereby they became Masters presently of the Castle, strengthned both by Sea and Land, by this unexpected Attempt Vanquished, which otherwise was Invincible; being possessed whereof by this Rape, the rest of the Island soon fell prostrate to the Lust of the Sur∣prisers; and the English having got their Booty, left the Christians (Oh Impiety)! to be spoiled by the Infidels. Which thing,Vengeance persues the Enterprisers. as it gained us Esteem among the Persians, was the utter Ruin of the Lusitanian Greatness, it ever since declining, and is almost at its fatal Catastrophe; for immediately upon this, their Fleet before Muschat is Defeated, and they were driven out of all their strong Places in the Gulf, so that the Loss was greater than if they had lost Mosambique, from whence they have their Gold; because all the Trade of the World centred here, all Merchandize both going and coming paid them Tribute; that the Wealth of this place thus entred was incredible; yet to see the just Vengeance
(where private Avarice and Pelf is preferred before Virtue and Ho∣nesty, and a due Respect to the only Supreme Deity) overtakes those Wretches who were the cause of their Overthrow. How it fell out with the Persians, who seemed to have the juster Cause, I cannot tell; but some of Those People now alive, who were the Un∣doers of These, are as Miserable, and it may be more, than those they made so; the Captain's Children having been known to go anights to the Brew-house for Grains for their Subsistence, and the rest of them who are still surviving are the unhappy scorn of all that know them; whereas they thought by this deed to have purchased a lasting Fame, and lived to have enjoyed their Ill-got Goods; which how it did thrive at home, those from whose Information I take this, have been, in part, Eye-witnesses; but here I am sure, at this time both Persians, Arabs, and Turks, fare the better for it, while they have divided among themselves what was entirely the Portugals; the Persians in the mean while doing what they please with us, so that at this present, all things considered, they allow us little more than a Name; but even here the truth must be confessed, it is be∣cause we have no Ships to guard the Gulf; which if done, and the Persians could be made to stand to their first Terms, in my Opinion must turn to a good account, and be a thing of greater concern than can be well managed by less than a Royal Company; though as things now stand they have free recourse to Tigris and Euphrates, this Sea being open, which was always kept shut by the Portugals, to their no small profit. This Emperor,Shaw Abass Kills his Son Mirza. Shaw Abas, in whose time this was Atchiev'd, was Cotemporary with our King James I. who had been happy in a Son, if the Fates had not envied so great a Man his Father's Favour; but for his Virtue he reaped Hatred; for there were not wanting fawning Parasytes, who abused the Emperor's Ears by spreading abroad, and casting out words, as if his Son Mirza Suffee courted the Popular Air; whereupon he withdrew his Countenance, and deprived him of the common Light, by that barbarous Custom of the hot Iron drawn over his Eye-balls; but seeing that could not sufficiently break his Spirit, he having gone thus far, could not rest till he had per∣fected his Mortality by Poyson: Thus what Virtue had raised to full growth, Jealousy soon cut off, although he could leave no bet∣ter Effigies of his Manners, Virtue, Constancy, Piety, and towardly Disposition, than his Son Suffee; to whom our Countryman Dreyden has ventured to give Immortality in his Tragedy called, The Sophy; which Suffee after his Grandfather's death enjoyed the Throne; who when he gave place to Death; permitted Shaw Abas the Good, who was the Father of Shaw Scholymon, the present Emperor: Who is a Man of a good Presence,The present Emperor given up to Debauchery. and of no mean Capacity, unless by indulging his Body he thickens his Understanding, as well as he has made his Body Gross; he is Tall and very Fleshy, so that when he stirs or laughs, all the Muscles of the Scapula, as well as Ribs,
move together. In the beginning of his Reign, like another Nero, he gave good Specimens of his Inclinations, not unworthy the He∣roes that were his Ancestors; but when he began to hearken to Flat∣terers, and give himself over to Idleness, he left off to Govern, and listed himself in the service of Cruelty, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Lasciviousness, and abominable Extortion, where he perpetrated things not only uncomely to be seen, but even offensive to the Ears; wherefore at his libidinous Feasts, to enquire what he transacts, or how he behaves himself, is fitter for an Aretin than a modest Author. But when he is enthroned and encompassed with the flower of his Courtiers,The way of receiving Ambassadors. and gives Audience to Foreign Ministers; the manner is thus: An Ambassador is Introduced his Presence by the Master of the Ceremonies, who instructs him and tells him his Duty; the Emperor is Seated on a Throne alone, boulstred up by Embroidered Cushions; his Counsellors are placed behind him, with Caps on, proper to the Kings and Magi of Persia, the Emperor being distinguished only by one White Plume of Feathers from theirs; when the Ambassa∣dor enters his Presence, he makes three profound Obeysances, after which he is permitted to deliver his Message, and then produces his Presents to the Emperor, having gratified the Chief Officers before his Admission. Those Men of Note that are Governors, or Cauns, stand now at∣tending with Guns hung over their Shoulders, performing the Ser∣vice of our Gentlemen Pensioners: If the Emperor is pleased to Honour the Person entring, or is pleased with the Message, he or∣ders him to sit at his Feet, and a Table to be richly spread: About the King stand Vessels of Gold beset with Gems, and the Carpets, are of high Value, one of which, not a Yard Square, I saw worth Fourscore Thomands; and all his Plates he Eats out of, are Gold inlaid, or beset with Jewels, as well as the Cups he Drinks out of; as Lipsius Notes the Custom of Old; Capacibus gemmis inter se propinarent: So Lucan, Gemmaeque capaces excipere Merum; and Cicero confirms it in ver. 4. Non pauca pocula ex auro, quoe ut mos est, Regibus & maxime in Syria gemmis erant distincta clarissimis. Whatever Cup the Ambassador is drunk to out of by the Empe∣ror, whether of Gold Enammelled, or beset with Jewels, it is fil∣led with the same Liquor, and the Cup is his Fee of Right, which, first Pledging the Emperor, he receives and carries away with him: The Civility of the Court being passed, he is Clothed with his Reti∣nue in an honourable Habit; and if the Petition be granted, he wears the Pharmond open in his Turbat, to be seen by all as he is re∣conducted from the Palace to his Lodging. When the King pleases to Mount on Horseback, he is guarded by a mighty Band of Horsemen that follow him; before him pass a Legion of Footmen, all with Guns, and Shotters, or Pages, about his Horse in great Crouds; these all wear Feathers; the first in a kind of Hat or Steeple-Crowned Cap, the other in their Turbats, which are covered with them, but the Gunmen have only one Plume
bolt upright; the others are of any Colour, and sometimes many Colours. When the Emperor marches out with his Women,The Processi∣on of the Se∣raglio, or H∣ram. and all the Se∣raglio, it is forbidden the Day before by a Publick Cryer, for any Man on pain of Death to invade his Walks; nor is it lawful for any one to stay within doors, though sick or decrepit with Age, till the Female Procession is passed by; which observes this Order; The King, like a Dunghil Cock, struts at the Head of the Amazonian Army; him, his Mother follows, and the Royal Consorts, which are reckoned as Wives; all the rest, Concubines or Slaves, accord∣ing to the Grace they have merited; carrying Hawks on their Fists, get a straddle on Horseback, bearing Consort to the Musick Gereed, i. e. Tilt and Turnament, play with the Ball as Men do. For this Effeminate Shew, Virgil's Description for Dido may serve: Oceanum interea surgens Aurora reliquit, It portis jubare exorto castrata juventus, Retia rura plagae, lato venabula ferro Regem quem Thalamis cunctantem ad limina prima Charbaug Astroque insignis & auro, Stat sonipes ac fraena ferox spumantia mandit. Tandem progreditur magna stipante Caterva; Illi Londina estque chlamys circumdata limbo His pharetra ex humeris crines noduntur in unum. The early Morn had left the Sea, And flaming Day bore Company; When the Gelt Youth afore the doors, Stood pimping to the King and 's Whores; With Nets and Toils for Countrey Sport, At the Charbaug expect the Court; Where in as ample manner wait The fiery Courser, full of State; Bedeck'd with Gold he chews the Bit, And paws and foams as he were hit. At length comes forth with a great Train, The mighty Monarch through a Lane: A Scarlet Cloak, edg'd with a Welt, Was thrown him o're, and hid his Belt. But the Women that went with him, Were clad with Silk, and may be Linen. Yet all their Hair was ti'd in Braids, And Bow and Arrow by their sides. If he chuse a Nocturnal Perambulation, he makes them put on the Dress of the several Nations they belong to; Europeans in Hat and Feather; Turks, Indians, and Arabians, in their own Habit; and having Tapers in their hands they go two and two abreast; and be∣tween every third File an Eunuch with a large Flambeaux marches, bot  Spy and Guard.
The Soldiers that are to guard the Outskirts, are relieved by a Band of Eunuchs, who line the Way for their Passage, and spare none that are led out of Curiosity to behold this Sight; but upon disco∣very, never examining who they are, discharge their Pieces, as if they had found a Wild Beast; for which they receive great Com∣mendation from the King, and are rewarded with great Gifts, get∣ting thereby into the Chief Places of Trust in the Family. The most ready for this Mischief are the Black Eunuchs,The Cruelty of the Black Eunuchs. the White being generally more sparing of Life, and less inclined to such unnatural Barbarities; wherefore he has Regiments of both, the one to serve his Pleasure, the other his Black Purpose. Thus is the Life of this Prince taken up, rarely permitting him∣self to be seen either by Strangers or his own Subjects; according to that Ancient Axiom of the Empire, Majestati major è longinquo re∣verentia; as if they feared that of Livy, Continuus aspectus minus verendos magnos homines facit; Lest an often appearing to the Vulgar should make them contemptible and common. But that which he least cares for,The Cavalry. is to go forth armed at the Head of his Army, against his Enemies, chusing rather to be Terrible at Home under the Persian Banner, (which when displayed, is, A Bloody Sword with a double Point, in a White Field, and is always carried next the Emperor's Person) than become Formidable abroad to his Foes: Let others reap those hazardous Praises of Grinning Honour, he has no Stomach nor no Mind to Feats of Arms, whilst Colorogosse, the Generalissimo, leads the Host. Corgee Bashee, Adjutant-General, is next him, Commander of Twelve thousand Horse. Min Bashee is a Colonel of a Thousand Horse. Eus Bashee, Captain of an Hundred Horse. Below this Office none of Noble Extract will accept, chusing ra∣ther to ride Volunteers till they gain Preferment, being listed Goloomy Shaws, the King's Slaves, which is a Title they of the highest Dignity pride themselves in. Under these, those who compose the Main Body of the Cavalry, are the Cusle Bashees, or with us, the Chevaliers; who are not left quite without hopes of rising by a just Desert, for the Prize lies open to them as well as others; and they are often advanced on that score to great Authority, both to animate them to atchieve, and their Superiors to prevent their being put over their heads; for, Ʋbi ho∣nos non est, ibi cupiditas gloria esse non potest: Where Honour is not the Recompence, there can hardly be a desire of Glory. Where∣fore of these are made Sub-centurions, Commanders of Fifty, and so downwards to Ten Horses. These,Their Arms, and manner of fighting. agreeable to the Old Scythian Custom, smite their Enemies with Arrows at a distance, and Hand to Fist fight with Sword and Spear, (though they are long since skill'd in Weapons of another nature, as Guns and Pistols.) Their Bows are shorter than ours, not made of Wood, but glutinated Horn; which being not so long, makes them more serviceable on Horseback; but being made of Horn, they
are less fit for Rainy Weather: They draw their Bows with the Thumb armed with an Horn Ring, not after the same manner as our Archers do. The full number of their Cavalry may be Sixty thousand Horsemen compleat, many whereof are double-hors'd; out of so great a Strength, Six thousand Horsemen are upon constant Duty every day. More than these,The Suffees, a War like Or∣der of Church Militants. as a Guard du Corps to the King's Majesty, when he is to take the Air abroad (within doors they are Footmen, abroad Horsemen) a select Band wait on his Person, of the same Race with the King, challenging Kindred with Adir Suffee, but of a lower Stock than to conspire against the Empire, and are therefore bound in a common Tye of Consanguinity to preserve a firm Faith for the Head of their Tribe, as well as the Common Father of the Coun∣trey: And since their Pretence reaches no higher than a Superstitious Affinity, or Adoption rather, the Throne is so far out of danger by them, that they are the Chief Pillars that support it; they being allowed to brag both of their being of the Blood of their Emperor and their Prophet, which obliges them to a double Obedience both of Children and Subjects. The countenancing of this Sect,Erected to check the Siads. is not to be ascribed to this plau∣sible Argument, more than to put a Check to the growing Perverse∣ness of the Siads, boasting their Original from Mahomet himself, and to be more immediately sprung from his House and Lineage: These are so bold as to infringe the Royal Prerogatives, and to let the Em∣peror know, That whenever he girts his Sword about him, he ought to draw it only in their Defence, and at their Commands; not de∣spotically to rule according to his own Dictates, but patiently sub∣mit to their Instructions: This Order is uneasy under Monarchy, nor are they for any Government where they are not uppermost. A Doctrine unpleasant to the Absoluteness of the Persian Emperors; and had not the Sword of the one the prevalency of the others Preach∣ing, it were no ways to be redressed; for as the one keeps them in Awe, so the Reverence paid the other on account of their Religion, makes them presume to inveigh, and often raise Factions against their Princes. Wherefore the Foresight of their August Ancestry is commenda∣ble, in providing another Church-Militant Tribe to suppress and re∣claim the Insolencies of the Siads; for out of respect to their own Laws, which are still unalterable, as well as to withhold their Hands from violating what the People repute as Sacred, they rather sought by one Nail to drive out another, than openly to denounce War against them: Wherefore when they find themselves perplexed with the same Dilemma, they seek not to abrogate any former Decree of their Emperors by a direct Contradiction, but study to impugn it some other ways: As for Example; In Shaw Abas the Great's time, on the days of their Feasts and Jubilees, Gladiators were approved and licensed; but feeling afterwards the Evils that attended that Liberty, which was chiefly used in their Hossy Gossy, any private Grudge being then openly revenged; it never was forbid, but it passed into an Edict by the following King, That it should be lawful to kill any found with Naked Swords in that Solemnity. And on these substan∣tial
grounds this new Order enjoys not only the Name of Suffees, but the Emperor himself will be their Captain, and suffers none else to head them, and thence takes on him the specious Name and Title of Grand Suffee; and to perpetuate their Memory, has given it in∣delibly to Spahaun, for this reason joined with the former, to be cal∣led Suffahaun. To distinguish these from the others,Their Habit, and the Persi∣an Standard Red and White. who cloathe themselves in Green Attire, and forbid it to any else, they wear an high Red Vel∣vet Cap, plaited at top like a Cap of Maintenance; whence on a Wooden Crest they fix a little Brass Ball, tied on with three wreathen Chains, which they bring down strait to the fore-part of the Bonnet, whose lower Brim is bound about with a White Sash, and some∣times a Plume of one Feather is set up with the Crest, much after the same Fashion the Noble Senators wear in the King's Presence: Besides which they have a Surcoat of Scarlet Cloth, as it were in defiance to the Grass green of the Siads; so much monopolized by them, that in Turky, if any other wear it, he pays dearly for his Folly: The Grand Signior's Standard is also of that Colour, being called Mahomet's Banner: In opposition to whom, the Grand Suffee erects a double-pointed Bloody Sword in a White Field, and brings it out in honour of Mortis Ally. To his adopted Kindred (now Regulars under him,Their Privi∣leges. their Chief) are many Privileges granted, and by them to be held inviolable. They are allowed a peculiar Missa, or Service, in a Chappel apart in the Alacoppe, or place where the Grand Council sit, where they attend the King, or one in his stead, every Friday Night, at the Sa∣crament of Holway, (or Wafer made up in Sweetmeats,) in Imita∣tion of the Shew-bread. When any one has run into Debt, or committed any Capital Crime, as Murther, Adultery, Theft, or the like; if the one to defraud his Ceditor, and the other to avoid the hands of Justice, make their Escape to the Alacoppe, the first Gate of the Palace-Royal, or to the King's Stables, and implore their Protection, and they engage for their Refuge, it is a Piacular Offence to force them thence; nor will they resign them to the Emperor, though he command them to be taken from their Sanctuary. Nor are they so wholly devoted to compassionate others Afflicti∣ons, as to defend their own Rights; for whosoever's Face the Em∣peror commands them to cover, they are dead in Law; nor will they scruple being Executioners, no more than the Roman Lictors, who bore the Rods and Axes; the latter of which are their proper Weapons of War, as well as a fit Badge of their Office. Their prescribed Number cannot enlarge its self to all of their Sect; wherefore they are interspersed among the common People, some following Trades and Husbandry, and others other Employ∣ments; retaining always their Habit, which none of the Vulgar dare affront or strike, however provoked; but taking off their Suf∣fean Cap first, and kissing it, laying it down reverently, they will not then be afraid to cuff them, or drub them to purpose; being careful in the mean while to offer no Indignity to the Order, while they revenge themselves on the Persons.
Besides these, there is another Mark of Honour wholly in the King's Power,Other Knights. and never bestowed but on those of the Prime No∣bility, and those who have endeared him by some famous Perfor∣mance, for which they are signalized by wearing a small Kettle∣drum at the Bow of their Saddles in their Cities; which at first was invented for the training of Hawks, and to call them to the Lure, and is worn in the Fields by all Sportsmen for that end; but he who is rewarded with it from the King, is a Man of Supreme Dignity; and therefore, —Titulo dignatus equestri Virtutem titulis titulos virtutibus ornans. —A Knight of high Degree Adorns his Title by his Chivalry. And thus having muster'd the Horse,The Infantry. let us dismount and take an Account of the Foot, who are not so formidable for Multitudes as Valour; the Infantry are all Gun-men, and are better in Garison, and under Covert, than in open Field, fighting Hand to Fist; chiefly because having been brought up under that Discipline, they are un∣acquainted with any other way of Engagement. But the Georgian Veterans (who are in the same nature among the Persians, as the Janizaries among the Turks) will stand it out either for Victory or Death; both Persians and Georgians, are thus disposed of in their Ranks: The First Order is Cool, Their Sa∣lary 9 Thomands per An. At the King's Charge for Cloaths and Diet. The Second Order is Corge, Their Sa∣lary 6, without Charges. The Third, Jeserve, Their Sa∣lary 5, all Charges defray'd. Which are the King's own Regiments, walking with Feathers in their high Hats, armed with Muskets and Axes. The Fourth, Topangee, Their Sa∣lary 5 Thomands, without Charges defray'd. The Fifth, Taterdars, Their Sa∣lary 4 Thomands, without Charges defray'd. Armed only with Poleaxes and Muskets. Of whose certain Number, Rumour and common Fame must be be∣lieved, where no other Notice can be had. There are in readiness 40000 Georgians: Besides 80000 Statio∣naries to and again in Garisons. All these receive their Pay out of the King's Treasury, or from Set Rents. To these may be added the Provincial Cohorts, as Subsidiary Forces, which are reserved for the last Push, to succour the declining
Army in great Necessity: These differ both in the manner of their Function and Pay: Otherwise, whatever the other foregoing Orders perform to the Emperor, these are bound to pay to their respective Cauns, receiving their Pensions from the alotted Lands of several Colonies, not from the common Bank. The lowest Degree of all these are the Watchmen on the Roads,The Watch∣men. maintained at the Charge of the Shawbunder, to clear the Ways of Robbers, and to demand Custom; for which, if any are set upon, in the King's Highway, whatever Loss is sustained, the Countrey is at no Charge, neither does the Merchant or Traveller suffer the Da∣mage; but whatever is entred at the Custom-house, the Shawbunder becomes obliged to see safe through the Kingdom, and makes full Sa∣tisfaction for any Miscarriage of this nature. The Men that serve under this Warfare are armed with Halberts, Bills, and Falchions, and are hired by the Day as need requires. Now follow the Sons of Nereus,The Navy. or the Seamen; these in the Persian Gulph are either Fishermen, or such as brush the Ocean to get a Penny by Freight: What are in the Caspian Sea, I cannot be positive in my Relation, but I never heard them boast of more hardy ones: In the Persian Bay, they have at Ormus, Bunder-Abassee, La∣rack, and Kismash, some few Gallies laid up, but unprovided either of Men or Tackle; and if at any time they are launched, they fill them out of the Provincial Auxiliaries under the Caun of Bunder. Thus have we run through this kind of Warlike Men from Top to Bottom. CHAP. XIII. Of their Bookmen and Books; of their Religion and Religious Worship; of their Notions in Philosophy; of Heaven and Hell: Their Astronomers, Physicians, and Lawyers. AFter These come the Academicks;A Learned Clerk rare. for such is the Civility of these Regions, that Arms take place of the Gown, Letters being of small Esteem among them; for the Incitements to Study are but few, the Toil and Labours are many; whereby it is no won∣der that slenderness of Profit, and Assiduity, should be alike irksome; when on the contrary, a Military Condition slights these Inconve∣niences and Austerities, and lives more at large, taking Pleasure, and commanding all where they come, and are in a continual Pro∣spect of Advancement: On which score, a Learned or a Noble Clerk in these Parts is as rare as a Black Swan, they being raised to that Station out of the Dregs of the People. The School-Language among the Persians is Arabick,The School-Language. as Latin is held so among us; in which not only the Mysteries of their Alcoran, but of all their Sciences are written. They have their Grammars,Their Books written with a Pen, not Printed Dictionaries, and Vocabulaes, in which are the Roots of the Arabick Tongue, which with other
Books are all written with the Pen by great Industry and Pains,Chap. XIII. not committed to the Press; wherefore they are chargeable, and less free from Errors; to correct which, they compare with others more cor∣rect, one reading with a loud Voice, while the other takes notice of the Faults: They reckon Fifty Letters to a Verse, and for a Thou∣sand Verses of ordinary Writing, they give Two Abcees; from Five to Ten and upward, for that which is more exquisite; after this rate are their Books for Sale valued. An Account of the Character being stated, they numerate the Verses of any one Page, and multiplying the other Pages thereby, the Price of the Book is produced: If there be Lines of Gold, Silver, Oker, or the like, surrounding the Mar∣gin, for Ornament, as is their Custom, they reckon nothing for them, but bestow them gratis on the first Buyer, and only pass as a better Grace to set off the Book; they being mightily taken with a fair Hand and good Writing. This agrees with the Custom of the Ancient Romans: Candida nec nigrâ cornua fronte geras Nec titulus minio nec cedro charta notetur. Ovid. Et Frontis gemino decens honore Et Cocco rubens superbus index. Martial. They use Indian Ink,Pens made of Reeds. being a midling sort, betwixt our common Ink, and that made use of in Printing: Instead of a Pen, they make use of a Reed, as in India. The Children of Nobles,Education of Youth. or other Rich Men, are brought up at home, not stirring out of their Houses without a Train of Eunuchs and Servants, for fear of Sodomy, so much practised among the pestilent Sect of Mahometans: Other Children of Inferior Rank are taught in their Publick Schools for a small matter. Their Childhood being passed,Preposterous way of Learn∣ing. and they beginning to write Man, they frequent the Schools and Colleges, and every one chuses a Ma∣ster where he pleases; and having chose him, after a few Months leaves him at his own Will, and goes over to another: For such a strange Itch is here of Learning, that before they are half way in∣structed in one Book, they are desirous to be perfected in another; and before they have read Philosophy, Morality, or any other Sci∣ence to qualify them, they leap into the Alcoran; for here are neither Publick Professors to examine, or Publick Acts to be kept, either in Divinity, Law, or Physick: They are constituted by the Primate of their cursed Fabulous Doctrine, without formal Disputation, or other Approbation than the Popular Fame, Interest of Friends, and a false Appearance of a Pious Life, and are introduced by these means into the Pensions and Benefices of their Wealthiest Mosques. Whence it comes to pass that they are so inclinable to read to all Comers;Emulation in gaining Disci∣ples. for he whose Lectures are most frequented, stands fairest in the Noisy Applause of the Town, and seldom misses of Promo∣tion; though it is known many of them consume their Patrimony in purchasing Disciples, and after all, reap nothing but Poverty for their Pains: Which kind of Philosophers are always attended with
Envy and Ambition; nor care they who they defame, may they but extol themselves: And after a long Invective both of Master and Scholar, against whomever they think fit to bespatter, or they are in danger of being outdone by, insulting in the mean while over them as the greatest Dunces and Asses in Nature; at length, out of kindness to themselves, having stretched their own Worth to the highest pitch (lest the swoln Bladder should burst by too much Wind) they feign an humble self-reprehension; which because nothing is more practised, I will use their own Phrase: Ezked tacrit goufton ai behest amma hemme kess me donet. It is indecent for a Man to speak his own Praise; but were I silent, this is a Justice you would do me, it being nothing but what you know. Whereby it is vi∣sible, if they abate of their own Tumour, it is likely to be very little to the favour of him they declaim against. Notwithstanding these Tricks and disingenuous Insinuations, yet this scabby Herd increases so, that they are at their Wits ends how to live: Some find Mecoenas's among the Noblemen, and content them∣selves to live slavishly, according to their Humours, for a Morsel of Bread: Others, by saving what they have scraped up from the poor Trade of Scribes, and teaching School, hire an House, purchase an Horse, and a Servant to run before them, (it being a sign of the greatest Poverty to foot it through the City); and if by good Luck they get a Name, and are reputed Men of Note for Learning, they then enlarge their Stock and Family: And these are they that pride themselves in being the greatest Doctors among them, and so set up for Academies of their own; and teach Aristotle's Dialect, and the Four Figures of Syllogism; though the Question being pro∣pounded, they bind not themselves up to the strict Rules thereof; but they beg the Premise by way of Interrogation, as a Truth grant∣ed, and from thence draw their Conclusions. The Terms of Negation and Concession are exotic among the Persians,Logick. contending that Distinctions and Laconical Evasions, on which the Stress of the Aristotelian Doctrine seems to be laid, are not to be held for the true Solution of the Argument; but by a long Harangue and Affluence of Speech, the Auditors are brought both to admire them, and be of their side; whereupon the greater the Convention of Auditors is, the more earnest will their Contention be; for to yield in such Assemblies, is not at all to be expected, un∣less he that holds his Tongue first, intends to lose both his Credit and his Cause. Universals,Their Phy∣sicks. Catagories, and their depending Questions, they of∣ten reject; concerning the nature of a Body, Place, Vacuum, Cor∣ruption, Quantities, and Qualities, they inform their Students after the Aristotelian way; being unacquainted with the Resolution of Causes of Sublunary Beings by Atoms, according to our modern Cartesian Disciples, revived in honour of Epicurus; whom they sup∣pose they have sufficiently Confuted by the Name of Zimorat, with some vain and boyish Instances against Composition without Interruption and infinite Particles; preaching up a Vacuum, where∣by they believe the Absurdity to be demonstrated.
In their Theology, after the Contemplation of One Eternal Di∣vinity, after its Unity and Attributes, which they maintain to be all one with its Essence; they hold the World to be from Eternity, and such a Treatise of the Soul and Passions, with the other precisi∣ons of the Intellect, which is no where to be found in Metaphysicks. In these, as in their other Speculations, they cleave so pertinaciously to their Books and undoubted Authors, as if it were piacular to de∣part from their Traditions. They fancy to themselves a Chimerical Creation of the World by Ten Intelligencies, which by the same inexpugnable Reason passes in∣to their Creed; and being freight with this Notion, they say, from one most simple Cause can proceed no more than one Effect; and therefore God framed the first Intelligence, and that mediating the First Heaven, and so in their subaltern order to the Tenth. That the World was many Ages before Adam and Eve,Metaphysicks (our first Parents Eduction out of the Earth) Inhabited by Devils; and that the Possession thereof was so long entrusted in their Hands, till they had extirminated the true Worship of God (which at first they applied themselves Religiously to observe) and gave themselves up to Uncleanness and Prophaneness; when Man was Created in their room, and they cast out of any farther Possession, and Men took their Places. That Souls were from all Eternity, and commanded by God on the actual Exigency of any Body to enter a Relation, or a certain dependency with them, not an Information, or real Presence, tota in toto & tota in quâlibet parte corporis vitam habentis; being all in all, and all in every part where Life does exist; from this foolish Con∣ception of theirs, they attribute Place and Circumscription to the Soul; therefore they Object not a Spiritual, but a Corporal Sub∣stance to be inferred. They acknowledge Four kinds of Causes, viz. Material, Formal, Efficient and Final; they allow not of an exemplary, but admit of a total Cause; by which they understand such an one as no conditi∣on is defective to put it into Act; and on these Foundations they suppose the World's Creation from Eternity to be enough proved. The Books of greatest vogue,Books in Esteem are those of Corge Nessir Tussi, of the City Tuss, in the Province of Korasam, wrote Five hundred years ago; he, as it is credible, understood the Greek Lan∣guage as well as others; from whence he has explained some Anci∣ent Authors, as Euclid, Polomy's Alguma and Opticks, and has re∣duced them into a Compendium, as also the Works of Plato. Some Expositors they have of their Law, with Rules of Justice and Morality; which they admire and extol to the Skies, and rest impli∣citly on the ipse dixit of their Prophet, never enquiring farther: If any thing happen to oppose common Sense, they protract the meaning Mysteriously or Anagogically, not to the disquisition of the Truth, but to defend their Fopperies. Among which they have in the first esteem, the Written Letter of their Prophet, as immediately prescribed by him, and these are Oracular. In the Second place, those who are since published by the Mahometan Sectators, and these are look'd upon as Human; any whereof, if they appear foolish, yet
they doubt not but their Prophet uttered them, that he might bring himself to the Capacities of his Hearers, and of the Arabians, to whom he was sent to call them from Idolatry to the Worship of the only One God; for which the Persians make this Answer, Should a Doctor talk to a Rustick, and speak as if he were discoursing with a Professor, and not conform himself to the apprehension of the Countryman, How should he be understood? Which course, say they, Mahomet took for the better Information of his Proselytes. Who leaving Natural Causes, declares these Secrets were Revealed to him: That The Winds were raised by an Angel's moving his Wings.Mahomet's Re∣velations. The Flux and Reflux of the Sea was caused by an Angel's putting his Foot on the middle of the Ocean, and compressing the Waves, the Waters ran to the Shores, which being removed, they retired to their proper station. Falling Stars are the Firebrands wherewith the Good Angels drive away the Bad when they are too sawcily inquisitive, and ap∣proach too near the Empyreum (the Virge of the Heavens) to hearken to, and eves-drop the Secrets there. Thunder is nothing else but the Cracking of an Angel's Whip, while he slashes the dull Clouds to such and such a place, where Rains are wanting to make the Earth fertile and remedy its Driness. Eclipses, he delivers, happen not by the mutual Interjection of the Heavenly Bodies, but that the Sun and Moon are shut in a Pipe (a Cupboard as well) and turned up and down, and that from each Pipe is a Window by which they enlighten the World; but when God is angry at the Inhabitants thereof for their Transgressi∣ons, he bids an Angel clap to the Window, and turn the Lights towards Heaven from the Earth; then the Light is taken away from the unworthy Miscreants, and an Eclipse is made; for which occasi∣on he has left them Forms of Prayers to be used by the Mahometans, that God would be pleased to avert his Judgments and restore Light to the World. In an Eclipse of the Moon they beat Pots and Pans, or any other brazen Instrument, as in time of Idolatry it was a pre∣vailing Custom, even in Europe (as well as here and in India) which still some ignorant Old Women, and the dregs of the People are ready enough to continue; for the Tradition was handed down to them, wherewith they were seduced of Yore, that the Moon might be Inchanted, and unless it were roused up by this Noise would certainly fall down dead asleep upon the Earth from Heaven. Juvenal in his Satyrs Comments pleasantly enough on the Garrulity of the Female Sex, by this Invective on one of them: Ʋna laboranti possit succurrere Lunae. Whose Tongue alone could help the Moon, Recover its Lethargick Swoon. But the incomparably witty Persians have an evasion for this,
telling this Tale; Their Learned Doctor Nessir (on whose Words they' Swear) had Predicted to the Reigning King an Eclipse of the Moon, but fearing lest the drowsy King should be asleep, and so he should lose the fruit of his Prediction, persuaded the Vulgar, that to drive away the ill Influences the Eclipse Presaged, they would smite with all their force on such Instruments; whereby the King being perfectly awaked, he lift up both his Hands and his Eyes in Astonishment, and admired the Skill of his Astrologer, for which he was well Rewarded. But this is but a Story, however positive they are, since it was a Custom all the World over long before. Their Thick-scull'd Prophet has set another Angel at work for Earthquakes, who is to hold so many Ropes tied to every Quarter of the Globe; and at God's Command, he is to pull and so shakes that part of the Globe; and if a City, Mountain, or Tower, be to be overturned, then he tuggs harder at the Pulley, till the Rivers dance and the Valleys are filled with Rubbish, and the Water swallowed up in the Precipices. Such Stuff as this he has abundance of; and the most impartial Interpreter of the Alcoran, as the Mahometans themselves confess, can afford no better: But for all that they hold that it contains profound meanings; for it has several degrees of Senses, the second of which it is hardly possible for the greatest Doctor to apprehend; wherein are couched Words of such efficacy, which if they were pronounced by Unpolluted Lips, and whoever should understand them and Pray, might both Raise the Dead and work Miracles; and that of an unquestioned truth this Book came from God, as both the Foecundity of Stile, and admirable Eloquence doth testify. For they are not afraid prophanely to say, That God accommodated his Missions to Place, Age, and the exigency of Times; in the Days of Christ there were excellent Physicians, Irlenus, i. e. Galen, Pichagor, Pockate, Afflaton, (prodigious Re∣concilers of Time!) all these Healed Diseases by their Plants and Herbs; but God to outdo these, gave Christ Power to Raise those from the Dead who had been Buried; acknowledging withal, that this Prophet exceeded the degree of meer Man. When Moses lived, many Magicians and Cunning Men were entertained by Pharaoh; God therefore gave Moses a more wonder∣ful Art, that his Serpent should devour theirs, whereby they were compelled to own him sent from God. And now to nick Mahomet, when he had the Impudence to set up for a Prophet, Oratory was in its full perfection; wherefore Ma∣homet, by the Ministration of the Angel Gabriel, brought forth the Chapters of his Alcoran; which when he had proposed to the Wisest Men of that Age to pronounce but Three or Four thereof, and they not being able, were forced to confess, that That Work must be certainly of God, since they knew Mahomet to be Illiterate; which he relates in his Alcoran, and takes thence an opportunity to boast, undervaluing the Psalms of David in the mean while (which are David's Psalms) because they know not with what Figures of Words and Sentences they are Illuminated, nor with what vehe∣mency they incite a Devout Soul; that the Persian Interpreter, could he express the Numbers and Elegancies of Speech contained
in the Hebrew, would leave off to admire the Nonsense of the Alcoran, and look upon the mistake with detestation: Nor would they dare to call their Impostor, as they do, the continual flowing Miracle of Rhetorick, but rather a meer Stammering Fool, and his Bastard-brood the Alcoran, Sottishness. The Antiquaries among the Christians,Assisted by Sergius the Monk. who have searched more narrowly into this upstart Religion-Monger, have scented who was his real Instructor, though he belied the Archangel Gabriel; for this Hodge podge was forged between him and one Sergius a Monk, who fled to him in Arabia, when the Nestorian Heresy, which he professed, was Condemned in Syria; Mahomet received him, being now risen to Power from a poor Lad, of the Father's side a Pagan, by the Mother a Jew; by their joint perverting the Holy Bible, sprang up this Motly of Blasphemous Dotages; in which that he made use of Sergius as his Tutor, may be discovered by some Footsteps still appearing out of the very Alcoran; for in the Chapter entitled Nahil, thus it is rendred word for word; The People accuse thee, that whatever thou pretendest to utter as from God, thou art taught all this by thy Companion. But the whole matter is related by Pomponius Loet.His Blasphe∣mous Opini∣ons. and Igna∣tius; thus Sergius the Master of Mahomet, was, as many believe, the Author of the Monothelites also: He cherished the wicked Heresy of Arius and Nestorius; therefore being Excommunicate, by the Orthodox, he was sent a Vagabond into Banishment, and at length he came into Arabia, where the false Prophet Mahomet obliged him by his Friendship, and by him learn'd to corrupt the Holy Scriptures, so as to frame a New Religion, which was neither Christian, nor altoge∣ther Jewish, but a Composition of both, obliterating what was not to their purpose; whereupon the Hagareens and Saracens, held Ma∣homet not only as their King, but also as a Prophet Divinely Inspi∣red, and follow him in all his Absurdities. He denied the Trinity, affirming it to be ridiculous to believe Christ to be God; wherefore with Socinus and Eumenius, he allowed him to be only a Creature, but with Carpocrates, an Holy Prophet. He held with Cedren, that it was a thing impossible that God should Beget a Son who never had a Wife. With the Manachites he would not have Christ Crucified, but ano∣ther so like him that he could not be distinguished. With the Disciples of Origen, he held that after a Revolution of time the Devils might be Sav'd; ascribing with the Anthropomorphites, Members and Human Shape to the Deity; placing, with Cerinthus, all Felicity in Pleasure. He has Commanded Circumcision, with Elion, though with Eu∣crates, he has forbidden Wine to his Disciples; he Damns those to Hell that speak against the Alcoran, asserting it to be given by Inspiration. Friday is his Sabbath;Friday his Sabbath and two Fasts are by his appointment, the one the First Moon of October, the other before the New Year at the Vernal Equinox. Polygamy is his Masterpiece,Polygamy. it being lawful to play the Brute with what Women they please; although to Eat Swines Flesh be a
Crime unpardonable; attributing to Beasts, as well as Men, a capa∣bility of a Resurrection. The Holy Baptism he explodes as insignificant, preferring thereto his Superstitious Washing before Prayers, and at Exonerating the Body; he lets them not Cut the Foreskin before the Eighth Year; he esteems the Eucharist given in Commemoration of Christ, as fri∣volous, because he confesses not that he suffered Death; but that the Eucharist was instituted of God for the benefit of worthy Receivers, and for the destruction of such as should not receive it worthily. His Ecclesiastical Orders are the Mufty, Cadies, and Talmen. The Mufty is the Head of the Law in Turky;The Mufti. to Kill, Depose, Despise, or to behold whom with Disregard, is a Sin of an high nature: But in Persia there is one in Title only, without any Authority of the Keys; for that our Persians insist, It is a Reserve only for Mahomet and his Twelve Successors; yet as their Vicar there may be Moutched, i. e. Doctor Vitae, one of that approved strictness of Manners, and eminent Knowledge for a Director and Guide to the People, that all Affairs and Strifes concerning Con∣science may be determined by him; but what is more, all Prefer∣ments relating to the Church are at his Disposal. Where this Car∣cass is, there the Eagles will be gathered; for to this High-Priest is not lacking wherewith to maintain his Inferior Brethren, would he spare something from his own Hoards; but he is a-kin to that sort of Animal which the more it hath, the more it craveth; nor is any thing more griping than he. There are more than 60000 Thomands reckoned Yearly to be coffered up;His Revenue. a Stipend sufficient to feed the whole Herd, were it not perverted from the intention of the Donor, and converted to pri∣vate uses; so true is it in him who is Head of their Law, while he presumes on that Office, he becomes the greatest Grievance thereof; whereby it is plain he is an Amphibious Creature, only affording the Priests an half Patronage, from whom he receives his Dignity; but the Lawyers give him Power and Wealth; so that though he delight to be called Primate of the Mullahs, yet he covets more the Rule of the Cadies or Cazies, from whom there is no Appeal. For as in Nuncupatives the irrevocable Decrees and Commands of the Emperor stand firm,His Autho∣rity. so his Determinations in the Written Law are as Authentick; so that where he has Wit to keep his Canons from interfering with the King's Prerogative, he acts as he pleases: They were formerly so resolute to interpose where they found their Sovereigns about to do a rash Mischief; but that Permission is laid aside, and he sings that Lesson to King Solomon, as to one that is deaf, he being impatient of any Reproof; not being willing to be drawn off from his Cups and his Gormandizing, nor at leisure to be present even at their Sacred Rites, having not saluted the Temple Twelve times since he began to Reign, which is Eleven Years; which his Forefathers were wont to do once a Week with great Pomp and State. Godliness is not only the chief, but the Foundation of all other Virtues; for therein is a great Tye upon Men to keep them in their Duty; and where no other Arguments prevail upon their Reason,
yet Religion compels: Pietate autem sublata, inquit Cicero, Fides eti∣am, Societas humani generis, & una excellentissima, Justitia, immo omnis Probitas tollitur. Lib. 1. nat. Deorum. Piety being neglected, says Cicero, Truth, Hum Society, and the excellentest part thereof, Justice, yea, all manner of Goodness is taken away and perishes. Now the Aedile may lock up the Church Doors,The Talman, or Mullah. and the Reverend Prelate, whose Office it was to Administer before the King, may fol∣low other Works or supinely take his ease in his Cathedral Chair, while at constant Hours the Inferior Clergy stretch their Lungs from their Obelisks and high Towers, and strenuously call to the People to Pray; any one of whom, if he can Read like a Clerk a Chapter out of the Alcoran, let his other endowments be as mean as his Brethrens, he shall be crowned with the honour of being a Mullah or Talman; wherefore though Learning be an Ornament, yet they esteem it less necessary than that it should interrupt their quiet or repose, to acquire it. The greatest Burthen here too,Their Fune∣rals more Pompous than the Turk∣ish Sects are. is to perform the Funeral Obse∣quies, when to their Liturgy they add an Oration: Before the Herse they carry Banners, taking their Way through the high Streets to the Burial Place; after the Corps the Mullahs follow Singing, the Corps its self being decently Vailed with a Coverlet of divers Co∣lours, and carried by Four Bearers, it lying on the Herse arrayed in the best Cloaths the Man wore, when alive: If it be a Woman she is put into a Coffin, or Chest, and an Awning made over the Herse, covered with a White Sheet instead of a Pall; after these come the Relations and People Hired to Mourn; at the close of all are carried on stately Voiders, the Holway, as among the Turkish Sect, which the Chief Mullah, after the Ceremonies are over, distributes to the Attendants, being, if required, obliged to repeat every Moon with the Kindred, who come with Lighted Lamps, Sherbets, and this Holway, to Pray for the Soul of the Departed, which they modestly continue Twelve Moons. This is the thing makes the Clergy sweat, for they have nothing else to do for the Republick, leaving the Peo∣ple to Pray for themselves that are Alive, only concerning them∣selves with the Dead. Barbers Circumcise their Children when they think meet,Their Tribes Clarified by Pilgrimage to Mecca; their Names given by the Pa∣rents. when the Parents give them the Name, joining to that of his Fathers his own, as Mahomed Hosseen, i. e. Mahomet the Son of Hosseen; taking their Sirnames, as the Old Jews, from their Tribes, which they glory in, though it be that of Ismael; of which Tribe they have many among them transmitted out of Arabia hither; which not∣withstanding, are yet reckoned a Villanous sort of Breed; agreeing well with the Psalmist's Paraphrase on them, Wo is me that my dwel∣lings are with Mesech, and my habitation among the Tents of Kedar; comparing these Men, among which he was an Exile, to the wick∣ed Ismaelites, addicted to Pilfering and Stealing, Prophaneness and Blasphemy; Kedar was the Son of Ismael, Mesech of Japhet, which Stock are very plentiful. But those of them that think the best Tribe not clarified till they have enobled it by some Religious Act, are not at rest till they have wiped off these Stains; which set them on foot so often to Mahomet's
Tomb; returning whence, all former Taint is abolished, and they become pure Musselmen indeed, which is the strongest Confirmation after Circumcision: For That is a time of Jollity, This of Labour and Travel, whereby they approve themselves what their Parents only Sponded for them; and this is a Task impos'd mostly on their new Proselytes. The Cadies,No Garb to distinguish their Clerks. or Justices, can both Marry and Unmarry: Which Lay-Clergy, with the whole Bookish Tribe, is hard to be known from the Gross of their Nation, by Strangers; unless some affect White Vestments in token of Purity, and walk with Eyes fixed on the Ground, a Rosary in their Hands, an outward Appearance of Demureness and Sanctity, and a Neglect of the World; a Book of Hadis in their Breast; and if any seem to mind them, they tune their Pipes to the Uncertainty of Riches; the Frailty of Human Nature; that all things are vain and fleeting; that our Minds ought to be fix'd on our End; with all the Train of Hypocrisy well per∣sonated. The Parish-Priests are maintain'd in the Country by Collections;How they are maintain'd. in great Towns or Cities, by the King, or Cauns. Besides these, those who are called Hodges are such strict Puritans, that if they meet a Christian, Jew, or Banyan, and by chance his Garment brush against them, they hye them home, shift and wash, as if they had been defiled with some unclean thing, a Dog or Hog; undervaluing all but their own Sect, as if there were no Holier Creatures in the World. And now having dispatch'd this Crew, moulded up in dull Clay, let us mix with those of more liberty in their own Language, al∣lowing them at the same time to be kept in Bounds by the rigid Compressures of their Taskmasters in Religion, so that all the Strain of their Wit must biass that way. And first,Poets. They have some (though few) set up for Admirers of the Muses, and value themselves in being call'd the Wits of the Age, and these are their Poets; who confine themselves to Rhime and Numbers, and sometimes to Quantity, inferring their Verses with Comparisons, Exaggerations, Flights of Ingenuity, and Ficti∣ons, which they repeat with Gestures both of Hands, and Body, and Mouth contorted, animating them with suitable Tones and Arti∣culations, proclaiming them dead without such Information. They have Romances of Famous Heroes and their Deeds; among which are pleasant Rancounters, Huntings, Love-Intrigues, Ban∣quetings, descriptions of Flowers and delightful Groves,Limners. emphatical∣ly set down, with Cuts and Pictures represented lively enough, would their Colours endure; for which Skill, otherwise than for hit∣ting the Life, their Limners are to be reckon'd defective, not know∣ing how to mix their Colours. The exactest History they have to brag on,Historians. is Rouze el Saphet, a Book of Three or Four Volumes, in Folio; which gives an account from the first Habitation of Men upon Earth, till the Two last Centuries. They are but bad at Chronology, making nothing of a Thousand Years confounded together: Had they the Aera of Augustus, or the Julian Period, or a faithful State of Time, there might be some
likelihood of Truth in their Histories; but they being Convicted of inadvertency in these Points, the whole Superstructure must fall; which to defend even in their very Alcoran, they are forced to Forge Aspersions to confront the lameness of its Stories, whereby they endeavour thus to come off: A Wicked Emperor having ob∣tained the Rule of the World, got the Sacred Writs together by force, and burnt them; after which, what occurred to the Memory of the Christians, were committed to Paper just as every one could recollect or fancy; and hence arose the several Mistakes and Diffe∣rences. Others pretending to a farther reach, follow our Saviour to the Fourth Heaven, where they affirm he now is, whither he carried the Gospel with him from the unworthy Nations, excited by the same Zeal Moses was, when he brake the Two Tables of the Deca∣logue. With such Artifices as these they studiously bespatter the Christians and their Religion, to uphold their own Dogmatical Tenents. Sed magna est Veritas, & praevalebit. A Book like our Aesop's Fables, called Emuel Sohaly, is preferred before all others, written in the Persian Language; yet their Super∣stition is such, that they dare hardly give it House-room, or afford it a place in their Libraries, lest it should bring ill luck. At the same time this was Translated out of Indostan into the Per∣sian Speech, there was Cotemporary another Persian, who had compo∣sed a Book of his own, but of a far inferior Stile; and being sensi∣ble his Work would be Postponed thereby, he industriously took care to spread a rumour among the Vulgar, that this Book of Emuel Sohaly was an ill thing, because it introduced Creatures irrational Talking one to another, alledging for proof some Texts of the Alcoran; and at that juncture laying hold of an Accident which happened to a Youth sleeping while he was reading this Piece, that fell down from the Upper-Room to the Ground, whereby he brake his Skull, and his Thighs, confirmed the Mobile in the New-broached Opinion of this Book; it ever since bearing an ill Name, because they looked on this as an Exemplary Judgment, wherewith their Prophet was pleased to sorewarn others, and denounce his Anger against such as should attempt the reading of it. Alchymy has bewitched some of them to spend both their Time and Money without any other benefit than to supply them with a peculiar Cant,Alchymy. and affected Terms of their Teachers, which those, who seized with that Itch, not only infect themselves but others, with vain hopes, which at last, together with the Consumption of all their Substance, vanish in Smoak. These are such as cry up the Trans∣mutation of Metals, till they have refined them to be the most Ex∣cellent in Nature's Cabinet, whereby they would arrive to that de∣gree of Midas's Wish, that whatever they touched should become Gold; a sottish and imprudent thirst of Wealth, as if it were in the power of Art to outdo the design of the Creation, wherein every thing was formed good in it's kind; by which these Dabblers cast
a scandal on the Noble Profession of Chymistry, to which is owing the true Knowledge of Physick, by an Analytical Separation of the Parts of the Compound, from the gross Dregs of the mixture, whereout may be sucked such Particles, as are applicable for the Remedies of Human Infirmities, while they depart not from the nature first impressed on them. Here are many good Writers in this Honourable Science, but are at present unskilful and unprovided with their Instruments or Furnaces, such as we find the Learned Sons of this Art use in their Laboratories elsewhere. Mathematicks being the Foundation of all Arts,Mathema∣ticks. should have pre∣ceded; but Treating of an indigested Nation, I deliver you them conformable to their own method; they understand Euclid's Ele∣ments, and Coelestial Phoenomenas, though they want the Citations and Adjuncts in the Demonstration of their Propositions: They have the Theodosian and Autolican Doctrine of the Spheres, some Frag∣ments of Archimedes, but have not the Contracted Proclivity. Practical Geometry is common with them; Arithmetick in intire Numbers and Fractions they Exercise, performing their Multiplicati∣on and Division in Transverse Lines: The Ancient Algebra, a Cal∣culation by Geometrical Progressions is not hid from them, though they have no specious Invention. Trigonometry of streight Lines and Spherical is their own, with the Canons of Signs and Tangents, yet without Secants: The Staff of 60 Parts, with so many Fractions, by a Prolix reckoning, they bring to Three, Four, or Five Minutes, our Chymical Arithmetical Transmuta∣tion never entring their Thoughts of the Sixtieth Number swelled into an unity by Cyphers, that all the Chords may evade absolute and intire; no more have they any smattering of that never enough to be admired Science of Logarithms. The Theory of the Planets, the Middle Motions of Ptolemy, and the solid Orbs, as delivered by Purbachius, they are perfect in: Copernicus, or rather before him Pythagoras's Hypotheses, are confusedly and ig∣norantly disapproved by them, neither desiring to be informed, nor caring to concern themselves with any other than what they have imbibed Traditionally by their Forefathers; For which reason Ticho's Instruments for Observation of the Heavenly Phenomenas are under∣valued by them. Their Astrolabe is the most Workmanly Tool among them, it being neatly framed of Brass, Copper, or Silver, in a truly plain and familiar method, on one double Square only divided into 180 Parts each, with their Tangents; from the Structure of which In∣strument, all the Centers of the Circles, are sooner found out by Steel Compasses, hung in an Arch with their Screws, than by our old way of Staefler, and Regiomontanus, which though true in it self, yet it hardly is made to come right. They have Tables shewing the exact Motion of the Planets, and thence collect their Ephemeris, which is Twofold; One whereof is Cameri, Answering to our Almanack, where are set forth the Con∣junctions and Oppositions of the Luminaries, the Rains, the Alte∣rations of the Air, also obscure and implicit Predictions, to catch the believing Multitude: The other is Chamesi, in which the Lon∣gitudes,
Latitudes, and Aspects of the Stars, the Eclipses sometimes agreeing, sometimes disagreeing with ours. In this Book are the suspicions of War, scarcity of Corn, and other Incidents not dis∣cernible in Human Learning; but so adapted, that like the sound of Bells to the Fancies of some, so these admit of an interpretation agreeable to every one's sense, that the Prognosticator may not be reproved of unskilfulness. Such an itch of knowing Contingencies reigns here, that no Journey is undertaken, no New Book read, no Change of Garments put on, no fresh Dwelling entred upon before the Stars are consulted; here is controverted when is the good, when the unlucky Hour to begin or end upon any Enterprize: The Moon's or other Planets ingrets into Scorpio is much dreaded among them; and if that Planet be Retrograde, a stop is put to all business. Whence comes the vulgar Juggle of the oblong Cubes, in which equal and unequal Numbers are disposed, where they being cast at ad∣ventures, what Figures they happen to be upon from these Points they thence make their judgments: Something parallel is found in the occult Philosophy of Cornelius Agrippa, in Page 221. These draw Schemes, and are puffed with Necrmantick Problems: If a Thief have stolen any thing,. if a Servant have run from his Master with stolen Goods, if any would be acquainted about Hus∣bands or Wives, they betake themselves to such Oracles as these. Who begin their Delusion with a Gipsy Cant, with Eyes and Hands lift up to Heaven; then casting the Dye, he observes the Points, and aenigmatically canvesses the Event; sometimes hitting the Case, and sometimes as wide from it as the East is from the West; and though by Experience they have found them tripping an Hun∣dred times, and upbraid them for the Cheat; they put it off as if they had not stated the thing fairly; that a Minute in the Calcula∣tion varies the truth; that this is the true profession Daniel trans∣mitted to Posterity; and if it answer not the Question, it is not be∣cause the Art is defective, but because few are so happy as to attain its perfection; and thus do they willingly continue in their belief of the Gull: They encourage an infinite number of these South∣sayers, as many as can invent new Tricks to get Money by it. When they consult for future success in Matters of great conse∣quence, they go to some Learned Doctor, who Divines by the Al∣coran; and he having prayed, opens the Alcoran, (that Legend of Lies;) and the first Page he sets his Eyes upon, if the First Com∣mandment happen to be in it, the Augury is of force, and they have no delay allowed them, but hasten with all speed about their Work; and if Twenty more come on the fame Errand, they are set away with the same Response, which after comparing Notes, though the Event be as unfortunate as may be, yet they content∣edly acquiesce in the verity of the Prophecy, however contradi∣ctory to their Senses; and shall repeat the same method, as if it were a Point of their Faith to go on in palpable Absurdities, by con∣stantly enquiring of the Alcoran. The Emperor nourishes a great many Astrologers,. the chief of whom is always by his side, with his Astrolabe at his Girdle, and
dictates the good hour or bad hour, when to rise, when to go to bed, or to perpetrate any action of Note; erecting a Scheme on the Sand; whose Advice is always followed, though some Stories are upon Record to their disadvantage: Two whereof I shall re∣late. About Eighteen Years ago, it being famous, and no longer since, remains fresh in memory, and is made use of to make sport with the Astrologers: The Cossaks on the River Tanais, came thence over the Caspian Sea, and made a Descent into Persia, and carried off a great Booty, loading their small Ships without any opposition: The Emperor of Persia incensed with this Affront, and Depredation made on his Subjects, arms such a Fleet as he thought sufficient to correct their Insolence with his Soldiers, and bad them take the Sea at the precise time the Astrologers should direct, that the Heavens also conspiring, they should effectually chastise their Enemies; which being without doubt carefully studied, should as infallibly come to pass to that upon their invading them, not one of them should escape: And for the better obtaining their end, advised'em to fasten their Ships together by strong Chains, that so they should keep their Body intire, lest the Cossacks should set upon any single Vessel, and at the same time should enclose the Pirates so, that they should by no means get out of their hands: But the cunning Cossacks being used to Stra∣tagems, foreseeing their Design, fell upon the first Ship with their Guns, which so bored her Sides, that she sunk, and by her weight occasioned the rest to sink one after another, so that 500 Men, and Twelve Ships were sent to the bottom in a well-chosen hour, and the Cossacks by this Exploit left Masters of the Sea, and the Borders thereon liable to their continual Incursions. Three Years after, one of the same Tribe contriving how to aug∣ment his Pension, in a chosen time, presented a Petition to the Em∣peror, when he happened to be out of humour; and therefore com∣manded an exact Account to be given him of the expence he was at in maintaining this Vermin; the return whereof amounting to 20000 Thomands Yearly, made him exceeding wroth, so that he not only denied an addition of Salary, but had extirpated the Function had not great intercession been made. Des Cartes, the Prince of Philosophy in this Age, gives his Sectators caution nè nimis superbe de nobis ipsis sentiremus decreta Dei à nobis intelligi supponamus; lest we should too vainly conceit the Decrees of God to be understood by any of us; and these had done better had they stuck to their primitive Astronomy. Coelique meatus Adscribunt radio & surgentia sydera dicent.Astronomy. The Heavenly course with Staff to clear The rising Stars tell through the Year. Which thing is but slightly touched by them; but because they do foretel some Revolutions of the heavenly Bodies, they are migh∣tily admired by the Vulgar; and not only by them, but by those
of better fashion also: Which here opens a Gap for all pretending Knaves, who fatten themselves on the folly of this Licence, which in all civil Governments is punished by the severest Laws; whose execution are so far neglected in Persia, that even now in the King's Court an old Hagg is respected; a relation of which, because it has as much of rarity as truth, I shall not think tedious to insert. A certain Turkish Woman, born at Constantinople (by these People named Stambole,A Pythonissa, or Witch. and Romeree) now an old Witch, in her young days provoked by the heat of her Lust, ran from her Husband with her Paramour; with whom enjoying her beastly pleasure for some time, at length she was carried into a Wood, where she lived five years without remembring how she came there, or what befel her in that space; but that time being spent, she perceived her self possessed with the Devilish Spirit of Prophecy, and so returned to the City from whence she had fled a Strumpet, a Pythonissa; which being noised abroad, and coming to the Grand Seignior's Ears, he caused her to be banished as a Portentous Evil out of Constanti∣nople: Who thence wandering here and there, found small encou∣ragement, till she came to Suffahaun, where being arrived, and the News brought to Court, without imprecation of the Gods to avert the mischief, she is the daily diversion of the Persian Monarch, and he delights to discourse her often. She calls every one by their proper Name, though never seen before: She gives an account of actions past, both ridiculous and se∣rious; which though it be the Emperor's sport to hear, the Cour∣tiers are shy of her Company, because of reaping up their old Sins; and being proved in this point to answer expectation, it is granted that she can Divine future Contingencies; toward which the Genius of this Nation being disposed, she is esteemed not only by the King, but by all People as a Prodigy. When she is seized with a Fit of Prophecy, the first insult begins, (where the Devil first entred,) at her Belly, which works strangely; and at such times there may be heard as it were the noise of Three or Four Kitlins, sucking and crying when she falls into an Extasy. Af∣ter which, the Spirit seems to answer from the bottom of her Belly to all questions propounded; and being in this transport, gives this account of her self: I (says she) am a Daemon, whether of an airy, fiery, or either substance compounded, I know not; nor of what Principles I am made, either heavenly or human; but that we are many and divided into Three Tribes or Orders; in eve∣ry of which we have learned and wise, foolish and illiterate among us; the same Religions and Opinions prevail as are upon Earth; some professing Christianity, others Mahometism; and again others are Pagans and Idolaters, and there are some few Atheists among us: As for my share, I follow the Persian Sect of Mahometism, and confess my self an Ideot, understanding no other Language than Turkish (where under a Cloven Foot may be discerned conform∣ing to a Foreign Religion, though skilled in no other Language but her Native; a pretty Wheedle to insinuate into the Suffee's favour) if therefore any thing be asked beyond my reach, that needs an Expositor, I betake my self to some OEdipus of our Order, who
unfolds the Mystery to me, whose Sense I only render for satisfa∣ction of my Inquirers. This being a new Doctrine to the Suffee, he commanded her to give him some Demonstration of the truth of what she had told; and therefore put her upon discovering how he might believe the airy Region to be peopled after this rate; she consented to convince him, and ordered all the Nobles attending the Emperor, to retire with him into one part of the Room, and leave her to work their Conviction, which she did after this manner: Falling into her usual Trance, she at that instant wrought their Fancies to be persuaded of the confused Articulation of Multitudes met as in a Fair, conversing and making a chattering, to the amazing of them all. Father Raphiel the Capuchin, who gave me this account, was set upon by the Emperor to encounter her; but he prudently enough avoided it, lest he might be brought into some Praemunire about Disputes of their Religion, in which he found the crafty Slut would involve him; but besides his single Testimony of this Affair, here are many Turkish Merchants in Town who all declare the same as to her being possessed, having known her many Years ago at Constanti∣nople, from whence she was expelled by a special Precept of their Sultan. Here is a large Field of Controversy offered, to wit the Possessi∣ons of Cardan, and the Lapland Witches; but these being Foreign to this intended Account, I purposely omit what might be said on this Subject, referring it to more acurate Pens. But not to let the credit of this Opinion lie as if it were of this Beldams broaching; Plato had long ago declared his approbation of it,Several sorts of Daemons. that there were Daemons wandring about the World: In Epinomede: Summos Deos, ultra mundanos amplissimam rerum providenti∣am habere, sub his in coelo quosdam conspicuos esse, tertio infimoque loco Dae∣mones horum genus, unum ex aethere, alterum ex aere esse, at neutrum con∣spici totum potest; sed quamvis hi Daemones propè nos sint, nunquam tamen manifestò nobis apparent: Et mox; Aliud vero ex aqua, &c. Post Dae∣mones Heroas. And what Plato promiscuously calls Daemons, the Latins distinguish by their Offices, as those presiding over Countries are Penates; those over Families Lares; those that are frightful and terrible represen∣tations are Larvae or Hob-goblins: But these that are Witnesses of the actions of every individual person are termed Genij, and those the Ancient Greeks called Heroas, the Latins gave the name of Lemures, Ghosts or Spirits to. But to return to our Men of Learning, from whence we have been Will-ith-whisped;Longitude and Latitude. the Longitude and Latitude of the Stars are writ∣ten in an intire Volume, together with eight and forty Signs beastly pictured; these compared with our Maps or Globes, differ seven or eight degrees in Longitude; only some few Minutes in Latitude. Dialling and its profound Sections and Projections of the heavenly Circles in the Plain,Dialling. by the mediating shadow from the World's Axis, is not understood by them; no more than Conic's, although Apollonius his Books are often turned over by them.
In Musick they lift up their Voices with a loud straining behind a Taber, which is the only Instrument, with the Flute, used with the Vocal;Musick. for Instrumental, they have little regard to Stringed, but the Orgiastick they are very expert at, and use it on all Festivals, at the Rising and Setting of the Sun in their publick Midans, or Courts, before the Emperor's Palace, as also before all their Governors; though within doors they chuse the other, where the Stage players, Tumblers, and dancing Wenches usher in their Interludes by Song, Tabers, and Flutes. At length I convert my self to that Noble and Excellent Art,Medicks. so beneficial to the Life of Man, Physick; which though it be here in good Repute, yet its Sectators are too much wedded to Antiquity, not being at all addicted to find out its Improvement by new Enqui∣ries; wherefore they stick to the Arabian Method as devoutly as to the Sacred Tripod, which they hold as Infallible as of old that Del∣phic Oracle was accounted. On which score Chymistry is hardly embraced;Anatomy re∣jected. nor to the Pa∣thological part do they think the Anatomical Knife can bring much Profit: However, many of them have Wealthy Presents from their Grandees. Whoever applies himself to this Profession, takes a Master of that Calling, who Instructs him in the Stile and ordinary Characters of Medicine; where being throughly versed in the Employment, and able to set up for himself, he consults whereabouts the fewest Physi∣cians are planted in the City, and the likeliest place to draw Custo∣mers to him; there he joins an Apothecary to him to make up his Prescripts, and sell them to his Patients, the half of which Gain comes into his Pocket: Thus by degrees increasing in Fame, he co∣vets many Students to Read to, who are sure to spread abroad his Fame, like so many Speaking-trumpets, and are sent about in quest of Prey, to bring in Game like so many Decoys. But the Bait that takes most, are the Womens crying up their Man, when he is found to please them by a fair Carriage and volu∣ble Tongue, who never leave off till they have rendred him graci∣ous to all their Acquaintance; who flock to him in Droves, and are as full of Chat as a Magpy when she has found an Owl in the Wood at Noon day; nor wants he his Lime-twigs for such sort of Birds, by whose frequentings he arrives to the top of his hopes, and sucks those Riches Galen is said to offer his Disciples: Dat Galenus opes. But as all the Eggs laid under one Hen do not always prove, so many of this Tribe miss their aim, and after an expence of time and endeavour, are forced to fall upon other Trades to get a Livelyhood. Here is no precedent License of Practising, but it is lawful for any one to exercise this Function who has the impudence to pretend to it. The Suffee retains several in Ordinary, and others in Extraordinary, without any Salary;The Suffee's Death requi∣red of his Physician. the Chief of whom is Hakaim Bashed, and suffers on his Master's Death, not only Banishment from Court, but Dispoyling of all his Goods, and must acknowledge it a Favour to escape with Life.
In the matter of their Physick, Extracts, or Essences of Plants, Roots, or Minerals, are beyond their Pharmacy; only they use cooling Seeds, and Medicines of that nature; so that in repelling a Fever, they make but one work of that and the Innate Heat, where most an end both become extinguished at once; or at least, the Body is left in that condition, that Obstructions or an Ill Habit succeeds; although I am not ignorant, that sometimes after the greatest Care in Chronical Distempers, such things will happen, according to the Experience of Hippocrates, yet in Acute Distempers so frequently to fall into these Indispositions, I cannot excuse the Indiscretion of these Medicasters, whose Patients in Suffahaun seldom pass out of this Life by any other way to their Graves. Besides this Abuse,Their Pre∣scripts. their Prescriptions are Pancrastical, a Salve for every Sore, without respect had to difference of Temperament, or Constitution; nay, or even to the Distempers themselves; but asking some frivolous Questions, viewing the Veins of the Hands and Feet, inspecting the Tongue, they write at adventure. The Apothecary dispenses the Ingredients into so many Papers, and leaves them to be boiled according to his Directions, and given to the Sick Party at such and such hours of such a day, by any good Wo∣man, or heedless Servant; who not attending the Quantities of the Liquor more than the Qualities of the Ingredients, boil more or less, not as the Exigency either of the Medicines or the Patient re∣quires, but as if they were to make Pottage, and give him to drink of this heterogeneous Broath, sometimes Three or Four Pints at a time; so that if it fails moving the Belly by its excitative Faculty, yet by its excessive Dose it makes way for Evacuation: And this they do re∣peat most an end for a Fortnight or Three Weeks together; which if it succeed not, another Physician is consulted; for among such store they think it hard to miss of a Cure; and in that are so opiniona∣ted, that if their own Nation cannot give them Remedy, they think none other can. (Though as to Chyrurgery they are of another mind, thinking the Europeans better at Manual Operation than them∣selves.) But to proceed, being severely handled by one, they fly to another; and he from extreme Cold things runs upon the other extreme; so that between these two Rocks its no wonder the Pati∣ent so often miscarries, and so many concurring Causes joined with their Distemper, hurry them to another World. Rhabarb,What Purges approved. Turbith, and Scammony, are dreadful to them; but Sena, Cassia, Manna, and Turpentine, are swallowed without any appre∣hension of evil. Many of their Physicians insist on Diets unusual elsewhere, as Goats-flesh, Horses, Asses, and Camels flesh; for which reason they have distinct Shambles for the same purpose. Avicen,What Authors in Esteem. Averroes, and Rhasis, are known Authors among them; and among the most Learned, Galen and Hippocrates, and some more Modern, who have treated of Botany, and Human Parts. Their Law forbids them to inspect a dead Carkass; they therefore lean implicitly on what they find among Ancient Anatomists, and yet think themselves at no loss in that Science; whence it is their Practice is lame, and their Theory no more than the prating of a Parrot.
Hence it follows they are imperfect in the Chyrurgeons Art; they can tell how to protract slight Wounds into Length of Time, but for things of real danger they are to seek which way to handle;Unskilful in Chyrurgery. especially where Ense recidendum ne pars sincera trahatur. The Knife is us'd to part the dead, and give The Vital Part occasion to live. Yet they are bold enough with the Blood, where they command Phlebotomy, bleeding like Farriers. The Endemial Diseases of this Country,Endemial Diseases. are Phrensies, Plurisies, Peripneumonies, Empyemaes, Catarrhs, distempers of the Eyes; Red Gum, which besets our Children in Europe, is pernicious to Old Age here; St. Anthony's Fire, or more properly the Persian Fire, impressing on the adust Blood the nature of Atrabile: But the fa∣shionable Malady of the Country is a Clap, scarce One in Ten being free from it; which the unbounded Liberty of Women, Cheapness of the Commodity, and the Encouragement of their filthy Law, are main Incentives to. And to back this Lewdness, they bring the Example of their Prophet Haly, who lying down without a Female Companion, is reported to be Author of this doughty Dialogue be∣tween the Earth and him, wherein the Earth upbraided him by say∣ing, Whilst you lye on the Ground an unfruitful Log, a burthen to my sides, I sweat and labour in producing Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals for your use; Why then do you not busy your self in getting Children, to transmit your Offspring to Posterity? Which pleasing Reproof of the Venerable Prophet's recommending to his easy Disciples, they embrace with both Arms, while the Poy∣son creeps into the Marrow of their Bones, so that they are not come to Maturity, before they are rotten; though by reason of the Pureness of the Air, it seldom or never arrives to that height of Cruelty as in Europe; inasmuch as when any are so dealt by it, they reproach it with the Frank Disease, Atecheque Fringi, when it breaks out into Sores and Ulcers, after it has seized the whole Mass of Blood, and eats them up alive; while they wear theirs dormant al∣most to extreme Old Age, which makes them not much solicitous for Remedy, nor are there any who profess its Cure. There is another Infirmity as general almost, proceeding from their Ceremonial Washing, when they exonerate, too frequent using of Baths, which causes a Relaxation of the Muscles of the Anus, whereby the great Gut of the Fundament falls down: Most of them by a Fulness of Body are subject to the Hemorrhoids; but what chiefly vexes them, walking or riding, (putting them into misera∣ble Pain, and contorted Postures of the Back, and whole Trunk of the Body), is a Fistula in Ano, which they contract from their Athletick Temper, and constant being on Horseback; as has been observed not only by Sennertus, but Platerus, Fernelius, and others: Nor does it seldom fall out, from their aptness to Venery, and prone∣ness to make use of Boys, that they are afflicted with terrible Ma∣riscae,
or swoln Piles of several forms, by them called Obne; where∣in Worms, as they perswade themselves, are bred, that excruciate them with such an Itch as they cannot lay, without adding Sin to Sin, and therein they report their Cure to be compleated; and this brings on them a white Leprosy, not incommoding the Body with Illness, but disgracing it with Spots in the Face, Arms, Thighs, Breast, and other parts about them. Children have frequently Scald Heads, which makes them keep close shav'd. The Plague has not been known among them this Eighty Years and upwards, but the Spotted-Fever kills them presently, yet is not contagious: The Bezoar-stone in this Case is highly approved. The Gout afflicts few here, the Pox commonly securing them from it; however as painful as that proves to their Bones, or rather Mem∣branes surrounding them, they applaud all Provocatives in Physick, and will purchase them at any Rates; which are sometimes so strong, that they create a continued Priapism to these Goats and Satyrs, and by their Bows being always bent, are brought to an Inability of re∣ducing them. To divert their Care and Labours,Large quanti∣ties of Opium eaten at a time. they are great Devourers of Opium, and Koquenar (which is Poppy-heads boil'd), which they quaff when they have a mind to be merry; for which reason, as Hemp is sown among our Fens and Fields, so they sow Poppies, and when ripe, make Incision for the Juice, which ga∣thering, they inspissate and eat; to do which, those unaccustomed adventuring unadvisedly upon too large a Dose, instead of the ex∣pected effect of cheering the Spirits, chain up the Vitals so that they are never loosed more, for they never awake from the Lethargy it intrances them in: So that they begin gradually, and then arrive to great Quantities; as from a Grain to half an Ounce, without any Harm, besides a frolicksome sort of Drunkenness; by means where∣of, without any other Sustenance, they are qualified to undergo great Travels and Hardships: But having once begun, they must continue it, or else they dye; whereby it becomes so necessary, that if they mis-time themselves, as in their Ramzan, or on a Journey, they often expire for want of it: Yet those that live at this rate are always as lean as Skeletons, and seldom themselves; but such is their love towards it, that they give themselves up to the study of infatuating themselves by all the ways they can, never smoaking a Pipe without the Leafs of the intoxicating Bang, and Flowers of the same, mixed with their Tobacco; besides which, they contrive ma∣ny more Medicines to put a Cheat upon the Pungency of their Cares, and drive Sorrow from their Hearts; which indeed diverts them for some few hours, till they return with a more fixed Melancholy, bur∣thensome to themselves and others: While the Operation of their forced Mirth lasts, they are incapable at that time of any Business; Whence they proverbially say, Belque Teriac ne resid, to any Trifler, or Fiery Spirit; That the Force of your Treacle you have eaten, still remains. Moreover, they have other Treacles, such as are taken notice to be sold in the Markets, by Apulcies, and the Circe of Homer, prepa∣red as Counter-Poysons, which are compounded of Garlick, Mother
of Thyme, and other Herbs beaten together: That Rich one made use of only by the Nobles, is adventitious, and is brought by their Merchants from Venice, the Poor not being able to go to the Price of such Medicines or Physicians as exceed the common Rates; and therefore is it that their great Towns and Buzzars are full of Mounte∣banks, Charmers, and Quacksalvers, to gull them of their Cash. After these Sons of Fate,Their Lawyers. follow the Lawyers, who hold the Chief Cazy or Codre for their Oracle, which is here usurped by the Mufti, who substitutes others under him; who though the Course of Law meet mostly with quicker dispatch here than in Europe, yet they know well enough how to retard a gainful Cause; which is consentaneous enough to the Comedian, —O Lernaeam vere sobolem Pragmaticorum, qui lites ex litibus serunt Mortalibus immortaliter— O wretched Crew of Pettifoggers, who Raise Strifes from Strifes, the Client to undo. Against whom he has set down this wholsome Advice; —Lites fuge, Macrum arbitrium judicio potius est. Flee lingring Suits, a lean Arbitrament Is more than Trial gain'd, when Money's spent. Here are no Inns of Courts, or Courts of Chancery; no Moot∣ings, or emulous Contests for Victory; no being called to the Bar, or a select, Learned, and upright Bench, which justly concert the Right of the Community; no distinct Courts, or subalternate Cham∣bers to appeal to, which are illustrated with Venerable Knowledge of Eloquence and Oratory, besides the Splendor of Nobility and Majesty to adorn them: Here are no Counsellors, Advocates, or Se∣cretaries distinguished by their Robes. Here only a Mullah is chosen by the Codre or Mufti, to be Cadi (corruptly called Kazy) or Judge, in his own House, at his own time, and in no other Garment than usual, unless a Red Cap make some Note of Dignity. To him comes the injured Party to complain of his Adversary,The Cadi. and implores the Cadi to do him Justice: At the Cadi's Elbow stand several Officers ready to execute his Commands, to whom he pays no Wages, but what they get by Catchpolling; to one of these he gives his Mandates, saying, Fetch such an one hither; who, glad of the Employment, seizes him by the Cadi's Authority, and brings him before him; nor shall he be let go, till he have discharged his Fees, guilty or not guilty; so close do these Harpies hold their Prey, that they never let go their Grasp, unless a Morsel be offered to their Mouths, in lieu of their Purchase.
Sometimes when the Cadi sits, one of the Parties is present, and the other absent; then a fresh Messenger is sent, and fresh Money must be paid; at other times both Contenders are present, and the Cadi sits not, and the Cause hangs in suspence while the Charges go on: But after delays of this kind, suppose they at length meet, and it prove matter of Debt contracted in the time of a former Cadi, whose Writing is produced and attested, when the Cadi gravely re∣proves the Debtor, Why dost thou not fear God and pay thy Debts? He nothing concerned at the Admonition, replies, this Bond and Hand-writing I know not, it may be Counterfeit, I never had any thing to do with this man. Here Bonds unattested are of no force, by reason of most impudent Cheats, but they must have not only One or Two Witnesses, but Thirty or Forty, and so to Sixty, who must be approved Men of Integrity, never accused to have told a Lie; and even then they will oppose their Evidence, insinuating, That for a small matter Knights of the Post may be Suborned, because that Interest may sway a many to be against one, and that a plain Truth may suffer through the conspiracy of a multitude: Moreover, if they should be detected, they only undergo a Reprimand from the Cadi, and no corporal Punishment, either of Death, or other Chastisement; and should it be like to go hard with the Defendant, or either Party, Plaintiff, or Defendant prove faulty, the conscious Party seeks out some Familiar of the Cadi's, employed on this ac∣count to sollicit the Cadi in his behalf, and secretly he obliges him∣self, either by Bond or Deed, to Bribe the Cadi to be his Friend, and therefore, either a Pledg is deposited, or good Sureties brought to satisfy the Cadi. In the mean while both being driven away from the Judgment-Seat, the Cadi with severe looks and angry words, threatens the Delinquent to clear his Debt; when begging for readmittance, he entertains the Creditor with a pleasing smile, and tells him, Justice is from God; at the which he chears himself up with the hopes of receiving his Money, and the corrupt Judge acts his Cue so well, that few suspect otherwise; when the other Party, as if hard measure were offered him, creeps with a dejected countenance to the feet of the Cadi, calling him Mirza, (a Title for the most noble Courtier) let me beg the favour of being heard but one word; the Cadi, as if provoked to wroth, bids him speak; when he goes on, Your Worship knows in this City there are such who on purpose are set to practise Cheats, that will do it so exactly, that the most discern∣ing Eye shall not discover the Fallacy, and that Money will pur∣chase Witnesses, therefore let the Oath be put to me against my Adversary, otherwise by these Tricks what Wealthy Man in Suffahaun can escape Poverty? This Gap being opened,A Corrup Judge. the Cadi with a milder countenance asks him, if he dear swear this Debt to be unjust; then lays open to him the horrid Sin of Perjury, how that Hell flames are prepared both by God and their Prophet for breaches of Faith, and those that presume on that manner can never escape Damnation; whereat shaking the Borders of his Garments, as it were with pure hands brushing them, he answers, I fear God, and from my Youth hitherto have never
omitted our prescribed Prayers, or the Fasts enjoined by our Law, and for my Honesty none can reprove me; besides, I am an Hodgee, and have the Honour conferred on me to be one of the Sons of the Prophet, and can any of that Sacred Stock tell a Lie? Then the Cadi calls for the Alcoran, which being brought, he rises out of re∣verence to the Divine Code, and Exhorts, Admonishes, and Preach∣es; yet he fearless lays his Hand on the Book, and by Swearing with a loud Voice that he owes him nothing, is dismissed from ever being accountable more; for here are no other judiciary proceedings or Tribunals to appeal to, where Mistakes may be rectified, or Inad∣vertency by too precipitate a Sentence corrected. Punishment in Criminal Causes are mightily biassed by Gold,Lex Talionis. which at any time or place shall prevail more than Right; but if it cannot be bought off, lex Talionis, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, is the Law, according to Moses's Institution, and the Execution is committed to the fury of the Friends. For Theft Immuring serves turn,Drubbing on the Soles of the Feet. where they can make no other retribution, and for petty Larcenary, and for correcting of their Slaves and Servants, drubbing on the Soles of their Feet beyond Moses's allowance, laying thereon some hundreds of Blows, that they are disabled to walk a long time after. The Law of like for like, affords us this memorable passage of the Emperor Severus, who made a bold Impostor in his Court undergo a suitable Punishment for his Offence, who had deluded several of his Courtiers with great Promises, and never had effected any; where∣fore on their complaint, the Emperor commanded him to be stifled with Smoak, and the Crier at the same instant to make proclamation, qui fumum vendidit eodem paenas dat, Who Sold Smoak perishes therewith. But this Law, though it seems the most equal among many Nations, cannot square in all points without difficulty, there∣fore it is the more prudently among us referred to the determinati∣ons of the Judges in Life and Death; who are to give Sentence ac∣cording to their discretion and the common usages in Capital Of∣fences. Since Celibacy is exploded by their Law,Poligamy al∣lowed. simultaneous Poligamy is not only Tolerated but Commanded, and Whoring is reckoned Meritorious among the Moors; for this carnal Gospel allows Four Lawful Wives in Matrimony at one and the same time, besides Concubines, an indefinite Number, as every one's substance is able to provide for with Serving-maids and Slaves; besides which they may have for a determinate Price, such as they shall hire for an Hour, Day, Month, or Year; and any Born in these Three Fami∣lies of Bedfellows, may be reputed as Legitimate, provided the re∣puted Father claim two parts, and the Woman one of the Child; whereby however speciously they boast of the Clarity of their Stock, it is apparent from what Puddle it is derived. All Women here,They Buy their Wives. contrary to our Custom, are Bought with a Price, the Husband that is to be, Bargaining to give so much for his Wive's Virginity by strict Indentures before the Cadi. Divorces are common among the ordinary People,Are often Di∣vorced▪ though seldom among the great ones, who count it a shame. A Bill of Divorce called
Talak is taken out when there is either an aversion from the Bed, or there are conceived home-bred troubles on account of the former Obligation, or when they have engaged themselves to perform more than they are able, then they make quarrels among the Wives, set∣ting them together by the Ears, and the Man grows surly to the new married Wife, not only giving her ill Language, but cruel Blows more than she can bear; who presently runs to the Cadi for a Divorce; but he willing to pacify them, returns her to her Husband with Exhortation to live peaceably; whereupon the Siege is re∣newed, and fresh Assaults are made by new Torments, till she have remitted part of her Dowry, if not the whole. Sometimes she retires to her Father's House, the Portion being retained, whence arise new Jars. The Husband going to the Cadi complains the Father keeps his Wife from him, and intreats his Warrant to fetch her back; where being brought afore the Cadi, and the Father with her to demand her Portion, she opens against her Husband, and he against her, with that noise and thunder, that often the Cadi being tired with their bellowing and roaring on all sides, cries out, they kill me with their bawling; and though he com∣mand silence, it is to no purpose, till being thoroughly vexed, he cause the men to be Bastinadoed, who though they were deaf to Words, must give ear to Blows, for they esteem it even indecent to lay hand on a Woman, or to strike her before Folks. If the Man propound the Divorce, and the Woman accept it, the Cadi pronounces the decisive Sentence, because the Mahometan Law observes to keep the right thereof in the power of the Man, not the Woman: But if the perverse Woman insists in her resolution of Divorce after the Cadi hath persuaded her to cohabit, and the Man refuse to give it her, the Cadi declares them to be separated; but the Woman in this condition cannot marry again, as being bound to her Husband; wherefore the Cadi commands the Man to give her Alimony, and maintain her at his own Charges while they re∣fuse to live together; but if they can reconcile themselves, they may come together without the Cadi's revoking his Interdict for the first and second time of Divorce; but after the third time they cannot come together without abominable Sin; yet such is the Heat of Lust in these Countries, that the Women cannot abstain from the Man, no more than the Men from the Women; wherefore if she takes another Husband, and some Months or Years living with him, if she will, she may be Divorced from him, and return to her first Husband. To the Cadi's Cognizance belongs all manner of Contracts,All Contracts made before the Cadi. Con∣veyances, and Settlements; to which purpose near his Door are such as make Instruments ready written for sale, in the Stile of their Law, to be presented for the Cadi's perusal: Into which in∣serting the Names of John-a-Nokes, and John-a-Stiles, Zeid, and Ambre, the Cadi calls aloud, Zeid, where art thou? Who answers here, upon appearance: When the Cadi proceeds; This House, Garden, or Land, or any thing of that kind, Dost thou sell wil∣lingly, and of thy own accord to Ambre? He affirming, aree, yes. Is the price agreed between you? Yes. Where are your Witneses?
says the Cadi; Then he replies, I have brought them, who answer for themselves; the Cadi asks them, Do you know this to belong to Zeid? Who affirm, it is known to all the Town, even to the Children. The Cadi after these Interrogatories, lifts up his Voice, and says, Does no one forbid this Contract? At which, they jointly cry aloud, no one forbids: Whereupon the Cadi calls for his Seal, which are words Engraven on Silver; and dipping it in Ink, stamps it three or four times in three or four places, especially at the junctures of the In∣denture, that no room may be left or fraudulent dealing, they not putting their own Hands, nor delivering it as their Act and Deed; but the Cadi makes the Obligation firm on this wise. Usury is forbid by Mahomet,Usury forbid by Mahomet, yet his Disci∣ples are cruel Extortioners. yet no place extorts more for Mo∣ney lent; for Ten Thomands in a year, shall at a moderate Calcula∣tion bring them in Thirteen every year; for the Needy giving a Pledge (without which they do nothing) to the Broaker or Usurer, which you please, Ten Thomands are procured for a Month, on condition he pays a Thomand for a Months Interest, and the Principal to be pay∣ed in, or the Pledge become forfeited; and for the first Months In∣terest he subducts aforehand, a Thomand, constraining the Borrower to return the Ten intire, or else seize the Pawn; such intolerable exactions befitting only Turk, Jew, and Indian Banyan, who reap such unconscionable Gain by this Trade. Those who desire to secure their Money thoroughly, come to the Cadi for a Bond, being agreed first on their Contract among themselves to pay Fifteen, Twenty, and sometimes Thirty Thomands for the use of one Hundred for one year. When the Money is brought in Two Bags, with a Knife, Book, or Mantle, and the Owner Zeid cries out before the Cadi, sitting on the Seat of Ju∣stice: I Zeid do give frankly for the space of one year One hun∣dred Thomands; but I sell this Book for Fifteen, Twenty, or Thirty Thomands to Ambre, and he is content to give it; therefore I de∣sire in the presence of the Cadi, that Ambre may be obliged at the years end to repay me my Hundred Thomands, according to agreement, and then seizes the Fifteen, Twenty, or Thirty Tho∣mands, according to agreement for the Book; or if he lets him have the whole hundred, the Cadi asks Ambre, Art thou content to give this Sum? And he answering, aree, yes, goes on, so thou art Debtor to Zeid an Hundred and Fifteen, Twenty, or Thirty Tho∣mands, payable this time Twelve Months, being fully expired; to which he replying aree, it is valid in Law: In which Form of Wri∣ting such caution is used, that they trust not Figures, nor bare Words that express the Sum intire, and at length, but half it and part it to prevent equivocation. For Example, the Sum of an Hun∣dred Fifteen Thomands is the Principal, the half whereof is Fifty seven, and an half; the Fifth part is Twenty three; deluding here∣by the skill of the most subtle Sophister, since the Subsequents so inexpugnably strengthen the Antecedents. They have another way of borrowing Money upon an House, which they pawn for a certain Sum for so many years, and Hire their own House of the Creditor at his terms, till the Sum be
payed; in which if there happen any lapse or failure, the House becomes forfeit at the end of the time, and is seized for the use of the Creditor, as well as if the Principal be not restored: And this is held good in Law among them. Besides the Cadi,The ▪ they have another Splitter of Causes, called Sheik el elloum, being Interpreter of the Ancient Laws, or some∣thing like our Court of Chancery; (the other being for the Common-Law) who sits in his own House also without any subalternate Ju∣risdiction. Nor does the Codre or Musty disdain to Hear sometimes;The Cod. but this Eagle catches not at Flies, haec Aquila non capit Muscas, the most weighty Affairs being reserved for his Audience. And through these muddy Streams runs the Law over all the Realm,Guilty of Bri∣bery and In¦justice. they acting under the Cauns in the several Districts, and the Codre under the Emperor; which how consentaneous to self-preser∣vation, let any one judge, where Bribery and Extortion get the upper-hand: For where Nature has prescribed that Rule as a Fun∣damental Maxim, That every man without respect to any ought to Patronize the innocent, or help the injured, whereby we seek to uphold the Community, and therein indeed preserve our selves, how can this come to pass, unless it should be alike diffusive to all, whereby every one of us become united in the same Law of Na∣ture? which if Magistrates would consider, they would find the Press of the Argument lie thus, To preside is to do right and pro∣fitable things, agreeable to the Laws of self-preservation; for as the Rulers are over the People, so the Laws ought to be above the Rulers, I mean so far as to Govern by them, and act nothing con∣trary to them: Nor can that Man be just or vertuous, who conorms himself to any other Sentiments; or are they otherwise to be esteem∣ed, than those whose Senses being depraved have not the true relish of their Food; who enslave the Laws, and act not within their prescript, and must come under the denomination of lustful, flagi∣tious, covetous, and insensible persons, who have not the true Taste of Justice, but stupidly follow the Dictates of their own Wills; which is too truly the Case of this Government. Nor need this be wondered at, since even their Summum bonum is placed in such Sensualities, as no ways consist with rectified Rea∣son. A Paradise Calculated for their blockish Temper,Their Para∣dise. whose Reach is not superior to the groveling Beasts, and therefore aim at no higher Felicity; Which makes them rely on their Interpreters of their Law when they preach, That after this Life the blessed Mahometans are to be received into pleasant Gardens, where they are to lie under the spreading Boughs of shady Trees; Clothed with soft Raiments; Adorn∣ed with most costly Gems; hung with Rich Chains, and Precious Rings; ed with the most delightful Fruits, delicate Fowls, and inticing Cates; shall quaff the best Nectar to Eternal Healths, with∣out Intemperance; their Liquors distilling from Vines that are not briating, which shall never offend the Brain; their Couches shall be stuffed with the yielding Down; their Quilts shall lighty press
their Bodies; and Virgins with never-dying Beauty shall bear them Company, who shall love none besides their own Husbands, nor ne∣ver be less Virgins than when first enjoyed, constantly renewing a full Tide of Glee, which is never to Ebb into dull Sadness, but con∣tinue an uninterrupted course of self-complacency: These are the Excellent Attainments of their Coelestial Happiness, and those that think these Promises of no avail, their Prophet denounces Hell-fire and Brimstone for their Unbelief. Flectere si nequeat superos Acheronta movebit. If in his Heaven they doubt there is no Room, Hark how he Thunders out his fearful Doom. They shall be punished in smoaky Fire and Brimstone; their Meat shall be Pitch and.Their Hell. Tar, mixed with Lime and Hair; their Drink a Composition of Flame, which shall cause intolerable Pains. A Religion suitable enough to this Meridian, where Polygamy, or the use of many Women is Authorized, which from these Borders has exspaciated it's self over the whole East with such impetuousness,The Progress of their Reli∣gion. that from the stinking Lake in Arabia, whence it first sprang, it has like a Torrent ran bearing all before it: Until it was a little di∣stracted by the Ottoman and Suffean Factions, but so that its Course was not broken, but divaricated into two Streams, and so became more diffused, and the Channels made more rapid and extensive; so taking is this Doctrine, fitter for Brutes than Men. For Man, to speak with the Philosopher, whether God or Nature the Mother of all things has given him a Soul, than which nothing can be more Sublime or more Divine,The Souls of Men superior to Brutes. can he be so stupid or senselesly abject to imagine there should be no difference betwixt him and Four-footed Creatures? Hmo enim, ut cum Philosopho dicam, cum illi sive Deus, sive Mater rerum omnium Natura, Animam dederit, quo nihil praestantius neque divinius sic ipse se abjiciet ac prosternat, ut nihil inter illum & quadrupidem putat? On which consideration it might well be concluded with what the Author of Religio Medici writes on this Subject: The Alcoran is a Book composed unadvisedly, stuffed with idle and ridiculous Errors in Philosophy; sustained by apparent Solicisms, Subterfuges of Ignorance, the decrying of Aca∣demies, and the banishing of all manner of Learning, upheld by Force more than Reason, the Fortune of their Arms be∣ing their greatest Argument. To which Lypsius consents, O Nuga∣menta, &c. which made Avicenna, (of an extraordinary Happiness of Wit, though unhappily born under the Mahometan Sect, after he had seriously reflected on the Imposture,) blush to think their Prophet had placed Eternal Felicity in a life of Carnal Pleasures; insomuch that he was forced to confess he could do no otherwise than abjure his Faith to become Master of his Reason. For, says he, The Law Mahomet has delivered to us, has limited both Beatitude and Misery under Corporal Terms; but the Promises and Hopes of Eternity, must be of other Blessings more refined sure and solid, which can no ways be conceived but by an immaculate and rectified Intellect, and the highest pitch of In∣genuity. Avic. Lib. 1 Phil. c. 1. apud Jovellum. Respecting herein
what our Divines have rightly determined, That Spiritual Bene∣dictions, abstracted from Earthly (as too mean) are the chief Ob¦ject of Happiness, whereby we are united to the first Truth: And for no other end were we created by God, and a Soul stamped on our Body, and on our Soul Intelligence or Understanding, says the same Lypsius, but that we should live faithfully and godly on the Earth, and thereby proceeding towards Heaven, we should, being blessed together with him, reap Everlasting Felicity, which should be so, because Spiritual, which is Eternal; not Carnal, which va∣nisheth of its self, and passeth away, being but Temporary: And then, if the Happiness expected hereafter by all wise men, is Spiri∣tual, our present Worship here ought to be directed thither, of which M. T. Cicero, though an Ethnick, was not ignorant, who has trans∣mitted it as a Rule to Posterity, Lib. 2. De Nat. Deorum, Cultus au∣tem Deorum, optimus, idemque castissimus, atque sanctissimus, plenissimusque Pietatis, ut eos semper purâ integrâ incorruptâ mente & voce venere∣mur: The adoring of the Gods ought to be the best Service we can pay them, which must be most chast, and holy, and full of Piety, that we may always reverence them with a pure, intire, uncorrupt Mind and Voice. And Hermes, . And hence by the Mouths of the Heathens it is allowed,But an Holy, Pure and Spi∣ritual, which is no where to be found but in Christiani∣ty. that an Holy and Pure Profession is an entrance to the Celestial Mansions. What better Conduct, what holier Guide than the Captain of our Salvation, the ever Blessed Jesus? who hath by his Apostle given us the true Characteristick of the Right Religion, which is first pure, then peaceable. Then what depravity of understanding hath corrupted the Minds of these Sectators, that hath framed to themselves a nasty Stable, more full of Filth than Augeus his, instead of that beautiful and un∣defiled Structure of the Gospel; and for the most Holy and Pure Doctrine taught by Christ, embrace with prostrate Body and bended Knees, the Libidinous and Lascivious Worship of Mahomet? What Stupidity, what Inchantment bewitches them to admit an Impostor for a Prophet, a Deluder for a Saviour; for a Juno, as Ixion did, to grasp a Cloud? Nor let Success animate them,Success no Argument since it is an Argument might serve the Gentiles as well as them, whose numbers exceed all the Contro∣verted Religions put together, whom St. Paul, their professed Emis∣sary, brands with unadvised Piety, and lays them under equal Con∣demnation; where he conjoins the Folly, , i. e. What can be known of God, is manifested among them; and , their foolish heart is darkened; which is the fault of the Mahometans as well as them, because the pravity of their Understandings has cor∣rupted their knowledge of God, the only True God, whereby they should know his only Son Christ Jesus, and him crucified, to fulfil both the Law and the Prophets. Thus from the previous Knowledge or Idea of Religion, as it is either true or false, so it happens there results a true Piety, Superstition or Idolatry, which would clearly appear, were Reason Master of our Conceptions.
CHAP. XIV. The Appellations of the Warrior and the Scholar; of the Mer∣chant, and Mechanicks and Villains; of their Garb, Civility of Manners, Facetiousness, Revelling, Sports, Weddings, Cleansings and Burials; of their Women, and License of Cur∣tisans. The Eunuchs, Vertues and Vices; and lastly, their Supputations of Coin, Measures and Time. AND now being about to dismiss the Two Upper Forms from farther examination, we shall part with them with their pro∣per Appellatives; The Warrior blustering in the Title of Begue, and the Gown-man priding himself in the courteous Name of Miirza; who being thus Marshalled with Respect, and passed by with what Or∣der they are allowed, The Crowding Multitude press for Admittance,The Mer∣chant. scarcely affording Priority to the Wealthy Merchant; the most Honourable of whom are the Armenians, and therefore styled Cogee, or Rich, by the Per∣sians; though even among the Persians many covet to be so reputed, but care not to measure the wide World, like them, venturing no far∣ther than over to India, which is their ne plus ultrà, while the diligent Armenian, Per Mare per Terras, per quod tegit omnia, Coelum. By Sea and Land does search for Store, And all Heaven's Covering ransacks o're. The Moors are by Nature, heavy, dull and lazy; nd were they not stimulated by Necessity, would not trot from their own Homes; for they are content with the Rags of Poverty, rather than to put their Hands to labour; and when they do exert their Faculties, they rather study to impose by Fraud, than by Industry and honest Gain to re∣pair their Fortunes. Underpullers to these are the Shopkeepers, whose Mercurial Parts are fitted to put off the worst Wares,Cheats in all Professions by making appearance of the best, either by false Lights, or crafty obtruding the Choisest to the view on their Stalls, and foisting Goods disagreable to the Patterns on their Chapmen. Nor are the Handicraft free from Sophistry, having tasted the same Philtre; the Cook, a Cheating Knave, will sell Asses, Camels, or Horse Flesh, instead of Ox's; and that often fetched out of the High-ways, being killed with Labour, or dead of Diseases, while the Unwary Buyer pays for wholsome Food. The Baker mixes with his Meal some Chalky Earth, which the Imprudent suppose to be good Wheat; though these when detected (as intimated already) suffer severely for it.
The Artizans also conspire in this,Ch. XIV. that Strangers are to be cozen∣ed; from whence results the necessity of employing Broakers or Banyans,Make the Broakers ne∣cessary. that the Cretes may deal with the Cretes; or as our Eng∣lish Proverb hath it, Always set a Knave to catch a Knave. For all these Miscarriages, not the Government so much, as the Administrators of Justice, are to be blamed: For the Laws are sound enough, were not the Magistrates faulty in the Execution; and the Reason is plain, their Offices being purchased at high Rates, indirect Courses must be taken to repay themselves: Wherefore there is hardly any Villany unconnived at, if they bribe but honestly, and have the wit not to be open in their Cheats; so that those, whose duty it is to preserve the Commonweal, are so far from being intent thereon, that on the contrary, their main scope is directed how to vex and oppress the Innocent; whereby, instead of being Dispensers of Equity and Right to the Citizens, they are the only Plague and Grievance they lie under: For their Gain arises mostly from the Ills they contrive for those under their malevolent Authority, as may ap∣pear by the subsequent, much to be lamented Story. A certain Droger or Calenture of a City,The Villany of a Droger. being introduced by the power of Gold, that he might the better make himself whole, began to ruminate within himself (nor is the Devil wanting to such Servants;) wherefore, besides the usual Exactions, to wit, to load the Rich with Injuries, Tributes, Prison, Stripes and Shackles; whereas he could not bring that to account to all, he devised a more sure and available Stratagem; he enters a League and Amity with all the Men of Note, treats them civilly abroad, and invites them friendly at home, but not without design; entertaining at the same time corre∣spondence with all the Pimps, Panders and Bawds of the Town, and charges the latter to mix with all the lawful Wives in the publick Baths (since only Men of the highest Rank have them in their Houses) and to observe their Manners, Gestures, Garments, Shoes, and their very Smocks, and give him an account; nor dare they be deficient in their part: At the next Assembly, where every one strives to the utmost of his Gravity to behave himself, he puts on a sober Vizor, looks concerned, and out of order; after many Expressions of sincerity, and a deep sense of Honour, he bursts out into heavy sighs, at which the Good Man, to whom he directs his Discourse, afflicted to see him in these Dumps, must to his own ruin ask the occasion of his sudden alteration: He craftily returns, The business is no other∣wise mine, than as it relates to my Friend, whose Credit is dearer to me than mine own, nor can I endure to see him abused; then the de∣ceived Coxe grows more instant, begging that he would not conceal it from him. The Droger being Master of his Science, persists; What comfort can I reap from your disturbance? It were better I should be silent; yet— whereat the other inflamed, thinking the Miscarriage aimed at him, greedily swallows the Bait; and whilst he endeavours to clear the doubt, is much more intricated than before, and therefore leaves not off till he have wrought him to discover the dangerous Secret; the Droger with much ado suffers himself to be overcome, and then
he declares, to his great grief, he took his Wife in Adultery with a Scoundrel, on whom, according to the Law, he inflicted sudden Death, as he deserved; but for the Respect born to him, he permitted his Lady to escape; nor had he made more words of it, had not he extorted this Confession; nor should he have known it, even at this time, had he not feared some less affected to him might have re∣proached him openly, with what he now privately advised him only of, otherwise it should have been buried in silence for all him. The Husband astonished, by degrees hardly recovers himself, but speaking incoherently as his Temper provokes him; sometimes breaks forth in a passion and hurries to the destruction of his Wife and Children, sacrificing all to his Fury, cutting off both Root and Branch by a desperate depriving them of their Lives; than which the Droger desires not a greater benefit, seising both him and his Goods for satisfaction of the Law: But if he begins to consider, and cooly to examin how can this be? Such a night I am sure she lay with me, or was so and so employed at such a time in her own House. The Droger in nothing abashed, goes on, Has not your Wife such a sort of Smock? Such a Pair of Breeches? Such a Vest? And then particularizes her Habit; which things are too well known by him to be denied, and so is possessed with a belief of the Levity of his Wife, and the Kindness of the Droger not to publish his Shame; which compells him to gratify the Favour by good Sums of Mo∣ney, and either Repudiate, Beat, or Kill his Innocent Wife for the malicious and wicked Invention of an unjust Magistrate. Hitherto we have taken notice of little change in Apparel to distinguish them,The Persian in his City Dress. the Patricii, or Nobles, being of the same make with the meaner Multitude, only their every-day Cloaths surpass in Richness, being Surbaffs, or Cloath of Silver or Gold, and the middle Sort only appear so on great days, otherwise they are Habit∣ed alike, unless Business, or Necessity of the Weather create a dif∣ference; they Ride shorter, and are booted over their Stockins, with a kind of Buskin with flat Heels, only shod with an Iron Horse shoe; in the Winter they wrap themselves in Furs, and in the Summer∣time go in looser as well as lighter Garments: Most an end their Stockins and upper Jerkins are made of English Broad Cloth; within doors they are clad more carelesly, as also when they are on Foot near their own Homes. But the set Dress of the Persian is after this manner; His Head be∣ing Shaved, a large Turbat is placed upon his Crown, of divers Co∣lours, either Silk or Cotton, in the Figure of an over-grown Cabage, with a great broad Leaf a top, which is wrought of Gold or Silver, and spread to make a shew; his Beard is Cut neatly, and the Whiskers kept in Cases, and encouraged from one Ear to the other, in fashion of an Half-Moon on the upper Lip, with only a decent Peak on the under; not so mossy or slovenly, as either Turkish or In∣dian Mahometans: Next, upon his Body is a Shirt, which he covers with a Vest, tied double on his Breast, and strait to his Body as far as the Waste, from whence it hangs in Pleats to his Ancles, sometimes Quilted, sometimes not; his Loins are Girt with Phrigian Girdles
or rich Sashes, above which his Belt carries a Falched Sword or Scimiter; from his Hips long close Breeches of Linnen, come down to his Hose, of London Sackcloth of any Colour, which are cut loose, not respecting the shape of the Leg; over all a loose Coat of the same, without Sleeves, Lined with Furs, or Sables, or else Silk; the outside either Scarlet, or the finest Wool of Europe, or Cloath of Silver or Gold of their own Manufactory; his Shoes of the best Shagreen Leather, mostly Green, with narrow Toes, high narrow Heels, shod with neat Iron Half-moons, without Shoe-ties or Quar∣ters to pul up about their Heels, being the readier to slip off and on as occasion requires; instead of Gloves they Tincture not only their Hands, but Feet, with a dark Red Colour, which they do with the Alkana, or Hen of the Arabs, small Twigs of which Plant Lobeli∣us writes, are brought out of Africa to be Sold, wherewith they Dye their Hair Yellow, or of a sandy Red; and not only the Turks, who are delighted with that Colour, stain their Hair, but their Hands and Feet, with the Nails on each, and other parts of the Body, to restrain Sweating and filthy Smells proceeding therefrom, Plat. p. 165. de Discoloratione. Both which are mistakes, in relation to the staining of the Hair, but as to the other part it is true. They only use a Glove when they carry their Hawks on their Fists, with which they are as often seen to carry them on Foot, as on Horseback. And thus have we Robed the Sparkish Persian in his City Dress; and now we shall attend the Ruder and less carefully At∣tired Rustick about his Country Affairs; which we shall bring under a Threefold consideration; for whether they be Carriers, Herdsmen, or Farmers, or rather Hinds, they are all Vasals to supreme Masters. The first therefore are such as Travel to and again,The Drove. who must not enter upon that Trust without a sure Return, non est abire domum vacuumque redire; for they, for so many Beasts of Burthen, with their Bells and Trappings, much like our Pack-Horses, (suppose Twenty Mules, Thirty Asses, Forty, Fifty, Hundred, Two hun∣dred, more or less committed to their Care,) stipulate for an equivalent Profit to the Owners; the Pack saddles are a Load them∣selves, being thick and broad, and made afore with an high Steeple, or Pyramid, and the Ridge in the middle is like a Mountain, over which they hang their Carriages; the like is to be said of their Ca∣mels. The Chief Drover is called Golabdar, and is priviledged only to Command over his Fellow-Servants, not to Domineer over any Passengers, whether Franks or Natives, as among the Turks is pra∣ctised, but rather to yield themselves to the Obedience of those who employ them. Those that breed up Cattel are wandring Shepherds,The Herds∣men. and have no stated Habitation; but where they find the best Pasture they pitch their Tents, together with their Wives, Children, and Fami∣lies, with all their Troops, in the fattest Vallies, living abroad far from great Towns, like the Wild Arabs, whose Chief, or Father of the Tribe, is owned by them, and no other, he giving account to the Emperor for the Number of their Flocks, and the Annual In∣crease; for they are Morose and Untamed, and are apt enough to
Worry any who fall unadvisedly among them: Their Dogs, with which they guard the Folds, are like Wolves, as fierce and stronger than their Wolves are here. Among these we must reckon those that bring up the King's Breed of Horses, because they lead a Life very like these, though under the Jurisdiction of a Prime Courtier, who lives like a Persian both for Eating and Pomp in his Pavilions of State in the open Fields, keeping there a kind of a Court with his Fellows and Companions, while the Inferior Servants provide for innumerable Droves of Cattle; for whose Foles newly colted, the Mules are the best de∣fence, (securing them from the attempts of the wildest Creatures when their Mares shall desert them, by a vigorous resistance with their Heels,) never leaving to prosecute them till they have drove them from their designed Rape; and to this End shall muster them∣selves together when they perceive any danger threaten the Young ones in their respective Droves, and for the same purpose are nou∣rished to be their Keepers. These then are Vagrants,The Hus∣bandman. while the Husbandman fixes himself in the Villages, to whom the native Soil is sweet, who reaps the Fruit of his Labour, provided he take care to discharge his Landlord, who generally is the Emperor, or else as bad a Task-master. These go clad in course Cloths underneath, above with Felts, kneaded into the form of a Coat, and are covered with Hats of the same, but their Hats are grey, bound about with a Linnen Cloth either of White, Green or Blew; their Coats are of what Colour they please, but mostly Blew; their Hats are high-crowned, and the Brim slit bere and behind, which if it be cold, they pull down and bind with their Cloth; if the Sun offend their Eyes, they draw it over their Faces, or cock up when it is shady: When they rest, the upper Garment is put on with Sleeves, armed with an undressed Sheep's-skin against the injury of the Weather; their Shirt next their Skin is rugged enough; over it a plain Jirkin is tied with an hard Linnen Girdle of the same wooft with the Shirt: About the Calves of their Legs they bind Rowlers for want of Stockins; and their Shoes are soled with Wood, and the upper part wrought over with Packthread. The Dervises professing Poverty,The Derviss. assume this Garb here, but not with that State they ramble up and down in India; being without Beasts of Burthen, without Wallets full of Provisions, which the others seize by force, without Attendance, without other Ensigns or Wea∣pons more than a Staff and Horn; travelling without Company, or indeed any Safe-pass; and if they fix up their Standard, it is among the Tombs; none giving them harbour, or encouraging this sort of Madness, as well for the natural Antipathy to Beggery, as for that under this Cloak many Intrigues and ill Designs have been car∣ried on. The Christians labour in their Vineyards,Vine-dressers. as do the Jews also. In all other Servility and Slavery the Old Gabers or Gaurs,Slaves made of the Old Persians. the true Ancient Persians, who differ from the present in Speech, Institutes, Laws, Countenance, Voice and Gate, which they retain with all the Abjectness and Sordidness a continual pressure of Misfortune can
reduce them to; being once Lords of all the World, are no more now than the Off-scum of the Earth, and the meanest on whom the Sun shines, although still he is adored as their Deity. And these being the Lowest of Mankind,The Eunuchs. made so by their Sloth; we shll pass from them, to those disabled from being Men by the Barbarous Custom of these Nations; whose Favour must be courted before we can come to the speech of their Women, I mean the Eunuchs; who barking, straitly wake their Masters; to whom being well disposed, it is hard to cast a seducing Bait before them; for since they are incapable of Enjoyments, though not of the Thoughts of Venery, their Masters conside in their Impotency to preside over the Female Senate, setting them as Spies over their Incontinency, and as faithful Keepers of their Vertue of Necessity: They order all their Cloths, and see that every one be arraid as becomes them, and that nothing indecent be committed among them; so pertenacious are they in the Authority placed in them, out of a tyrannical Humour, that they are never brought over to their Mistresses Designs, but are ever trusty to their Master's Pleasure, being most exquisite in the Art of Bawdery, and impure Assistants to Lechery; insomuch, that whoever beholds them, must pronounce them a Map of Villany; for they look as if they had stolen an Old Woman's Face, and a Puppit's Voice, seldom Fat in Body, but always Lean in Visage, without Beard, that not so much as the Hair of a Good Man appears, and the very Image of that Divine Creature seems utterly eraced; that one would suspect them to be Gypsies inverted, transformed from Young Men in∣to Deformed Old Beldams, unless their Cloaths were allowed to be the same as the Mens; for they have no other Testimony left of their once being of the same Sex; for they are Gelded so inartificially, or Butcherly rather, that All is cut off, nothing of witness being left, but as clear as the Skin will permit; and thus are they given over to Nature to cicatrize: If they live, it is well; if not, they try others till they do; wherefore a Chyrurgion skilled in this Art, is of greater value, than if he were expert in every other part, and defi∣cient in this. They have both White and Black; the first from Georgia, the other from Arabia and Arica; these are the fit Tools of their Beastly Offices, and thereore the more endeared to their Masters, by how much the more lewd they are. Which would hardly be born with silence by the Ancient Procu∣ers of the Female Sex,The Old Women. had they not been found faulty in their often contriving and helping their Young Mistresses out in their Assigna∣tions; of which they being conscious, they the more quietly admit them into their Quarters, not to say more contentedly; for they look upon them to be Overseers of their Actions, and imposed as so many Argus's to discover all their Intrigues. In the mean while,Their Wo∣men. the Women of this Country are in a bad State, where Jealousy reigns with such a sway, (and it is said not without cause;) for which reason they are without hope of redress, or any one so much as to pity them, since they'r known above once to break through those Bars; nor is it wonderful when their Profoundest Divines teach them to be , without Rational Souls, and there∣fore
exclude them their Mosques; nor are they trained up in those Principles from their Youth, which should render them fit to be∣come prudent Matrons; but measuring from extraneous things the sweetness of their Being, are instructed in Affairs of the Bed, Ban∣quetting, Luxury, and Brutish Obsequiousness. They are taught to Ride a Straddle like Men,Their Excel∣lencies. to Leap, to Dart, and drink Tobacco. None, though of the Royal Lineage, are permitted in Matters of State to meddle, or have their Cabals or Instruments, whereby to convey their Policies; nor must they stir abroad unvailed, unless hut up in Cedgewaies, and then well attended. They have little care over their Children, nor have they much businesss with the Reel or Spindle; as if they were created only to be Idle Companions for the Men; their Garments differ no farther from the Mens than Conveniency requires; their Hair is braided with Elegancy under their Veils, with a Golden Crown or Gar∣land, bestuck with Jewels and precious Stones in pretty Knots and Fancies. Pectoris & cordis pariter proprieque monile Ornatus. Colli sunt torques, auris in aures, Annulus est manuum, sicut armilloe brachiorum, Atque periscolides exornant crura puellae. Besides the Breast, the Neck, the Ears, the Hand, Their proper Ornaments, the Thighs command. The Plebean Women walk without Doors, either on Foot, or else Ride on Horse-back covered with White Sheets, with Holes for their Eyes and Nose; content to enjoy Day at a little Hole rather than prostitute their Face to publick View; the honest Women have no Borders to their Sheets. Those that desire to be reputed Whores have large Borders,The Mark of a Whore. and wear them as a Sign of their Trade; with which to disgrace a Mar∣ried Woman, and to shave her Head, is the greatest Mark of Infamy she can be branded with; unless to add a perpetual stigmatizing Note, she be carried on an Ass, with her Face to the Tail, quite through the City. The Women are fair, with rather too much Ruddiness in their Cheeks; their Hair and Eyes most black; a little Burly, by reason they wear their Cloths loose, yet not altogether so, but more at ease than our Dames; a Plump Lass being in more esteem than our Slen∣der and Strait-laced Maidens. The Lovers court not one another; for the Recluseness of their Condition is such, that should they attempt to carry on a Secret Amour, it could not long lie hid; wherefore when they are at leasure to Love, they ask the Parents of the Daughter for their Consent, which if they gain, the Match is struck up: That of Catullus being granted,
Virginitas non tota tua est, ex parte parentum est, Tertia pars matri data, pars tertia patri, Tertia sola tua est. Noli pugnare duobus. Your Virginity is not all your own; Two Thirds your Parents claim, one Third alone Remains to you. Fight not then two to one. She is led through the Streets in all her best Apparel vailed, with∣out Dowry, more than what Goods and Chattels are sent with lusty Slaves, by her several Relations, with a pompous Procession and Illuminations, with noisy Musick for several Nights together; and thus the Men, do as it were, buy their Wives, while the Women are ignorant of the Chapman till they come together; it being not reputable for Women of good Fame to enter upon such Bar∣gains. Only professed Whores are tollerated to make the best of their Markets;Curtezans. Curtezans therefore are dispensed by the King, they gi∣ving him so much for their License when they first set up, and An∣nually as long as they practise, not exceeding the number of Forty thousand in his Chief City of Suffahaun; and these are always Mar∣rying, as the Poet pleasantly relates, Quotidie viro nubit, Nupsitque hodie, Nubit mox noctu. Daily Man she Marries, She has been wed to Day; If till Night she tarries, She thinks she does delay. When they go to Bed, they Clamber not up to them, as we do, but throw themselves on the Ground after Carpets are laid, and a Bed made in a Summer-House in some Garden, left open in Sum∣mer-time, or else on the Tablets upon the Tops of their Houses; where, if they observe any peeping upon them, or their Wives, an Arrow drawn up to the head is let fly; nor does any blame the Marks-man when he hits. In Winter-time they keep all close. If a Curtezan conceive,Their Chil∣dren how provided for. and it proves a Girl, she is registred of her Mothers Profession; if a Son, she fixes it on some Father. There are costly Whores in this City, who will demand an hun∣dred Thomands for one Nights Dalliance, and expect a Treat besides of half the price; these while their Wit and Beauty last, outshine the Ladies of the highest Potentate, and brave it through the Town with an Attendance superior to the wealthiest. In their Lyings in,Lyings in, and Purifyings. it is common for the ordinary Peoples Wives to meet together to assist the Woman that Cries out: And the Mo∣ther, and the Babe, are purified by washing in their Hummums after forty Days.
When their Husbands dye they make great Lamentations; the Widows howling with their Neighbours and Relations, crying out, Who will take care for us,Widows reckoned Mutes. who will defend the Cause of the Widow and the Fatherless; after the Custom of the Hebrews, where in Sa∣cred Scripture they are termed Mutes, because there is none to plead for them; and if by chance they offer to urge any thing for themselves, no one regards their Complaints: For three Days after their Kindred's Death they change not their Garments; the Men shave not their Heads, or trim their Beards; the Women shear their Heads, vow Widowhood, and go carelesly Clad, only in a Sheet or mean Dress. The Persians,Sodomy. when they let go their Modesty, put no bounds to their lascivious Desires, not being content with Natural Inclinati∣ons, outdo the Sensuality of the hottest Beasts, who never attempt on other than the Females of their own Species; but these, oh shame! covet Boys as much as Women; and to speak an horrid Truth, are too guilty of Buggering other Creatures; these poor Children thus abused are sad Spectacles, looking diseased, and are not long liv'd. So wholly bent on Pleasures are these People,Addicted to Pleasures. that to grow Rich, be saluted with Honour, appear magnificently, be account∣ed Noble and speciously Great, to Play, to Ride on Horseback with Gold Trappings on Prancing Steeds, to feast Day and Night, they will venture on any Evil Enterprize, and sell themselves to any Mischief, well knowing without Money they can arrive at none of these, so that they are intent to get it right or wrong: There∣fore neither in Court, Camp, or in Judicature, is there catching any thing without a Golden Hook; no one sues in forma pauperis, Justice is not to be had without a Bribe; and if you Appeal to Caesar, he is deaf, if you knock not at the Door with the Showre that opened the way to Danae's close Confiners. On the other hand, commit any Wickedness, cast but a Golden Mist before the Chief Ministers, and the King shall know nothing of it; but if the Clamour of the Subject force a Magless, the Case is not represented fairly to the Emperor, but as a Blend they mix Falsities with Truth. Atque ita mentuntur, sic veris falsa remiscent. No Court in the World is fuller of Corruption than the Persian Court,Corruptness of the Cour∣tiers. whereupon the Crowd is sent away no better satisfied than it came; which causes ill Blood, a perpetual Reproach to the King, and if they durst, Insurrections, which whether Fear, or want of Courage restrain them, or the innate Fidelity and Passive Obedience on the formerly mentioned grounds, I shall not determine: Since at this time they seem to be more provoked by the Supiness of the Emperor, and the Ill Management of the Government, and the general out-cry of the Mo∣bile; but yet, even in this Confusion I do not perceive a Propensity to Rebellion, though they refrain not from open Curses, especially the Womenkind, who are set on by the Men to bellow their Oppres∣sions, which they roar at the Palace Gates, by Troops of Women,
in a Tumultuous manner some Weeks together; to which Vocal Weapons they are sparing. When as should the Men come in a Riot,Women made use on to com∣plain. they would handle them otherwise; which is the reason they thrust them on to complain, when they dare not speak their own Grievances, it being not held manly to fight with a Woman. And hence it comes to pass that the Law loses its Authority,The Persian places Felicity in Prosperity. and the Subject becomes a Prey to the Avarice and Violence of the Ma∣gistrate; and while the one grows exorbitantly Rich, the other be∣comes miserably Poor, through an unproportionable distribution; and by these Exactions is verified the Proverb, Homo homini Lupus; One Man devours another more cruelly than a Wolf. Nor is it pos∣sible for one that is Poor ever to rise without a Miracle, there being no Mean between extreme Poverty and the height of Wealth or Honour, which makes the Great ones truly Great, while the deject∣ed Wretches have no other Sanctuary than to appear under the shel∣ter of the Mighty; and to be reckoned of their Retinue is all the Favour to be expected in recompense for the most notorious Injury; which would augment the Affliction of a Generous Spirit, to follow on Foot the exalted Extortioner that has undone him, who climbed over others Ruin to be eminently Rich, and is still upheld by their Downfall. And this must ever be the state of those Kingdoms where Goodness is banished, and Virtue must give place to Vice; and this unavoidably happens where ever the Mahometan Religion takes place; which makes a voluptuous Life the only Benediction both on Earth and in their Heaven; and this squares more peculiarly with the Climat and the Temper of the Persians, than any other Nation un∣der the cope of Heaven: For since Misfortunes are looked on as the most grievous Curses, they all aim either to be, or to be thought Properous; whence it is not only indecent, but unhappy to walk on Foot out of Necessity; and he that comes abroad with the finest Palfry, the richest Accoutrements, the most Followers, with Foot∣men with Bells at their Wastes, Feathers in their Turbats, Em∣broidered Horse-Cloaths over their Shoulders, delicately wrought Saddles for War and Housings, Golden Bridles, Breast-Plates and Cruppers often beset with Precious Stones; has his Golden Headed Coleon behind him magnificently carried, with change of Vests in rich Buy-Shoes or Portmantles; he is the Favourite of Heaven and the Darling of Fortune, is courted by all, and esteemed the chief care of Providence. Thus mightily are the gaudy Bubbles of For∣tune admired here; on which account to be most Impious is most emulated, since to arrive at these Ends there is no other method than what has already been related. And thus Equipped they appear in their Martial Camps,Their Recrea∣tions and Ex∣ercises. not to out-do, but out-shine each other, where they have Obelisks for Goals, where they try their Steeds, not giving them a long Race, but short and swift; they, as most of the East do, Ride short, and stop with a Jerk; for which, as has been said in India, their Curbs are useful, that on a motion they Obey; otherwise they (being placed with a sharp Cone, in a round Ring pointing on the Tongue,) so pierce it that it Bleeds as if struck with a Fleme; here they Gerede,
or cast Darts, play with Balls on Rackets, bringing their Steeds to observe the Rebound; here they train their Hawks to fly at Crows, and Crows to fly at Sparrows: Here they Exercise among themselves what the King requires to be presented before him; and the Nobility learn to Shoot backward, as the Parthians, their Predecessors, were wont, and in that were dreaded more on flight than when they stood to it; nor is this the only Skill they pretend to with Bows and Ar∣rows, but Shoot at Marks not far distant, though they seldom pra∣ctise Rovers. On these Sands the Anointed Wrestler keeps himself in Breath, and the undaunted Fencer bares his Livid Arm; Rams are set against Rams, and against Bulls, Lions, &c. and against all, our English Mastiffs, who carry the Prize from the Combatants, when they Celebrate the Boetian Games. They are frequent Huntsmen:They Hunt a long time to∣gether. When they go out on this sport they return not in a Days time, as we do, but remove from place to place, where Game is to be had; take with them their Wives and Family, and Travel in state with full prepared Tables, and act the Bacchinals like Alexander; for which purpose they have their Tents and close Carriages, their Gogdans for Provisions; they carry also Bulgar-Hides, which they form into Tanks to Bathe themselves, and Women, in their Progress; for drinking Cups they have both Gold and Silver ones, as also large Flasks of that Metal; besides Earthen Jars for Water, and Puckeries, which are porous Vessels to keep their Liquor Cool. Upon their Return,How Treated on their re∣turn. or Entrance of any Magistrate into any great Town, or City, all of any Quality meet them at some Garden, a Pharsang off, with led Horses, Musick, and Banquets, to Congra∣tulate their Arrival, which is also done upon their Departure, with a Train of Servants, and especially those bearing their Tobacco-Ves∣sels, Tea, and Coffee-Pots; which, with hot Rose-Water, and Su∣gar-Candy, is their preparatory Fore runner to a splendid Entertain∣ment; which they are sure to have at the return to their Palaces, where they Treat like Persians. Alighting they are introduced the Guest-Chamber,Immoderate in their Feast∣ing. all bestrewed with Flowers and sweet Herbs, besides perfumed with Odoriferous Gums, or the Aloes Wood alone, or other resiny Matters made into Candles, and in Massy Silver Fuming-Pots very costly and delicate; leaving their Slippers where they begin to tread on Carpets; they take their Seats on Susanees, a rich Tapestry of Needle-Work that Borders the Carpets, behind which are placed huge Velvet Bolsters, before them Spitting Pots to void their Spittle in when they Smoak Tobacco, or Eat Pawn; these Rooms are large and airy, and open fold∣ing Windows on every side, where being placed they bring their Coloons; after which they Welcome you by a flood of Rose-Water, or other Compound Water poured on your Head and Beard, then they bring in, in neat Voiders, China Plates of Fruit, as Pistachia's, Walnuts, Almonds, Haslenuts, Grapes, Prunes, Prunello's, Apri∣cots Dried, and Sweatmeats Wet and Dry of all sorts, amidst whereof they fill out Coffee, Tea, and Hot Rose-Water, and all the while have Mimicks, Stage-Players, and Dancers to divert, between
whose Interludes is mixed the Custom, as ancient as Nebuchadnezzar, of certain Wife en repeating Verses in their Praise, or reading Mo∣numents of Antiquity, which continues till Victuals are brought in, and the Cloath spread on the Carpets, every one keeping their places; First, Water being brought in great Silver Basons and Ewers to Wash, the Courses are ushered in with loud Musick, and the Table being filled, the Servitors are placed so as to furnish every one with Plates of the several Varieties, which they place before each, and give them long Wheaten Cakes, both for Napkins, Trencher, and Bread, and sometimes thin Pancakes made of Rice; though Boiled Rice serves usually for Bread, which they mix with their Soops and Pottage. The usual Drink is Sherbet, made of Water, Juice of Lemmons, and Ambergreece, which they drink out of long thin Wooden Spoons, wherewith they lade it out of their Bowls. The most admired Dainty, wherewith they stuff themselves, is Pullow, whereof they will sill themselves up to the Throat and re∣ceive no hurt, it being so well prepared for the Stomach. After they have Eaten well, and the Cloath is removed, they Wash again. And then most of them will freely take off their Bowls of Wine, (which is brought to each by their several Servants) most of Silver, some of Gold, which we call a Toss, and is made like a Wooden Dish, purposely so shap'd for convenient Carriage, at the bottom of their Coosdans placing their Gurgulets upon it, which Coosdan is a Case made neatly of Rattans or Canes, covered with a Coverlet of Scarlet, Bordered with Silk for Shew as well as to keep the Dust off. When they have tired themselves with Feasting (which is not suddenly) as they depart, they return Thanks, by Inviting every one in course to an Entertainment of the like nature, where they strive to outdo each other. Thus extravagantly Luxurious and im∣moderately Profuse are they in their great Feasts, stately Dining-Rooms, magnificent Gardens, and Water-Courses; exceeding the Roman Voluptuousness, of whose Prodigality Seneca. Turpis libido (scilicet) potens venere Luxuria victrix, orbis immensas opes, Jampridem avaris manibus ut perdat, rapit. Active in Lustful Fires, they heap up stores, To waste in Riot, and to spend on Whores. Seize all the World by Avaritious Hands, Get to consume on Prodigal Commands. In their Weddings, Childbearings, Circumcisions and Purifying Ban∣quets, they make great Revellings, Fireworks and Rejoycings Night and Day for a Month together, that it is troublesome living in great Cities by reason of their Nocturnal Perambulations, when they Shoot, Shout, and make great Acclamations, with hideous thundring Ket∣tle Drums and Trumpets; and however obscure they live at other times, they are wholly taken up in Expences at these Times, and
sometimes forgetting the main Chance, they say out all, and more, to imitate Men of Fame. But the greatest Festivities are injoined by the Church,Their Religi∣ous Feasts. some whereof are common to the Turks and Persians, others belong only to the Persian Sect; as those in the end of their great Fast of the Ramzan, and that of Imaum Osseen, No Rose, when the Caliph, or Archflamen, or one for him, should sacrifice a Ram in memory of that intangled in the Thickets, which Abraham offered up an Holo∣caust instead of his Son Isaac, and these are equally observed by each. When the Emperor, seating himself on his Throne, arrayed in his Royal Robes, that he might display all the Wealth and Glory of the Empire both to the Plebeans and Potentates, and ought after the Pri∣mitive Institution to make a Feast for all the Princes and his Servants, the Power of Persia, the Nobles and Prefects of Provinces, for many days together: By placing Golden Vessels at the Gates of his Palace for the Lions and strange Beasts to drink out of, as large Golden Jarrs for Passengers; where, upon the frequent expectation of their Liege Lord, and the Shews and Pastimes represented before him on these Days, great Numbers of People flocked into the Hypodrome, where the Presence of the King was as eagerly desired, as Caesar's Advent was welcomed by Martial. Phosphore redde diem; cur gaudia nostra moreris, Caesare venturo? Phosphore redde diem. But as if nothing were owing either to the Affections of the Vulgar, or to Honest Report, he not only neglects the Sports and Games, but by contracting new Impieties, loosens the very Bonds by which the Subjects Faith are tied; for he being commonly drunk on these Solem∣nities within doors, with his Pimps and Panders comes abroad like a Royster, neither regarding the Temple, or the Grandure of the Mageless: For on No Rose, the First Day of the Year, which is the Tenth of March, he being attended by the Great Council, should re∣ceive the Homage of all his Great Slaves, and they should pay their Feuditory Tributes, for which he should return them Colluts, or Robes of Honour, either by themselves or Substitutes, and at the same time entertain them Royally; where, besides the usual Sports, on this Day there is a peculiar Diversion of the Shotters or Footmen, begun at Two or Three in the Morning, and held for Twelve Hours; in which space the Shotter that is appointed, fetches Twelve Small Streamers placed a Pharsang distant from the Starting-Post, which is before the Palace-Gate, which reckoning four Miles to a Pharsang, is four times Twelve, or Forty eight Miles backwards and forwards, but at a modest computation it is full Three Miles that they run, and then it will amount to Seventy two Miles that they run in Twelve hours time; which I once saw performed at the Caun of Bunder's (who all over the Realm imitate the Emperor on this Day) on the Sand along the Sea-side, we being there at the Vernal Aequi∣nox, when this is performed.
He sets out with his Fellows, who by Turns wait his return, and are obliged to attend him,Foot-racing. both to make way, and to fan him in his passage, and to be ready with Towels to rub the Sweat off his Body: Two or three hours before Noon the Prime Nobility gather to re∣ceive the King's Commands; some to be Spectators, others to act afore the Mageless; where at the appearance of the Shotter, with his Streamer in his Hand, the loud Musick proclaims his coming: When he has fetched the last, the King has notice, and all with him ascend∣ing their Steeds, wait on the Emperor, who meeting him, the Shotter runs chearfully afore his Horse, and holds his Horse till he alights, and prostrate before him, delivers the Streamer, for which, after he is cleansed, and the Mageless is seated, he is brought before the Emperor of the Suffees, clothed with nothing more than his running Breeches, and then a Rich Vest is thrown over him, and receives a Gratuity besides from the Suffee, whose Example all there present following, he is plentifully rewarded, and made Chief Shotter for the ensuing Year: After the Shotter's Race is over, the Suffee calls all his No∣bles to a Sumptuous Feast, which concludes with demonstrations of Excessive Joy. At the beginning of April they have a proper Feast of their own, where the Emperor is to give the People of Suffahaun a Camel to be slain, which they lead about the Streets with a confused Noise, be∣ing dressed very fine with Flowers and Garlands for the Altar; and being brought to the Priest, he cuts the Throat, and burns the En∣trails, distributing to each Principal Ward of the City the several Quarters to be eaten publickly after they are roasted, the Head only being presented to an Old Sybil, the only Relict of the Tribe to which it appertains by right, which she preserves till next Year, and then produces it at the Feast, for which she has a setled Pension; and the Blood of the fresh slain is scrambled for to besmear their Lin∣tels and Side-posts, signing them with the Sign of the Cross: What relation it has to the Passover ordained to the Jews, I could never learn from them; but they say it is to keep their Houses free from Hobgoblins and Evil Spirits: It is called Aede Corboon. About December they observe a Feast for the happy Conjunction of Mahomet and Alli, known by Aede Chudeer. In January is the Commemoration of the Snares of the Ottoman intended against the Osmeran Family, Aede Bobba Shujawhundeen, which are ridiculous enough. They celebrate the New Moons with the rest of the Moors; and to speak fairly, they outdo others in Civility of Manners: Nor (to give them less than their due) are they behind-hand in ex∣erting their Valour where requisite,Their Valour, whence it proceeds. whether out of the opinion of Fatal Necessity, or an Innate Disposition, I know not, nor will I judge; but that of Lucan prevails with them. —A prima descendit origine Mundi Causarum series, atque omnia fata laborant; Si quidquam mutasse velis.—
Since the World's Frame at first began, All things in setled Order ran; What you'd change, should have been changed then. Friendly and Courteous Salutation is no where so much promoted as among the Persians,Their Urbani∣y. as if they had learned Cato's Prescript; wherefore I think it not impertinent to give you some Forms of their Address, and a Specimen of their good Behaviour; not that I would hereby pretend I understood the Language (for I confess, be∣yond the Discourse of Traffick, and for ordinary Occasions, I do not,) but rather to vindicate the Place, famous for so many Ages past, from the Barbarity of the rest of the Eastern Nations; and to shew that it has transmitted some of its Civility (though by ano∣ther Conveyance than the direct Ancestry) through the repeaed Alterations of Fortune, to the present Possessors, who were originally of a morose Extract; yet have they put off their Native Ferity, to comply with the over-ruling Influence of the Climate. For the very Plebeans in other Parts, surly and unconversable, are here Affable and Kind, not Rude and Unmannerly; where-ever you meet them, before you salute them, they accost you with Sa∣lam Aleekum, God's Peace be with you; and if you do the like to them, they resalute you, and bowing with their Hands across their Breast, return Aleekum Salam, God save you; approaching nigher, they Embrace with the Appellation of mi Sahab, my Friend, or more properly, my Lord; Cuddah ne gardin, God be propitious to you; in passant, they cry with some vehemence, Chehauldore; how fare you? to which they reply, Choukossee, at your Service; at Departure, Salamut basheet, Peace be your Companion; at Meeting, Nosajun Bashut, I am glad to see you; at Meals, Aupheat Bashut, much Good may it do you; if any fail the appointment after Invitation, or come late, being called, they say Ja Shamau collee booth pishee eauroon, Your Seat is empty among so many good Friends; and what I wonder at more, many Words in use among the High Dutch, are in Common Discourse with them, as Fader signifies Father; Moder, Mother; Broder, Brother; bad, beeter, and innumerable of the like sort; which not only confirms their being Scythians, but corroborates the Learned Antiquary, Mr. She∣ringham's Opinion of Woden, and his Asas or Asiaticks, (Asa being a Common Name among the Parsys in India and Gaurs here) and of our being derived from them, as appears in his Anglorum Gentis Origine. The Courtiers think the Turkish Language more commanding, and therefore addict themselves to that Speech, which is neither so Polite or Verbose, but more Gutteral; the present Dialect of the Persians is much more smooth and neat, yet not agreeable with the old Character, as may appear by our Polyglot Bible, which they understand no more than they do Welch. But to perfect their Urbanity; when they Encounter, they pluck not off their Caps, but with a pleasing Modesty bow their Heads; within Doors they bare their Feet by pulling off their Shoes,
which they leave at the Entrance upon the Bucchanno's; not that they salute thereby, but out of Cleanliness to preserve their Carpets, from which when they descend, their Servants stand ready to help them to their Shoes, and while they are seated, glory to be incircled with Servitors; nor do they presume afore their Betters to use any other Seat than their Heels, till they have License to sit at ease. They are formal in the matter of going First, and shall protract the Ceremony into a tedious Contention, and generally are pressed hard to Precedency, and will strain a Courtesy to Strangers. The Custom of carrying Aves one to another,The Custom of carrying Aves. is not Obsolete. Prima Salutantes atque altera continet hora. No more than among Martial's Parasites, the very Slaves Reveren∣cing the Threshold of their Lord's Doors; so extravagant are they of their Courtesies, with an hundred such good Morrows; but if any weighty thing be to be presented, it is with an eye to Profit. However,Their Virtues. not to exempt them from all good Inclinations, could we excommunicate Self-Praise, Philautia, from their Pious Acts, we might discern some noble Deeds for which they merit to be extolled, as the Building of Temples, Publick Hospitals for Travellers, (not for Sick or Wounded) which are the Caravan Seraws, Colleges, Bridges, Fountains, plaining Mountains, and raising Vallies, for to facilitate the Way for long and troublesome Journies. The Colleges that are not of Royal Foundations, are Adjuncts to the Prophets Tombs, or Built in Commemoration of some Noble Warrior; to be Buried near which, is the desire of these Martis A∣lumni, as much as for Catholicks to be Buried in St. Francis his Ha∣bit; which Sepulchres are, as it were, Triumphant Arches, after the Figures of their Mosques, in the middle whereof is deposited the Corps in a Stone Tomb, like a Chest, or Coffin, with Four Golden or Silver Apples, at each Corner One, commonly covered with a Purple wrought Pall, with curious Artifice; over head hang Stream∣ers and Banners, and it is Railed with Iron Rails, in which are Lamps always Burning; nor do any enter with their Shoes on, the Floor being Matted, or spread with Carpets; and if a Mullah attends, he goes to Prayers for the Quiet of the deceased Soul. They never Bury in the Church, and seldom in the City; they per∣mit Representations of Lions or Tigers, on Grave-Stones, as has been said, to express a Man taken away in the prime of his Age; have Inscriptions and Places for Incense; they always lay the Body North and South, in opposition to us Christians, who Bury our Dead East and West; agreeing in most things with the other Mahometans. To this Magnificence and Civility of Temper, we may add a Third Virtue, their Fidelity to their Princes. For which Excellencies they seem to be beholden to the pureness of their Air; for it is Hot and Dry for the most part, whereby their Hearts are more firm and solid, which makes them more constant and resolute, they being of a more refined Head than the other Easterns, their Brain being more spirituous and clear.
To which Three Graces, notwithstanding, there are a Trine Aspect of Vices; to Magnificence, Oppression and Covetousness; to Munificence,Vices. Intemperance and Lust; to Fidelity, Jealousy and Revenge. The Philosophers agree not with Galen,How far be∣holden to Constitution of Body and Air. ; that the Body suffers from the Affections of the Mind; they saying, That they depend not on the Texture of the Body, but are Conjoined with it; yet Experience teaches, That as often as the Mind is Troubled, the Spirits are variously Agitated, which move the Blood and put it on a Fret, whereby the Heart is Con∣vulsed, and many times the whole Frame of the Body is put out of Order. And therefore is it necessary,Their Diet. that to the excellency of the Air, and disposition of the Body, a requisite Diet, as well for Meat as Drink, should correspond with both; and indeed Nature seems to have provided them with both, for those they desire are these: Cabob is Rostmeat on Skewers,Cabob. cut in little round pieces no bigger than a Sixpence, and Ginger and Garlick put between each. Thus sparingly do they feed on Flesh alone, ordered after this manner; and if at any time they intend a Meal thereon, they have it well Boiled, Baked, Fried, or Stewed, or made into Pullow; which is a general Mess, as frequent with them as a good substantial piece of Beef is with us, and reckoned their standing Dish; which is made either of Flesh, Fish, or Fowl, as the Indian Moors do; but the best is made of the fattest Meat, for which the pondrous Tails of Suet (which their Sheep bear) is most coveted, in regard it saves Butter. To make Pullow,Pullow. the Meat is first Boiled to Rags, and the Broth or Liquor being strained, it is left to drain, while they Boil the Rice in the same; which being tender, and the aqueous parts evaporating, the Juice and Gravy incorporates with the Rice, which is Boiled almost dry; then they put in the Meat again with Spice, and at last as much Butter as is necessary, so that it becomes not too Greesy or Of∣fensive, either to the Sight or Taste; and it is then Boiled enough when it is fit to be made into Gobbets, not slabby, but each Corn of Rice is swelled and filled, not burst into Pulp; and then with Mango or other Achar, they will devour whole Handfuls (for Spoons are not in use, unless to drink Sherbet with, they mixing their Pottage with dry Rice, and cramming themselves with their Fingers) and never Surfeit; always taking this for a Rule, never to Drink till they are satisfied, it causing them otherwise to swell too soon; and then they will Eat as much at a Meal, as an Horse or Mule can of Barly. Baked Meat they call Dumpoke,Dumpoke. which is dressed with sweet Herbs and Butter, with whose Gravy they swallow Rice dry Boiled. Their Stews are also made of Cooling Fruits,Stews. as Cucumbers, Gourds, &c. which they mingle Rice with. But the bulk of their Diet consists of the Fruits of the Teeming Earth, sowre Milk, with soft Cheese, Grapes and Wheaten Bread. They have a kind of Cooling Musilage of Seeds, like Psyllium; in the Maritime parts they use Dates instead of Bread, or Bread made Pancake Fashion of Rice.
They have a Dish they call Cookoo Challow, which is dry Rice and a Fritter of Eggs, Herbs, and Fishes, They seldom Eat fresh Butter,Cookoo Chal∣low. and as seldom Beefs Flesh; the Poor near the Sea live only on Fish and Dates; the Rich live plenti∣fully every where. No Country is more taken with Sweetmeats,No good Con∣fections. not even the Lusi∣tanians; wherefore Sugar is a good Commodity from India, for Persia produces none of its own; they are not such Confectioners, not∣withstanding, as might be expected from so constant a desire and practice; the chief reason I can impute it to is Custom, which in every thing they are very tenacious of. They mightily covet cool things to the Palat, wherefore they mix Snow, or dissolve Ice in their Water, Wine, or Sherbets. Out of Taylets of Willows they make a compound Cool-Water, very sweet smelling and refreshing. Sherbets are made of almost all Tart pleasing Fruits as the Juice of Pomegranets, Lemmons, Citrons, Oranges, Prunella's, which are to be bought in the Markets. Thus by Diet, as well as Air, they procure not only a firmness of Constitution, but Properness and Tallness of Body, for none excel them either for Beauty or Stature. But before we part with this Subject, since they are not so starch'd and precisely bent as the more rigorous Mahometans, we may be ac∣quainted with their constant course of Eating, and lie down with them at Meals, and receive a good Welcome. Their Breakfast is begun with Melons, Cucumbers, Gourds, Grapes, or other Fruits, as Peaches, Apricots, Cherries, or the like, with soft Cheese or Butter-Milk; which is about Ten in the Morning, from which time they abstain from all manner of Food (I mean when they observe their set Meals till near Sun-set) when they feed heartily on Flesh, or any other hot Meats, and enlarge sometimes till Midnight. They observe the same usage for going to Stool as the other Easterns, washing away the Filth with the Left hand, for no other cause than that they feed themselves with the Right. They sit down to make Water, but whether that way empties the Bladder better I leave to conjecture; though their continual sit∣ting within doors with their Legs up to their Bellies helps digestion, is a thing beyond dispute. That the Persians never Spit,The Persians Spit as much as other Peo∣ple. I cannot allow to be true, since they Smoak Tobacco in their most solemn Assemblies, and for that purpose we have already shewed they are provided with Spitting-Pots, or Pigdans; but since Xenophon relateth it in the First Paedia Cyri, as a reproach for any to Spit in Company, and brings it as an argument of Gluttony, or Laziness, Nunquam sputant inconventu Per∣sae, quia maximum ignominioe argumentum, quasi indicaret eos aut plus cibi, quam par esset sumere, aut nullis corporis exercitationibus uti; I must add, that I find them to indulge both; nor are they ashamed to Carouse or Eat lustily, but on the contrary Gormandize to excess; there is therefore nothing but the Thinness of the Air, expressing their super∣fluous Humours can bespeak this Virtue; nor indeed do I find them differ much in that point from other Nations.
To conclude then; to the Endowments of Mind, they have an Happiness of Body,Their Happi∣ness of Body. through the extraordinary Fineness of Air, which by a suitableness of Food nourishes a well-mix'd Temper both of Soul and Body; for as they have the start in the first, so they sur∣pass all their Neighbours in the latter, being not only Ingenuous and Free, but Fair, Tall, and Comely, with a Stock of Health not easily to be impaired, unless violent Debauchery root up the Stabi∣lity they enjoy by Nature. Thus having run through their Distributive Justice,Commutative Justice. their Religion, and Morality, their several Rites, Usages, and Ceremonies; it re∣mains then, as we have declared their Wealth and Merchandize, so we should shut up all with their Commutative or Trading Justice, which keeps an Arithmetical Proportion; as buying, selling, letting, and hiring. The Valuation of every thing is made either by Num∣ber, Weight, or Measure: Number is the same, and common to all People, Tongues, and Nations; but Weight and Measure are not so, there being a great Variety of these, and every Country has a Sta∣tutable Account of Weight and Measure after their own form. All things in Persia are put into Balance, but Silk woven and Cloath; wherefore they weigh all Liquids, as well as Wood, Straw, and Metals; and measure by the Cobit, or Cubit, what comes from the Loom, even their most fine Carpets. Which brings us to examine their Weights, Measures, and Coins, or Current Money.   l.   A Maund Shaw is 12 Five Eighths. A Maund Taberez 06 and a half. Charack 01 and a quarter. Miscolle. Their lowest Weight is a Miscolle; nearest our Ounce: whereof, 6 make an Ounce. 96 make a Pound. 600 make a Maund Tab. 1200 make a Maund Shaw, or the King's Maund. The King's Cobit consists of Inches,—36 The Carpet Cobit is little more than half the King's, it being but—18—¼ Or nighest four Thirds of our Yard. The Money which passes is a Golden Venetian, equivalent to our Angel. And a Turkish Abrahmee, of inferior Value. The one esteemed at 29 Shahees, and is called Shekre. The other but at 27 and is called Miseree.
Money coined by Shaw Abas in Silver, has Persian Characters impressed, the highest worth Five Abasses, which is half'd, and then it is worth Two and an half, which is Two-pence more than our Half-Crown; or—2 s.—8 d. A single Abassee is—1—4 Which amounts to Sixteen of our Pennies, intrinsick Value. Which Abassee makes two Mamoodies,—0—8 Or two Eightpenny Pieces,—0—8 A Mamoody is two Shahees,—0—4 A Shahee is Four Pence, or equal to our Groat,—0—4 Fifty Abassees make a Thomand,—3 l.—6 s.—8 d. Which is only Imaginary, there being no such Coin, but is to them to reckon by, as Pounds are to us, which we suppose to be Twenty Shillings; and their Thomand is valued at Three Pounds and a Noble, or Six and Eightpence in English Account. Brass Money with Characters, Are a Goss, ten whereof compose a Shahee. A Gosbeege, five of which go to a Shahee. Four Goss make one Bistree. And 100 Deniers one Mamoody. And 20 Pise one Shahee: Both which are Nominal, not Real. Geographical Measures, Are the Persian Stathmus, answering our Perch: And Parasang, now Pharsang, which contains an Hundred and thirty Stathmi, or 3000 Paces; three of their Paces make a Cobit Shaw, in way of Mensuration. The last thing to be measured is Time, which accords with that which has been delivered in India.
A FARTHER Discovery of India. LETTER VI. CHAP. I. Takes Notice of Broach; the Change of Governors at Surat; intestine Broils of the Empire; Rencounters of the English; and Portentous Accidents of this Year. SIR, MY last I had thought to have presented you with my own hands,Chap. I. but being still detained, I must persist to give you farther Trouble. Forty Course Northward of Surat lies Broach; it therefore being esteemed in relation to the English as a Branch of this Factory, up∣on any one of our Merchants being ill, they can easily and suddenly send a Messenger for Assistance; which gave me opportunity of see∣ing that City, soon after I had returned with the President to Surat. The Way thither is twofold, either by Sea or Land; the first, from Swally-hole,The Author sent for to Broach. makes an easy Passage up that Creek, or rather Arm of the Sea, to Broach River's Mouth, into which the River empties its self: The latter is measured over a spacious Plain, and is travelled either by Coach or on Horseback, both which I had for my Conveyance, together with the Attendance of a good Guard of the Company's Peons, because of frequent Robberies hereabouts. Going out by Broach-Gate, we fell into a notable beaten Way; Hoc iter manifesta rotae vestigia cernes. Contrary to whatever we found in any Place of Persia,Different Modes of tra∣velling in In∣dia, from that of Persia. where are neither Carts, Coaches, or Wains: There we sel∣dom meet any to turn us out of our Way; here the Roads are pester'd with Caphalaes of Oxen, Camels, and Bufolaes, with heavy Waggons drawn by Teams of Oxen, yok'd Eight, some∣times a Dozen or Sixteen times double, bringing and carrying Goods of all sorts: There with Guides, here with Guards, for fear of Thieves descending from the Mountains, or lying in Ambuscado among the
Thickets:Letter VI. There they journey at all Seasons, secure from Weather or Assaults; here they must observe the set times, and move with a good Force, both to defend them from their own Armies, and the Insults of Outlaws: Here are no Caravans or Inns to shut them in a-nights, for then is their time of travelling; and when they rest, if they have no Tents, they must shelter themselves under shady Trees, or sometimes great Tombs in the Highways, unless they happen on a Chowkre, i. e. a Shed, where the Customer keeps a Watch to take Custom: Yet good Rivers are more often found here than there; and where they are deficient, they want not great Tanks or Ponds of Rain-Water mostly uncover'd and open to the Heavens, or else deep Wells many Fathom under Ground, with stately Stone Stairs, Cool Apartments, and Grottoes, whence Oxen (as has been said) draw Water, with huge Leathern Buckets or Pots around a Wheel, to water their Gardens: But one thing you are more sure of here than there, and that is, Provisions of all sorts, in almost every Village, which stand thick hereabouts. The Coaches (unless those called the President's) and Carts are much alike,Their Chariots for travelling. the last being only stronger built with main Timber for strength. But it being no unpleasant spectacle to see one of these Chariots equipped, I cannot forbear giving it you; though I am sensible it cannot be so well express'd in writing, as the Sight is now comically represented unto me: Two large Milk-white Oxen are putting in to draw it, with circling Horns as black as a Coal, each Point tipped with Brass, from whence come Brass Chains across to the Headstall, which is all of Scarlet, and a Scarlet Collar to each, of Brass Bells, about their Necks, their flapping Ears snipped with Art, and from their Nostrils Bridles covered with Scarlet: The Cha∣riot it self is not swinging like ours, but fasten'd to the main Axle by neat Arches, which support a Foursquare Seat, which is inlaid with Ivory, or enriched as they please; at every Corner are turn'd Pillars, which make (by twisted Silk or Cotton Cords) the Sides, and support the Roof, covered with English Scarlet Cloth, and lin'd with Silk, with Party-colour'd Borders; in these they spread Car∣pets, and lay Bolsters to ride cross-legg'd, sometimes three or four in one: It is born on two Wheels only, such little ones as our Fore∣wheels are, and pinn'd on with a Wooden Arch, which serves to mount them: The Charioteer rides afore, a-straddle on the Beam that makes the Yoke for the Oxen, which is covered with Scarlet, and finely carved underneath; he carries a Goad instead of a Whip: In Winter (when they rarely stir) they have a Mumjuma, or Wax-Cloth to throw over it. Those for Journeying are something strong∣er than those for the Merchants to ride about the City, or to take the Air on; which with their nimble Oxen they will, when they meet in the Fields, run Races on, and contend for the Garland as much as for an Olympick Prize; which is a Diversion, To see a Cow gallop, as we say in scorn; but these not only pluck up their Heels apace, but are taught to amble, they often riding on them. Four-wheel'd Coaches, and to sit with the Legs hanging down, here are none, unless some few the Europe Merchants have, covered with Scarlet, and ill hung, being much like those sold at London to
please little Children with, only larger, and lin'd with Velvet; they having no Horses managed for the Coach, or any skill'd to drive them, so that these also are drawn by Oxen. Setting out about Sun rise,Bereaw. we passed by pleasant Inclosures spread far from the City, and flourishing Fields of Corn, and Plantations of Tobacco; we came Three Course, and then ferried over the River to Bereaw, a Village on the Bank of the other side; and at Persaw, two Course more, we broke our Fast; when it growing hot, we went but a Course and a half over another small River, before we baited under a Grove of Palms, or Toddy-Trees. When the Crows came hither to roost (which they did in great Flocks) we departed,Uncliseer. and at Midnight arrived at Vncliseer, the most Northern Extent of the Province of Guzerat (after the old ac∣count) where Custom is exacted, a Bar of Thorns being stuck into an high Gate, opposing such as are to pay at each end of the Town. Here we slept at our Broker's House, and at Sun-rise proceeded over delicate Medows to Broach-River, where round about it is all Cam∣paign; betwixt where, we met more than Five hundred Oxen laden with Salt for the Inland Countries; and betwixt Nine and Ten passed Broach River in a Boat; which is a broad, swift, and deep River, but choaked up with drifts of Sand, by reason of Rains forced into the very Channel, so that good Pilots are required, to steer clear of them; by whose directions good lusty Vessels are brought up to the City-Walls, where they are laden with Salt and Corn, to be carried to those Parts that are not so well furnished; here being excellent Wheat and good Cottons, of the Growth of this Country. It is likewise the Thoroughfare to Lhor,Broach-City. Dhely, Agra, and Ami∣davad, which is the chief City now of this Province, as well as of Guzerat; though Broach was the Metropolis when Cambaia was an Empire, which was before the Portugals were strong in these Parts, who made way for the Mogul to make an entire Conquest thereof: But as to what concerns its peculiar History, it was dismantled, and the Walls thrown down, for refusing Passage to Shaw Juan's Army, the Father to the present Auren Zeeb; which, as appears by the Ruins, were very strong of old, being doubly wall'd and trench'd, into which Nin Gates still lead the way; wherein was an Heathen Temple, now converted into a Mosque, looking over a rich Plain towards another, a Mile from the City, the Burying-place of their Emperors, where is entomb'd Mahmoody, the last of their Sultans; whose Progenitors being Arab Moors, were not sprung from the Hea∣then Rajahs on the Fall of Ramras, but laying hold on those Divisi∣ons, came in by Conquest, and were the occasion also of the Mogul-Tartars being called in to assist the oppressed, who made not only Resistance against Nishamshaw, one of the three Treasonable Con∣spirators against Ramras, but a long while defended themselves against the Mogul, till unfortunately broke at the Siege of Diu, Sul∣tan Badur being defeated both by Sea and Land; he left a tottering Kingdom to Mahmoody, his Successor, who was afterwards vanquish∣ed by the Mogul, near the place where he now lies buried.
Nor does this place now yield small Advantage to the Great Mo∣gul, Customs being paid here,What Profit to the Mogul. and here being a good Trade; though at present a stop be put thereto by Raja Jessinsins being lately dead, who set the present Emperor on his Throne, together with Emir Senda, and the Emperor's demanding the Treasury and Territories of the Widow; and her sending this Answer thereupon (the same almost in effect the Spartans were wont, among whom it was a say∣ing, Our Kingdoms extend as far as we can cast our Darts); so she re∣turned, Money I have none, but Swords good store: Which has brought all the Infidels into a Confederacy with her. And the Governor of this Province,Rana Jessensin defies the Em∣peror. but a late Convert, and a kin to her, begins to make Parties for the Advancement of one of the Sultans he has espoused, to Dethrone Auren Zeeb, as he did his Father Shaw Gehaun, by the Assistance of his Father Emir Gemla: Whereupon the Mogul is engaged over Head and Ears in Wars, cal∣ling the Caun of Brampore to his help. Which gives occasion to Seva Gi,The Confede∣rates make di∣sturbance. and a Neighbouring Raja, the one to move towards Surat, the other to set upon Brampore; which had put such a Consternation on the Merchants, that at my return they were all fled with their Wealth, Wives and Families, not think∣ing themselves safe within the Walls of Surat; which are now com∣pleat and able to beat off a strong Enemy, would they stand to it: But having formerly felt the hostile Cruelties of Seva Gi, besides the present Governor being a better Politician than Warrier, has hitherto only Mulcted the Banians to cast a Crust before this Wolf, and he still expecting the usual Tribute, descends now in hopes of the same Booty, Burning and Spoiling the Country about till they send him a Peace Offering; of which they having informed the Emperor now the Walls are built, that he Taxes them as much as before, and that his Musters are not half filled for the defence of the place, Morad Beck the present Auren Zeeb's Armour-Bearer in all his Wars, is coming with force both to displace him, and to succour the place: Who took Possession in the beginning of May,Morad Beck made Gover∣nor of Surat. and the late Go∣vernor parted well content with what he had gotten during his hold∣ing that Employment. This Exchange brought some Blows upon Seva Gi's pilfering Troops, being encountred before the latter end of the Month by the new Governor's Soldiers, not without loss, some Cartloads of the slain being brought hither to be Interred. The Rains are this year set in with that violence,Great Inun∣dations by the Rains. that the very Tops of the Trees hereabouts are all under Water; and since the great Mogul by reason of these interruptions cannot go on to overcome the Pagans, he wreaks his Malice by assessing them with heavy Polls, that are not of his Faith, under his Dominions; and those not able to pay, are compelled to turn Musselmen, so that they begin to desert in abundance.
The Ra being over, great preparations are making to go against the obsinate Pagans,The Mogul prepares to chstise the agans. the Emperor marching out of Juan Aboud 10000 strong, besides Ordnance, Elephants, and other Warlike provisions. At the beginning of September the Judda Fleet,The return o the Judda. Fleet. freighted with Religion and Pelf, made this Port, bringing Fifty Leques worth of Rupees in Cash, which is so many Hundred Thousand: It could not be improved till the Governor had released the Shroffs or Bankers, whom he had clapp'd up on pretence of Conspiring with the late Governor to Cheat the King, by Coining more Money than had been accounted for; but intercession being made by our President, they were set at liberty, for that our Company's Bullion was also coming from England, the Ships being arriv'd at Bombaim; and these are they that try and set the value on all Metals. Our English Ships had no sooner left the Port at Bombaim,Seva Seizes Henry Kenry. but that Seva Gi had posted several Hundred Men on Henry Kenry, a Rock in the Mouth of the Bay, on pretence of hindring the Syddy's Men go∣ing in and out; whereupon a small Bark, with an old Captain, be∣ing sent to demand their Business there, and he landing with his Men imprudently, were all cut off by the Barbarians. After this Action,The Barbari∣ans relieve it. Seven Prowes and one small Ship (the Pink) were ordered to lie at an Anchor and block up the Avenues before the Rock; which seen by the Barbarians on Shore, the first fair Wind they Manned out Forty Gallies, at whose approach our Prowes fled all but one, which was easily vanquished; and the Pink feign∣ed a fear likewise, whereat they being encouraged, Boarded her with a terrible noise, who cleared her Decks with her small shot, and blew some Hundreds up from her Prow and Poop, and then plying her great Guns, on those who were Board and Board, sunk Four of their Gallies, and put the rest to flight; which made them more afraid than at the first onset, being glad to bear away with the rest; however they in this skirmish succoured the Besieged with Five Boats laden with Provisions. A Month after they appeared again with all their strength,Their Fleet drove into Tull. and the English being recruited with another small Ship, engaged them, and gave them the rout, following them into their own Harbours, where they got hastily ashoar and drew up their Vessels under some small Guns planted to secure them. Whilst our Fleet were busy in this Enterprise, and left some Boats to shut up the River Tull, the Syddy came before Henry Kenry, where he lies with his Fleet; who, should he get Footing there, would be as bad a Thorn as Seva Gi. In the mean while that the Mogul Marched against the Rashpoots,The eldest Son of the Mo∣gul brings an Army to Brampore. his eldest Son came to Brampore with a mighty Army; for all that Seva spoils the Country at his pleasure, knowing well the Sultan will not break his Forces to hazard a Battel till he sees how his Father speeds, that he may be the better able to promote his own Interest for the Crown: On which score it is unhappy both for the Husbandman
and Merchant, who suffer on all hands, being pillaged and plundered without redress. This Year hath been filled with Two Portentous Calamities,Two Portents. the one Inland, a Shower of Blood for Twelve Hours; the other on the Sea-Coast, Mechlapatan being overturned by an Inundation, wherein Sixteen thousand Souls perished. And this being the sum of this Anniversary, I remain, Surat, December 31. 1679. Tours, J. F.
LETTER VII. CHAP. I. Continues the general Occurrences with Remarks. SIR, AMidst these Wars and rumours of Wars, we quietly lay down our Arms, and leave Seva Gi and the Syddy alone to contend for our stony piece of Ground on Henry Kenry;The Syddy and Seva left to contend for Henry Kenry. how much to our Honour or Reproach, may be gathered from the Language we have daily cast in our Teeth; Why Vaunts your Nation? What Victories have you atchieved? What has your Sword done? Who ever felt your Power? What do you possess? We see the Dutch outdo you; the Portugals have behaved them∣selves like Men;The English Reproach'd. every one runs you down; you can scarce keep Bombaim, which you got (as we know) not by your Valour, but Compact; And will you pretend to be Men of War, or Cope with our Princes? It's fitter for you to live on Merchandise and sub∣mit to us. But for all these Revilings Seva Gi makes them tremble here, forgetting that twice their Safety has been owing to us, from falling into the hands of that terrible Plunderer. For all which the Mogul continues a double Poll on the Heathens this Year,The Mogul in∣flicts a double Poll. and breaks down their Idolatrous Images where-ever he finds them; whereupon the Heathens begin to Worship in Dens and Caes, and solitary Places, being forbidden their open Celebrations. In the heat of all these Combustions,Seva Gi Dies. the Firebrand Seva Gi is called to pay the common Debt to Nature, he Expiring June 1. 1680. though after some time his Arms are carried on by his Son Sambu Gi Raja, whose first care was to solemnize his Father's Exequies with hellish and cruel Rites, after the barbarous Custom of these Princes, to Burn all that were grateful to them when living, to at∣tend them in the other state of Life; doubtless deriving it (which is more than alluding to) from the ancient Getae, their first Parents, and not theirs alone, but of all the World since the Deluge; who, as Nich. Damascen reports, Tauri gens Scythica una cum Regibus mortuis gratissimos quosque amicorum humare solent; and Solinus, as well as Pomponius Mela, says the same of their Wives, Funera Festa sunt, & veluti sacra cantu lusuque celebrantur, ne foeminis quidem segnis est ani∣mus, super mortuorum virorum corpora interfici simulque sepeliri votum eximium habent; & quia plures simul singulis nuptoe sunt cujus id sit decus apud judicaturos magno certamine affectant: Which here, though it be
said to be slain and buried with their Husbands,Letter VII. is the same as to be burned, since the Custom of burying also with their Husbands has been before declared, and still is maintained to be put in execution among these Heathen Princes. Seva Gi, while living, as he delignted in Fire and Sword, so he was sent out of the World with a numerous Company consumed in his Flames: Yet not such a Train as Raja Jessinsin had when he died, which was far greater, being a more Po∣tent, though less Barbarous Raja; but his Widow now holding out against the Mogul, though his Prime Lady, being then big with Child, was excused, and she still is preserved to bring up the Young Prince, whom they own for their Raja. Thus these two great Rajas being disposed of by Fate,Heats about Succession the Gen∣tiles seem to be under hatches (the Mogul for the present persecu∣ting them with the utmost severity and hatred) and the rather, for that the great Ministers of the deceased Seva Gi, were at variance about the Promotion of the Successor: Anna Gi Pundit, Chief Mini∣ster of State, setting up the Younger Son, and Morad Pundit decla∣ring for Sambu Gi, the Eldest; who after punishing his Opposers, was before the time fit for Expedition in the Low Countries, pro∣claimed Maw Raja, or the lawful Heir to his Father's Conquests. In this Interim the Mogul,The Moguls Eldest Son sent to the Post. jealous of his Eldest Son, had sent him to the Joualar or Post; but the next being commanded from their Kingdoms where they were fixed, the one Sultan Assum in Bengala, the other Sultan Massum in Aurengabad, have refused to resign, and stand upon defiance if they be farther moved; which Resentments the Father must smother a while, having been twice out this Year against the Infidels with a numerous Army, which have been as often distressed by Famine, and forced to return without engaging; the Rashpoots leading them into Straits, while they shift from Moun∣tain to Mountain, and studiously avoid coming to blows. The Emperor being returned to Court,Withdraws his Army. makes much of his young∣est Son, whom all give out he intends to raise to the Throne after his Death, whose Name is Sultan Eckbar; but at present being wholly bent on the Ruin and Extirpation of the Gentiles, he forbears to no∣minate him as yet. And to weaken the Conspirators, has order'd the Governor of Ami∣davad to join him, who being originally a Gentile, inclines to favour the Ranna, seeking to deliver her from the Tricks of the Intriguing Generals, who while she committed her Cause and her self to their Instructions, had almost ruined her, pretending they would represent her State to the Emperor in favour of her; who meaning nothing less than to delude her (while she bribed well), bid her not be soli∣citous, or take thought for her safety, till her chief City of Chetore was surprized; wherefore Mahmud Emir Caun, being of the Juncto, and privy to the Designs of the Court, discovers to the Emperor not only how the Generals Badur Caun and others had been treating with the Ranna, and that she was bought and sold by them, with the Mo∣ney she had sent to the Mogul himself to purchase Peace, which they had defrauded him of; but that also Cabul Caun of his Privy Coun∣cil, held Correspondence with Sultan Massum in Duccan; and that a
Within the Gate O. O. was Vdepor but ye way was so thick of Thorne trees that one man would have kept back a 00 A A fine Tower of ye foot of ye Hill B A Garden near the Tower C The first Gate D The Way E Another Gate F A Gate H A Gate I The Walls K Hills Trees and Thorne Woods M A four square Tower 7 Stories high being the entrance into the Pagod N The House of the Ranna in those days there were many brave▪ Pallaces and before the Tower a Rwer with a Bridge of 12 Aches also many fine Goardens: form er∣ly the King had to mntain it 6000 men in his Court of Guards and in the field 550 men
general Defection was likely to ensue, if he pursued to afflict the Heathens to a desperate Resistance. This Truth,An Example  Teason. though he stomach'd, he could not but own, yet resolved to dissemble it; and having seized Letters signed from Cabul Caun to Sultan Massum, to begin a Rebellion while his Father was in Asmire against the Ranna, (which were intercepted by the Advice or Cunning, I know not which, of Emir Caun), he found in what condition he was, and that it was time to withhold; but for a Re∣ward of the Treason designed, he order'd Cabul Caun immediately to be thrown down a steep Rock, as a Terror to the Conspirators. And now being returned,The Mogs Secretary's Reasons to disadne Emperor from his persecu∣ting the Hea∣thens. he hardly forbears uttering his Mind about his Intention to make all the Heathen Musselmen; and told his Chief Scrivan seriously one day, That he must lose his Place, unless he would be of his Religion: To which the subtle Heathen replied, Sahab, (i. e.) Sir, why will you do more than the Creator ever meant? You see hardly two Faces bear exactly the same Features: Look farther into the World, and behold the variety of Creatures! God has made Elephants, Tygres, Horses, Camels, Sheep, and Oxen, of different Figures, and Man of a more exalted Composure than the rest; whereas had the All-wise Disposer of Things thought it convenient, he might have rested contented in one only Form; but every one of these in their several Species glorifies their Maker: And so it has pleased God to permit Variety of Religions, by which Men worship and call upon him; nor can they go on in any one against his Will, to which whatever is contrary cannot continue; and till he make Men to be of one mind, in vain does any go about to compel what he has ingrafted in their hearts. This rational Discourse kept the Brachmin in his Office, but could not quite extin∣guish his conceived Prejudice against their Superstitions. Which he made appear, by giving Order to demolish all the Tem∣ples, and deface the Pagods his Army had possessed themselves of in Asmire, the Country of Raja Jessinsin; and chiefly Chetore felt in a few days the Overthrow of what many years could not entirely fi∣nish, most magnificent Marble Structures being levell'd to the ground, and laid prostrate to his Rage and Fury: A Draught of which City is her inserted, being transmitted by an English Gunner in that Ser∣vice, an Eye witness both of its Glory and Destruction. A Place by Site invincible, had not the Mogul's Commanders Treachery gained on the Faith of an easy Woman; who relying on their Me∣diation, neglected the Means of her own Security, there being nei∣ther Men nor Ammunition to oppose his Entry; whereupon they left all open, and retreated in disorder from the approaching Foe, to Places better provided, and inaccessible to any but those who are acquainted with the Recesses: Sullying hereby the brave Provoca∣tion that drew on her the Emperor's Arms; which she might have prevented at first by a mean Compliance, or more nobly now by a stout Resistance; rather than by a base Flight yield to the Will of a devouring Enemy, which not only keeps fast hold by a sufficient ece, but does despite to their Altars, and lays waste their Coun∣try Gods. This shews either want of Conduct, or an abject Spirit in the Rashpoots, or at least an irresolute Temper in the Ranna, who
did unadvisedly dare, when she was impotent, to maintain the Challenge; or, which is worse, she foolishly applied her sell to the Servants, when the Master was proud of her Fetters (she being a Rare Creature): So that the ground of this Quarrel, however hy∣pocritically gilded with an Holy War, is Love; as is demonstrable from the kind Offers left with the Plenipotentiaries towards an Ac∣commodation; unless the fordid and unfaithful humour of his Cauns should prompt him to clap up a Peace, that he might be more at leisure to ward himself, and free his Affairs from such corrupt Mini∣sters. What the Cause is, (though unknown yet,) that his Forces were withdrawn from following his good Fortune in the midst of his Career against the Infidels, appears a Riddle; if it be not to car∣ry on the Custom of this Empire, never to go through with any Conquest. This Year a Drought was feared,A Drought feared. which the Brachmins inter∣pret a Judgment for the Emperor's persecuting the Gentues; which whether it gain credit among all People, I cannot tell. But that Night and Day a mixed Multitude of all sorts run through the Streets of this City after the Brachmins carrying a Board with Earth upon their Bare-heads, and crying Bowo hege panne bes; on which old and young make the Chorus to the Precentor, sprinkling Wa∣ter and sowing Rice thereon, saying the same after the Brachmin, which in English is▪ God give us Water; and on this impending Affliction they are very charitable, and give great Largesses to the Poor. I should have concluded these Remarks here, had not a wonder∣ful Sign in the Heavens appeared to call for our Animadversion;A Comet. which beginning the Twentieth of November, disappeared not till the latter end of January, which enters on the next Year, that within the space of our Europe Fleet may bring you the Rise and Fall of the most prodigious Comet I ever was witness to; or it may be, the oldest Man alive: What makes me the more willing is, that I may have your Account over Land, whether it was visible in England, and what Observations our prying World have made thereon. Eleven degrees from the Earth South-East, a terrible flaing Torch was seen in the Skies in Capricorn, near the Head o Sagitta∣rius, darting it's Rays upwards to the Stars; at first not above two Ells in a small Stream, but day by day as it inclined to the Horizon, the Flame grew longer but slenderer; it rose first at Three in the Morning, and so later and later till the Sun out-shone it; and as if it had circled the Globe, at last it arose and set at Nights, after the Sun was down, when we beheld it W. N. W. which was on the Evening of the Twelfth of December, and about Seven at Night; at first no bigger than a man's hand from its coming forth of the Horizon, which thence arose with a mighty Fulgor or shining Light for more than Nine Degrees as big as a Rainbow, towards the highest part of the Hemisphere; or to speak more truly, like a Pillar of Fire, whose Basis, whether for its tardy rise, or the Clouds gathered about the Atmosphere, I could not discern till the Seven∣teenth, it setting about Nine of the Clock; but after that time it ascended above the Horizon, and passing the middle of the Hea∣vens
(which afore it seemed to enlighten after Seven) as it grew higher at lost of its Brightness and Splendour, but looked more fiery. January the 16th. 1680-81. it had attained its Zenith, when about the Noon of Night it vanished, and so by degrees at last it came to nothing. While this was reigning, several in the Hole and Buzzar at Swally, attested they saw two Moons; others of our English-men out a Hunting after Sun-set, saw an unusual Star of the bigness of the Sun, which must certainly be this fiery Ejaculation, striking obliquely upwards, being equally thick until its highest part had stretched its self into a Colum. It pointed towards the North, and whether it be Meteor, Comet, or Exhalation, it is certainly omi∣nous; and since they disclaim its Influence here, I wish it may not affect our Europe Kingdoms; for says Claudian, In caelo nunquam spectatum impune Cometam. In Heaven no Comet ever shin'd, Which was not grievous to Mankind. I am, J. F. The 25th. Jan. our Ships setting sail then from Swally-Hole. 1680-81. Yours,
LETTER VIII. CHAP. I. Concludes with my Return to ENGLAND. SIR, LEaving the Affairs of India in the posture I have ac∣quainted you;Let. VIII. I begin to think of returning to my Native Soil, the Fleet here being ready to set Sail for England; The Success, Captain Cooly Commander, Massenberg, Captain Gladock; Josiah, Captain Owen. At the same time Mr.Set Sall for England. Rolt the late President took his Passage in the Josiah: The Second of India, Mr. Chamberlane, in the Success as I took mine in the Massenberg: Mr. John Child being removed from the Government of Bombaim to the Presidency; which was the 19th. of January in the Year 1681-82. Till the Twelfth of February we directed a Southern Course, when about Two in the Morning the Moon suffered an Eclipse, and in half an hours time was almost totally hid, which endured till Four in the Morning: In Four or Five days after, about the Seventh Degree of North Latitude, we met the Sun coming to∣wards the North, and passed him to the Southward, when he often raised Vapours from the Sea to thicken the Air, and obscure his Face, which were as often poured down upon us, we having here uncertain Weather, sometime wet, sometime calm, though most an end, according to Varenius's Position, the Winds hold Easterly from the First of January till the End of July, as far as Ascension, and then turn Westerly: We met hereabouts with a Tree bestuck with Sea-Shells, which made us lie by a-nights for fear of the Chango's. And now dreadful Thunders cause the Sea to tremble,A Young Man lost Over-Board. and Lightnings fly through the Heavens in frightful Flashes; by reason of these alterations we went but slowly, being but Ten Degrees Southward of the Sun on the First of March, when a SouthEast Wind favoured us; with which sailing fortunately enough we were damped by a Mischance on one of our Young m who going up the Shrowds to loose the Top-Gallons, by the u advised letting go of some Bowling, was hoisted into the Main, ad
perished, the Ship having fresh Way, and the Boats lying on Board; they threw over several Planks and Vessels, but he made no sign of contending with the Waves, or Motion to save himself: Wherefore it was judged he had his bane against the Ships side, or some Gun in his Fall before ever he came at the Water; and in this hurry we were presently carried out of sight, so that he was left for desperate, and given over as lost. Before the Tenth of this Month,We Sail on the Backside of S. Lawrence. St. Brandon an Island on the East, and Diego Rais to the South, were passed by; as also St. Maurice kept lately by the Dutch, for no other end but to prevent others setling there; as Mascarenas, not far from it, by the French, for the same reason. The day after the Sun was possessed of the Aequi∣no, we made the Tropick of Capricorn, from whence the Platonists feign the Souls descend upon the Earth; but more truly it decla∣red that we drew near the Coasts of Africa; for having hitherto measured a Southern Way almost directly, we now incline towards the West, having not more Meridional distance from Joanna than Nine Degrees; but now we begin to bend our Course Westward, which we should do in a strait Line, were it not for St. Lawrence, the outside whereof our Navigators always pass by homeward bound, it lying Twelve Degrees South, to Six and Twenty and an half, which we suppose to be Three hundred Leagues West of us, though here being a strong Current to the West, itmakes our Judgment very unsteady; however to make the Cape, it is necessary to ele∣vate our Longitude more than our Latitude, which we did till we had made Fourteen Degrees West from our supposed Meridian of Joanna, whereby we reckon our selves clear of the Island Madagas∣car, or as the Portugals call it, St. Lawrence; when the East Wind failed us, and the West blew hard upon us, contrary to the assertion of the forementioned Author; the Winds, as we formerly Noted, beyond the Tropicks being unaccountable, for that they observe no Rule; and hereupon it happened we were so long beating about the Cape, and had been much longer, had we not made for the Shore; which we did about the middle of April, when it is high Winter in these parts, wherein we tried all Weathers, the worst of which were Calms, according to our English saying, Worse is a Winters Calm, By far than Summers Storm. Which we suffered till we got under the Shore,We Weather the Cape of Good Hope. whence we were assisted with fine Briezes, we falling first in with Cape d' Aguthas the low Land being bare and naked, the high Land, a Ridge of Mountains only gaping in one place, from which the Portugals gave it the name d' Agutha, or of the Needles: Fifteen Miles North∣ward of it lies the Promontory called Cape Falso, which we wea∣thered in the Morning, and afore Night did the like to the Cape of Good Hope, which in respect of the Heavenly Position is 34 Degrees and a half South Latitude, Longitude 47, in a strait Line from Joanna 1800 Leagues. The Marks of this Promontory are agreeable to Sellier's Atlas: It is inhabited by a Barbarous People
called Hottentots: As Nature designed their Looks deformed, so they are untractable in Manners, and harsh in their Voice; these wind the Guts of Beasts Excrements all about their Necks, both for Food and Ornament, consenting to what Job Ludolphus, Author of the Ethiopick Lexicon, relates of the Abassinians, under which Go∣vernment (if any they have) this Region must be comprehend∣ed, who says, they prefer the Meat digested in the Maws of Beasts, before the best Sallads, supposing those Animals better at distin∣guishing the good Plants from bad, than Men. Here in Soldania Bay the Dutch have a strong Fort, for the same purpose we keep St. Helena, to refresh and water our Fleet on their return home; but these touch here both going and coming; whereas ours put in at Joanna in their Voyage to India: In these Seas are the Sea-Calves, and Sun-Fishes; the Nights are very cold, and the Days are shortned near Two hours. The end of April we lost sight of the high Tops of these Hills,Land on St. Helena. and in thirty and two Degrees South, met with the stated South-east Winds, when we left the Cape-Birds behind us, daily depressing our Southern Latitude, directing our Course full North-west, being too often retarded by frequent Calms, and sometimes contrary Winds, (a thing not known between the Tropicks) till at last we made seven∣teen Degrees South; when we altered our North Course to the West only, for fear of out-sailing St. Helena; which is a thing full of ha∣zard and difficulty, since the Season proved Cloudy, though not Rainy, yet often so Dewy, that it wetted to the skin; the supputa∣tion of the Longitude on which we depend, being no less obscure than fallible: Besides, the Island its self is but a small Rock in the middle of the Main Ocean, which cannot be seen far, unless in a clear Day; but by the Grace of God, the 19th of May it lay fair be∣fore our eyes like a little Cloud by eight in the Morning; from whence are small White Birds floating sometimes on the Sea, at other times taking their flight to and from the Island, which they stir not far from: It is very high Land, and may be discerned twenty Leagues off at Sea; wherefore we gained not the Harbour till Ten at Night, where we silently let go our Anchor, neither we nor the Fort salu∣ting one another till next Morning. When going ashore, the Guns roared, and the Governor Mr. John Blackmore received us on the Beech, which was stony and troublesome ascending; we passed through Rows of Soldiers, called to their Arms on this occasion, into a Valley surrounded with high Mountains, except towards the Sea, where stood the Fort and Platform for the great Cannon, which reach farther than there is any Anchor-hold, so that no Ships can come in, or endure their Force, without their Leave. Notwithstanding which, it is yet fresh in memory, that the Dutch landing on the backside of the Island, gained the Tops of the Hills, and invading the Island, drove the English from their Fort, for all they had two Ships in the Road at the same time, which did no farther service than carry off the Inhabitants, leaving the Dutch Possession, till Captain Munday by the King's Command was sent out to retake it that very Year we came out for India (which was the
very Fleet that set out with us, and bore us company to St. Iago); which the said Captain retook also by Surprize; and added to his good fortune the seizing of Four of their East-India Ships richly laden; which, after he had left sufficient Strength upon the Island, he brought as Trophies of his Victory into England. The Island thus reduced,The story of the Island and Islanders. was governed immediately by the Royal Commission, till at the Importunity of the Company, his Majesty reinstated the former Colony planted by the Honourable Company, and restored them to their first Possessions, advising them to be more cautious for the future. It is seated in Sixteen Degrees South in the vast Atlantick Ocean, distant from Cape Bon Esperanzo Six hun∣dred Leagues; placed opportunely for the English in their return to Europe from the East Indies, both for Wood, Water, and fresh Pro∣visions; which are comfortable Refreshments these long Voyages; those Ships that miss it being in an ill state, ready to be eaten up with the Scurvy, and most an end make for Barbados in their distress; which makes the Company to be at some expence for this benefit, supplying them with English Beeves, Cows, Hogs, Turkies, Ducks, Geese, and all manner of Pullen, with Tools for Husban∣dry, and a constant Guard of Soldiers. The Portugals first found it out, as is said, by an unhappy Accident; one of their great Car∣racks being cast away here, or not able to proceed farther, they drew on shore her weather-beaten sides, and all the Armory and Tacklin, Building with the Timber a Chappel in this Valley, from thence called Chappel-Valley, and stocked it with Goats, Asses, Hogs, and other Cattel, lest any other time they should be under the same misfortune; but as their Credit fell in these parts, they grew more careless of Futurity, and long since deserted it, that it became free to the next comer to make his own; and now by the Industry of the English it is much improved, yielding, partly by the good∣ness of the Soil, and the care of the Husbandmen, all things neces∣sary for human subsistence to its own Inhabitants, and to spare, good Cheap to such as need. Yet to whet their Diligence and Labour, here is a mischievous Virmin sorely vexatious to them, which are Wild Rats, which in∣fest all their Grounds, whereby they can have no Bread-Corn, they destroying it all; instead whereof they have a large Root, very biting when it is Raw, so that they will not touch it, but being Boi∣ed, it is both nourishing and pleasing; and of this they make an in∣toxicating Liquor, called Mobby; the Indian Name of this Root is Yaum. t is very troublesome clambering these Hills; yet to acquaint my with the Country delights, I assayed it; at top it is something ener, where were many Rural Seats of the Planters, Cows grazing, Goats seeding; their Cottages placed near Rivulets, whose next Downfal hurried them into the Sea; from these advanced places we discovered Two Sail making in hither, which is noticed by the Firing of so many Guns and hoisting of the Flag, who proved to be Josiah, being an heavy Sailer, we lost Company about the Cape, where keeping off at Sea, the Golden Fleece came up with it; upon the Hills the Air makes a great difference from the Vallies, it being
purer above, and something harsh by reason of the constant Easterly Blasts, which is not so kind to the Fruits on the Mountains as in the Dales. The course taken to People the Island is this; they indent either as Servants or Soldiers for Five Years with the Company, at the ex∣piration of which Term, they are free either to go or stay; if they stay, they have liberty to chuse Twenty Acres of Ground unoccu∣pied, as their own proper Portion, on which they live and maintain themselves and Families; of which Islanders there may be Four hundred English, reckoning Men, Women, and Children. A Week being spent,Of Ascension, and Catching of Tortoises. the Success and we (coming in first) set Sail for Ascension, another meer Wart in the Sea, being a Barren Rock destitute of all manner of Natures Stores, it being an Horrid place, without any green thing, Plant, or Water, a meer Ciner∣cake burnt by the Sun, and incrusted by the filth and slime of the Sea-Fowl, who both Nest and Roost here: Here is no covering or shade from the Heavens, more than the Holes or Tops of Rocks, no Turf nor Grass, but all is scorched by the Sun's heat; and here I ap∣prove, rather than consent to the general Opinion, of its having been once a Vulcano, or Island of Fire; but since no such matters appear for such a subject, I shall deem it Fabulous, since it would be altoge∣ther strange, had it e'er been so, that no Footsteps of Bitumen, Sulphur, or Combustible substance should remain, which most an end flow from an unexhausted Fountain, bred as fast as the Fire can feed up∣on it; otherwise those ancient Fiery Mountains in Italy, and else∣where, had many Ages since been consumed; and we might have admired them as Poets Fictions handed by Tradition, but not have had ocular Demonstration to convince the incredulous: Besides, the continual confluence of Flocks of Water-Fowl declare they ne∣ver feared Smoak or Fire here; they having paved or pargetted the whole Rock with their Filth, that it seems incorporated with it. These Birds are so heedless or fool-hardy,Foolish Birds. which I cannot tell, that they will fly so near as to be struck down with a Cane. When I went to Land (if such it may be called) bating the Sands around the Rocks, we could tread no other Ground but on Stones cemented by the Sun's heat; all the advantage or pleasure proposed was to stretch our Legs, and see the Seamen turn the Tur∣tles, or Tortoises, which they did anights when they came ashoar to lay their Eggs, which these Sands hatch, they lying in ambush be∣twixt them and the Sea, and with Hand-spikes casting them on their Back; at which they must be yare; for they perceiving themselves pursued, make towards the Sea, and cast a cloud of Sand upon the Assailants with their Feet or Claws; they are very big, and some∣times as much as Three or Four Men can do to lay them sprawling, where as fast as one is conquered they leave it to master ; for they cannot rescue themselves out of that posture; so that what they serve thus in the Night they are sure to find them in the Day where they left them, and so bring them aboard Ship for their fresh Food, the Flesh of some being as much as our little Indi Bullocks.
Of these (we gathering for the Four Ships that were behind) to no time, they turned One hundred and twenty, whereof Eight and twenty came to our share; which (without any other substence than three or four times a day throwing Sea-water on them) we kept alive above a Month, on which the Ship's Crew fed daily with great eagerness while they lasted, dressing their Flesh se∣veral ways; and besides that, these are reckoned the best in the World, and to which they fall the more greedily, because they are esteemed specifical for the Scurvy, Pox, or Gout, they fancying their whole Mass of Blood to be altered by them, and their Flesh to become new and sound again; and this Opinion takes the rather, because through all the Emunctuaries, and especially near the Genitals, they see the col of their Sweat altered to a nasty yellow Green: And indeed to peak the truth, whether Fancy or real virtue in this sort of Dyet be the cause, they continue healthy and lively while they feed thereon, and will mightily lament the want of it when spent, be∣cause they must return again to their salt Meats. In catching of these we tarried five Days, in which I had time enough to recollect my Thoughts about these Creatures; but ha∣ving already been particular thereon, I shall forbear to add more: Only the Custom of this place is to leave Letters of what Ships have been here, in a great Hollow of a Rock, sealed in a Glass Bottle; and where the Portugals have erected a Wooden Cross to affix Leaden or Brass Plates Engraven: An Example whereof may be this: Anno Domini 1677-78. Martij 14. In Nave Aureum Vellus dictâ, Joanne North Navarchâ, huc appulerunt Edmundus Hallaey & Jacobus Clerk, ab Insulâ Sanctae Helenae reduces; ubi Observationibus coelestibus Annum integrum im∣penderunt. Ascension lies under the Seventh Degree of South Latitude, 250 Leagues from St. Helens, which we made in a Weeks time from thence with a North-West Course; here is little Meridional di∣stance East from England, not much more than two Degrees; but now we must go more Westward to meet with the Winds, and this is just as the Sun is upon his Summers Solstice in our Coun∣tries, but here quite contrary. In the middle of June we came under the Arch of the Aequator,Isle of St. Thomas. where lies St. Thomas Island, and elevating the Arctick Pole six Degrees, we met with Storms and some Calms; this then was the reason we moved but slowly, till the Sun began to be vertical, it bringing those Winds with it, which were for our turn; to wit, the North-East Winds; which was the Twelfth of July before we had it the last time, perpendicular in Twenty Degrees North, and an half, the next day, made us parallel with Surat; insomuch that all this while we seem to have done nothing, being no farther, ba∣ing our Western way, than where we set out; which would be ident, could we have paffage through the Red-Sea into the Me∣diterranean;
but Nature having opposed a small Neck of Land or Sixty Miles, has thought fitter to let the unquiet Ramblers go about these vast Coasts, than to cut them out a nigher Way o to long undiscovered Regions. The Sixteenth we passed the Northern Tropick into th eth∣perte Zone,A bold Act of an Algier Slave. where take an account of a desperate Action. In the Josiah an English Seaman held in Captivity by the Algerens, had so perfected himself in that durance in the Art of Thieving, that nothing could escape him; in which being often Apprehended, and as often Bound with Chains and Ropes, they were all too little to hold him fast; for he could unty the hardest Knot with his Toes as well as Fingers, and was expert at filing or eating of his Irons! But continuing in these Pranks nothing could be safe from him, even the Ships-stores were imbezelled by him, which touched the Lives of all in the Ship, he having several times broken open the Lazeretto, from which no Correction could deter him; at last assured by a general Consult, some punishment was devising for him, he unmanacled himself, and came before them as they were thinking what to do with him, and bidding them Adieu, leapt into the Sea, at once putting an end to their Consult, and his Fear and Fury. In Thirty Degrees North, we met with Alga or Sea Weed, sup∣posed to be brought hither by the rapid Course of the Gulf of Florida, which notwithstanding is a great way to the West off us. The North-East Winds have been very faint hitherto,The Azores. whereby we were hindred from meeting with the South West Winds sooner; but between 30 and 40 North they enter to purpose; that in the beginning of August we left the Western Islands, which are called Flandricae, or the Azores, which lie between the Isles of Corvo and Flores; where many place the first Meridian, because here is found in these Seas and the parts adjacent, that the Magne∣tique Needle has no declination from the Meridian Line, and that it points out North and South exactly; which beginning of Longi∣tude, Mercator observes in his Tables. And now we set our Face directly for England,England. knowing by our Account we are past these Spots of Earth, which those return∣ing from India think themselves obliged to be secure of, before they do; we having depressed our Longitude West, from Ascen∣sion Eighteen Degrees take a North-East Course, and being past forty Degrees North, we take our Fortune both for Wind and Wea∣ther, sometimes fair, sometimes foul, sometimes for us, sometimes against us, till having our Latitude almost compleat, we again raised our Longitude within a Degree and half of that of Ascension, which brought us the Fourteenth of August in sight of our Albion. When entring the Channel,Land at Folkston near Dover. the Pilots were more concerned than all the Voyage afore: As we came up we daily met with Ships outward bound, and other overtook us coming in, and the Com∣panies Waiters Boarding us, every one was as cautious to own h Estate, as a Miser to confess on a Poll Act. With these Cat Oflars
we sailed till we came on the Sussex Coast, when longing to be on Shore, we hailed a Fisher-Boat on Board, who put me on Shore at Folkstone in Kent, Five Miles South of Dover, on the Twentieth of August, 1682. From whence sending you this, give me leave to come leisurely to London, that in that time I may feel my Legs, and try how agreeable the natural Sweets of England by degrees may be to one who in this long Absence has so little felt the Hardships of Travel, especially coming home; which though a tedious Voyage of Seven Months, we passed away merrily with good Wine, and no bad Musick; but the Life of all, good Company and an honest Com∣mander; who fed us with fresh Provisions of Turkies, Geese, Ducks, Hens, sucking Pigs, Sheep, Goats, &c. And to Crown all, the Day we made England, kill'd us a fatted Calf; so that you may spare that Welcome when you receive, Yours, J. F. Soli DEO Gloria. Amen. FINIS.
AN Index Explanatory. A. Proper Names. ABagares, Page 283 Abas, 247, 257 Abdul Caun, 171 Ab Gi Pundit, 80 Adul Caun, 165 Aga Toky, 244 Alan Adul Shaw, 169 Ally, 351 Ana Gi Pundit, 416 Aram, 283 Asa, 267 Auren Zeeb, 120, 194. Names of Places. Abassee, 221 Achein, 45 Aegypt, 226 Aethiopia, 11 Africa, 10, 16 Agra, 199 Airoon, 336 Aleppo, 224 Algiers, 120 America, 25 Amidavad, 116, 120 Anchola, 146 Angediva, 58 C. Anguilis, or C. d' Agulhas, 14, 421 Antartick, 14 Arabia, 220 Aram, 283 Ararat, 270 Araxes, 250 Armenia, 270 Artick, 10 Ascension, 425 Asia, 25 Asmire, 417 Asseen, Page 227 Asspass, 256 Atlantick, 2, 3, 11 Aubgurrum, 313 Aumbegaum, 130 Aurengebad, 416 Augustin, 14 Azores, 426. Names of Things. Abrahamee, a Gold Coin, 210, 406 Absee, a Silver Coin, 55 Achar, a Pickle, 119 Admtrante, an Admiral, 153 Adulcaun, an High Constable, 165 Aede, the New-Moon before the New-Year, 108, 306 Aede Bobbashaw, Aede Corboon, Aede Chudeer, Feasts, 401 Aequator, Aequinox, Imaginary Circles or Lines 18 11 Agoada, an Aquaduct, 70 Alacoppe, a Chappel, 358 Alajah, Silk and Cotton, 196 Albicore, a Fish, 12 Albitrosses, Cape Birds, 12 Alcoran, the Turkish Gospel, 94 Aldea, a Country Seat, 10, 16 Aligator, a Crocodile, 56 Amphisbena, a Serpent with two Heads, 34 Ananas, a Pine-Apple, 182 Antilope, a Goat-Stag, Aquada, a Watering-place, 71 Arach, a Leaf, 40 Arack, Indian Brandy, 69 Armado, a Fleet, 59 Arras, a Loam, 101 Arundel, a Shield to keep the Sun off, 30 Atlas, Sattin, 86 Aucto de Fie, the Gaol-delivery of the Inquisition, 155
B. Proper Names. BAdu Caun, Page 132 Bassepa Naig, 162 Biram, 267 Bullul Caun, 147, 169 Names of Places. Baçein, alias Basein, 73, 74 Badnagur, 163 Baligaot, 78 Balisore, 38 Balsore, 82 Band Ally, 230 Bandora, 70 Bantam, 86 Barbadoes, 423 Barbary, 4 Barfta, 141, 142 Barmuch, 333 Bassatu, 320 Batavia, 16, 46 Batticalai, 57 Bednure, 162 Beelseer, 130 Bengala, 25 Berreau, 410 Betu, 148 Beunovista, Isl. 6 Bimly, 127 Bindamire, 250 Bobba hodge, 245 Bombaim, alias Bombay, 61 Bombass, 144 Bonares, 161 Bonaru, 240 Botan, 188 Brampore, 412 St. Brandon, 421 Brasil, 11 Britania, Isl. 14 Broach, 409 Bury, 240 Bussorah, 112 Names of Things. Baftaes, fine Calicoes, 86 Baloon, a Barge, 70 Balu, a Wolf, 142 Bambo, a Thorn-Tree, Page 24 Bandarines, the Militia and Woodmen, 66 Bang, a poisonous Plant, 91 Banksol, Custom-house Key, 27 Banyan, an Indian Merchant, 82 Barbier, a Disease, 68 Bassa, a Turkish Lord, 113 Bashee, the Chief, 314 Bastion, a Term in Fortification, 57 Batty, course Rice, 67 Bezoar, a Stone generated in a Goat, &c. 238 Bege, a Soldier, 387 Berenjau, a Fruit, 104 Betel, a Nut, Leaf, &c. 40 Biggereen, a Porter, 158 Bilhim, a Schismatick, 93 Bistree, a Copper Coin, 407 Blubber, the Carvil, or Sailing Fish, 69 Bocca mortis, a Gun, 156 Bonano, an Indian Fig, or the lesser Plan∣tain, 40 Boneto, a Fish, 12 Borrah, a Schismatick of Mahomet, 93 Bowany, an Image of the Buncelos, 78 Brabb, a Tree, 76 Brachmin, a Priest, 33 Bubsho, a Rotten Fish, 55 Buchanna, an Ascent cover'd with Car∣pets, 131 Budgee, an Ape, 21 Bugsho, a Cloak-Bag, 397 Buffola, a Beast bigger than a Cow, 118 Bumbelo, a Fish, 67 Buncelo, a Cast or Tribe, 171 Bunco, Tobacco, 57 Bunder, a Dock or Port, 115 Burrow, Great, 195 Busrook, a Coin, 53 Butt, the purest Sect of Brachmins, 161 Buzzar, a Market, 54 C. Proper Names. CAbul Caun, 416 Catub Caun, 165 Sancta Clara, 151 Cowis Caun, 147 Cusset, 267 Cyrus, 146
Names of Places. Nos Signior de Cabo, Page 148 Caffa, 285 Caifar, 244 Crand Cairo, 220 Calcut, 54 Cambay, 120 Canonore, 55 Canaries, 3 Canatick, 57, 159 Candahar, 273 Canora, 58 Canorein, 61, 70 Carmania, 303 Carnopoly, 50 Carwar, 58 Casbin, 234 Caselbuzzar, 38 Cashmire, 137 Caspian, 296, 328 Caulam, 50 Caurestan, 235 Causabar, 273 Ceilon, alias Zeilan, 22, 23 Celicia, 273 Charasan, 336 Chaugos, 420 Chawtalk, 241 Chetore, 416 Chiblone, 77 China, 223 Choul, 59 St. Christophers, Isl. 15 Chuldestan, 298 Chulminor, 251 Chuperly, 86 Cis, 273 Cochin, 51 Cochin China, 188 Cola, 157 Columbo, 23 Comoc Isl. 16 C. Comory, 22 Comy Shaw, 259 Conacaraw, 298 Conacurgu, 298 Congo, 237, 320 Constantinople, 55 Cormoot, 236 Coromandel, 29 Corvo, 426 C. Cory, 50 Cousabar, 273 Cossack, 373 Cuderah, Page 146 Cuscuzar, 256 Cutty-cony, 56 Names of Things. Cabesso, an Head, 153 Cabob, Roast-meat, 404 Cadi, a Judge, 32 Cajan, a Bough of a Toddy-Tree, 17 Cair, Rope-yarn, 121 Calabash, a Gourd, 17 Calapee, the Breast-plate of the Tortoise, 122 Calenture, a Fever, 11 Calentur, a Bailiff, 243 Caliph, Mahomet's Successor, 122 Callipet, the Hut of the Tortoise, 122 Camari, an Almanack, 371 Cancer, the North Tropic, 4 Canister, a Chest, 127, 231 Canoo, an Indian Wherry, 54 Caphir, an Infidel, 109 Capitaneo, a Government, 73 Caphala, a Troop, 120 Capricorn, the South Tropic, 11 Caravan Ser Raw, an Inn, 99 Cargo, a Freight, 153 Carrack, a Ship, 88 Carvil, a sailing Fish, 69 Cash, a Copper Coin, 57 Cassawar, a Bird that digests Iron, 116 Cassia, a Tree. 176 Cast, a Tribe, 27 Castor and Pollux, Meteors, 4 Catarre, a Poniard, 93 Cattamaran, a Raft of Logs, 24, 25 Catubcaun, Huntsmaster, 165 Catwal, a Sheriff, 97 Caun, a Duke, 131 Cazi, a Judge, 94 Cadgeway, a close Carriage for Woman, 309 Champore, a strutting Cock, 116 Chamsi, an Almanack, 371 Chanquo, Mother of Pearl, 320 Charack, a Weight, 200 Chaur, Four, 286 Chawbuck, a Whip, 97, 98 Cheek, Painted Bents, tied artificially to deceive the Sight, 83 Cheik, an High Priest, 385 Cheripo, a Shell-fish, 320 Cheruse, a Fruit, 182 Chinam, Lime, 40 Chias, a Sect, 28
Chinor, Sycamore, Page 259 Chint, a sort of Callico painted, 86 Chints, Stinking Insects, 35 Chitonee, an Umbrello, 160 Chitorei Deer, 71 Chitty, a Pass, 124 Chop, a Mark, 98 Chouse, a Scand, 176 Choultry, a Seat of State, 82 Chocky, a Watch, 100 Chuper, a Foot-post, 313 Cobit, a Cubit, 406 Cockatooa, a Bird, 116 Coco, a Nut, 7 Codre, an High-Priest, 385 Coffery, a Woolly-patched Negro, also an Unbeliever, 91 Coge, an Eunuch, 393 Cogy, a Merchant, 388 Coho, Coffee, 225 Cohor, a Porter, 68 Coleor, a Glass Vessel, 268 Collat, a Robe of Honour, 86 Colorogosse, a General, 356 Colum, a Bird, 119 Columbeen, a Porter, 67 Comby, a Hair-Cloth, 54 a Woodman, 142 Commodore, a Commander, 117 Conchon, the Netherlands, 62 Conge, Starch made of Rice, 207 Cookoc-chalow, Fritters, 405 Cool, a Soldier, 359 Cooly, a Tribe, 34, 77 Coosdan, a Gurgulet Case, 399 Corge, a Soldier, 359 Corge Bashe, Adjutant-General, 356 Cormute, a Date, 236 Cosanna, Treasure, 164 Course, a Mile and a quarter, 29 Cowreys, Fish-shells, 161 Cowshees, South-East Wind, 226 Creciers, a Constellation making that Fi∣gure, 11 Crook, an Interdict, 348 Culga, a painted Plant, from whence the Name to the Silk, 105 Culverin, a sort of Cannon, 37 shcush, a Grain, 179 sselbash, a Chevalier, 356 tchery, a Mixture of Pulse, 81 D. Proper Names. DArius, Page 350 Delvi, 147 Doud, alias David, 109 Names of Places. Dabul, 175 Daman, 82 Damkin, 83 Dan de Rajapour, 78 Dedumbah, 318 Degurdu, 256 Dehid, 298 Dehir, 125 Derab, 318 Descoon, 239 Dhily, 199 Diego Rais, 421 Diu, 100 Doulet Abad, 165 Duccan, 165 Dungeness, 135 Dungham, Durmapatan, 55 Names of Things. Dammar, Pitch, 121 Dar, a Keeper, 309 Dehir, a Scrivan, or Secretary, 80 Denier, a Coin, 407 De-Roy, an Interdict, Dervise, a Beggar, 3 Desie, a Farmer of the King's Rents, , 147 Deu Bash, an Interpreter, 30 Deup Colla, the Heats, 187 Dipsy, a Plum, 13 Divan,  Council, 315 Doll, a sort of Grain 101 Dolphin, a Fish, 12 Dowly, a Cast, Droger, a Mayor, 389 Dually, an Heathen Feast, 110 Duel, an Image, 159 Dumpoke, Bak'd Meat, 404 Duppar, a Vessel made of Skins, 118 Dutry, a poysonous Confection, 33 Duty, a Link-boy, 34 Dungaree, a sort of Calicut, 86 Duccan, the South Wind, 93, 123
E. Proper Names. EKou Gi Raja, Page 169 Emanuel Lobos, 153 Emanuel Mendos, 218 Emir Jemla, 120 Emuel Sohaly, 370 Names of Places. Elam, Eliphanto, 61, 75 Erewan, 268 Esduchos, 246, 257 C. B. Esperança, 12, 13 Esthemy, 77 Euphrates, 220 Europe, 25 Names of Things. Embargador, the Council, 151 Eusbashe, a Centurion, 356 Escritore, a Box to put Writings in, 34 Escrivano, a Secretary, 80 Etimundoulet, a Chancellor, 338 F. ames of Places. C.  421 Firaw, 244 G. Florida, 426 Flandricae, ib. Flores, ib. I. Del Fogo, an Isle of Fire, 10 Names of Things. Fakier, a Beggar, 95 Fanam, a Gold Coin, 38 Fetiscero, a Wizard, 155 Fidalgo, a Gentleman, 74, 123 Frass, a Porter, 67 Fringi, an European, 113 Fresco, a fresh Air, 49 G. Names of Places. GAmboa, Page 4 Ganges, 47 Gaot, 126 Gaspar de Dios, 148 Gates, 49 Point de Gaul, 23 St. George, 24, 36 Georgia, 284 Genoe, 303 Gerom, 242 Getche, 233 Gibralter, 3 Gillean, 123, 334 Ginea, 12 Goa, 58, 149 Gocurn, 158 Gogo, 100 Gombroon, 221 Gomora, 16 Gongole, 158 Gongouly, 78 Gorgades, 5, 6, 10 Goorbazergum, 235 Grobundel, 74 Gulconda, 29 Gullean, 123 Gundore, 38 Gurgestan, 284 Guzerat, 120 Names of Things. Gabers, the old Persians. 2 Garavance, a Pease, Gelabdar, chief Muliteer, Gentu, a Gentile, 27 Ger colla, the Cold Season, Gereed, Tilt and Turnament, Ghe, Butter, Ghong, an Hour, Goloomy Shaw, the King's Slave, Gom, a Town, Gomcar, a Bailiff of a Town, Goss, the lowest Coin, Gosbeek, a small Coin, 343, Grob, a Boat, Goualar, the Post-prison, 416 Guiana, a Creature like a Crocodile, which Robbers use to lay hold on their Tail to rob Houses, 116
Guiava, a Pear, Page 40 Gur, an Hill, 129 Gurgulet, a Vessel of Earth to drink Wa∣ter with, 47 H. Proper Names. HAgiess Caun, 138 Haly, 32 Hamaleech, 92 Hanoffi, ib. Names of Places. Hacatompylos, 337 St. Helena, 2, 10, 14 Henry Kenry, 61 Hercules Pillars, 3 C. Good Hope, 13 Hubly, 153 Hugly, 38 Huttany, 175 Hyrcania, 316 Nova Hyspania, 4 Names of Things. Hackery, an Indian Chariot, 83 Hackim, a Physician, 312 Hackum, a Governor, Hammock, a Bed, 115 Haram, the Womens Apartment, 132 Havaldor, a Commander, 123 Hazary, a Thousand, 195 Heste behest, Paradise on Earth, 314 Hindu, a Tribe, 80, 147 Hing, Liquid Assa Fatila, 239 Hera, a Bird, 318 Hobsy, an Arabian Coffery, or woolly-pated Negro, 147 Hodge, a Pilgrim, 91 Holway, a Sacramental Wafer, 94 Holencore, a mean Tribe, 28, 34 Hooly, a Festival, 180 Horto, a Garden, 154 Hubble-bubble, a Tobacco-Pipe, 8, 31 Hummum, a Bath, 345 I. Proper Names. I Mo, Guardian of Mahomet's Sepul∣chre, Page 220 Imaum Cooly Caun, 257 Imaum Osseen, 108 Imaum Zadah, 313 Don John de Castro, 218 John Coreedsaw, 153 John de Melos, 74 John de Mendos, 73 Josseen, 108 Ishau, i. e. Isaac, 108 Names of Places. St. Iago, Isl. 6 Jafnapatan, 46 Jambee, ib. Japan, 86 C. Jasquez, 221 Java, Isl. 14, 106 eria, 284 Jebun, 235 Jelfa, 256 Jeneah, 123, 130 Iniaus, 187 India, 16, 23, 185 Indostan, 191 Indus, 47, 105 Intwally, 124 Johanna, Isl. 15 St. Johns, 82 Jouscan, 334 Ispahaun, 259 Juan Abaud, 413 Juan de Novo, Isl. 15 Juddah, 47, 91 Names of Things. Jackal, a sort of Fox, 53 Jaggaree, Melossees, or course Sugar, 99 Jageah, an Annuity, 120 Jambo, a Fruit, 56 Janiseen, a Substitute, 338 Jarr, an huge Earthen Vessel for Water, 108 Jatry, a Wasing, 159 Jawk, a Fruit, 4 Jehun, Hell, 233
Jemotty, a Schismatick of Mahomet's, 93 Jeseree, a Soldier, 350 Imaum, the Prince of Arabia, 119 Jougy, an Heathen Devote, 72 Junk, a Ship, 24 K. Names of Places. KErenjau, Isl. 61 Ketcher-macroon, 316 Kismash, 221 Korasam, 363 Names of Things. Ketchery, a Mixture, 320 Kedgways, Carriages, 309 Kitsoll, an Umbrello, 160 Koquenar, Poppy, 379 Kosanna, a Treasure, 164 L. Proper Names. St. LAwrence, 14 Lewis Mendoso, 151 Names of Places. Larack, 221 St. Lawrence, Isl. 14 Lhor, 199, 236 Loft, 320 Names of Things. G. Lace, Wax, Lacre, harden'd Wax, 52 Lascar, a Seaman, 55 Lecque, 100000, 104 Linguit, a Cast, 153 Lumbrico, a Sconce or Vessel, where Lamps burn together, 78 Lunga, a Waste-Clout, 53, 101 Luscar, a Soldier, 107 Luscarry, an Army, 139 M. Proper Names. MAhamoody, Page 411 Mahmud Emir Caun, 120 Mahomet, 32, 196 Melech-bury, 126 St. Monacha, 151 Morad Beck, 412 Moro Pundit, 79 Mortis Ally, 32, 358 Mucklis Caun, 13 Names of Places. Madagascar, Isl. 14 Madaras, 40 Madaree, 163 Madèra, Isl. 3 Magatana, 71, 77 Magellania, 11 Maijm, 67, 254 Maijo, Isl. 6 Malabar, 46 Maldivae, Isl. 22 Mangalore, 55 Sancta Maria, Isl. 11 Marmagoun, 148 Mascarenas, 421 Massegoung, 67 Mauritius, 53 Mayar, 259 Mechlapatan, 25 Medapollon, 35 Media, 336 Meergoscoon, 148, 251 Mein, 73 Merge, 259 Melinda, 44 Meoty, Isl. 15 Mesopotamia, 228 Mirja, 57, 161 Moecha, 47 Mohelia, Isl. 15 Molaia, 296 Mocock Sugta, 243 Moluccas, 46 Moorbar, 124 Mora, 83 Mosambique, 14 Mousar, 241 Moxutebeggy, 257 Munchumbay, Isl. 61
Muschat, Page 220 Mushat, 75, 298 Mussaferry, 245 Mussendoun, 221 Names of Things. Mageless, a Council, 396 Maluche, an Expositor, 92 Mammoody, a Coin, 205 Mandador, a Commander, 67 Mango, a Plum 56, 182 Mangofaleudo, a Cape-Bird, 12 Maund, a Weight, 78 Maw Raja, chief Raja, 76 Meer, a Tribe, 93 Meerbar, a daily Waiter, 98 Metarrah, a Leathern Bottle, 136 Mew-colla, the Rains, 187 Midan, the Palace-Yard, 249 Millet, a Grain, 179 Minbashe, a Colonel, 356 Mirchal, a Fan of Peacocks Feathers, 85 Mirza, a Courtier, 381 Miscolle, a Weight, 206 Miseree, a Gold Coin, 406 Mogul, White, 93 Mogul, a Tribe, ib. Moncloes, Bracelets, 156 Mongoose, a Squirrel, 116 Monsoons, Tempestuous Seasons, 48 Montross, a Gunner, 38 Mordisheen, a Disease, 114 Moors, Mahometans, 24 Moratty, a Language, 78 Mosque, a Moor Church, 17 Moutched, Doctor Vitae, 367 Muck, a Religious Frenzy, 91 Musti, an High-Priest, 367, 380 Mullah, a Priest, 95 Mumjumma, a Wax-Cloath, 410 Munsubdars, Petty Lords, 195 Munsel, the Stage, 231 Musal, a Link-boy, 34 Musceto, a Gnat, 35 Mussal, a Fan of Ostrich Colours, 160 Mussals, Links, 34 Mussanne, a Tribe, 93 Musselman, a Believer, 91 Mussoola, a Boat, 24, 37 Mustezo, a Mixture, 69 Musubdar, a petty Ombrah, 195 Muttany, a Pilgrim, 101 N. Proper Names. NArun Gi Pundit, Page 78 Narun Sinai, 77 Nessir, 365 Nishambeak, 136 Nishamshaw, 165, 166 Names of Places. Nabond, 308 Negapatan, 46 Nerez, 335 Nerule, 157 Nilus, 48 Nishampore, 77 Nockshuan, 205, 285 Norway, 153 Nunny-gaot, 141 Nunsarry, 117 Names of Things. Nabob, a Governor, 130 Naig, a Gentleman, 162 Naik, a General, 160 Naik-wherry, Lieutenant-General, 160 Nairo, a Gentleman, 51 Naptha, a Bitumen, 333 Natal, Christmass, 17 Nepa de Goa, Arach, Newry, a Bird, 116 Nigess, Unclean, 93 Nisham-maluke, chief Treasurer, 165 Noerose, New Year, 306 Nuchery, a small Grain, 119 Nucquedah, a Sea-Captain, 107 Nunny-gaot, a little Mountain, 141 Nure, a Flower, 143 O. Proper Names. OSseen, 108 Names of Places. Obedah, 298 Ojoan, 255
Onor, Page 57 Oppagaot, 129 Ormus, 221 Oxus, 328 Names of Things. Oftagary, a Skreen to keep the Sun off, 160 Oleas, Leafs, 66 Ombrah, a Lord, 195 Obne, swoln Piles, 379 P. Proper Names. PAulisto, 150 Pedro de Sylvia, 144 Perimel, 45 Peta Gi Pundit, 80 St. Pilar, 154 Porr, 185 Names of Places. Panala, 171 Panana, 51 Pangeim, 148 Parell, 67 Parthia, 246 Patnaw, 38, 257 Pegu, 46 77 gom, 132 olis, 251 217, 246 11 Persaw, Petachos, Isl. 61 Pettipolee, 38 Phalapatan, 51, 55 Phillipine, Isl. 86 Phursistan, 227 Isle Picos, 11 Pokutal, 240 Policat, 42 Polygore, 313 Porto Porto If. 3 Novo, 175 Portugal, Pulparra, 101 Punchra, 78 Pundit, 146 Purcat, 50 Purtaabgur, Page 7 Putachos, 70 Names of Things. Paddy, course Rice, 67 Padre, a Father, 52 Pagoda, a Temple, 24 Pagod, an Idol, Pagod, a Gold Coin, 38 Palempore, a Coverlet, 34 Palenkeen, a Sedan, 28, 29, 34 Palmeto, a Tree, 16 Pamerin, a Mantle, 77 Papaw, a Fruit-Tree, 19 Parade, a void space before a Fort, 66 Parapet, a Walk breast-high, 37 Parochet, a Parrot, 71 Parsy, an Old Persian, 117 Patamar, a Foot-Post, 36, 111 Patan, a Tribe, 93 Paulistin, a Jesuit, 70 Paunch, Five, 157 Paunch-augy, Five Fires, Pawn, an Indian Treat, 40 Pengrim, a Lord of Bantam, 106 Peon, a Servant, 26 Peor, a Prophet, 67 Petacha, a Dollar, 53 Peshua, a Chancellor, 79 Pervenau, a Salute to a Caun, 131 Peterraro, a Gun, 108 Pharman, a Salute to a King, 131 Pharmaund, Letters Patent, 115 Pharsang, i. e. Parasang, a Persian League, Pharsistan, Persia, 257 Pigdans, Spitting-Pots, 223 Pintado, painted, 12 Piscash, a Present, 134 Pise, a Copper Coin, Plantain, a Fruit-Tree, 19 Podeshaw, an Emperor, 266 Pore, an Hour, 186 Porpoise, a Sea-Hog, 23 Poust, a Prison where Prisoners are in∣toxicated, 32 Potkass, Calicoes, 86 Povo, the Poor, 76 Puckeries, drinking Cups, 223 Puckery, a Turbat, 2 Pullow, Meat stew'd, 93 Pundit, a Branch of Sinai Brachmins, 190 Putacho, a Melon, 76 Pythoniss, a Witch,
Q. Names of Places. QUedab, Page Quoilon, 50 Names of Things. Querpo, a Body, 4 Quetery, a Soldier, 190 Queshery, an Exchange, 261 Quilt, a Bed-Covering, 295 R. Proper Names. RAmras, 165 Ranna Jessinsin, Raja, 173 Rezin, 259 St. Roch, 149 Rustam, 170, 172, 253 Names of Places. Rabag, 163 Rhamnagur, ib. Rajapour, 59 Rairee, 76, 79 Bunder Reek, 237 Ro Neal, 120 Roys Magi, 148 C. Rouselgaot, 220 Rute Conna Shure, 234 Names of Things. Rabo del Elephanto, the Tail of the Ele∣phant, 48 Racanners, Pirates, 218 Rackbeet, sweet Water, 223 Rhadars, Watchmen of the High-ways, 222 Ra, a Prince, 58 Ramazan, Lent, 107 Ramram, God, 101 Ranna, a Princess, 162 Rashpoot, a Soldier, 27 Rattan, a Cane, 17 Raw, the Way, Page 230 Recarder, Service, 70 Rendero, a Farmer, 123 Rousander, a Chevalier, 195 S. Proper Names. SAmba Gi, 79 Sam Gi Nan Gi, 80 Sergi Caun, 162 Sergius, 366 Seva Gi, 58, 79, 165 Sham Shanker Naig, 162 Sham Zange, 236 Shaw Gi, 171 Siddy, 76 Siegman-jaffa, 28 Sultan Assum, 416 Sultan Badur, 218 Sultan Echbar, 416 Sultan Massum, ib. Names of Places. Sal, 148 Salset, 61, 157 Salvesong, 67 Sandaraslapatan, 24 Saranpatan, 163 Scandaroon, 224 Schamachia, 333 Scythia, Semissar, 146 Sephir, 56, 126 Serapatan, 145 Shabanat, 238 Sham Zange, Sherwan, 334 Siam, 46, 67, 86 Sinda, 120, 185 Siras, 246 Sis, 272 Smirna, 224 Soldania Bay, 422 Stambole, 224 Suffahaun, 224, 336 Succotra, Isl. 21 Sumatra, Isl. 14, 45 Sunda, 162 Surat, 61, 82, 120 Syria, 268 Swally, 63, 82
Names of Things. Sabre, an Elk, Page 175 Sahab, Sir, 417 Sackcloth Londre, English Cloth, 224 Salam, a Bow, Health, or Complement, 18, 93, 126 Sallos, Calicoes, Sarbaff, Cloth of Gold or Silver, 225 Sash, a Girdle, 26 Sattee, a Portugal Vessel, 9, 112 Scrivan, a Secretary, 191 Ser, the Head, 230 Seraglio, the Court, 130 Seras, a Bird, Serpaw, a Robe from Head to Foot, 87 Shagareen, Leather, Shaw, a King, 168 Shawbunder, Chief Customer, 98 Shakee, a Coin, 406 Shebar, a Boat, 77 Shekree, a Gold Coin, 406 Shemaul, N. W. Wind, 226 Sherbet, Liquors for Drink, 263 Shiek, a Judge, 93 Shitan, Satan, 141 Shoffi, an Expositor, 92 Shroff, a Banker, 98 Shotter, a Footman, 22 Siad, Mahomet's Kindred, 93 Sinai, an Under-Brachmin, 161 Singanias, Pirates, 218 Siturngee, a plain course Carpet, 93 Snicker-nee, Dutch Duelling, 119 Sogg, an Herb.▪ ib. Sogwan, boiled Salad, 119 an Oak, 178 Soldado, a Soldier, 151 Start, an Ass, 224 Stathmus, a Perch, 407 Stochado, a Stab, 156 Stone-bass, a Fish, 12 Subidar, a Commander, 77 Suffaguzes, Calicoes, 182 Suffahaun, the Suffees City, 350 Suffee, the Emperor of Persia, ib. Suffet, White, ib. Sumbrero, a Shade from the Sun, 51 Surpoose, a Covering to a Dish, 130 Susanees, Embroider'd Cloaths, 398 T. Proper Names. TImi Naig, Page 162 Tockersy, 304 Names of Places. Taberez, 268 Tangedelon, 235 Tanais, 373 Tanore, 51 Tanaw, 73 Tarapore, 82 Tartaria, Taurus, 125 St. Thomas, Isl. 24, 36, 43 Triblitore, 44 Isle Trinidado, 11 Trincomalai, 42 Tripoly, 120 Taumbay, 61 Tudera▪, 161 Tull, 77 Tunis, 120 Tuss, 363 Tutticaree, 50 Names of Things. Tabardars, Foot-Soldiers, 359 Talak, a Bill of Divorce, 382 Talman, a Priest, 368 Tambole, a Tabret, 160 Tank, a Pond or Cistern, 27 Tarr, a Coin, 55 Teke, the Indian Oak, 142 Telinga, a Speech, 33 Terrhenos, Land-Breezes, 2 Theatini, an Ecclesiastical Order, 151 Thamarind, a Tree, 16 Thomand, an imaginary Coin, 2 Tindal, a Boatswain, 07 Tocta, a Throne, 139 Tody, Cocoe Wine, 53, 76 Token Cyr, a Cypres-Tree, 247 Tomasia, a Shew, 15 Topangee, a Gunner, 359 Topazes, Musketeers, 66 Topes, Groves, or places of Trees, 41 Tornados, Storms, 10 Toss, a Drinking Cup, 131, 398
Tropick, an imaginary Circle in the Hea∣vens, Page 4 Tulse Calaminth, 199 Turbat, an Head-dress for Men, 18 Tuthinag, a Metal, 86 V. Proper Names. VAsquez de Gamez, 62 Vangu Gi, 171 Names of Places. Vagarsiabat, 272 Valentine's Peak, 88 Udgewally, 245 Venice, 55, 249, 380 C. Verd, 5 Verulee, 67 Vingula, 151, 152 Virginia, 3 Visiapour, 58, 148, 165 Uncliseer, 411 Urchin, 259 Usbeque, 167, 332, 373, Names of Things. Ventosoes, Funnels, 222 Ventosoes, Cupping-Horns or Glasses, 114 Visier, the Prime Minister of State, Umbrello, a Shade, 222 Vocanovice, a Publick Notary, 80, 140 Vockeel, a Factor, 115 Vortobeed, a Monk, 270 W. Proper Names. WOden, 402 Names of Places. Wesnure, 141 X. Proper Names. St. XAvierus, Page 150 Name of Things. Xeriphan, an High-Priest, 95 Xeriphin, a Coin, 150 Y. Names of Things. YAum, a Root, 104 Yaupengee, a Felt, 234 Yogdans, Chests for Provisions, 398 Z. Proper Names. ZAmerhin, the Pope of Calicut, 51 Zimorat Epicurus, 362 Names of Places. Zergoon, 25 Zermaw, 2 Zevan, 2 Names of Things. Zenith, 36, 76 Zodiac, 187 Zone, 19
A TABLE of some Principal Things herein con∣tained, neither reducible to the Index Explanatory, nor the Contents. A. ABASSINES and their Empe∣ror, Page 315 Abdul Caun outwitted by Seva Gi, 171 Absolute Authority circumscribed by no Sanction, 249 Adventures of the Portugals taught us to bring the Eastern Commodities home by Sea, 55 Aegyptians given to Hieroglyphicks, ex∣pressing the Year by the Palm-tree, 232 Affronts not pardoned, 156 Agent of Persia, his Character and Emo∣lument, 223. He waits to appear be∣fore the Suffee, 315 Agility of the Indian Women, 31 Air and Climate what Influence, 346 Air the chiefest Commodity in hot Coun∣tries, 222 that is thick tarnishes; a thin Air reeds no Soil, 306. Open Air not so healthy for Men as Beasts, 234 Air infectious at Gombroon, 227, 229 Alah Adul Caun bruited to be begotten by an Elephant-keeper, 169 Alcoran, a Legend of Lies, 372 Alexander in all probabilit had been stopt in his Career of Victory, had not a Per∣sian Rustick discovered to him the Pylae Persic▪ 24 Alexander's Army followed the Course of Indus, 72 Alexander, whether he ever conquered Porus▪ 185 Aligators Amphibious Creatures, 118 Almond-Tree Wand worn by the best men in Persia, 242 Alteration of Humours between Indian Persian, 221 Ambition knows no mean, 168 Amphisbena, &c. Serpents observe Mu∣sick, 35 Ants and Muscetoes how remedied, 35 Antilopes taken only by a Decoy, 45 Hunted by Leopards, 111 Guardian Angels saluted, 93 Ancestry of Portugals commended, 153 Animals not void of Reason, 76 Antiquaries esteem things moth-eaten by Time, 54 Sir Anthony Shirley, 100, 256 Apostacy grounded on a trivial piece of Pageantry, 289 Apostates despised, 138 Arms take place of the Gown, 360 Arabs fly as oft as pursued, 215. Are true Rovers both by Sea and Land, 119. Are fierce and treacherous, gain more by Fraud than Merchandise, 220 Armenians use Amulets against Witch∣craft, 276. Are to appear in the Royal City as Merchants, 268. Converted to Christianity by St. Bartholomew, 270. Are most Jacobites, 273. Move their Turbats as we our Hats, 31 Aristocracy countenanced on the Coast of Malabar, 51 Army every New Moon refresh the Offi∣cers of their Pay, 139. The Cheats in the Army, 140. Armies make the Indians miserable by their Devastations, 142 Art of painting Calicoes most perfected at Mechlapatan, 31 Arts that are profitable more in vogue than Liberal Sciences, 191 Articles betwixt the Persians and English, 222 Asae the Companions of Woden, what re∣lation to the Gabers or Old Persians, 267 Astrolabe supplies the defect of the Qua∣drant, when the Sun is perpendicular, 11 Astrology eluded by two Examples, 373 Asdrubal, Hannibal's Brother, Inventer of the Graver to govern Elephants, 118 Author of the Goa-Stones a Florentine Apo∣thecary, 150
Aureng-Zeeb conquers Duccan, Page 166 Austerities of the Pagans outdo the Pa∣pists, 102 Awe teaches People to understand them∣selves, 197 Aucto de Fie, 155 Azimuth Compass corrects the common Chart, and gives the Sun's Amplitude, 11 B. BAlance all things in Persia, 406 Baker offending, thrown into his own hot Oven, 339 Banyan Tree adored by the Heathens, de∣spighted by the Moors, 16, 17 Banyans offer to Neptune, 77. Dare not kill a Flea, 82. They present the Go∣vernor to keep a Mart at Swally, 83. Worse Brokers than Jews, Ib. Banyans whether Rechabites, Ib. Servile, and sneakingly officious, 139. They affect not stately Buildings: Besprinkle them∣selves with the Stale of a Cow▪ Live sordidly: Hold Transmigration, 92. Banyans Largess to Beasts at their Fu∣nerals, 101. Implacable in their Re∣venge, 112. Banyan, though despica∣ble, intrusted with Thousands, 113. A base sort of People, full of Tricks, Hypocrisy, and Cheats, 113. Boggle at no Villany for an Emolument, 192. Adore that for their God which brings them most Profit, 222. Banyans in Persia not so strict Pythagoreans, as in India, 224. Pay 350 Thomands to ex∣cuse Beeves from the Shambles, 225 Barter for clean Linnen Rags at St. Iago, 7 Bashfulness unfits Women for Conversa∣tion, 157 Bassa of Bussorah and his Son's Heads set on the Walls of Visiapour, 164 Bassa of Bussorah protected by the Mogul, 113 Beads common to Moor-men as well as Gentues, to tell their Prayers, 102 Behaviour of the common People rude at Church, 151 Beggars discouraged in Persia, 406 Beggars of the Musslemen stand on Pun∣ctilio's with God, 91 Benefaction voided by ordid Gain, 237 Benefit of the Balneos, 306. Best go first, 296 Bezoar-stones bred in several Creatures, 238. Its Account, 212 Cape-Birds and Water-Snakes presage te approach to Land, Page 48 Birds fall down as they fly, by reason of Heat, 35 Fighting Bishops, 146 Blood of the Persians, how puddled, 382 Bodies when dead, washed and apparell'd as alive, 282 Bombaim capable of securing 1000 Ships against Weather, 61 Bombaim part of Q. Katherine's Dowry, and would be of great Import, were it transferr'd according to Contract, 62 Boats housed in the Winter, 55 Boat-men dive 9 or 10 Minutes, 148 Books adorn'd with Gold, &c. in the Margin, 361 Bonds how firmed, 384 Bows of Horn unserviceable in Wet Wea∣ther, 99 Bounty to the Brachmins, 78, 80, 101 Breaking out in Botches a sign of a pre∣vailing Crasis, 35 Breezes from the Land 12 hours, as many from the Sea, 23 Bride veil'd with a Saffron-colour'd Veil, 279 Bridegroom eats not till his Father-in-Law produces a Bag of Gold, 278 Bury North and South among the Moors, 94. Never bury in Mosques, Ib. Bulls, Elephants, and Tygres intrapp'd, 56 Bullul Caun a good Soldier and a Patan▪ 147 Burning Women with their Husbands a Custom as old as Dido, 101, 152 Butter is boiled to keep in hot Countries, 118 C. CAlicut the See of the Zamerhin, 54. Calicut less famous than reported by Travellers, Ib. Calicut though it give the Name to Indian Cloth, yet produces none, 86 Camels Male lust after the Female forty days, 298 Camel-Riders subject to a Gonorrha, 108 Camelions feed on Flies, 41 Canorein the Primitie Language of Indo∣stan, 162 Canoreens too conversant with the Devil, 57 Canoreen a Fruitful Island, 73 Capuchins at Surat, 88
Caravan Ser Raws dedicated to their Saints, 230 Minor Cardamoms grow only near Cutty-Cony, 56 Carmelites eat no Flesh, 150 Cash constantly turned, amounts to the Credit and Profit of him so employed, 83 Caspian Se receives Rivers plentifully, but makes no reciprocal Return, 334 Castles inconvenient in the heart of a Kingdom, 358. Castle of Rairee, 79 Cattle feed on Thistles, 316 Charms pretended to be laid on Aliga∣tors and Tygres, 56. Charms admit∣ted in Physick, 114. Charms not ha∣ving Success, are imputed to the Ini∣quity of those they fail, 116. Charms a pious Fraud of the Brachmins, 118. Charms against Witchcraft, 215 Chastisement brings a due sense of Crimes, 164 Getting Children an Indulgence for Po∣verty, 197 Chimneys not known, 296 Christians Lions of the Sea, 121. Chri∣stians turning Moors, despised, 138 Christianity prevented spreading, on Worldly Concerns, 75 Christ acknowledged more than mere Man, 365 Chronology of the Persians ridiculous, At Church, Bath, and Caravan Ser Raw, no distinction, 341 Chyrurgeons valued for making Eunuchs, 393 Cinamon grows only on the Island Cei∣lon, 23 Cities Safeguard lost, the loss of Trade follows, 140. Cities of the Portugals receive none a-nights besides Christi∣ans, 74 From the Circumference to the Centre all things move by a Natural Tendency, 339 Cleanliness next unto Godliness, 200 Clouds of Sand, 221 Coaches drawn by Oxen, 68. No Coaches in Persia, 292 Coats that are seamless worn by Rusticks, whether the same our Saviour wore, 297 Coco-Nut a-kin to the Palm-Tree, 230 Cock-fighting, 175 Cofferies govern in Duccan▪ 167 Cold affects in Hot Countries, 54. Oc∣casioned, 256 Coin in India the most refined in the World, 98 Combating of several Europe Nations, 119 Comedians usher in their Interludes with Taber and Pipe, 376 Commerce ceases during the Rains, 76. Commerce makes People Urbane, 57 Commons Slaves in the East, 167 Company, whether best a National, or Private Concern, 65. Company's Ser∣vants brook no Competitors, 122 Complexions and Colours, 197, 198 Convents fuller of Men than the Gari∣sons, 156 Cornish-men have a Right to Trade to East-India, 146 Corn trodden by the Moors with Oxen, 194 Cotton-string Badge the Characteristick of a Brachmin, 190 Courage conspicuous as well in Adversity as Prosperity, 46 Cowardliness of 400 men, 309 Cowards when Peril is far from them▪ strike all with Lightning, &c. 32 Cow-dung the only Firing at Maderas, 40 Cows held sacred, 33 Cowis Caun Protector of Visiapour, 175 Diversity of Creatures hath no other end but to represent the Divinity, &c. 44 Crime unpardonable to convert a Maho∣metan, 276 Crow has an Enemy contemptible in Bulk, in Revenge implacable, 189 Custom more venerable than Science, 69. Custom makes all things easy, 231. Customs abated on account of defend∣ing Surat, 87. Customs cheated, if detected, only Corporal Punishment, not Loss of Goods, 98. Custom of the Moguls never to go through with a Conquest, 418. Customs of the Old World retained in the East, 44, 301. D. DAys and Nights equal almost between the Tropicks, 186. Good and Bad Days taken notice of, 131 Dan de Rajapore endures Fifteen Years Siege, 173 Danger in travelling not feared, 329 Dawn of the Day, how varied, 136 Dead Bodies burnt by the Genues, buried by the Moors, 33 Death to attempt the Discovery of their Women, 31, 395 Delight preferr'd before Security, the ill effects thereof, 172
Deluge possible, Page 76 Dervises charged with Intriegues, 392 Devotes morose, 52, 161 Devotion of the Heathens consists in wash∣ing and praying, 101 Diamonds only cut Diamonds, 113. Dia∣monds carried into Europe to be Set, return'd to India, make good Profit, 89 Diseases contracted at Mechlapatan cured by timely removing up the Country, 35. Diseases produced by the Alteration of Seasons, 93 Disrepute attends ill success, 51 Civil Dissentions the Ruin of the Indian Government, 28 Don John de Castro pawn'd a Hair of his Beard, which he redeemed at the Ex∣pence of all his Wealth, 218 Dowry the Credit of the Affinity, not Money, 267 Dregs of the People submit themselves to the Devil out of fear, 179 Drought the unhappiness of Persia, 328 Drunkards Monarchs, 91 Duccan the Bread of the Military Men, 167 Dutch Policy in burning four Ships Car∣goes of Spice, 223. Dutch got into the Breach we made on the Portugals, 88. Dutch demolish St. Thomas, and restore our Prisoners, 116. Dutch after twelve years besieging Goa, forced to leave it at last, 148. Dutch assist the Moors against the French, 42. Dutch Interest to quell the French in India, 43. Dutch engross the Spice-Trade, 57, 223. Dutch awe the Natives, 51 Dying Persons laid up to the Chin, to expire in their holy Waters, 101 E. EArs stopt with the Fingers, emits the Voice the stronger, 145 Earthquakes frequent where Sulphur abounds, 301 Easements made at set hours, 33 Eating together a Sacramental Obliga∣tion, 162 Eat nothing has life among the Gentues, 33 Eating together among the Eastern Nati∣ons a great scruple, 92 Ecliptick Course of the Sun creates the Seasons of the Year, 11, 229 Elephants Male mounted in State only by the Royal Family, 29 Elephants imitate human Progression, 35 Elephants generate as other Brutes, 35 Number of Elephants give Esteem to those that maintain them, 96. How governed, 35 Emanuel Lobos Rebel to the State of Goa, 153 Emblems of Dominion and Justice, 81 Emperors of Persia exoculate their Bro∣thers, 347. Emperors of India send their Kindred to the Post to be intoxi∣cated by a Poysonous Drink, 32. Em∣perors only in India allowed a Sum∣brero, 86. Emperor seizes young Girls for the Haram in Persia, 276 Enemies not to be furnished with Wea∣pons, 70, 106 English possessed of Bombaim after a long Debate of the Indian Portugals, 63. For∣midable to the Moors, 62. Breed sickly Children, 69. English privately befriend the French, 43. English have a Right to the Customs in Persia, 222. Neglect the Gulph of Persia, 353. English Trade is chiefly in Calicuts, 88 Entertainment in our Travels course, un∣less provided by our selves, 231 Envious Eye cast on Bombaim by the Dutch, 70 Equilibrium as to Temperament, 296 Eunuchs most in favour at the Court of Gulconda, 28. Eunuchs Spies upon the Women, 393 An Exalted Pitch of State a more con∣spicuous Confinement, 263 Eye-sight lost by an hot Iron drawn over, must not be recovered, 347 F. FAkiers ungovernable, 95 Family Government maintain'd, 118 Feast of Ahasuerus continued to this day among the Persian Emperors, 348. Feast truly Persian, 259 Fidelity a rare Instance in a Covetous Man, 138 Fighting with Mountains harder than fighting with Men, 171 First-Fruits exacted by the Emperor of Persia, 248 Great Fish prey on the little, as well on the Land as in the Sea, 147 Rotten Fish cause a poysonous Stench, 55 Fish and Fowl dedicated to Sacred Uses, 259 Flattery, odious in a Generous Spirit, much encouraged, 131
Flesh eaten as we do, pernicious in East-India, 82. Flesh more eaten on the Island Bombaim in a Month, than in Surat in a Year, 68. Flesh roasted pe∣culiar to the English Nation, 82 Flies cover the Table, 30 Flying Fish, 4 To Foot it through the City, a sign of the greatest Poverty, 361 Forbidden to burn the Wives with the dead Husband, 109 Force without Counsel of no value, 45 Foreign Ministers have a Respect equal to their Privy Counsellors, 314 Founders pervicaciously vain-glorious, 226 Franciscans touch no Money, 150 Fraud performs what Force could not, 173 Freemen the most Slaves, 86 French bad Neighbours to the English, 43 French force St. Thomas from the Moors, 42 Friendship not suspicious, 168 Frost at Surat, 187 Friday set apart for the Moors Worship, 95, 130 Funnels to let in Wind to the Houses at Gombroon, 222 Futurity not regarded, 226 G. GAbers the Ancient Persians, 265. Their Garb the same as those portray'd on the Walls of Persepolis, 266 Instant Gain preferr'd before Glory or future Emolument, 65 Ganges what esteem among the Indians, 188 Gaot or Mount Sephir crosses the Conti∣nent North and South, as the Taurus does East and West▪ 124 Gardens idolized, 330. Gardens granted by the King's Favour for Diversion, 104 Garlick used in Lethargick Distempers, 114, 137 Garments shaken in token of Innocence, 281 Gentiles scruple to kill their Neat, yet make no Conscience to work them to death, 143 Gentues had rather kill a Man, than suffer a Beast to be led to the Stall, 155 Geographers reckon Gates or the Gaot Mount Sephir, 126 Georgians make the Infantry among the Persians, as the Jarzaries do among the Turks, 284, 359. Are Christians of the Greek Church, 284 Gibralter the farthest Point South of all Europe, 3 Girls among the Armenians espoused a soon as Christned, to prevent the Em∣peror's Usurpation, 276 Gizard of an Hobera good in an Asthma, 318 Goa well seated, 154 Goats from Carmania sent to endeavour a Breed on St. Helena, 325 God infatuates those he will destroy, 165 God's Decrees not to be known by us, 373 Godliness not only the chief, but funda∣mental of all other Virtues, 367 Gold prevails more than Right, 382. Gold though it grows not in India, yet it stays there, 112 Goods ill gotten thrive not, 353 Government of India Tyrannical, 194. Ar∣bitrary, 197. Government of Persia the most Absolute, 251. Government of Seva Gi both Tyrannical and Bar∣barous, 152 Governors ought to observe Laws, 385 Governors expect large Gratuities to license Heathen Ceremonies, 118. Go∣vernors of Castles confined within Li∣mits, 99, 138. Governors in Fee with the Publick Notaries, 140 Grandeur of the World momentary, 266 Grapes without Stones, 242 Greatness of the Portugals expressed by their number of Sumbreroes and Cofferis, 74 Greek Church and Language abominated by the Armenians, 283 Groves of Beetle-Nut Trees represent a Place of Worship, 40 Gulconda its King, how chosen, 29. Aw'd by the Mogul, 166 Gun cloathed with Scarlet, that has made any notable Breach, slain any great Sol∣dier, or done any extraordinary Feat, 177 Gurgulets, called so from the sound is made when Water is poured out of them to be drunk as the Indians do, without touching it with their Lips, 47 H. HAbits of the Armenian Clergy, 275 Hands and Feet chief Instruments, and so used among the Gentiles, 113 Hatmakers adulterate Bevers with Carma∣nia Wool, 330 Harbour at Goa a fortunate and well∣weigh'd Choice, 154 Hawks of Muscovy in great esteem, 291
Health not to be impaired, but the Mind strengthned by a due subjection, 280 Heathens admire their Brachmins foretel∣ling Eclypses, 109. Heathens in India hold the Antiquities of Pan, Ceres, and Flora, 44. They are polled by the Mgul, 117 Heats unhealthy, 76. Their ill effect re∣medied, 235 Hrnia Umbilicalis, or Navel-Rupture, 21 Hills of Red Earth, 55 Hing used to correct a Windy Stomach, 114. Cakes of Hing, 239 Hobsies with their Swords able to cut down Man and Horse, 147 Hodges or Pilgrims Holiness makes them proud, 369. Lay Burthens on others, and exempt themselves, 319 Hogs unclean, 34 Hollanders only carry Money from Surat, 112 Holencores viliied for eating every thing, and doing servile Offices, 28 Holidays observed, especially Sunday, 186 Honesty of the Country People, 251 Honours breed Emulation, 140. Hopes of Honour being frustrated, there can be no desire of Glory, 356 Horse intomb'd, 158. Horses have the Virtue of their Sires communicated to them, 329. Used gently in the East, 100. High-mettled, 140. Not put to carry Packs, Oxen being for that Service, 34, 118. Horses never gelded, or cropped either Ears or Tails, 118 Hospitals for Beasts, 53 Hot Countries, as they are bad for young and lively, are good for Women and Old Folks, 69 Hottentots mere Barbarians, 422 Houses on Wheels, 230. Houses of Of∣fice none at Goa, they doing their Needs a-top of their Houses, 156. House of Office kept cleanly, 71. A piece of Courtesy to direct Strangers to them, 71 Humanity turned into Avarice no Bene∣fit, 239 I. St. IAgo Natives thievish and cunning, 9 Jasper Antonio Author of the Goa-Stones, 149 Ice drank frequently, pernicious to most Bodies, 311 Idea of Religion as it is true or false, so it happens there results a true Piety, Superstition or Idolatry, 387 Idleness makes Work, 345 Jealousy the Overthrow of the Indians, 27 Cause of Distraction, Page 116 Jenneah the Imperial City of the Duccan Kings, 139 Jesuits rich, despise Government, chief Traders, 159 Jews wear a Patch of different Colour only at Lhor, where the Caun has been a Pilgrim, 277. Jews ripped open on suspicion of e practice against the Emperor, 315. Jews allow Dispensa∣tions, to avoid the Inquisition, 185 Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, 44 Imaum Guardian of Mahomet's Tomb, 220 Immunity from Customs granted Mussel∣men out of a Religious Fit, 98 Immuring a Punishment for Robbers in Persia, 243, 318 Indians paint their Forheads, to distinguish their Tribes, 32. Idolaters; eat only with their own Tribe, Ib. Indostan has no Character to express its self in, 191 Industry of the Portugals commended, 221 Inflammation cured by the Butter of Gourds, 242 Influence of the Climate, 402 Innkeepers unprovided, 341 Inquisidor the Chief Judge, always a Do∣minican, 149 Inquisition a terrible Tribunal, 148. Cal∣led the Holy Office, 155 Inquisitiveness into the Affairs of the Ba∣nyans revenged with Poyson, 85 Intemperance the Cause of short life, 69 Interest obliges to be faithful, 167 Interloping destructive to the English Trade, 86 Interpreters for Europeans are allowed each a Wine-press in Persia, 224 Insects generated in every Plant, 242 Johanna Natives simple and innocent, 19 Their Infants have large Penes, 21 Don John de Castro's Virtue, Valour, and singular Probity, 218 Justice alone all other Virtues holds, 236 K. KIndred of Mahomet presume on that Title to enslave his Followers, 249 Kindness extorted not so obliging as free∣ly offered, 43
King of antam, Junior, espouses the Dutch nterest, 106. Kings that see by the Eyes of others, must have a false Prospect, 167. Kings hate where they fear, 258. A good King ought to govern, that the Laws as well as Arms should be a Safeguard to his People, 285. King of Persia's Bounty to the Fryars and Artisans of Europe, 288. Kings Slave a Title of the highest Honour, 339 Kingdom entirely subjected, what advan∣tage, 341 Kitchens how  339 Kites idolized, 33 Carpet Knights, 140 Knight of the erhin distinguished by Golden Manacies to his Wrists, 53 L. LAbour to get, before allowed to spend, 268 Lands in India all the Kings, 195 Language at the Persian Court Turkish, 402. Language at the Mogul's Court Per∣sian, 201. Language of Indostan a mix∣ture of Persian and Sclavonian, 201. Language of the Armenians polished by the Greek, 269 Lapis Lazuli how attained, 332 Laws of Persians still unalterable; their Laws therefore never abrogated, but always impugned by a fresh Edict, 357. Laws swallowed up by the Absolute Authority of dispensing with them, 249. Laws of Conchon restore no Wrecks, 80 Left Hand Place of highest Honour, 107 Legs appearing while sitting, ill breeding in the East, 93 Letters how sealed, 140 Lex Talionis squares not in all points, 382 Liberty of the Country not so much in∣sisted on, as whose Salt they eat, 139 Linguits bury, contrary to other Indians, who burn, 153. Linguits Stalions, 179 Linguo a França universally understood in the East, 283 Liquors enervating are Arack, made of Blubber, Jaggaree, &c. 69 Lizard the most extreme part South of England, 2 Logboard gives only the Ships Way, not the Course, and that uncertainly, 3 Lousy Companions fill us with that Ver∣min, 299 Loyalists Colleges would serve for Castles, 71 Luxury of the Persians, 279 M. MAgellanian Clouds and Crosiers di the Sailors to the South, 1 Magus quo peritior eo detestabilior, 192 Mahomet's ipse dixit implicitely relied on, 363 Mahometans divided, 92 Malabar Monkey, 56 Lord Malborough, 63 Malabars expert at darting Launces, 52 Maldivae Islands, 22 Fountain of Maladies are Air and Diet, 37 Mangoes best at Goa, 182 Marl the Material of Gombroon Pottery, 332 Marriage voided by the Armenian Priests, 277 Men married often, Women but once, 110 While Matrimony is celebrated, Morta∣lity admonished, 277. Matrimony a Bargain, 394, 395 Marrying by a Justice of Peace borrowed from the Mahometans, 94. Whose Ca∣dies can unmarry, Ib. Mariners of the Moors are unexpert, 24. Mariners of East-India invoke God at their Labour; ours more given to cur∣sing than praying, 55 Mastiffs of England esteemed for their Valour, 292 Mastich-Tree, 241 Mats used for Sails, 51 No Mean betwixt Poverty and Wealth, 397 Meat easily digested in Hot Countries, 82 Medicks among the Egyptians came from their exposing their Sick to all Passen∣gers, to administer Physick, 143 Melancholy more than Magick among the Indians, 180 Mendum's Point the English Burial-place, 67 Merchandize not scorn'd by the Indian Princes, 58 Merchants and Soldiers of a different Temper, 64, 284. Merchants not countenanced by Seva Gi, 174 Meridian, why placed in the Azores, 426 Meritorious to dye in their Sacred Ri∣vers, 101, 188 Mesrobe the Refiner of the Armenian and Georgian Language, 271 Midwives distinguished by Tufts on their Shooes, 94 Minds Excellencies beholden in some measure to the pureness of the Air, 403
Mineral Waters touched upon, Page 305 Mines of Copper discovered lately in Per∣sia a detriment to the Dutch, 333 Miscarriages laid on the King's Favourite, 315 Miserable is it where, the Members grow too powerful for the Head, 164 Mock-Creation of the Mango-Tree, 192 Modesty of the Indians, 101 Moguls better at standing it out in the Plain, than the Mountainers, 175 Mogul persecutes the Heathens with Seve∣rity and Hatred, 416. Mogul's Forces never entire, 167. Imposed on by the Officers, Ib. His Policy in govern∣ing, 195. His Ports blocked up by Seva Gi, 170. Mogul seated by the Overthrow of his Brethren, and Death of his Father Shaw Jehaun, 173. Mo∣gul signifies White, 195 Monarchy defaced, when circumscribed by no Sanction, 249. Monarchy more for the Dutch Advantage in India, than a Commonwealth, 197 Contempt of Money a rare Virtue in a Banyan, 307. Money not only the Nerves and Sinews of Trade, but the Life it self, 26. Money centres in In∣dia, 112. Money corrupts the most Loyal, 172. Money, says Seva Gi, is inconvenient for the common people, 174 Monkeys fabled to be once Men, 177 Monsoons blow North and South beyond the Tropicks, between them East and West, from whence they spring, 10. A far∣ther Account of the Monsoons, 47 Moon inchanted, an old Opinion, 364 Moormn beslabber with Rose-water, 92. Pull off their Slippers as well out of Complement as Religion, 93. Moor∣men not content with sipping, but drink largely of Strong Drinks when they begin, 93. Moormen mourn by neglecting to trim their Beards, and shift their Cloaths, 109. Moormen illi∣terate, 112. Pray for the Dead, 124 Moors in common account signify the same as those of the Mahometan Faith, 24 Moors of the Arabian Sect more Purita∣nical than the Chias, 92. Moors are jea∣lous, 31. Their foolish Behaviour at an Eclypse, 109. Are revengeful, 32 Moors forced to use Europe Pilots, by reason of their own Unskilfulness, 24 Mosques turned into Granaries by Seva G, 124. Mosques kept clean, 17 Mountainers Pillagers, and fare hard, 175 Mountains covered with Snow all the Year in Persia, 256. Mountains hard∣er to be overcome than Men, 172. Mountains of India cross the Continent North and South as the Taurus East and West, 187 Mules defend the Herd, 392 Mules and Camels over-land Ships, 329 Natural Mummy, 318 Captain Munday sent to St. Helens, 2 Murder of Wife, Child, and Paramour, connived at, apprehending the Adulte∣ress in the Fact. 97 Musk from Cochin Cha, 188 Mushat a Country Village, where I had like to have been smothered, 298 Muscetoes intolerable, 35 Loud Musick gives the time of the Day, 237 Musick Vox & praeterea nihil, 376 N. NAstiness evaporated in the Heats, and washed out of their Cities in the Rains, so that no Plague was ever known, 113 Native Soil admired by all, 300 Nature abhors Idleness, 4. Nature effects Miracles on Bodies not debauch'd, 114 Naval Power a Curb to the Indians, 115 Navigation perfects Geography, 221 Nests of the Toddy-Birds admirably con∣trived, 76 Nobility extinct among the Armenians, 270 Noise in their Inns, 231. Noise not made, they hardly think any intent on their Business, 89 North of the Line the Crocers are not far seen, 22 Numbers of the Heathens a thousand to one more than the Moors, 109, 165 O. OBedience taught before Command, 347 Obscenity and Brutality of the Gabers, 267 Offices purchased at high Rates, indirect Courses must be taken to repay them∣selves, Officers defraud the Soldiers of their Pay, 140 Oistershells used instead of Glass for Win∣dows, 64 Omens observed, 172 Onions correct the Unsavouriness of their standing Waters, 137
Opium used to make men perform things above their strength, 111. Opium brought from Malabar-Coast, 86 Orders of Priests at Surat, 95 Organs and loud Musick taking with the Barbarians, 191 Ormus being taken by the English, was the first Blow to the Portugal Greatness, 352 Ovid deceived about the Fifth Zone, 181 Owners of Ships unfit for Commanders in time of War, 67 Oxen made by bruising their Testicles, not gelding, 118. Oen all over India have a Bunch between their Shoulders, Ib. P. PAgods showred into Blood, 133 Palenkeen-Boys out-travel their Hor∣ses: Palenkeen described, 34 Palm-Tree delights in hot and sandy Countries, 244. Palm-Trees impreg∣nated with the Seed of the Male, 233 Parsies made Free Denizons of India, 117 Parsy-Tombs in Persia the same as in India, 292 Pass at Tanaw a stop to our Trade, as well as Sustinence at Bombaim, 144 Passions discernible in the Faces of the Blacks, 133 Chief Pastor's Office, 285 Patamars wear Feathers in their Turbats, 111 Patans a Warlike Race, 96 Patriarchs foisted on the Armenians by the Mandates of the Persian Emperors, 271 Pawn, a bundle whereof wrapt in a Leaf of Arack, an Indian Entertainment, 40. Pawn makes a fragrant Breath, and gives a rare Vermilion to the Lips, 93 Pay the cause of Soldiers, and Money the cause of Pay, 139 Peace could not be obtain'd by the Syddy, 78 Peace endeavoured with Seva by Visia∣pour, 79. Peace concluded with the English at Seva Gi's Coronation, 79 Pearl dragged at Tutticaree, 40. Pearl-fishing divided between the Persians and Arabs, 237. Pearls how generated, 331 Peons Officiousness, 30 People Warlike about Bonaru, 242 Pepper how it grows, 53 Persepolis the Residence of Storks, the Ty∣rants of the Fens, 251. Persepolis set on fire by Alexander, 253 Persian Language as in our Polyglot, not understood by the present Persians, 402 Persians are Good-Fellows, 246. Court∣ly, 221. Feast truly Persian, 259. Per∣sian Monarchs Absolute, 348. Persi the Fench of the East, 301. Opitors, 3 Person and Order distinguished by t Persians, Pilgrimage to Maecha clarifies their Blood, and purifies their Manners, 368 Pilot-fish, 5 Pirates of Malabar, 55 Pissasphaltum Dioscoridis, 318 Pits dug for Wild Beasts, 56 Plato's Revolution kept alive, 39 Platanists feign Souls descend upon Earth from the Tropick of Capricorn, 421 Plenty of India invited the Moguls, 194 Plica Polonica incident to the Indians, 26 Poesy how animated, 369 Poll-Tax on the Indians, 109 Poor well provided for, 156 Pope grants East-India to the Portugals, West-India to the Spaniards, 88 Popish Priests of all Orders buried in their Habits, 150 Popish Emissaries compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, 37 Ports blocked up, an irreparable Loss, 170 Portugal Women good at Cookery, 157. Portugals the first Discoverers of the Way by Sea to the East-Indies, 55, 189. Por∣tugals fondly report all India to be sub∣ject to them, 62, 197. Portugals great Bleeders, 151. Portugals on their Ar∣rival at Calicut found 500 Sail without Compass, 54. Portugals to their Ho∣nour took sure-footing in India, 62. Portugals hold their Tenants in a state of Villenage, 70. Portugals supply the Defect of the English, by sending a Fleet into the Gulph of Persia, 218 Poverty a cause of Contempt, 69 Prayers for the Dead held efficacious among the Moors, 124 Presents gain admission, 78 To preside is to do Right, 385 Priests ascend the Steeples every Pore, or Three Hours, to call men to Pray∣ers, 186. Priests marry, 275 Princes of India weak at Sea, 43, 44. Princes how educated, 347. Princes Actions cannot escape canvasing, 349. Princes of India poyson their Presents, 29 Slenderness of Profit and Assiduity alike irksome, 360 Procession made to implore Rain, 418 Professors examine not their Students, 361 Prognosticators chime to all Fancies, more than consult the Truth, 372
Providence has suppress'd the Growth of Tigres, Page 177 Punishments of divers kinds, 97 Q. QUadrants of no use, for want of Shade, 11 Persons of Quality protect the Banyans, 97 Quarrels for Religion implacable, 75 Queen-Mother of Persia of the Georgian Extract, 284 R. RAja's are burnt when dead, with a numerous Train of their Relati∣ons and Domesticks, 416 Raja of Rhamnagur dispossessed by Seva Gi, 164 Rajapore produces Hot Baths, 188 Rain a cause of Insects, Vermin, &c. 10. Rain accompanies the Sun, 11. Rains an occasion of Sickness, 22. It seldom rains at Gombroon; the Cause, 226 Ramras the last Heathen Emperor, 165 Ranna Jessinsin, 412 Rashpoots share the Toll at Surat, 110 Rats whet the Labour of the Inhabitants of St. Helena, 423 Religion, what can it not perswade? 283. Every one indeed ought to have a sense of Religion, but that the Immortal Gods should be appeased or pleased with Wickedness, is the highest Frenzy to believe, 266. Religion that should cement and unite Mankind in the Band of Humanity, introduces Absurdi∣ties, 284. Religious Debates foment∣ed by Interest and Ambition, Ib. Re∣ligion has enjoined the Indians healthy Rules, forbearance of Flesh and Wine, 182 Representations not abdicated by the Per∣sians, 258 Splendid Retinue both their Pride and Safeguard, 30 Revenge by Poyson cautioned, 30. Eve∣ry Region provided with Remedies, 310 Rice, the best grows on the Coast of Ma∣labar, 53. Rice delights in Water, 40 Riches, Honour, and High Birth make none happier or better, unless this Worlds Goods be seasoned with a Mind endued with Virtue, 284 Riders how they manage their Horses, 139 Robberies prevented in Persia, without op∣pressing the Subject, 222 Robbers immured, Page 243 Roots instead of Bread-Corn eaten at St. Helens, 423 S. SAcrifice-Islands, 55 For common Safety if any Part be afflicted, every Member runs to the Succour of the other, as to their pecu∣liar Tranquility, 174 Sailors more accustomed to ride on Yard-Arms than any other Cavalcade, 220 Saint of Mahome  lowd Villain, 312 Salute with Even  s we with Odd, 107 Salt at Ormus a Cure against Fevers, 221 Sands whirled by the Winds, 221, 226 Satyrs, 188 Seals cut in Silver are engraven with Words, not Images, 384 Seasons of the Year how contrived to the North of the Line, 181 Self-preservation, 385 Serpents charmed by Musick, 34 Servants bow every Morning and Evening to the Thresholds of their Masters Doors, 222. Servants more Lordly than better born, 85 Servitude has debased the Ancient Persians, 268 Seva Gi his own Pay-master, 163. His Stratagems, 172. Seva Gi escapes the Mogul's Court in an Hamper, 173. He is disheartned for going to Sea, 174. He is weighed against Gold, which he gave to the Brachmins, 80. He ascends his Throne, 81. Seva Gi a diseased Member of Visiapour, 170 Sharks, 5 Shaving a sign of mourning among the Gentiles, 101 Shaw Abas a great Hero, 258 Specious Shews recommend more tha Profoundness of Parts, 28. Shews expose the Christian Religion to Con∣tempt, rather than gain Proselytes, 276 Wandring Shepherds, 253 Ships make into the Indian Ports after St. Francis's Moon, 77. Ships, when they go in and come out on the Coast of Coromandel, 48 Sir Anthony Shirley, 100, 256 Shoot backwards as the Parthians, 398 Shroffs try all Metals, 413 Siads only wear green, 92, 93 Siegmonjaffa, a Great Minister of Gulconda, his Gratitude and Policy, 28 Silver Bait procures all things, 297
Singers in Siras are the best in Persia, 247 Sinus Persicu and the Red Sea, Keys to the Worlds Treasury, 221 Siras is an University, 247. Glasses are made there as well as Wine, Spirits of Wine, Rose-Water; and there are the best Copper-smiths, 248 Snakestones a remedy against their Bites, 53 Water-Snakes warn the Pilots of their approach to the Indian Shores, 77 Snow called White Rain by the Indians, 298 Sodomy common, yet Revenge on the Aggressor common  97, 112 Soldiers Maxim  Compliments expected fro . 126 Solomon's Throne▪ 139, 293 South of the Sun's clination, a North Sun makes the same time of Day, a South Sun does on the contrary side, 11 Spice-Trade, all but Pepper, in the hands of the Dutch, 51 Spies under disguise of a Fakier, 193 Spirit of Sulphur, where best, 238 Sports of the Moors, 110 Spouts very frequent, 10 Stab or a Slash, which most mortal, 137 Stars Ascension and Descension, 186. North Star seen in a South Horizon, 11 Statists keep Princes Judgments in Mino∣rity, 347 Stones in the Body generated by bad Wa∣ter, 241 Straw chopped used instead of Fodder, 292 Strength void of Counsel sinks with its proper Weight, 45 Suffee a great Hoarder, 293 Suffees, in contradiction to the Siads, wear Red, 358 Sumptuousness the consequence of Trade, 124 Sunday observed by the Indians, 186 Sun where Vertical, 186. Sun's Eclip∣tick Motion determining the Seasons contradicted, 317. Sun at the Line twice, at each Tropick but once Per∣pendicular in a year, 11 Superstition makes men lose their Reasons, 179 Surat advanced from a Fishing Town within this Century, 120. Surat Seva Gi's Treasury, 163 T. TAskmasters most severe of the same Tribe, 67 Tears the Sluggards helpless and last Ef∣fort, 211 Temperance a cause of long Life, 200 St. Thomas buried in India, on whose Mount grows the Arbor Tristis, 43 St. Thomas Christians have one Leg big∣ger than the other, see the Cause, 53 Time of Heats healthiest at Mechlapa∣tan, 35. Time of Rains sickly, 35 Time wears all things, 251 Timurlan enters India with his Scythians, 185 Tobacco and Walnuts the best at Maijm in Persia, 254 Toleration in Religion consistent with the Rules of Gain, 68 Tombs of Emperors why not durable, 332 Tomb of a Persian Ambassador sent in∣to England, 100. Tom Coriat's Tomb, Ib. Tortoise-shells from the South-Seas only made transparent, 122. Tortoise weeps; its large Heart cause of its Pusilani∣mity, Ib. Tortoise or Turtle-flesheat∣en a Month together, specifical for the Cure of Diseases gotten in long Voya∣ges, 425 Trade to Euphrates laid open by the Eng∣lish, 353. Trade of India over Land, 55. Trade not understood by Seva Gi, 170 No travelling in India without a Guard, 120 Treasure centres in India, 112. Treasure amass'd by Trade, 170 Trees bending indicate the Constancy of the Wind, 295 Trumpets of the Moors sound dreadful∣ly, 83. Trumpets of Seva Gi more tuneable than the Moors, 126 Turnadoes productive of Storms, 10 Twilight in the Torrid Zone but little, the reason, 55 Tyrannical Government in India as ne∣cessary to keep them under, as abstain∣ing from Flesh, and washing their Bo∣dies, to keep them in health, 197 Tyrants trust those least are most allied, 347 V. VAinglory of an entire Founder, 226 Vasquez de Gama the First Discover∣er of the East-Indies, 62 Venetians raised their State and Grandeur by Over-land Trade from Calicut, 55 Venetians decline in Trade since the Portugals Discovery to the East-Indies, 55 Venon of Malice and Insinuation, 173 Viceroy of Goa, 151
Victory dearly purchased, 164 Vanage exercised by the Portugals, 71 Virgil's Account of Dido is false, 152 Visiapour the greatest Mart for small Dia∣monds, 155. Visiapour Kingdom, its Extent, 166 Vortobeds, Armenian Monks, profess Celi∣bacy, 270 Voyages made in Six Months by obser∣ving the Trade-Winds, which were wont to require so many Years, 4 W. REligious Wars are cruel, when to kill our Fellow-Creatures is thought a Service to God, 220 Washings too much presumed on to pu∣rify Sins, 344, Washing the Feet an hospitable Entertainment, 71. Wash∣ing before Meals, 32. Wash at Ease∣ments, 33 Watch in Garisons call on one another, 126 Water made sitting, 200. Water defiled if any dead Carkass have fallen into it, 226. Water reckoned good or bad, as we do Air, 53. Water the clearer the better, 304. Water characteri∣zed, 310. Thames Water apt to take Fire, keeps longest, 17 Water-Snakes on the Coast of India, 45 Wealth of the Subjects falls into the Kings hands at their Death, 28. Wealth a necessary Adjunct attained by a few, 70 Wealth centres in India, 188 Dancing Wenches common Whores, 152 Dancing Wenches sacred to their Gods, 44 Wheat the best at Esduchos, 257 Wheelbarrows sail laden with Salt on the Isle of Maio, 6 Whirlwinds from the Mountains hurl Men and Oxen to the bottom, 128. White Men expect observance, 156 Whoring in India a point of Manhood, 28 Wild Beasts entrapp'd, 56 Winds sent before the Rains, to qualify the Heat, 120. Winds why they shrink on the Coast of Guinea▪ 10 Wine odious to Musselmen, 168. Wines turn Vinegar, for want of Cure, 242. Wine in Hot Countries makes ill Nur∣ses, 69 Winter at the South Cape, 12. Winter and Summer how varied, Ib. Winter at the Mauritius, 58 Wives burn with their dead Husbands, 33, 117, 152 Women in India  in Labour, 115 Women of Reput converse not with the Men, but transact their Affairs by themselves, 277. Women ride astride, 279. Women coop'd up, 287. Wo∣men that burn not with their dead Husbands, despised, 198. Women set on to complain, 400. Women cabal not in Persia, 396. Women held to be , 393. Women how puri∣fied, 94. Women married but once, 110. Women strictly guarded, 31, 133. Women carry Water, and do the Drudgeries of the House, 199. Inde∣cent to strike a Woman, 383. Worms breed in Human Bodies, 229 Y. YEar, its Seasons varied by the Speci∣fick Determinations of Winds, &c. 317 Yearly Seasons in India, 186, 187 Z. ZAmerhin not brooking the Portugals as Inmates, they removed to Goa, 55 Zeal blinds and warms, 160. Zeal of former Ages thought no Labour enough to express their Love to the Deity, 138 FINIS.
