F719 12099007 54018
CHRIST Ruling in midst of his ENEMIES; OR, Some first Fruits of the CHURCHES DELIVERANCE, Budding forth out of the Crosse and Sufferings, and some remarkable deliverances of a twentie yeeres Sufferer, and now a Souldier of Jesus Christ; Together, With Secretarie Windebanks Letters to Sr: Jacob Ashley and the Maior of Newcastle, through which the violent prosecutions of the common adversaries to exile and banishment, are very transparent. Wherein also the Reader shall find in severall passages, publike and particular, some notable encouragements to wade through difficulties for the advancing of the great Designe of Christ, for setting up of His Kingdome, and the ruine of Antichrist. By Lievtenant Collonel, JOHN FENWICKE. Apoc. 7. 14. These are they that come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lambe; and, Chapt. 12. 11. And they overcame by the blood of the Lambe, and by the word of his testimony, and they loved not their lives to the death. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen in Popes-head Alley, 1643.
The Epistle DEDICATORY TO NEWCASTLE upon Tyne. NEWCASTLE, though not the place of my birth, or much of my breeding (for I have herein been more beholden to other parts of the world) yet none may challenge from mee more interest in this Dedication. Newcastle, famous for thy mocking and misusing of Christs Messengers, and ill entertainment of his Ser∣vants, ever since our Reformation, witnesse that famous Knox, great Reformer of Scotland, his Sermons preached there: witnesse learned Ʋdall, thy faithful Monitor, whose innocent blood cryes yet from the ground, whom for writing against the Prelates, thou prosecuted as a Tray∣tor to bonds, imprisonment, and sentence of death, un∣der which he died before execution; witnesse Reverend Balmford, whom in like manner thou expulsed, though thou couldst not touch his life, thou pricked his sides (as well as Christs) in his hearers, with the reproach of Balmfordian Faction and Schisme; witnesse Alder, Jenni∣son, Murton, all godly Ministers, expulsed by thee: witnesse others of Christs servants, ill entertained of
thee, yet alive to witnesse all that is alledged against thee, and much more; and last of all, hee that sends these things unto thee, his wife and children, who have received their birth and breathing in thee, make up that long and blacke roll of bitter things writ against thee from heaven. O Newcastle! how hath God dealt with thee, by his divine waterings of his Word many yeeres? how has God spoke aloud to thee by his judgements and forewarnings of ruine and desolation after thou hadst refused all instructions from his Word and Messen∣gers? hast thou forgot how loud God spake to thee in that great plague, Anno, 1636. when there died in half a yeere about seven thousand, which made thee almost desolate, thy streets growne greene with grasse, thy treasurie wasted, thy trading departed, as thou never yet recovered it; thy wounds increased thy madnesse; thou wentest not to heaven for a perfect cure: What thinkst thou was the meaning of that strange fire brake out Nota, This fire brake out in the evening of that day after their consultati∣ons were ended wher∣in many an∣tient Re∣cords were burnt up and consu∣med. (none ever knew how) in thy secret chamber of thy Townes house, or Common hall, where the next yeere after that great plague, thy Rulers, like Wolves of the evening, were lurking all that day in plotting the new project about Coals & Salt, to devoure thy poore inhabi∣tants, and also new devices to suppresse sound preaching, and strave your soules. How is it, after many more warnings, too large to recite, that thou art still hardned, and the cry of thy sinnes like Sodome is come up to hea∣ven: in thee is found the blood of the Prophets, the blood of the Saints oppressed & banished, and hunted to death: in thee is found the blood of thy inhabitants op∣pressed and impoverished, by unlimitted authoritie, and arbytrarie government, so court-like, as an Aple is like an Orange. In thee is found the uncleanesse of Sodome,
Adulteries, and Fornications in thy Rulers houses: thy filthinesse in thy skirts, transparent to strangers round about thee; in thee found drunkennesse and excesse, with melodie, to see the Church laid desolate: in thee is found the two grand sins, that will sincke a whole state, a whole kingdome without repentance and reformati∣on: superstition in worship, and oppression in govern∣ment, which has brought upon this Land that bloodie sword, which now threatens to devoure thee (I meane, thy wicked Magistracie and Rulers, who have wrested all thy power into their own hands, and all that wicked crue of their confederacie) O Newcastle! when wilt thou learne the dialect of heaven, speaking loud in thine eares? O Newcastle, Newcastle! wilt thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. If thou wilt not hearken to heavens counsell, heare thy sentence, Thou art defiled with blood, and cannot be cleansed, but by the blood of them that shed it, Numb. 35. 33. O Newcastle! what shall I say to thee? what hath inraged thee against him that writes this complaint against thee? whom have I wronged of you? bring forth your evidences, and plead your cause; I hope ere long, wee shall have a faire and free hearing and just proceedings, not at the barre of your Court Law of hanging, Excom. imprisonment and banishment; but at a bar of right judgement. I have ever sought thy good in spiritualls and temperalls, even to my owne hurt and losse; I have seene sometimes thy plagues a farre off, and wept insecret for thee, (as the place of my habitation, though my Meseck and Kedar, the place of my sorrow, and never of my joy, how oft have I assayed to have left thee in thy rebellion against God, but heavens counsels did not favour mine) when the great plague began, Anno 1636. Consider what might be Gods mind, to make mee
one day weepe bitterly over thee, riding alone about a mile from the towne, with many sad thoughts, and when I lookt up, and see Newcastle before mee, my heart burst out with grief, with the same words boing within me, wherewith the Lord Jesus wept over Jerualem: O New∣castle, Newcastle, would God thou in thy dayes had remembred the things belonging to thy peace, often revolving these thoughts with me: but when I came to the next words, with many reasonings within mee, shall they be hid from thine eyes, shall thy habitations be laid desolate. My heart was like to burst within mee, for a good space, assuring my selfe to heare ill newes, (for I had been in the Coun∣trey) and comming to towne, I heard presently of the increase of the plague, and that the night before some six and thirty died of it; and from thence it daily increa∣sed to foure hundred a weeke, till it had swept away about seven thousand at least, in seven or eight moneths time. O Newcastle, before thou hadst recovered this blowe, which I mourned to see comming upon thee, what ailed thee to begin to plot the ruine of me and my wife and children. I had seen many habitations laid de∣solate, though I returned safely to my owne, with all my family, praise to my God, often strangely preserved from that deadly infection; was it that thou grudged me thy corrupt ayre to breath in, that thou sought my life, and pursued my wife and mee both as traytors, till thou drove us out of the kingdome. God made mee require thy malice with the like pitie as before, that morning I escaped thy malicious designe against me, as I passed the gates in the darke of the morning, and being a little passed from the walls, the towne being still in my sight, God made me weepe over thee, the second time, in the same manner as before, and with ruminating and rea∣sonings
within me upon the same words of Christ over Jerusalem, and how soone after was the bloody sword drawne, which has wasted thee not a little, and well if the worst be not yet behinde. What hast thou got now by all thy discourteous and harsh dealings with mee, who has ever sought thy good? I have served thee di∣vers yeeres in a publique office, wherein, though I could doe thee little good, (the streame run so strong against mee) yet I have sometimes kept out some evils from over-spreading thee, untill thou began to stretch out thy necke against God, in the Scottish Cause, and then, ever since, how  an inundation of all evills over∣whelmed thee, and God, I feare, left thee to some fatall fall. Repent, repent, O Newcastle, lest the Lord de∣part from thee, and send a revenging sword to avenge his quarrell against thee; if so, take heed of what was threatned to a wicked Citie: Afflicton shall not come the second time, which the Lord avert, and give thee a heart to repent and turne to him, that has long smitten thee, that hee may repent him of the evill which other∣wise will befall thee; For all the strength and power of man wherein thou still dost boast and glory, I have thought it my dutie, to present thee with a briefe view of thy harsh usage of mee and mine, to see if at any time God may give thee an heart to repent, which should be to mee greater joy then to see thee laid de∣solate, when these papers I now send thee, shall be as a flying roll through thy streets and dolefull habitations, filling your fainting hearts with errors and shrikings to think of all your wickednesses; and amongst the rest, your bloodie plots and practises against one that has ever sought your good, John Fenwick.
To the READER. Courteous Reader, I Had beene silent concerning my selfe in this evill time, had not the importunity of some friends, and the unthankefulnesse of this apostate age imposed a necessitie upon mee of publishing somewhat to the world of my late troubles and sufferings to many extremities these five yeeres compleat,  about the great worke of God begun in Scotland, finding by others as well as in mine owne opinion, that I have suffered much by my silence; The stormes and tempests of this troubled time, having tossed mens wearyed minds, out of their right course and motion, and the many buffets and blowes in these common calamities, upon this kingdome, have so malld the heads and dulled the spirits of men, that they have almost lost their hearing and understan∣ding, and as slow to remember what they have heard and known of former sufferings, the new sufferings wearying out the old; so that a necessitie is laid upon mee to publish somewhat to the world of my late troubles, for these reasons: First, my dutie to God, to declare his mercies in midst of mine enemies malice, in thankfulnesse of minde and spirit, to leave it to posteritie, as it is expressed, Psal. 102. this shall be written for the generations to come. Secondly, if God bring out good to my Countrey out of these troubles, the world may see, that I have suffered somewhat for it. Thirdly, Being called out to the field in the publike service of the State from the first going out of our armies, and having lost some blood in this cause already in Keynton-field, where God gave me (I may say) a new life, being sore wounded, and
stript and left for dead upon the ground among the dead almost an houre senslesse, and being still resolved to be prodig all of my blood, (if God assist me) in this his cleare and undoubted cause, wherein the bloody sword makes no difference, but my lot may be to fall as soone as another; my children may be some∣what comforted from my former deliverances, to trust the same God, who hath strengthened me with resolution, rather to die ho∣nourably, then live a sordid life in slavery, and when they shall enjoy their precious priviledges, and find them dyed in their fathers blood, they will more prise them, and be more carefull to preserve them in their integrity to the generation following, as their st inheritance, that still God may have his due honour and glory, and a constant succession of faithfull ser∣vants to the worlds end: Fourthly, having lost my whole estate, in these late troubles, and not enjoying the benifit of 100l. of mine owne at home, or in fraigne parts in five yeeres time, and spent my selfe further in the publique service, and not able to provide for my children (if God shall call mee before things be settled) I leave to them I hope hereby, a title and in∣interest in the publique good, whereby they may bolaly and just∣ly challenge a share, from that rule of common equitie, That those that have borne the hea of the day, and tasted deeply of the sowre, ought drinke of the sweet and be comforted with the coole waters of repast and rest; it not being for the honour of my Countrey to leave mine to sincke under my burthens for the publique good, wherein I have spent my selfe, without the least publique support. Good Reader▪ beare with my plaine and simple stile, my desire being to speake in plainnesse to the wea∣kest capacitie, not curious to studie words and sentences, quaint termes or elegance, but that plainnesse and simplicate may set forth truth in her owne proper colours, without dimnesse or obscuritie, if any thing here may adde the least strength or
courage in thee, to prosecute this great worke of Christs King∣dome, give God the praise; if any thing beare the character of my weaknesse and infirmitie, burie it in that love that suffers all things, and thinks no evill, and remember in thy prayers, Thy Servant for the Kingdome of Christ. Iohn Fenwicke. Epitaphium in hoc tenebroso mortalitatis tempore ab Authore scriptum, ac posteris relictum. THe Lord's my Life, he lengths my dayes, My tongue, my pen, shall spread his praise: From dangers great, by sea, by land; From pestilence, from enemies hand: From fruits of sinne, from hellish feares, From folly of my tender yeeres; He has preserv'd, and heard my cry Assuredly; if death draw nigh, Christ my Joy, shall soone destroy Both death and sinne, which mee annoy, And bring me safe into his barne, In season as a ricke of Corne. I. F.
TO THE HONOURABLE, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, The humble Petition of IOHN FENVVICK. Humbly sheweth, THat your Petitioner hath been bred a Merchant in divers forraigne Countries many yeeres, and so lived a Merchant in his native countrey some eightene yeeres in which time his imployments of shipping sea and land-men▪ and divers manu∣factures of this Kingdome, have not been unpro∣fitable to the Commonweale, nor unfruitfull to his Majestie, affording to his Treasurie, three, foure and five hundred pounds per annam fifteen or sixteen yeeres, as the Custome-house books will shew. And amongst other nations your Petitioner had commerce with the Scottish nation some fifteen yeeres, or more, in exchange of monies, buying and selling and shipping goods and merchandie to and from thence, and there being no restraint of commerce. Your Petitioner went into Scotland about 26 Decemb. 1638. and brought a ship laden with Wheat, of the Earle of Winton a papist, as he had done a few moneths before, and with whom he had dealing divers veeres before; your Petitioner comming home to Newcastle, was pursued as a Covenanter by divers illaffected persons in the Magistra∣cie▪ and a Warrant sent forth by Sir Alexander Davison & Sir Iob. Marloe, to the Constables who watched your Petitioner his house three dayes to apprehend him for no other cause, but correspondence with the Scots, which your Petitioner in regard of his trading could not avoid. And your Petitioner being informed by some of good quallitie that they had a malicious plot for your petitioners life; and when no friends durst intercede for him, your petitioner was forced to returne back in∣to Scotland; where both privately he was watched, excepted out of
the peace at Barwick by the Earle of And, when no man else was ex∣cluded, and publikely pursued in the Parliament there by the Lord Traquaire, his Majesties Commissioner (by the instigation, as hee be∣lieveth) of his adversaries at Court and in Newcastle, as may appeare by the Letters of Secretary Windebanck hereunto annexed. And further humbly sheweth, that a little after your petitioner was thus most inuriously driven from his countrey, family and friends, and all his affaies struck ded in an nstant, to his utter undoing: the aforesaid Sir Iohn Marloe and Sir Alexander Davison, with Sir Thomas Rydle junior, Master Ralph Coke and Ralph wes, under pretence of a Commission from his Majestie, which they refused to produce, most illegally molested your petitioner his wife, examined her and her friends, and severall times did search your petitioners house, and tooke away writings at their pleasures, and sundry times imprisoned your petitioners wife, and at last drove her from her family and succour of friends, into Scotland for her safetie, where she was forced to abide untill the pacification at Barwicke, and then returned to Newcastle. And last∣ly, upon the newes of the Scottish armie advancing into England, Master Robert Bewick then Maior of Newcastle, by his officer brought your pe∣titioner his wife out of the countrey far beyond his jurisdiction to Newcastle, where she was searched and examined by Sir Iohn Beaumont a Commander under my Lord Conway and Sir Ioh. Marloe, and a guard of 12 Musketeers set upon her, threatning her life; so as she was forced to escape a private way by water, into the countrey: By which injurious dealing, your petitioner hath been sore damni∣fied in his liberty, estate and credit, which is a Merchants livelihood, to the dissipation of his family, and losse of all friends, and priviledges of a subject to possesse his right and his debts at home and abroad in for∣raigne parts, no man to this three yeeres past, paying him, or will yet pay him any thing without suit of law, which in regard of his long troubles and many losses, he is wholly unable to prosecute, untill by the justice of this assembly he be righted and repaired of his great losses and dammages of above foure thousand pounds, as he hopeth to make good▪ Most humbly prayeth, this Honourable Assembly to take into consideration your Peti∣tioner hs sad ondition, and to afford him redresse of his grievous wrongs and repaire of his heavie losses and damages sustained by the injustice and illegall molestations of the above named persons, his long and heavie adversaries, And your Petitioner shall daily pray, &c. This Petition was first presented by the Earle of Roches, and the rest of the Sc Commissioners at the Treaty of pacification about ult. Deemb. 1640. but found no time of remedy. And in June 1642. at the next Treaty by the Earls of Lothian and Lindsey, and the Lord Balmirinoe, and the rest of the Commissioners from Scotland, againe recommended and referred to Col, Fir, to be taken into consideration in Par∣liament upon first opportunity, but hitherto the great distractions of the kingdome hath preted.
SECRETARY WINDEBANCKS Letter to Sir Iacob Ashley; presented at a Commit∣tee about Newcastle businesse, Mr. Miles Corbet in the chaire, May 28. 1642. By Sir Thomas Rydle Junior, and Sir o. Marloe, in Justifica∣tion of their good Service to the King; pleading that it was good Service then, and how they sought to take mee, but could not ac∣complish it. HIs Majestie hath commanded me to give you notice of an Information lately come to him from a very good hand, that one John Fenwicke a Merchant, and one Betleston a Tanner, both of the Towne of New∣castle have lately bin in Scotland and subscribed to the Covenant and carried with them t es of divers others which will doe the like, (this being a most notorious and base Treachery, especially in an English Subject, and of most pernicious consequence if it should spread further. His Majestie is pleased to re∣commend the strict Examination of it to your eare, and commands that if these find you not at Newcastle, you immediately repaire thither, and advise with Mr. Marlay of that Towne, what course is fittest to bee taken to come to a cleare and certaine knowledge, of the truth hereof: You are likewise to call to your A∣sistance Sir William Bellasys a very able Gentleman, and of exceeding good af∣fection to his Majesties Service; and if upon examination, you shall find Fenwick and Bitlestone guilty of this charge; you are by His Majesties expresse Command to Commit them immediatly to Prison, there to remaine close, untill his Majesties pleasure shal be further known; and you are further to examine strictly what names they carryed with them into Scotland to become Covenanters; and to certifie me with all speed, what you shall find herein, that so this dangerous correspondence and practise may bee discovered and prevented, and that place of importance secu∣red, upon which the Covenanters have a speciall eye, and in the preservation where∣of consists the safety of all these Northerne parts: You see what diligence and dex∣terity, the weight of this businesse requires; and how great a trust is laid upon you; and I doubt not but you will consider it, and governe your selfe accordingly. I have received two dispatches from you, and immediately after the first came to my hands, I gave you notice of it by a line or two: The Lords of the Committee have beene made acquainted with them both, and you are to receive herewith seve∣rall answers from their Lordships to all that you have desired to be instructed in.
The enclosed is from Mr. Controller, who remembers his true love to you, to which you may doe me the favour to adde mine with many thanks for your friend∣ly expressions to mee: In some acknowledgement whereof I shall be your true Ser∣vant, in any thing wherein I may contribute to your Service there, or to you owne particular, with the assurance whereof to you, I rest. SIR, Your most Affectionate and true Servant. FRANC. WINDEBANCKE. At the Court at Whuhall, 19. Ian. 1638. POSTSCRIPT. THe greatest danger we conceive of those Northerne parts is Newcastle, and therefore it is expected that you endaevour by all meanes possible, according to the powers and instructions, which you have, to strengthen that place, and to secure it from surprise; seeing likewise upon the safety of that depends much the security of those parts, which are furnished with Fewell from thence  will give me ac∣compt of this businesse of Fenwicke and Bitlestone, as  as you may, for so his Majestie expects, and to that purpose you may keepe this Messenger with you, untill the Examinations shall be taken, and then send them expresly by him. There goeth herewith a Letter from the Lord Marquesse Hamilton to Mr. Marlay of Newcastle; And likewise a Warrant under his Majesties hand to your selfe, the Major, and Store-keeper, for the issuing out of Arms to some of the Scotch Nobility, as you will perceive.
Secretarie Windebanckes Letter to Sir Alexander Davison, & aliis, presented at the same time with the former, and by the same Persons. AFter my heartie commendations, I have received your Letters of the 24. of Jannarie, subscribed by yourselfe, Sir William Bellasis and Master Iohn Marlay, to∣gether with the examinations that came with them, and have acquainted his Majestie with them, who takes very well your care in that service, and hath commanded me to give you thanks for it: His Majestie perceives the confederacie in that towne, with the ill affected party in Scotland, may grow dangerous, if it be not speedily prevented; and therefore doubts not of the continuance of your diligence in the discovery of the whole com∣bination and strict and severe proceeding against such as you shall find inclining to it. Concerning Iohn Fenwicke, it is to be doubted be is in Scotland, and therefore you must carry a watchfull eye upon his returne, and if you can apprehend him, commit him immediately to some prison out of the towne, where his confederates may have no meanes of resort to him; for Thomas Betelston, you have done well to commit him, but you must likewise send him out of the towne to some safe pri∣son where he may remaine close, and out of the danger of the conversing with any of his confederates: and the like course you are to hold with all others whom upon examination you shall finde of this faction.
You are likewise to take some speedie course for the prevent∣ing of these clandestine meetings at undue houres, at Henrie Dawsons house, under pretext of , and if Master Mourton the Preacher there be ill affected to the Church go∣vernment, you must make diligent inquiry from whence he hath his maintenance, and if you finde hee lives by contribution of refractorie persons, you must either prevent his preaching in private, and those supplies which hee receives from them, or else not suffer him to remaine in your towne. His Maiestie will expect from you an account from time to time of your proceedings herein, according to the importance of this service wherein hee doubts not of your care, and so with rememberance of my love unto you, I rest Your affectionate friend, Fr. Windebancke. From the Court at White-Hall, 2. of Febr. 1638.
CHRIST Ruling in the midst of his ENEMIES. I will not now trouble the Reader, with a large Relation of the troubles of my Life, or what I have suffred under an unlimited power of Prelacy▪ reaching me into Germa∣ny above twenty yeeres agoe, when I had spent some se∣ven yeeres in that then flourishing Country; and how the practises of Dr. William Loe and his accomplices, by Letters from King Iames and Arch-bishop Abbot. I was driven from my employments and meanes of preferments there. Or what I have suffered since in my Native Country, both in matters of the Church and Common-weale, by molestations of the Prelates, there Excom∣munications, sometimes in foure severall places upon one day▪ and ma∣ny other molestations of Dr. Iackson and Mr. Alvey; his Successor in the Vicaridge of Newcastle, and what other vexations in the Common-weale, Nota, Herein I have been many yeers the Subject of the admiration of friends, and the object of the enemie madnes and rage, in that they could ne∣ver make mee stoope, I have waded through with much cost and trouble; In oppo∣sition of illegall taxes and oppressions, under an Arbitrary Govern∣ment; about Knighting. Ship money, projects; and other oppressions in the Government of Newcastle, the Court Records of Durham, Yorke, Westminster, and also of the Counsell board can testifie. My aime at this time is only, to let forth my late and bitter sufferings, about the Scottish businesse now allmost full five yeeres. In relating the passages of my troubles about the Scots, I shall overpasse, many things will necessarily fall out to bee read in the Letters▪ of my adversaries, and in my petition to the Parliament, and will only here observe some other remarkable passages of Gods providence, in the publike, as well as in my particular. When the first troubles began in Scotland about the new Service Booke imposed, the world knowes what alterations and changes fol∣lowed. As mainly, the renewing of their old Covenant, which had
lyen by forgotten many yeeres, during the reigne and rage of the Pre∣lates: A Copy of which Covenant, a worthy Minister of almost 20. yeeres acquaintance in Scotland sent me with a relation of the solemne taking of it in that Kingdom, which when I read and seriously weigh∣ed the Covenant it selfe and passages about it, I writ under it. Inde Triumphabit Chrus post praelia ior. That is in English, From thence after bloody battailes Christ shall triumph and begin his conquests throughout the World. And so sent it to my Friends in New-England; who where no lesse affected with it then I: and earnestly solicited my constant in elligence about that busines of Scotland, which I also as willingly performed un∣till I was driven out of England. And indeed to speake plaine out I had some assurance from Heaven, that now was the dawning of the Churches deliverance neare, and that from those weake beginnings Christ would a rise to doe great things in the world, and make way to his Kingdome. About 6 May 1628. I had occasion to ride into Scotland, and bought Note, I had to doe with others as∣well as Cove∣nanters. of the Earle of Winton a Papist, a Barks lading of Wheate; and being at Edenburgh on the Sabath day, it fell out that the Covenant was that day solemnly taken in as reverent a manner, and with as much Majestie and signes of Gods presence as ever I saw in any publique Assembly, where Job served some ancient and white haired men to water their cheeks, and wipe off the teares with one hand, while they held up the o∣ther hand in token of assent to the Covenant as their custome was. Now all this yeere in England, mens cares and mouthes were excee∣dingly taken up in listning after, and speaking of newes and discourses of the Scots affaires. And my correspondence with the Scots as a Mer∣chan, for at least 15, or 16. yeeres before, being generally knowne in Newcastle, my adversaries begun to set watches for to trap mee about the Scots, and my Friends began to forwarne mee of it; at last about the 15. of Decemb. 1638. Mr. Robert Anderson an Alderman of the town, and my good Friend came to me privately and told mee, Now your Enemies have got their desire they have long looked for, they have got Witnesses sworne against you, of such things about the Scots, as will undo you; and so wished me to look to my selfe, I thanked him for his love, but I regarded not much their malice, being so well accustomed to it; nor did I so much as speake of it to any, not to my wife, till after the plot broke out: The same day, another Gentleman of good quality gave mee the the like warning; but I will spare his Name because hee is yet living, and now a sufferer under the Marquesse of Newcastle, And upon 25. December after being a time of much profanenes and ex∣cesse in Newcastle: I tooke that time to ride into Northumberland, and Barwick where I had moneyes owing me; and so into Scotland, (there be∣ing
no restraint of commerce with the Scots) and bargained with the a∣foresaid Earle of Winton, for another Barkes lading of wheate; but be∣fore I got home to Newcastle, a Warrant was sent out to apprehend me, by Mr. Alexander Daveson, and Mr. Iohn Marloe, Note, They were not Knighted till afterward, for their good ser∣vice against the Scots. Nota, My returne was about the 8. of Ianuary, by com∣paring the Date of Secretary Windebancks letters, you may see how ripe the plot was for ex∣ecution. and the Consta∣stable watched my house three daies before I came, but comming home late about ten of the clocke at night, they missed of their purpose. Observe here Gods providence over mee, for I knew nothing of this dangerous plot to apprehend me, but was stayed by the way about businesse, and relying on the Moones light, stayed by the way some∣what the longer. But being come home late, I found my wife in a ve∣ry sad posture, and was not sit downe, untill some friends came in and gave me notice of the danger, assuring me that the plot was of such ex∣tent as my life was strucke at; and that there was no abiding in the Kingdom for me, some advising me to goe for France, some for Holland, and some for Scotland; none of my friends daring to be seene in it, or in∣terpose their interest to stop their violence, no not so much as for two dayes safely in my house, to order and settle my affaires both at home and abroad, all struck dead in one instant. Well I saw there was now no dallying, provided for my escape in Note, Here that New∣castle was begun to be fortified for the King a∣gainst the Scots. the morning early, where I passed the Guard and the Gate with some difficultie, and passing along in sight of the Towne of Newcastle. God made me weepe over it the second time, as is expressed in the Epistle Dedicatory, with many sad thoughts of the place, and of my Wife and Children. I had left in a disconsolate condition amongst my enemies. So rode into the Country where I stayed among Friends some 8 dayes, using meanes to see if the businesse could be accommodated, but all meanes failing, and the businesse carryed so high, as none of my friends durst meddle in it: I took my leave of them in a sad condition and took my way for Scotland; I had not been above eight dayes in Edenborough, untill I was watched by the Lord Traquire, then Lord Treasurer of Scotland, and had the whole power there for the King; giving out threats against mee in severall places, that the Kings Dominions should not hold me long; so as I was forced to lurck very privately that winter in Edenborough and the Country, in a disguised manner: and so wee re∣turne to what they were doing in Newcastle. My Adversaries having missed of their purpose of mee, fell withall violence upon my wife and friends with much inhumane usuage of one of her Sex, as is set forth in my Petition to the Parliament. hereunto annexed; wherein Mr. Alexander Daveson Major, Mr. Iohn Marley Mr, Thomas Rydle Town Clerke. Mr. Ralph Ceck Alderman, and Ralph ows the Clerke of their Commission from the King for that businesse, were the chiefe actors. It would be too tedious to relate the molestations of my poore wife
and friends, and examinations about me, and of the imprisonment of others meerely for my cause, but my wife especially for correspondence with me, till at last they were plotting her life too, for that very thing, and so hunted her as she durst not come in her owne house, for a week together, or see her children but through a glasse window, that they might not see her; and so at last forced her to escape into the country, where none of my friends durst keepe her two nights together, but conveyed her into Scotland to me, where she abode untill after the paci∣fication at Barwick, and then about the end of October, 1639. she re∣turned to Newcastle great with child; but I being excepted out of the pacification by the Earle of Arundale, who treated on the Kings part, I was forced to abide in Scotland, to expect a calmer season, but how calme it proved I shall tell you presently, after I have told you a little more of my wifes troubles. The unfound peace with Scotland being broken quickly, the next Summer produced new preparation to warre on both sides, and upon the newes of the Scots armie advancing into England, Master Robert Bewick the Maior, sent his officer into the countrey out of his jurisdiction and brought in my wife, where she was searched, exa∣mined, and divers papers taken away, and a guard of about a doozen Musquetiers set upon her; well, the Scots approach with their armie, and her aboad in Newcastle was so troublesome on both sides to her and our adversaries, as 'tis hard to say, whethers feares were greatest, her sex may excuse her flight with her children, unfit to be left amongst such monsters of men and women, as Newcastle now was full of all sorts, from all quarters to fight with the Scots: Reade more of this in a little Tract I published two yeeres agoe, entituled, The Downfall of the Hierarchy. Well, being got away by water into the countrey, she found cold entertainment, all being afraid of trouble by her, untill the Scots armie came neer to Newburn, and then there was flying indeed to pur∣pose, the swiftest flight was the greatest honour to the Newcastilian new dubd knights, a good Boat, a paire of Oares, a good Horse, (especially that would carrie two men) was more worth then the valour or ho∣nour of new knighthood. Surely Vicar Alvey too would have given his Vicaridge for a horse, when he for haste leapt on horseback behinde a countrie-man without a cushion, his faith and qualifications failing him, he might well feare to fall from grace by the Scots comming; we leave him in his flight to the grace of Conterbury, and the new dubd knights, and others to the Courts grace for full twelvemoneths, untill the cots were gone home againe. They no sooner returned to New∣castle, but the first Sabbath Day after the Scots were gone, Vicar Alvey appeares in publike againe, new drest up in his pontificalitie, with Surplice and Service-booke, whereof the Churches had been purged by
the Scots lads, and therefore now become innovations, and very offen∣sive to many, who could digest such things before; but my wife be∣ing Nota, Some men car∣ried away pie∣ces of her cloaths, and made as much of them, as if they were holy reliques. This was a bold affront, the Par∣liament then itting. lesse used to have her food so drest, growing stomack-sicke, set some other weak stomacks on working, who fell upon the Vicars new dressing (the Surplice and Service-booke) which set the malignant superstitious people in such a fire, as men and women fell upon my wife like wilde beasts, tore her cloaths, and gave her at least an hun∣dred blowes, and had flaine her, if the Maior had not stept out of his pue to reseue her, he and his officers both well beaten for their paines such was the peoples madnesse after their Idols, as God wonderfully preserved her life, and brought her to me to London. I returne now to some remarkable passages of divine providence to∣wards me in Scotland, in Edenburgh, and in my travell in the countrey from place to place, to avoid the Lord Traquires prosecution: God being never wanting to fill up the emptie soules of his servants in their Nota. This hundred∣fold is not meant of tem∣porall things, as many under∣stand it, but is meant of a hun∣dredfold more of Gods pre∣sence, and com∣munication of his fulnesse e∣ven in this life, and in time of our sufferings especially; yea, as much as our leaking vessels can hold, untill wee come to e∣ternity when our cup shall o∣verflow conti∣nually. bitter suffrings did often fulfill that promise of the hundred fold to such as forsake father and mother, house and lands for his names sake, which promise I sued out at my first escape out of Newcastle, and had it faith∣fully & retly performed; and therfore when I speak of the fulfilling of a promise, let none carp or catch, or tax the to countenance fantasies and revelations, yet doe I not deny but will with all humilitie and mo∣destie maintain divine raptures in divers cases, especially in the Saints bitter exile and sufferings; and when God comes neerer to his Saints then is ordinarie, thinke it not a vaine thing or a fantasie, as some too wise men doe; but rouze up our selves, and looke about us for some∣what more then ordinarie; yea; sometimes some great things are neer but will stay no longer in the Apologue for any thing shall follow, which I hope shall be expressed with that reverence and feare of God and modestie towards men, as no man (not malicious) shall have cause of offence. One day as I was riding over a solitarie heath, in Tividale, my mind much exercised with musings and meditations on the word and works of God, to see two neighbour nations so neere conjoyned in many bonds, both divine and humane, readie to clash together, so neere im∣bruing their hands in each others blood, about so poore a quarrell as for Bishops and Service-book, (as was at first pretended; yet a deeper designe of Rome and all her consederates was in it) these things strongly possessing my troubled spirit, occasioned some ejaculations as I fate on horsebacke, and not with drie eyes, thinking on these unnaturall ware between my countrie-men and the Scottish nation. I often prayed: Oh that we might joyne in one against our common enemies; Oh that we were one, I had answer and assurance from God that we should be one; yee shall be one, yee shall be one, was as strongly inculcated vp∣on
my spirit, as if it had beene spoken from heaven. Another time, when I was travelling from the pursuite of the Lord Traquire, towards the evening there fell a showre of small rame and after the raine, broke out a Rainbow, cleare and bright before me as I rode, and at last so low upon the ground about me, that I rode in the cirle of it a prettie space, which occasioned some thoughts within me of this as a signe of Gods covenant of peace and mercie towards me now in midst of mine enemies plots and malice: And often in the company of men of severall rancks and qualities, I conversed with upon severall occasions, my spirit being exalted above all the troubles of the world, in many high thoughts of the workes of Christ he is about to doe in the world in there later dayes from those small beginnings in Scotland; I spoke often to their encouragement, that it was the morning of the day of Christs power, Psal. 110 though darke and cloudie, and full of troubles, wherein he would doe great things for his distressed Churches; and when some more readie to appropriate that worke of Christ to Scotland upon severall occasi∣ons, I used as frequently to interpose these answers that Christ the bright morning Star is not risen for Scotland's cause alone but for his Churches full deliverance one after another; adding withall, Christ is first come to visit you in Scotland: first to deliver you of all his Churches in the world, O strive to give him kinde entertainment, this was my humble request often to them to welcome Christ with a full reformation, that he might delight to dwell amongst them. And at some other times, when their spirits were oppressed with dif∣ficulties at home, and the great forces and preparations from the King, and menacings from abroad; I used these incouragements I had re∣ceived from God; that this is the beginning of that earth-quake wher∣in the tenth part of the great Citie that is, England, Scotland, and Ireland (Rome) shall fall, though she call up her Astrologers and Wise men to take craftie counsell, as Herod did against the Lord Jesus and his workings, and to trouble him in this his comming to deliver his Churches, it should not be able to hinder his worke who is wonderfull in counsell, and excellent in working. And at some other times I said. This worke in Scotland makes Rome to shake in Aguish fits fearing great al∣terations from Christs working here. And when the pacification was concluded at Tweed neere Barwicke, I being then at Dunse Law in the Scottish army a godly Minister▪ with whom I was familiar having often heard me speake confidently of the large extent of that worke begun in Scotland, asked me in this manner, what thinke you now of this worke. I can see no further into it▪ it would seeme to terminate here (meaning in that pacification to which I speedly answered, no, Sir, it will not end thus, God will bring
it about some way or other, it must go over your borders; Christ has a great people in England, and other parts of the world hee has a tender respect to and he will not arise and sit downe againe, untill hee have delivered them as hee did his people in Egypt; their cry has helped to bring him downe from the habitation of his holinesse, and he will hear their cry, and help them for he is mercifull. This wee have seene now in part fullfilled in England▪ wee see how often we have been upon Pacifications with the King, and none will hold; Christ has some designe in this worke, that every one sees not, it would seeme to mee that it must not end in these three Kingdomes, if we would never so saine make a peace for our selves; no art of man can sement it, if God lay no peace for England, till the power of Rome bee a∣bolished. Nay untill his designe be accomplished and Christs King∣dome advanced; that is the great designe he is about; till that bee in some measure accomplished our troubles will not be ended; and then he will require our help to deliver his forraigne churches, and helpe to spread his Kingdome and Dominion to the ends of the earth. Now having related some passages along to the Pacification, Scotland being seemingly secured a Parliament and a Nationall Assembly granted to settle and confirm all both in Religion and Liberties I have yet somewhat to impart both of my further troubles and of Gods mer∣cies: for in their peace my troubles broke out into a new flame and fire. First, I was excluded out of that pacification, when never a man in England or Scotland but my selfe was exempted; and here by the way, I cannot without ingratitude (which my very nature abhorres) but give noice to the world of the noble favours I received of the Scottish Lords, still engraven in a thankefull mind to be recorded to posterity▪ And in the first place falls in the memory of my honourable & faithfull (but ah now deceased) Friend and Noble Earle of Rothes, who upon all oc∣casions shewed a tender affection towards me in all my troubles: and to whose memory, and posterity, I shall whlles I five, owe the poore abilities in me in thankfullnesse of mind and duty. When the peace neare Barwicke was towards a conclusion, being at dinner with this noble Lord the Earle of Rothes, among divers Lords and commanders, in his Tent a Dunse law; he was pleased (after much other discourse about the conclusion of the Treaty) to speake after his wonted familiar manner; come Iohn, what wouldst thou have done for thee, speake and it shall be done. I return'd his Lordship thankes for all his Noble courtesies and this as the greatest. Saying my Lord my onely desire is that I may be included in your peace, and be free'd from all molestations about your cause▪ that I may goe home in peace, as you doe. My Lord answered, it shall bee done Iohn? (making no
doubt of it) but to bee short, when the Treaty was ended, this Noble Lord told me, he was sorry for mee, hee could not procure my liberty, for that the Earl of drundale, who treated with them on the Kings part, had excepted me out of that peace, and that not only by my name, but to make sure worke, (because my eldest brother was then in Scot∣land also) by this designation of that Fenwicke whose wife was with him in Scotland; and for my brother and some other English men that were there they might returne for England, bringing but a Certificate under my Lord Rothes hand, that they had not sworne and subscribed the Scot∣tish Covenant. So as I was glad to be content to wait for clearer weather for my returne. Both the Armies being now drawne out of the field, all the expecta∣tions of a firme peace were suddenly blowne away, in the Kings refu∣sall to come into Scotland to his Parliament (as in the Treaty it was ex∣pected, if not promised) and sending the Earl of Traquire as his Commssi∣oner to sit, both in the Church Assembly, and in the Parliament. Well all the time of the Assembly which about a month and more, I went almost daily to the Assembly, with divers Gentlemen of our. Nation that came into Scotland, to see the Assembly and Parliament, and I sate in the Assem∣bly (by the favour I had) very neere the said Lord Traquire, who often gave mee great lookes but never a word, he knew me well by face for I had not long before my trouble, rid post in his company to London (as I remember) two severall times: But the Assembly being ended (where he sate onely as a Church-man it seemes) and the Parliament begun: upon the second or third day of the Parliament, he sent for me, in the Kings name, by a Messenger of the Privie Counsell, in the open mar∣ket place; which messenger carryed me to the Kings House, called Holy Rose House; accompanied with Mr. Robert Hamilton, and Mr. Forthwicke, sent by noble friends from the Parliament House to see what should become of mee; where I was welcome, and well-baited by Traquire and his Associates, divers Scottish Earles and Lords, belong∣ing to the Court: with all revilings and reproaches of Treason and treachery, (the then Court language) Nay, said Traquire thy Life cannot satisfie the wrongs thou hast done his Majestie, by possessing his Subjects of Scotland, with an ill opinion of his Government; and somenting the late divisions and doing many ill Offices; yea that suffi∣ced not but he further charged me, that I had got many of his Majesties honest Subjects moneyes into my hands and had bought Land in Scot∣land purposing to dwell there: but swore that Scotland should not shel∣ter me. To which I replyed, his Lordship was mis-informed the con∣trary was well knowne to divers of the best quality in Scotland: and so Traquire fell into discourse with the Lord Roxborow, and the Lord Dalyell, and th'other Lords: then one of the Gentlemen sent from the
Parliament along with mee, tells mee in the eare, that hee thought I would be sent to prison, which I thanke God did not daunt mee: then begun Traquire againe to aske me, what made me leave my coun∣trey, he was sure I might enjoy my Religion in England, with as much libertie as in Scotland. To which I boldly answred, (expecting nothing but extremitie, I resolved not to goe to prison for nothing) that if I should lose my life for it. I must affirme that I could never enjoy my Religion with peace under King Charles his government. When thus the Earle of Traquire saw my resolution, and considered how the Par∣liament tooke notice of me by sending two Gentlemen along with me, and the people of Edenborough readie to rise to riscue me, he called one of the Gentlemen (Master Borthwick) aside, and talked with him a prettie space, after which, Master Borthwick returned to mee, saying, I have brought your release for this time, but my Lord Traquire sweares he will have about with you ere two dayes be ended, and that he would send post to Newcastle to get more matter against me. Now I found out the drift of this his sending for mee by a messenger of the counsell, to get me out of Edenborough, downe to the Kings house with∣out the liberties of the Citie, was to horse mee away to Barwicke, where there were more men attending to receive me, and carry me to the King; for within three or foure daies these men came from Barwicke to Edenborough, and to my chamber three or foure times to looke for me, and spoke with my wife, who perceived by their wyles and dis∣course what they were, and knew one of them to have been a servant to Sir Iohn Marley, my chiefe adversarie, which men were observed to lurke in Edenborough about the Castle, then surrendered to the King, and Generall Ruthven and his men possessing it, but missing of me, (be∣ing advised to absent my selfe out of Edenborugh, from under Traquires power) they grew weary of attending, and returned for England. After a few dayes I returned to Edenburgh privately, where my wife Note, At this time of the restraint of libertie, I com∣posed these me∣ditations, Psal. 102. which I published late∣ly under this Title of Zions Ioy in her King comming in his Glorye told me how I was watched for, and the men then still in towne, I was glad to keepe close. When thus they found their wyles would not worke their ends, the Lord Traquire made a publike Declaration in Parliament against me, declaring that he had a designe upon me by Commission from his Majestie; expecting, it seemes the Parliament should deliver mee up into his hands, but that failed him too; for a noble Lord sent me presently notice of it, and wished me to keepe out of his way, so I was glad to keepe more close then before; yet after supper, being then darke, I went out to my noble friend, the Earle of Rothes, who told mee what had passed from Traquire that day, and that my noble friends, the Lords in Parliament, were resolved to protect me, if I should be in danger, yet rather advised mee to keepe me out of Traquires way, and to absent my selfe out of Edenburgh, inviting mee
most courteously to his house in Fife for my shelter; and withall, if any danger should befall me before I could remove out of Edenburgh (my wife being there, and about to returne for England, by Vertue of the late peace, and being also great with childe, was in a sort necessitated to undergoe some hazard, to preserve the priviledges that one forraigne born cannot enjoy by our laws) My noble Lord Rothes bid me cry out in his name for helpe, and he would warrant me enough to rescue me, which was a noble courtesie in my extremitie, deserves of mee and mine never to beforgotten. Whereupon I dispatched my wife and eldest sonne away for Eng∣land, accompanying them a part of the way into Tividale, where I heard there was no safetie for me from Traquires sconts; so I betooke mee over the cold snowie mountaines towards the Irish sea, and comming to Lanerick, a dayes journey on the west of Edenburgh, a Gentleman of my acquaintance before in the armie, came to visit me, assuring mee, that place was scarce safe for me to lodge in, because of a neer dwelling enemie, Sir Iohn Deyell, who being lately come from Edenburgh, from Traquire, the Kings Commissioner had threatened to watch those parts for me, and that hee would be glad to drive a cart to teare me in pieces, and also had in his hearing, declared that the Lord Traquire (thinking that hee had frighted mee out of Scot∣land) did sweare that no countrey should hold me long, and that there were watches for mee both in France and Holland. These were that Gentlemans owne words▪ whose advice I followed, and removed thence the next morning, himselfe accompanying me that dayes jour∣ney, and so I rode to Dwyne and Ayre upon the west sea, in which parts I spent that Winter, untill the Lord Traquire was gone to Court, after which I saw him no more, for then the ill bottomed peace quickly fell to pieces, and new preparations on the Kings part and on the Scottish both appeared, and then againe I appeared in Edenburgh, where I found the Citie in great feares of being fired from the Castle, and many other distractions. Thus I continued in Edenburgh most part untill the time of the Scots armie comming into England, under whose wings and conduct I re∣turned to my countrey, and to Newcastle, where wee entred upon the Sabbath day (after God had scattered our enemies in the skirmish at Newburne,) whereof I have by me a briefe relation I keepe amongst other monuments of Christs victories, and may have a time, if God continue life, to record them to posteritie. Here by the way I must not omit to tell you, how some of my adversaries in Newcastle; Sir Iohn Marloe, and others, that had profered large summes of money for men to come into Scotland to apprehend me, and others, who that morning before the skirmish, made me their melodie in their cups
and pots, and drunke my confusion, and vowed my death, (as I was credibly enformed) were some layd low in the dust, and the rest, some glad to give two or three peeces for a paire of Oares to fly, some by wa∣ter and some by land, whiles the Souldiers▪ returned to Newcastle with bloody heads and some without hands, crying to the People of New∣castle flie for your lives, naked Divels have destroyed us; fie, fie, for a guide to Duram cry others that were strangers; all the Priests and Blacke-coats fled as fast as they could, but meanely mounted, when Vicar Alvey himselfe in great hast got on horse backe behind a Coun∣try man as before: the next bout if the Scots come againe, he may per∣haps learne to foot it, (after my friend Windebancke) into France, and learne to dance and sing, Alas poore Vicar, whither wilt thou goe. The Army comming after forenoone Sermon on the Sabath day to∣wards Newcastle (being in great want of Victuals) pitched on the South side of the Towne; his Excellency Generall Lesley, accompanied with the Lords and divers Gentlemen rode into Newcastle about noon, where they were met upon the bridge, by the Major and some few Aldermen who were not so nimble at flight, as Sir Marloe, Sir Daveson; and Sir Ridles, and others that were conscious of their guilt of their good ser∣vice against the Scots, for which they got the honour of Knighthood at Newcastle and Barwicke; though Sir Marloe some say, came hardly by his, and had well nigh missed, if some others merits had not surmoun∣ted his; the Boyes say, that Cuckold luck has raised his fortunes from a Tap-house and et cetera, to a Carpet Knight: O tempora, O mores! VVell, we being entred Newcastle; after dinner I had the honour to Usher his Excellence and the Lords to the great Church, where Mr. A∣lexander Henderson preached, and Mr. Andrew Cant at Alihollowes where the Organs, and Sackbuts, and Cornets were strucke breathlesse with the fright of their Vicals, and other of their best friends flight on Fri∣day at night before after Newburne fight in token of mourning that they should neuer meet againe; for not long after, the breach of the Scots Covenant in the Scottish Souldiers did blow them down both root and branch, with their Altar; and Raylings. Service-book and Fonts, and all such fopperies, as the honest Scots Lads found without a War∣rant, or Salvo-guard from their King Jesus. who sent them out. The Army being in great straits for Victualls, I studied how to gratifie the honest Souldiers who had conducted me home to my owne Coun∣try. On the Mnday morning I found out one of the Kings store-hou∣ses, and therein about threescore thousand pound of Cheese and about two tunne of Bisket which served the whole Army untill Corne was grinded, and other provisions made. But here was not an end of my troubles, for the time I stayed in New∣castle, which was about three moneths and more, though under the
shelter of the Scots Army; my wife and selfe continually reviled and abused by the malignant people of the Town, of whom I could not get provisions and necessaries for my family, for my money, without the Authority and command of the Scots, or seldome goe abroad without the company of some of the Scots Gentlemen divers of whom gave me notice, that they over-heard divers Malignant people of the Towne threaten to wash their hands in my heart blood, and others saying whe∣ther peace or warre, I should be sure to be knockt on the head; such was the madnesse of the Malignants against me in that place; neither would any there or in the Country pay me any thing they were owing me: So about beginning of December, when I could be no longer use∣full to the publike good, or yet to my selfe in my owne affaires, I de∣clared to his Excellence Generall Lesley, and such of the Lords as were then in Newcastle, my urgent necessity to repaire to London to the Parli∣ament, for remedy of my many grievances; and there being no passage by land for me, but through the Kings souldiers, I came to London by Sea about the latter end of December, and repaired to Westminster, where I had walked but a little in the Hall, untill I was carried away by some friends, assuring me that there was no safety for mee to appeare so publike as yet, and that my adversaries who walked in Westminster Hall; as Sir Iohn Marloe, and others of Newcastle fugitives from the Scots, would be sure to lay hold of me, and that as yet I was not cleere of the Scots businesse, for all the treaty then in agitation, some of my friends advising me to remove into Holland, untill the Scots Treaty were fully finished, and an act of oblivion passed, till when I could not be secure from the danger of our Lawes, so that I continued privately in London about eight moneths, in some hazard, before the act of oblivion was passed; being resolved not to goe out of the Kingdome, untill I had re∣medy of my heavy losses and grievances, which as yet I have found no time for, though I have sought to purchase it with my blood in the ser¦vice of the state, and still am ready to wade through difficulties and hazards to procure peace and truth. Judgement and Justice, to my na∣tive Country. Divers other passages in my troubles, I doe willingly reserve to a calmer Season, because as yet the times will not beare them. By these already mentioned it may appeare, that I have suffred somthing for God and my Country, and have borne a large share in the heat of the day, even to many extremities to my selfe and family, without any publike support in a sincking condition to the hazard of life▪ losse of my estate (of which I have not had the benefit of one hundred pound these five yeeres, compleat in December▪ next) friends in this cause all forsa∣king me, my name and credit racked with reproaches, whereof my God whom I serve and suffer for (I am confident) will in his good
itme cleare me, and make mine innocency breake out as the light, and my Judgement as the noone day. I appeale to this ungratefull and appostate age whether it be reason, that one who has borne the heate of the day for the common good of both Kingdomes, should be left to sincke under the burthens of their good. it being not for the honour of my Countrey to leave mee and mine under insupportable burthens of worldy necessities and distresses, wherein I have spent my selfe, and without timely assistance, I and mine must necessarily perish. Divers other passages have slipped my memory, about the rage and madnesse of mine enemies extending from the countrey to Court distaste of me, and the Kings notice and rebukes of friends about me; so s none of them durst owne me, or afford me common courtesie, or  me▪ but in the language of mine adversaries: also the first messenger the Scots Lords sent to the King at Yorke after Newburne fight at his returne told me there was great enquirie at Court after me; and further, in midst of all my greatest troubles and pursuite of the Lord Traquire, as I should be willing to forget the unkinde and unchristi∣an dealings of my friends, in spreading the reproaches of my adversa∣ries, striking at my very life (deepewounds from friends) so may I not here forget to record the Noble respects of the Scottish Lords in their ample testimonie of my fidelitie to my countrey, and carriage amongst them, which I sent into England for the satisfaction of my friends mis-informed; a Copie whereof attested under the hands of divers Gentle∣men and Merchants in Edenborough I have annexed for conclusion.
VVEe undersubscribers (understanding that John Fenwick of Newcastle upon Tyne, in the Kingdome of England, Mer∣chant, since his comming into this Kingdome of Scotland, hath undergone many vise and slander us calumnies and reproaches: as that hee hath beene a chiefe Incendiarte in these late broyles; inciing the Nobilitie of this Kingdome to invade England, and to use all as enemies that were not of our minde in Religion; and that hee sought a Captaines place, and did beare armes against the King at Dunse, and servea in a troope of Horse when bee could not get à Captaines place, and doing many ill offices against his Countrey.) According to our Christian dutie, have beene moved, to testifie to all whom it may con∣cerne, that the said John Fenwicke, during his abide in this Kingdome of Scotland now about eight moneths, bath behaved himselfe as becomes a good Christian, a loyall Subject to his Soveraigne, and a loving Countreyman of his na∣tive Nation, for ought that ever wee have heard from him, seene or observed in him in all his carriage amongst us. And wee doe verily believe, all the fore∣said calumnies to be very false, malicious and scandalous, and injuriously insinu∣ated against him by ill affected persons: and doe conceive of him as one that hath deserved better of his Countrey-men. In witnesse whereof, wee have subscribed these presents with our Hands▪ At EDENB. the 30. Octob. 1639. Subscribed by Earles. Argyle, Rothes, Lothian, Lyndsey. And,The Lord Balmirinoe. Witnesses that this is a true Copie: John Meyne, Robert Keith, Thomas Levingston, Alexand. Dickson, John Lowrie. The Originall of this Copy I sent into England for satisfaction of friends mis-informed, Novemb. 1639. FINIS.
