H656 13017009 96584
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF The Proceedings, Sence and Advice of the People called QUAKERS. At the Yearly Meeting of Faithful Friends and Brethren, begun in London on the 28th of the 3d month, 1694. and held by Adjournment unto the 11th of the month following, In order to put an end to the Divisions and Differences among some of the People called Quakers in America. To which is added, An account of the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, relating to the said Diffe∣rences; shewing the Dis-harmony of the two said Meetings. As also. Some Queries to that Party of the Yearly Meet∣ing at London, who gave the aforesaid Judgment. LONDON, Printed for R. Levis, MDCXCIV.
TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, THE following account of the People called Quakers is recommended to thy Impartial Judgment, wherein thou mayst find a Party of them of the Yearly Meeting at Lon∣don, are proved guilty of endeavouring to Cloak and cover the Antichristian Errors, and persecuting Practices of ther Apostate Brethren in Pensilvania, as will further appear by these following Queries, given forth by an offended Christian Quaker, a∣gainst the partial proceedings of Six Days Controver∣sy, and their False Judgment. Prov▪ 17.15. He that Justifieth the Wicked, and he that Condemneth the Just, even they both are Abomination to the Lord, Robert Hannay.
ERRATA. Page 3. line 19. for impatiently read in patiently.
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF The Proceedings, Sence and Advice of the People called QUAKERS. At the Yearly Meeting of Faithful Friends and Brethren, begun in London on the 28th of the 3d month, 1694. and held by Adjournment unto the 11th of the month following, In order to put an end to the Divisions and Differences among some of the People called Quakers in America. WHereas by Agreement of this Meeting, all Epistles directed to this Meeting, should be read openly therein; and there∣upon some Epistles from America, being read in course, in which the dif∣ferences between Geo. Keith, and others were mentioned, and upon Notice thereof given him, he came into the Meeting and desired to have a Paper Read, and to be heard in his own defence;
which the Meeting tenderly condescended unto; and whereas the said Geo. Keith did before that, in the publick Meeting of the Bre∣thren belonging to this yearly Meeting, openly and tenderly sig∣nify his earnest desire of Union, and that he might not be cast off, and that the Breach might be made up, and that he would rather lay down his Natural Life, then it should not be made up; with other Expressions of the like Import, which did tenderly affect ma∣ny Brethren; and also his open confessions in divers Meetings to the power and presence of God amongst us, and with our Mi∣nistry.—And also there being a General sense in this Meet∣ing, of a great and tender Compassion (as well as condesention) in the bowels of Jesus Christ, with earnest Breathings and supplica∣tions to God, both with Regard to Geo. Keith's help and pre∣servation, and also with great respect to the peace of the Church of Christ, and prosperity of the holy Truth, and great work of the Lord God in our day, and the honour of his great and glori∣ous Name, and our Christian Reputation, as a Chosen people ga∣thered by his divine Power and Goodness to shew forth his praise in our Age and Generation; and to Remove and prevent Re∣proaches and Scandals, that tend to affect us, to our sorrow and Grief, as a Christian Society and People; that the Mouth of Ini∣quity may be stopt, and our Enemies, that seek occasion to blas∣pheme the holy Truth, and reproach us, may be confounded by the great power of the Lord our God, for his Name and Truths sake, which we are deeply concerned and Zealous for. And we understand the Christian care and tender endeavours of our Friends and Brethren here in London, hath not been wanting, since they heard of the Divisions, by Friendly and tender Advice, in the Love of God, in their Epistles, in order to stop and Re∣move this Unhappy difference, and to Reprehend these unsound and Erroneous Expressions, and shew their dislike to these heats that have been among some of them, Exhorting them to Brotherly Love, and Christian Tenderness, and Warning them against Separa∣tion, or that Spirit that would lead thereto, and expose the same to Reproach.
This Meeting also taking tender Notice of the Request of our Friends and Brethren of the 6 weeks Meeting in London, for this Meeting to be concerned, in order to hear and end the said dif∣ferences, which they had in part heard before, but had not op∣pertunity to hear fully: It was thereupon, in Brotherly Love, assented unto by this Meeting, that as many Friends and Bre∣thren of the six Weeks Meeting as were formerly deputed by the six Weeks Meeting; and all other Members of the same Meeting that should desire it, might be present and Assistant with this Meeting, for the good ends aforesaid. And this Meeting agreed, that after all the other publick affairs should be over, as many Members of the yearly Meeting as could attend the service, together with all publick faithful Friends that are free, should Remain and continue the yearly Meeting, to hear, judge and determine, and endeavour to Quiet all the differences between Geo. Keith and others concern∣ed therein. Proceedings thus far agreed to by this Meeting, in order to a full hearing of Geo. Keith and others concerned in the said differences, much of six days were spent, impatiently hearing the said differen∣ces, so far as they were related, or made out unto us, both by the publick Reading of several Printed Books and Papers from G. K. and his Friends, relating to the differences, particularly one book, intituled, A True Copy of Three Judgments, &c. another, intituled, The Plea of the Innocent, &c. another, intituled, Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation, And also by Epistles, Papers and Certi∣ficates (from many concerned on both sides) out of America, be∣sides the great Patience of this Meeting towards him, in frequent∣ly hearing him in his Defence and Complaints, Allegations and Ar∣guments; as also in divers passages both by G. K. with his Friend Tho. Budd; And Sam. Jennings with T. Ducket, on the other side, were several times patiently heard Face to Face, insomuch that G. K. divers times acknowledged the Moderation of the Meeting. The foregoing Causes and Reasons, How this Meeting came to be concerned in this Weighty Affair, together with the manner of Procee∣dings, thus far being sincerely related, we proceed likewise to give the true Sence, and Christian Advice of this Meeting thereupon.
Concerning the Printed Books from G. K. and others of his Friends, relating to those Differences and Divisions in some parts of America, it being proposed to this Meeting, That Friends concern∣ed might singly declare their Sence; which they had liberty freely to do in the Fear of the Lord, whose Power was over the Meet∣ing. Thereupon many Weighty Testimonies were given in great Fear and Tenderness of Spirit, That the exposing the Differences in Print to the World, to the View of our Enemies, both in America and Europe, hath been of great dis-service to the Truth, and given great occasion of Offence and stumbling to many, and of great Sorrow and Grief to us, and many Faithful Friends, opening the Mouths of our Adversaries, Professors and others, to reproach the Truth and Friends thereof. And it's the clear and general Sense of this Meeting, That G. Keith, and the rest therein concerned with him, were not acted in God's Wisdom and Counsel therein, and that they ought to have had more regard to God's Glory, and the Reputation of our Chri∣stian Society and Profession. And altho it appears that some few per∣sons have given Offence, either through Erroneous Doctrines, un∣sound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness, Want of Wisdom and Right Ʋnderstanding; yet the spreading thereof in Print, and in that aggravating manner as they are, and sending them over into England, and other parts of the World (unconcerned in the dif∣ferences) appears not to be in God's Peaceable Wisdom, nor consi∣stent with the good Order of Truth among us, since we were a Peo∣ple. And therefore it is the tender Advice and Counsel, That G. Keith should either call in these Books, or at least publish something In∣nocently, and effectually to clear the Body of the People called Qua∣kers, and their Ministers, from those Gross Errors charged on some few in America; and retract the bitter Language in them, so far as he is concerned, which seems to have too much appeared in some few particular persons on both sides, thereby giving occasion to Truth's Adversaries to asperse us, and to look upon the Quakers rendering Reviling for Reviling one against another; which is of an ill savour, and to be remov'd by God's Power and Truth, and the Root and Spirit thereof, in whomsoever it is. And as to the Separation among Friends in America, arising from
the unhappy differences, and the dividing some Meetings there; It hath been, and is to the great reproach of Truth and Friends, and dishonour of our holy Professions, and hinderance of Truth's Pro∣sperity, and the great Grief and Trouble of Faithful Friends, both in England and other parts of the World. And how far soever G. Keith hath been concerned therein (which the general Sense of Friends here is, doth lye at his door;) He ought now sincerely to use his utmost Endeavours, and Interest with his Friends concern'd, to remove it, and to help forward a Re-uniting and Amicable com∣posure for the holy Truth's sake, and the Clory of God, and Peace of his People. And wherein G. Keith apprehends himself injured, or aggreived by any particular persons, he ought to exercise a Spirit of Forgive∣ness, as he would for Christ's sake be forgiven of God and his Peo∣ple, accordingly as he himself has sometimes openly declar'd. And we desired the same in all others concerned towards him, as in re∣lation to personal Injuries or Offences. And as concerning those few late Magistrates (professing the Truth) concerned against G. Keith, in their Sessions-Proceedings, and Order of Sessions published against him, and in their fining him, and some few others (professing the Truth) about words of Refle∣ction, or such like; It is the Sense of Friends, That G. Keith, and o∣thers with him, had been, and were under an hour of Temptation and Provocation; And those Magistrates concerned, did too much let in the Provocation over them, and did too highly resent Reflection; and it had been better they had not medled with it, but quietly have born it, and passed it by; and had they kept in the Wisdom of God, these things might have been prevented. There appears to us to have been too much height of Spirit on both sides, and both had need to be deeply humbled, both Provokers and Provoked. Tho the Legality, or Illegality of the Proceedings, according to Men, it ap∣pears not proper for this Meeting to meddle with, howbeit the Book of the Printed Trial of the Proceeding, where Quakers are represented to persecute Quakers, has done great hurt in this Nati∣on, and other parts, and occasioned great Reproach upon the said People in this Nation, whereby many of our Enemies insult over
us, as if we were a People swayed by a persecuting Spirit, saying, We knew what the Quakers would do if they had power in their hands. And therefore Friends ought to be cleared from that Reproach; howbeit the said Book appearing scandalous in divers parts of it, Inquiry was made in this Meeting, who was the Author and Own∣er of it; and G. Keith disowned it to be his; but he owned that part of it which concerned his Trial, and T. Budd said, he was not willing to discover the Author's Name. Therefore our Sense is, That the Publishers of that Book (if they pro∣fess Truth) should call it in, and condemn its publication, and sending it over hither, to our great Reproach, and Injury of the Truth and people of God. We understand from divers Epistles and Testimonies from many of our Friends in America, corresponding with us in Brotherly Love, That they appear to be in a Spirit of Love, and of a sound Mind and Judgment in the things of God, in the Faith of Christ, and principle Doctrines of Christianity; and particularly, besides other Epistles, we observe one bearing date the 17th of Month 4. 1692. signed with near 30 Names, from a Meeting of Ministring Friends, wherein they do appear sincerely to believe and confess their Faith in Christ, according to the Scriptures, both as to his Conception, Birth, Life, Sufferings, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession, and that all he did and suffered, was to compleat our Redemption; and that they expected Salvation by no other Name than by the Name of Jesus, to which every knee shall bow, and Tongue confess; and that of the Resurrection and General Judg∣ment, they believe them according as they are declared in Scrip∣ture▪ Thus far they. Nevertheless, if there be any such Gross Errors, False Doctrines, or Mistakes, held by any professing Truth in Ame∣rica, as are either against the Validity of Christs Sufferings, Blood, Resurrection, Ascension, or Glory in the Heavens, according as they are set forth in the Scriptures, or any ways tending to the denial of the Heavenly Man Christ; such persons ought to be diligently instructed and admonished by Faithful Friends in those parts, and not be exposed by any to publick Reproach; and where the Error proceeds from Ignorance, and darkness of their Understanding, they
ought the more meekly and gently to be informed But if any shall wilfully persist in Error, in point of Faith, after duly informed, then such to be further dealt with according to Gospel Order, that the Truth, Church and Body of Christ may not suffer by any particular pretend∣ed Member, that is so corrupt. It was very observable in this our solemn Meeting, that G. Keith, in order to remove some scruples, that might be in the Minds of some concerning his belief, or Doctrine about the Sufficiency of the Light within, did voluntarily Declare in these words, viz. I know no man upon the face of the Earth, that professes a Belief of the Sufficiency of the Light with∣in to Salvation, more than I profess or hold, and have always professed since I came among Friends, viz. That the Light within, being God, the Word and the Spi∣rit in every Man, is sufficient to Reveal to every Man all that is needful to his Eternal Salvation: Which Confession did appear to have a tendency to the Satisfaction of the Meeting in that respect; and it is earnestly de∣sired, and tenderly advised by this Meeting, that G. Keith have a tender regard to our Antient Testimony, for the Sufficiency of the Light, the Word of Faith, the Immortal Seed and Spirit of Truth within, and to the plainness and simplicity of the Preaching of it from the begin∣ning, whereby many have been turned to God; which Testimony and Ministration the Lord hath signally blessed and prospered by his power and presence, for the Gathering, confirming and Building up of many thousands of his People, in the most holy faith; Whereof there are many Living Witnesses yet Remaining. Also this Meeting, in true and tender Love, for Christ's sake, desire and admonish the said Geo. Keith (and even for the peace of his own soul) to watch against his Human Infirmity, and Weakness appearing therein, and against such passionate Behaviour, as thence appeared di∣vers times in this Meeting, to the trouble and Grief of many Antient and faithful Friends; and humbly to Wait upon God, to feel his pow∣er, to subdue his own Passions, and to be very Watchful against the same, and against the Enemy that takes Advantage thereupon to hurt him, or at any time to hurry him into disorder of Spirit at unawares; which we pray God make him truly sensible of, and watchful against, for his own Inward peace, and for Good Example and behaviour in the Church of Christ. Howbeit, we do declare, that the said Geo. Keith did divers times openly acknowledge his Passions, Weaknesses and In∣firmities; so that this Meeting did the more Exercise Compassion, Cha∣rity and Patience towards him. And this Meetings tender Advice to G. Keith also is, to live in Peace and Charity among Friends and Brethren here in this City, Nation,
and else where, and to avoid all publick and apparent Reflections upon Ministring Friends, or their Ministry; and likewise all Ministring Friends to forbear the like towards him, that no occasion of stumbling or Reproach may be given thereby, nor any Brother Hurt in his Te∣stimony. And as G. Keith shall apptove himself in Charity and Re∣conciliation with Friends and Brethren here in London and elsewhere, they are desired accordingly to be tender and kind to him, as he sin∣cerely approves himself to be a Man of Peace and Charity towards all, and Answers our Christian Advice herein. And lastly, This our Solemn Meeting, in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, doth Exhort and Charge all them that have separated, to meet together with other Friends, in the Love of God, and humbly to wait for his Power to Repair the Breach, Reconcile and Reunite them in his tender Love, and earnestly Supplicates the God of all our Mercies, to remove all Prejudice and Offences out of their Minds, and to Effect this good End, which our Souls have deeply, and in great Humility and Brokenness of Heart, Travelled for in this Meeting, and are still in a Travel for, that the great Re∣proach may be removed, Gods Truth Exalted, and his Churches Peace Restored and preserved. And if any man think himself a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him ac∣knowledg, we have the Mind of Christ in these Matters, to whom we Recommend you, and in whose Love we Salute you all. The God of Peace be with you, and bruise Satan under your Feet. Signed on behalf of the said Meeting and their Appointment. By Benj. Bealing.
Some Queries to that Party, or Faction, of the Yearly Meeting at London, who gave the a∣foresaid Judgment. Friends, I Being deeply sensible of the renewed burthens, and afflictions, and grief of Spirit, which your Paper of False Judgment will bring upon many Hundreds of the poor despised, persecuted Witnesses of the Crucified Jesus, in Pensilvania and elsewhere; I thought my self obliged in Conscience, to publish in Print the Judgment given forth by the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, against the Twenty Eight False Judges, together with these following Queries. By all which it will be discove∣red to all Impartial and Unprejudiced Readers, which of the Two Yearly Meetings were guided by the Wisdom and Counsel of God, and Infallible Spirit of Christ; the Judgment given by them of Bur∣lington, or the other given by that Party or Faction of this Yearly Meeting at London, they being so Opposite and Contradictory, in matter of Fact, the one to the other, viz. That of Burlington, being signed by Seventy Friends of Known Integrity and Good Conversati∣on, wherein there doth appear a more convincing Demonstration and Ground of Truth, that they were acted in, and by the Light of a ten∣der Conscience, as Impartial and Unprejudiced Men, who had not set their Hands to any Papers of difference on either side. The o∣ther, viz. that Party of this yearly Meeting at London, giving Just Cause of Suspicion that they were not acted by the Counsel of God, as partly appears by their refusing to set their Hands to their own Judgment, when much importuned thereto by us, but too Pharisee-like, laying that heavy burthen upon the Back of their Hi∣red Clerk, which they themselves would not touch with one of the least of their Fingers. (so as to Sign it.)
Query I. WHether that Party or Faction of this Yearly Meeting, have not discovered themselves to be too like unto their Persecuting Brethren in Pensilvania, by endeavouring to cover and lessen their Crimes? Query II. Whether it hath not been sufficiently proved that some of your Bre∣thren in America, are guilty of holding such Damnable Errors and Doctrines of Devils, that no Protestant Society would tollerate? (If this you deny) the Letters and Papers Writ and Signed by their own hands which were read in your yearly Meeting, may be Printed to further Demonstrate, and prove the same. Query III. Why are you so partial as to order George Keith and Friends to call in their Printed Books, and not also to order Samuel Jennings, and his Brethren, to call in the false and rash Judgments given forth by them against George Keith and Friends, without any due Conviction, Hearing or Tryal, especially that of the twenty Eight Ministers, that being the rotten basis and foundation on which all the rest are built? Query IV. And how do you make it appear, that that part of your yearly Meet∣ing, that have blamed G. K. and Friends, was led by the Spirit of Truth, and that yearly Meeting at Burlington that were unanimous in clearing G. K. were not led thereby, but by the Spirit of Error; unless ye will say that the Meetings in America have a dependance on the Meeting here, as Samuel Jennings openly affirmed to you in your and our hear∣ing, and to erect to your selves a new Rome, or Metropolitan Church in London, which G. K. openly opposed in your and our hearing, say∣ing, The Meetings in America, or any where else, had no more depen∣dance on you here, than ye had on them; nor had ye any more pro∣mise of Infallibility annexed, or Intailed to you, than any other Meet∣ing of Friends; and G. K. blaming the word Dependance, W. P. bid retract that word Dependance, and call it Relation; to which G. K. re∣plyed, He did own all Meetings every where related one to another, but without any Dependance of one another, and did own our giving and receiving Advice to and from one another; but the Dependance of all must be upon Christ, on whom God hath Promised, He will hang all the Glory of his Fathers House, and all the Vessels of small and great quan∣tity,
(read Isa. 22.24.) and another of the Ministers said in his Declara∣tion in one of these yearly Meetings, in your and our hearing, that this Meeting was the Mother of Churches, without having any check given him by any of you; but we believe that Jerusalem above is that Mother of Churches, and not the yearly Meeting at London, nor any where else upon Earth. Query V. How could you lay the Separation on us, seeing Thomas Lloyd went away twice from the Monthly Meeting, and taking a skirt of the Meeting with him, and denying the Monthly Meeting to be a Meeting, and their Judgment to be a true Judgment, tho ye your selves cannot deny it to be a true and seasonable Judgment. See a true Copy of it in Reasons and Causes of Separation. (pag. 10.) And seeing it was suffici∣ently proved that Thomas Lloyd, and his party did first Separate from their Brethren, by leaving of the Bank Meeting eight Months; and that the Publishing of the False Judgment of the 28, and their for∣cing the Reading of it in Monthly Meetings, against the consent of many of the Principal Members of said Meetings, did occasion the dividing of the other Meetings. Query VI. Why should you refuse to sign your Paper of false Judgment, and lay it on your hired Clerk, who was mostly absent from these Meet∣ings, and therefore extreamly Ignorant of the matter of fact? Was it not because you know that it was only a prejudiced party of you that are the Authors of it, and not the yearly Meeting; for it cannot be thought that all the Members of so solemn Assembly should be so great∣ly blinded, as to consent to the Publishing of such a paper, that is so full of Errors and Mistakes. Query VII. Why have you so readily and heartily received, owned and com∣mended your Brethrens Scriptural Confession of Faith, seeing it doth not appear they have Condemned their Antichristian Errors, and un∣sound Notions, which they should have first done, before you had re∣ceived them into Communion, and owned them Sound in the Christi∣an Faith; otherwise they may be still guilty of these gross Errors, not∣withstanding their Confession according to Scripture; for the Papists, as well as they, will confess in Scripture Words, but differ in the true Sense of it, from sound Christians; something of which will appear by the following Query.
Query VIII. Why do you not tell your Brethren in Pensilvania what those Errors are which you reprehend, and would have them disown, seeing they were read to you in the Meeting, out of many of their own Manu∣scripts and Papers, signed by their own hands (as namely) that of John Dellaval, who charged G. K. of being guilty of Heresie, in denying a Fundamental Doctrine of the Quakers, his Heresie being, That the Light within is not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; G. K. meaning by that, something else, the Man Christ Jesus, &c. and John Della∣val defining Heresie by a Popish Definition. (not saying with all sound Pro∣testants,) that it is repugnant to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, (but to the Church) meaning his Brethren. Also John Humphrey's saying, He is grieved to hear some say, they ex∣pect to be Justified by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem; and further saying, Is not this to divide Christ; to use that Term Christ within, and Christ without, and divers other blasphemous Expressions of his read in your hearing. Likewise Jacob Tallnar his charging G. K. with impious Blasphemy, and denying the Lord that bought him; for his saying in his Cate∣chism, That Death both Spiritual and Temporal was the Effect of Adam's Fall; in which said Paper he positively asserteth gross Antinomian Do∣ctrines and Principles, as that mens sins are forgiven them when Christ died on the Cross; and blaming G. K. for not giving all that belongs to Christ without; as others of his Party blame G. K. for not giving all that belongs to Christ within. As also the Record of their Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, that clears Thomas Fitzwater of his charging G. K. of saying, the Light [with∣in] is not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; with divers other Vile Errors and Blasphemies, contained in divers other of their Pa∣pers, signed with their own Hands; the Original Copies whereof were read at one of the said Meetings in your hearing. Query IX. Why are ye so partial, to leave out these Material, and very Neces∣sary Words of G. K. his Declaration in your hearing, after he had said, He believed that the Light within, being God, the Word and the Spirit, in every Man, is sufficient to reveal to every Man all that is needful to his E∣ternal Salvation, viz. not excluding the Man Christ Jesus, his Death, Suffer∣ings, &c. and Intercession, &c. from being joyntly concerned in our Salvation; as also his telling you, That the Faith of him, as he died for us, &c. is ne∣cessary to our Christianity and Salvation.
Query X. Why are you so partial, so to misconstrue G. K. his Godly Zeal and Earnestness, in defence of his Christian Testimony, calling it Passionate Behaviour in your Meeting; whereas ye take no notice not on∣ly of the greatly Passionate Behaviour of divers of you towards him, oft interrupting him in his Just Defence, and in divers of you speaking to him at once, nor of other divers gross Abuses he met with from some of you, whom he did prove manifestly had falsly accused him in your hearing; Nor of Samuel Jennings attesting the Name of God to a Lye, as G. K proved to you in your hearing, from a Paper signed by Samuel Jennings his own Hand? Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O Congregation? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Psal. 58.1, 2. Robert Hannay.
From the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Se∣venth Days of the Seventh Month, Anno 1692. To our Friends and Brethren in the Truth, both in Pensilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion, to be Read in their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, as they in the Wis∣dom of God shall see meet. WHEREAS there hath been an Unhappy Difference, of late, between our Friends, Geo. Keith, and the rest concerned with him, and our Friends Thomas Lloyd, John Simcock, Sam. Jennings, and others joyned with them, which hath tended to the Great Reproach of Truth and Friends, and Dishonour of our Holy Profession. And whereas there hath been a Paper signed by Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jennings, John Simcock, and others joyned with them, being in Number Twenty eight, of those who have opposed George Keith, and the Friends joyned with him, whereby he is condemned, as a Person unfit and unqualified to be a Minister of Christ, and as a Person without the fear of God before his eyes, &c. And whereas the said Paper of Condemnation hath been the occasion of setting up many separate Meetings, as well as of other Confusion and Disturbance, (both privately and publickly) in these Parts. And where∣as the said George Keith, and others joyned with him, being offended with the said Judgment, have appealed to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment of all faithful Friends at this Yearly Meeting, and have re∣quested (by a Second Paper sent to the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned with him) That they might have a fair Hearing and Tryal before impartial Friends, (who have not taken part to the signing Pa∣pers sent to each other, on either side) the Second Day of the said Meet∣ing, about an hour after the breaking up of the Meeting for Publick Worship; and we whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being extream∣ly
grieved and troubled, under a sence of the Reproaches the Truth has met withal, by reason of the said unhappy Difference, yet having not concerned our selves actually in the said Difference on either side, be∣ing met at the said Meeting-House, with true Desires to the Lord, that he would make us instrumental to put an end to the said Difference, and truly make up the said Breach, before it grow wider, according to the Request of the said George Keith, and the rest of the Friends joyned with him in their said Appeal: And the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned, (though again desired, by two Messengers from the Meeting, to appear, and they) refusing the Meeting, adjourned till an hour after the Publick Meeting the next day; and then being assembled, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned still refusing to come (although the said Thomas Lloyd, had lately before advised the said George Keith, to make Application to the Yearly Meeting in this Case, (as Divers of us can witness) and the said George Keith, and the rest concerned, laying their Complaint before us, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest con∣cerned, not appearing, (though again desired several times) our Ex∣pectations and Desires, (with respect to that effectual and absolute heal∣ing the said Breach) is in some measure frustrated. Notwithstanding whereof, having heard the Papers on both sides read, and having weigh∣tily and deliberately considered them, do give it as our Sence and Judg∣ment, That the said George Keith, and his Friends concerned in the said Paper of Condemnation, are not guilty of the Charges and Cen∣sures therein contained; and that therefore, for the Honour, Prosperi∣ty, and Welfare of Truth, and Peace and Quietness of the Churches of Christ in these Parts, and elsewhere, the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the said Twenty eight Persons, forthwith Re-call their said Pa∣per of Condemnation, and that they condemn the same by a Writing under their Hands, directed to all the Monthly and Quarterly Meet∣ings, whereunto the said Paper was directed; And that they forbear offering to speak, by way of publick Testimony in Meetings, till they have so done. And we do also give it as our Judgment, That those Publick Friends who are charged with Misdemeanours, and Ill Behavi∣our in their Lives and Conversations, do forbear speaking in Publick Meetings by way of Testimony, till they clear themselves, and make Satisfaction to their Brethren: And that all Publick Friends on both sides, forbear all Railing and Reviling one another, either publickly or privately, which hath only this tendency, to dishonour Truth, and lay Stumbling-blocks in the Way of the Weak; but that in such Case they observe the Primitive Churches Order, established by Christ and his Apostles, and practised among Friends.
Signed by Us, in behalf of Our Selves, and many more Friends, who are one with us herein. Robert Turner, Elias Burling, John Reid, Charles Reade, Thomas Coborne, Harmon Ʋpdengraves, Thomas Powel; Nathaniel Fitzrandal, Joseph Richards, Edmund Wells; Thomas Kimber, John Neall, Anthony Woodward, Andrew Smith, William Hixon, John Panceast, Henry Burcham, Thomas Hearse, John Jones, Joseph Willcox, Thomas Godfrey, John Budd, Roger Parke, Caleb Wheatly, Edward White, Thomas Gladwin, Thomas Rutter, Edward Smith, Benjamin Morgan, Joseph Sharp, William Thomas, John Bainbridge, John Snowden, William Black, William Snowden, Abraham Brown, John Hampton, Daniel Bacon, Joseph Adams, Edward Guy, Barnard Devonish, Samuel Ellis, Thomas Cross, James Moore, Thomas Jenner, John Harper, Robert Wheeler, Nathaniel Walton, Robert Roe, Peter Boss, Thomas Bowles, William Budd, James Silver, Samuel Taylor, Griffith Jones, William Righton, Thomas Kendal, Samuel Houghton, Emanuel Smith, Peter Daite, Richard Sery, George Willcox, William Wells, Isaac Jacobs van Bibet. Cornelius Scevers, William Snead, David Sherkis, John Carter. Henry Paxon, Thomas Tindal. FINIS.
