H985 11811097 49516
A DISCOVERIE For Division or Setting out of Land, as to the best Form. Published by Samuel Hartlib Esquire, for Direction and more Advantage and Profit of the Ad∣venturers and Planters in the FENS and other Waste and undisposed Places in England and IRELAND. Whereunto are added some other Choice Secrets or Experiments of Husbandry. With a Philosophical Quere concerning the Cause of Fruitfulness. AND An Essay to shew How all Lands may be improved in a New Way to become the ground of the increase of Trading and Revenue to this Common-wealth. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street, 1653.
TO THE READER. Christian Reader, THE hopes which we have of a more speedie Refor∣mation in time to come, and of a readier dispatch of Publique Designes then formerly, doth encou∣rage me to offer to the view of the Publique these Motions, which haply may finde acceptance; if not so farre as to be set up by Authority; yet to be understood by private Persons, that they may finde their Conveniencie therein. They concerne, as thou maiest see, chiefly the Advantages of Husbandry, to remedie some Defects and Disorders, which are found therein; and to lay the foundations of Trade and Com∣merce to increase the same; and all this by some Orderly Con∣trivances, which may produce incredible Effects, if rightly un∣dertaken and attended. If I should intend to lay open the Mis∣chievousnesse of Disorderlinesse and Confusion, I might fill a Volume; it is either the root or the effect of all the evils of this
World; whether they afflict our Soul or our Body, and concern our private or our publick Relations; and to bring our selves and our affairs into a righteous Order, is the great Work which every one should attend within himself; and the greatest good which can be procured at any time unto others; and at this time unto the Publique: it is therefore incumbent to all, equally to serve one another herein, according to their utmost ability; and except all concur to order themselves aright both within themselves, and towards each other, we cannot be throughly happy nor setled in any course succesfully, because it is in Humane Societies almost as in a Watch; except all the Wheels be not only sound and well setled upon their own axle-trees; but fitly ordered to correspond with each other, there can be no Universall Motion, because the disorderliness of one will disturbe many from acting in their Spheres; so it fals out in most matters of Humane So∣ciety chiefly in Trade, and in some points also of Husbandry, as by this following Discourse will appear. Therefore, that which one says is to be heeded; Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus cura∣ri debet. That which is the concernment of all, ought to be the care of all; but no man can make this to be so; except the spirits of men be raised to a pitch answerable to the worth of things offered unto them. For as Seneca saith, Magno animo de rebus magnis judicandum est; alias illarum vitium esse vi∣debitur quod nostrum est. Great Matters are to be weighed with a raised minde, otherwise the fault will seem to be in them, which is in our selves. And although these things may perhaps seem to some, of no great moment, yet if they be lookt into duly, they will be found such, as have an influence, upon the Fundamentalls of the Settlement of Common-wealths. For if Husbandry, and Trade at home and abroad be well regulated; all hands may be Employed, and where all hands are at work, there the whole strength of a Nation, doth put forth its endeavours, for its own advantage, which if it can be directed to do in an
Orderly Way; and with a joynt Concurrence of all parts to one and the same effect; it is not to be imagined how succesful such an Undertaking may be; As for myself, I have in my station bin faithful to offer Objects of this and some other kinde unto the Publike, to provoke every one to minde the best things for their own and the Publike Good; and although in this endevour, where∣in for many years I have continued in the midst of some difficul∣ties, and all our Changes, and have spent my self thereupon as upon a necessary duty; yet I have found no great Encouragement thereunto from abroad, more then what mine own resolution (to persevere faithful unto the end in well doing) did suggest unto me; nevertheless I hope I shall not faint. For I hope the Lord will continue me in the Apostles minde, that I may say from my heart, 2 Cor. 12. 15, 16. That I will very gladly spend and be spent for the good of others, although for the most part it proves a thankless office, and the more abundantly one is found to love the Publike; the less he is loved: Yet let it be so with me; I shall not at any time seek to burden any man, but rather set my self in doing things freely by this kinde of Craft to catch men by their own advantages, to minde the Pub∣like, and do good one to another as servants of each other through love; for herein is the Law of Jesus Christ fulfilled, and his Kingdom advanced amongst us, when upon such a ground trust∣ing unto him, we do all our Affairs heartily for his sake, and not as serving Men only or Our selves. And that thou mayest Christian Reader be inabled to walk in all thy Ways by this Rule, is the Upright desire of him, who shall always profess himself, Thy faithful Servant in Christ, Samuel Hartlib.
This Chart is the Plot or de∣scription of one entire Lordship, or Mannor-house, with its pro∣per Demains: or it may serve for a considerable Farm of 100, 200, or 300 Acres. A the Mannor house, or dwelling house. B the Kitchin Garden. C the Orchyard. D the Garden for choyce fruits or flow∣ers. E the Garden for Physicall plants, or what you will. F F the Dary and Landry. G G the Sheep coats. H H the two greatest of the home Closes to milk the Cows in, or to put a saddle Nag in. I I the Bake house and Brew house. K the standing racks for Oxen, &c. and the great Corn Barn. L L Other Barns, Stables, Cow or Ox∣houses, Swines styes. M M the little houses for all sorts of Poultry. N N More standing Racks. O O Coney-berries. Q Q little Closes for a stoned Horse, a Mare, or Fole, &c. R R Little Closes for like purposes. S two little Pastures for fat Sheep. T two Closes for Pasture for Ewes, Lambs, or weaker Sheep. V two little Pastures for a fat Beef or two. W two little Pastures for infected Cattle. X two little Pastures for your own, or your friends Saddle-horse, that is for present service. Y two little Pastures for weaning Calves.
This Chart conteins 2000 Acres, consisting of or divided into 16 great Farms, conteining 100 Acres apiece, and 16 lesser Farms, consisting of 25 Acres apiece: And that so as each thousand Acres may be considered apart, as being divided in the middle by the great Bank or high way, with the two great Drains on each side of the same. A the Bank B the 2 great Drains on each side. C the foure lesser Drains. D the great Ditches or Cuts to each Farm. E the like Cuts to the little Farms. F the main River. G the Cut from the four best Farms to that River. H the Farm∣houses and home-stalls of the great Farms. I the lesser Farm Houses K the marks f division to the Farms. L the mark of the ring hedge Ditch or wall M the four first great Farms. N the 12 o∣ther great Farms. This may serve as the plot of ano∣ther greater Mannor of 2000 Acres, wherein the four middle Tenements may be made into a grand Farm, or the Lords De∣mains. And then there re∣mains twelve great Farms of 100 Acres apiece, and 16 lesser Farms of 25 Acres apice, whose inabitants (being suppo∣sed labourers) lie cōvenient∣ly to serve ei∣ther the Lord or the greater Farms. All which may be cast into ei∣ther form Round or Square, though for my part I judge the round in the square the best and most convenient.
A DISCOVERY For New DIVISIONS, OR, Setting out of LANDS, as to the best Forme: Imparted in a Letter to Samuel Hartlib, Esquire. HONOURED SIR, I Here present you with a plain Discovery of that pru∣dentiall Contrivance for the more advantageous set∣ting out of Lands, which I have formerly acquainted you with, and as you know offered in vain to some of the Company of Drayners of the great Fen, as I had
opportunity; That so I may not onely gratifie your Publique-heartednesse and great Zeal for the Common good, and testific my willingnesse to be doing some good in my generation, as God shall enable me, but that I may in some sort be blamelesse to all Posterity, though those Lands be not well divided or sub-divi∣ded, since I have not onely offered my assistance, such as it is in private, but do here (and suppose not altoge∣ther too late) freely offer it to the consideration of all men that are, or may be concerned in the same, or the like nature, of what better use Lands divided, or sub∣divided, according to the Plats here intended to every mans view may be found or esteemed. And lest any mistake should be in the not rightly understanding my meaning, or the nature of the thing, give me leave to trouble the World with a few of my Reasons for, or apprehensions of that Advantage or Conveniency, which may be more had and obtained by following this Example. I have been even called to a more then ordinary use of, and love to all sorts of Husbandry, and particular∣ly to Agriculture, wherein God hath been graciously pleased to recompence my Zeal, and indeavour with an increase of knowledge and experience in the wayes of managing Agriculture and Husbandry; in all its parts; and that not onely according to what is com∣monly known and practised, but by some Additionals, which if well accepted, and rightly pursued, would tend exceedingly to the prosperity, honour and plenty of this whole Nation; but of this, as I have formerly ac∣quainted you more largely (for you have thought fit to
hint it to the World in your Reformed Husbandman) I shall therefore proceed and say, that that dear and even naturall affection which I have to Husbandry, above all other employments among men, may (perhaps) have occasioned my further enquiry into these affairs; and by those observations to which I have given my selfe more then every man, I may have attained to far∣ther insight then every man hath troubled himself to take, which I freely present to my Native Countrey, at least so much as concerns the matter here in Questi∣on; namely, The setting out of Land, as to the best Forme. I have observed that all or most part of the Lands, Lordships, Mannors, Parishes, Farmes, and particular Grounds, or Closes in England are not (or rather were not at that time past, when they were first) set out in any good Forme; too much of England being left as waste ground in Commons, Mores, Heaths, Fens, Ma∣rishes, and the like, which are all Waste Ground; but some more, some lesse; some being made a little better use of then others; but all capable of very great Im∣provement, as not now yielding (not one of forty of them through England) the one fourth part of that profit either to private or publique, which they are re∣spectively capable of. I have observed in all places in England the great in∣conveniences that come by the Want of Enclosure, both to private and publique, the irregularity of these Lands that are inclosed, the frequent, and (as things now stand in relation to time past, and Land already set out) unremediable intanglements or intermixture of
Interest of severall persons in the same Common, in the same Field, in the same Close, nay sometimes in the same Acre. The inconvenient passages made or allowed between divers grounds, and that not onely, when they belong to severall men, but even when one man is owner of divers grounds; and the truth is, ei∣ther he that is possest of Lands, is a Lord or Tenant; if Lord, he seldome alters that Form he found his Lands in, whether he received them by Inheritance, or pur∣chase; and if but Tenant, he would count it (for the most part) lost labour, although he did indeed under∣stand both the inconvenience and the right remedy: but I fear neither Lord nor Tenant do so, or at least so, as to lay to heart the Crosses or Losses they or their neighbours do too frequently sustain meerly up∣on this accompt, or are too carelesse or desperate of the remedie. I have observed the carelessenesse and wickednesse of Servants and bad neighbours both; which a man shall be sure to meet, let him remove as often, and to what place he will. I have observed the proneness most of Cattel & Poul∣try to break into forbidden places, but above all others, commonly kept in England (not to speak of Deer and Goats, or of wilde fowl, or the like) Swine, Coneys, and Pigeons, (and some sorts of Poultry, at some seasons) are most inclined to and frequent actors of mis∣chief, and that so great, that men dare hardly consider it seriously, but let it passe to avoid vexation. Who is it that lives a Countrey-life, but knowes, or may know, and upon enquiry finde, that one pair of
old Pigeons eates of one sort or another of Corn, and grain in the year at least 6 bushels, & that there are almost (if not altogether) as many such pairs of Pidge∣ons, as there are men, women and children in England, and it is plain, they can get none, but either of what you have sowne, or of what you should reap, or of the sheadings in the field, which were better bestowed on your Swine or Poultry, or out of your barne, or rick, or threshing-floor, from whence I suppose you cannot well spare it, or from the manger, standing racks, or dunghill, all which your pigs and hens must want so much. I conclude as to this Creature, that there is no such enemy to the prosperity of England, of his bigness so little taken notice of, or that yields so little return; nay I dare affirm, that all the beasts & fouls in England, (wilde fowl, which we cannot so easily prevent, and Swine, and Coneys, which yet return abundantly more profit excepted) do not equalize the losse and damage suffered by this one sort of small birds; but let this serve by way of digression, for the truth is, the Contri∣vance here principally intended is for the better casting out of Lordships or Farmes in point of Forme, and doth no other way remedy this, but as it contracts your businesse into a close order, making it as easie to disco∣ver, and chase away this enemy in one ground, as in a∣nother, which is not commonly to be done in other places. The next destructive Cattel are Coneys, they will eat down the Corn at the first coming up, sometimes to its destruction, they will eat it down all along till Harvest, and if it yet prosper in part, they will stand on their hinder legs, and crop off the ear just at the bot∣tome,
and leave the straw standing, I have seen seve∣rall fields in a confiderable part so served, they will de∣story young Woods, by eating the bark away round about a foot high, and in good meadow and pasture make a thousand crosse paths, and in all grounds dig holes under the roots of trees, corn, &c. to a very great prejudice; and this evill is something the worse, in that there is no Fence in the common way against them, but the dog or gun, which is not alwayes allowed, yet to do this little beast right, it is not his fault but his Masters, or those that keeps him in no better order, for I do affirm, that few Creatures under heaven, (as they may be managed) turn to greater profit to the Owners, and yet may they be kept (all things considered) cheap∣er, and (in a manner) free from doing any hurt to his Owners, or their Neighbours; and so become a most pleasant, profitable, harmlesse creature. And thus to manage this Creature is most properly to be done by such, whose Lands are divided, or sub-divided into some such Forme as these Charts expresse, and in such a Farme it is not uneasie to make these Creatures to do some especiall services even in his life-time. The third most harmfull beast is the Swine, a Crea∣ture so ravenous, that children are scarce safe from a lean sow that hath pigs, and for her to eat her own pigs is no very strange thing; and to eat your Turkeys or Goslings a thing often seen. And as Swine are order∣ed, there is hardly any thing safe from them; how will they break through almost any hedge, not onely eat, but root up & destroy the Corn abundantly, as likewise any grass, trees, plants, or whatever corn is in their way, or they can come at? what and how great and frequent
are the losses abroad, and the nasty inconveniencies at home occasioned by this Creature? And herein they differ, and are worse then all other Cattle, that when they are in the corn they are not easily seen, and (if their owners or keepers misse them not) as too many of those that are called poor people, will not onely willingly not misse them, but (I have seen it, and suf∣fered by it) will on set purpose drive them thither by which means they will sometimes get a haunt of a piece of corn, and go into it so cunningly, that a man can scarce finde where, but being a good way in, they will destroy wholly great spots of a rod or two together, and when a man shall discover them, he had almost as good let them alone, for without a dog they will but play bo-peep, and be running from place to place, but trample down and spoil more, and so they will do a good while also, though you have a dog. Seriously, Sir, I suppose, that though the Hog being fat, and dead is excellent meat, and of so large a body, and good price that he may be worth some pounds, yet there is not one Hog of ten, but (besides the corn given him, after put up to fat) hath one way or other lost, spoiled, destroyed, or devoured twice his price. Most of which inconveniences, as well the nastinesse as the dammage is almost totally prevented by the right Use of this Contrivance, which if, I may truely say, that with some additions to the Common, or for the better ma∣nagement of this Cattle, they are of exceeding Use and Profit equall to Cowes, Sheep, or any other, if not much beyond; but indeed all Cattle almost de∣pend so necessarily on one anothers fellowship, that he that keeps one hath good reason to keep all; (but if any alone, Sheep.)
The fourth necessary sort of Creature fit to be about a Farme, is Poultry of all sorts; whether Water-fowl, as Geese, Ducks, &c. or Land-fowl, as Turkeys, Hens, &c. The first sort are of speciall Use, and require more care then charge in the keeping, which care is eased ve∣ry much by this Contrivance, and those many ill turns, not unusually done by Geese, prevented with an oppor∣tunity given to breed or keep many more without charge. The second sort are exceeding profitable, if bred and fed according to a safe and orderly Rule in a place convenient, allowing a large walk, yet prevent∣ing the harme they are apt to do. I am assured both by reason and experience, that very great profit above all charge may be had without much trouble by them that keep great store of these sorts safe and well, which I conceive will be much facilitated by this Contrivance. All other greater Cattel, as Horses and Mares, &c. Buls, Cowes and Oxen, &c. and all sorts of Sheep, as they are apt to run into every Meadow, better pasture, or corn-grounds they can come at: so are they easier seen or prevented; and besides, it troubles a man lesse to make satisfaction to his Neighbour, or to bear his own losse patiently, when he considers, that such Cat∣tel many times (though not alwayes) are the better for what they have eaten, and may shortly one way or o∣ther make him some amends, either by their fat, or Fleece, or milk, or labour, or the like, whereas all the Pigeon, the lean Hog, or the Coney gets irregularly is meerly lost. And the evill Contrivance and Inter-mixture of wayes and Interests in most places of England is a spe∣ciall reason, which many, even of the more Ingenious
sort of men, that would fain yet do not attempt or en∣deavour those many, great, and visible wayes of bet∣ter improvement that are in nature, and in view, and that because they have no place secure enough, but may every day one before the other expect, that the carelesnesse or wickednesse of their Neighbours, or their own children, or servants (yea, and by mistake sometimes themselves) may let in all or any sorts of these beasts or fowls, (worst of all Hogs or Coneys, which in the common way have most liberty and op∣portunity) to destroy all their labours and charges in an instant; therefore say they (not very wisely nor indu∣striously though) it is better sit stil then rise up and fall. Whereas if English men would be resolutely and ingeniously industrious by this, or some other, or bet∣ter Contrivance, Way, or Means (which I shall gladly subscribe to, when I see it) those dangers may be avoid∣ed, and this Nation become in an age or two, as much (almost) beyond what it now is, as it now is beyond Scotland for fertility, or Ireland for good Husbandry. And we need hardly be beholden to any Nation under heaven for any of their Commodities, except Spanish-Wines and Spices, or some such things, of which we have no simple necessity. I have observed, that in most parts of England, es∣pecially in Champion Countreys, the Pastures lie neer home, and the Woods, Meads, and Corn-land lie at a great distance. And something like it in inclosed grounds also, and that it is common to go through one Close into another, whereas it is plain, that the corne or grasse in the first Close is liable to be eaten and tro∣den down by the Cattle that passe to and again to the Close beyond it. It is also very plain, that all Cattle
that are well, lusty, and not of immediate Use, are a∣ble to carry themselves to a greater distance, but that Wood, Corn, Hey, or the like, require much time, charge and pains to remove them; I appeal therefore, whether it be not fitter to send such Cattle further off, and have your Corn and Hey, (and Wood too, if need be) neerer home. And for your young, sick or weak, or infected Cattle in this Contrivance, there is provi∣sion made for such; as also for your Milch-Cowes at Milking-time, so well, that till I see some better I rest contented with this. I have observed, that when the foul or home-sted is too neer the dwelling house (as it is in most places) it makes the Inhabitants liable to many inconveniences, and offensive sights and smels, as well within doors, as without; but here I refer my selfe whether that evil is not remedied, and yet the Barns, Stables, &c. neer e∣nough for inspection, which is all the reason for their being neer; for as you have it in this Contrivance, you may at all time swith case view and take accompt of your businesse, and yet be as neat and sweet as in a Bur∣gemasters house in Holland. Finally, here your house stands in the middle of all your little world (which you may build as your purse and fancy directs, though I could say something as to that in particular, which I take to be as effectuall if need were) enclosed with the Gardens and Orchards, refresh∣ed with the beauty and odour of the blossomes, fruits and flowers, and the sweet melody of the chirping birds, that again encompast with little Closes, that all young, weak, or sick Cattle may be fostered under your own eye without losse or inconvenience, and all bound together as with a girdle, (and surely never had
the old proverb, ungirt, unblest, a fitter or fuller sense or application) and all that covered again, as with a fair large cloak of Meadow and Tillage, to which you may commit the corner pasturage, the Cape if you please, or the Sleeves to the Coat (for a Coat as well as a Cloak will serve to cover either knavery or foolery) of old cu∣stomes or negligence. Here you have your Bake-house Brew-house, Darie, or the like; your Barns, Stables, and Out-houses in such apt places as may serve indiffe∣rently for all your occasions. And no one ground to passe through into another, no probability of being trespassed upon by others, or by your own, but the most perfect right and ample Use of every foot of ground inclosed entire, by all which (I doubt not) will make good what I have sometimes affirmed; that besides all other wayes of Improvement that may be farther ad∣ded, this alone in meer point of Contrivance is enough to improve the value of your Estate one half part; viz. that if it were really worth 100 li. per annum before, it will thus become as really worth 150 li. per annum, and the charge in casting it into this forme, (especially where no fences are already) little more, in some cases not so much, though I must tell you, you cannot spare in any case more unhappily then here. And besides profit, the case and pleasure will be better felt then ex∣prest in words. Very much more might be said in order to this, but it would too farre exceed the bounds of a Letter, and it is also not amisse to see how the World will accept or reject this first: From the hands of him, who sub∣scribes himself ever SIR, Your most faithful, thankful Friend, and humble Servant, Cressey Dymock.
An Experiment for the multiplying of Corn, practised neer Paris in France, by some of that new order of Friers, who are there called Peres de lâ doctrine Chrestienne. INto two French pintes of rain-water, they did put a certain quantity of Cow-dung well rotted, and as much Sheeps-dung and pigeons dung. This water they boiled, till but half a pinte was left, then they strained it through a linnen cloth, and in it dissolved 3 small handfuls of common salt, and as much Salt Pe∣ter. This brine they set in some vessel upon hot ashes, and in it they steeped their Seed-corn; which being so ordered, and at the usuall seed-time, being put into barren ground▪ produced unusuall increase, I my selfe have seen one hundred and fourteen eares upon one root, which, they told me, came from one single corn so prepared. This way of theirs differs not much from that which I found in an old Manuscript, and can∣not dislike. Take, saith he, rain-water that hath stood in some pool or pond till it putrifie. Put into it good store of dung of horses, kine, sheep, goats, pigeons, hens, and any other beast or bird that feeds upon grass or seeds. An quia herbarum, & seminum Vita media vegetativa in stercoribus illis restiterit exaltanda? Set this mixture eight dayes in the Sun, (or if you be in haste, boil it over the fire half an hour, stirring it all the while,) afterward strain it, and then make it stronger by putting into it more of the foresaid sorts of dung the second time. This having stood as before, strain out, and put into it some common salt, and a little Ox-gall. Into this liquor put your seed-corn; float or scum off all the light corns that swim; let the rest lie in the li∣quor
24 houres. Then take out your seed-corn, and spread it thin upon a linnen cloth, and dry it in the sha∣dow. Put this seed into barren ground (for in such it will thrive better then in a rich soil) you shall reap at least an hundred-fold. Another Secret worthy to be tryed by all such as are lovers of the Advancement of Husbandry. IN the choice of seed-corn, prefer that wheat which is most weighty, as being more masculine and fitter for generation then the lighter graines. In the produ∣ction of plants, the earth is considered as a female, whose sterility may be much helped by the extraordi∣nary melioration of the seed; As if you take water, which hath bin made fat with horsdung wel rotted, and afterwards dissolve in it as many pounds of Sal terrae as you intend to sowe acres. In this water steep the afore∣said weighty seed for 24 hours. So shall you have a better crop then usuall, though you sowe but halfe the usuall quantity of seed, and though your ground be not so often ploughed, nor be at all dunged; nay though it were barren of it selfe. Your harvest will be ripe sooner by a moneth, and by reason of the Salt-peter, this corn will be fitter for store-houses; for there it will lie ten years uncorrupted. Observations and Animadversions upon the foregoing secrets or experiments: Writ∣ten by the Author of the large Letter in the Legacy of Husbandry. COncerning the Experiment from Paris about steeping of Corn, I have told you heretofore that steeping of Barley is used in
a∣way all soile, (except Drake) and also all light corn, further to accelerate growth, if it be sowne late; and further, if pigeons dung be added, it may be as good as half a dunging; and I think I speak high enough, for that little strength that Corn draweth by this steeping can∣not do wonders: and if all that Salt, Niter, Cow-dung, Sheeps, Pigeons dung, of this brine were cast upon the earth, it would not dung a quarter of it, how then can the Extract do so much? I cannot as yet see any great reason for it, unlesse perchance there be some occult vi∣vification of the spirits of the Seed, which as yet I am ignorant o, As for an 114 ears of Corn from one, it's nothing: I have had from Oats 140 without any steep∣ing, or such doings; yet I have used some Art, which I may call a Secret; for I am perswaded very few can do it: but I'le tell it you, and I would all the World did know, for it is a trifle: viz. when the Corn be∣ginneth to spread, to lay either clods or Tileshards, or any broad thing upon it to cause it to spread, and fur∣ther, let not any corn grow within a foot and a half of it; and this is the great businesse which every one may try (the lands also ought to be excellently good.) Fur∣ther, I have had above 2000 grains for one, or of one cut in the midst, and above 100 in one car without steeping. As to the second Experiment of Brine, I think of it as of the former; onely I think it convenient to adde, that first they are to blame, who think to medicine the earth as Physicians do the Body, and therefore adde such varieties of Dungs, as Cows, Pigeons, Horse, Sheep, &c. as so many Radices, Folia, Fructus, Semina, &c. and then adde Salt and Niter as Phycsiians do Gin∣ger and Mace, then a little Salt and Oxe-gall, as they do Musk and Amber-greese; then boil and strain them
Cape colaturam, & dissolve ut prius. I for my part think that our old Grandame the Earth ought not thus to be nursed, and suppose there is more vanity in these then in the Apothecaries Bills. Secondly, Niter is costly: I fear the Crop will not pay the charges; for that I suppose the Countrey-man will consider, though our projecting Husbandman do not. Thirdly, that it's a vanity to overcharge any liquor with too great a quan∣tity of materials. For we know that the power of e∣very thing is finite, and if you put Salt into water, such a proportion it will dissolve, if you put above that pro∣portion, it sinketh to the bottome, and there lies undis∣solved. Fourthly, that the cause of Fruitfulnesse is not onely the vita media in dung; for when it is totally corrupted, and the vita media gone, it is very fruitfull: further, Chalke, Marle, Nitre, which are exceeding fruitfull, have no vita media. But concerning Fruitful∣nesse I have sent you a short Discourse which is onely to shew you the difficulty of the Question, and to stir up some other to attempt it. As for the Conclusion of the processe (or Experi∣ment) viz. you shall reap an 100 fold: let me but dig Land, if it be not extreamly barren, I'le wager to have the same increase without all these slibber slops. As to the last Processe which I like best, having the greatest probabilities; I answer, that to get this Sal Terrae to supply every mans occasion, is more then I know how to obtain, and the trouble great; and I sup∣pose he that hath that Salt needeth not horse-dung; for rain-water I suppose will do better: and further, I de∣sire to know how he would extract it, and how it differ∣eth from Niter: This processe pleaseth me, and I sup∣pose the graines will be excellent and long lasting.
A great Question concerning Fruitfulnesse. Offered to all ingenious Searchers of Nature. It is a main deficiencie in Husbandry, that though we by experience finde that all the foresaid materials, and divers others, as oft-tilling, Husbandry, seasons, &c. change of seed and Land, resting of Lands, fencing &c. do cause Fertility: yet we are very ignorant of the true causes of Fertility, and know not what Chalk, Ashes, Dung, Marle, Water, Air, Earth Sun, &c. do contribute: whether something Essential, or Accidental; Material or Immaterial; Corporal or Spiritual; Prin∣cipal or Instrumental; Visible or Invisible? whether Sa∣line, Sulphureous or Mercurial; or Watry, Earthy, Fi∣ery, Aereal? or whether all things are nourished by Va∣pours, Fumes, Atoms, Effluvia? or by Salt, as Urine, Embrionate or non-specificate? or by Ferments, Odours Acidities? or from a Chaos, or inconfused, indigested, and unspecificated lump? or from a Spermatick, damp∣ish vapour which ascendeth from the Centre of the Earth? or from the Influence of Heaven? or from Water onely impregnated, corrupted or fermented? or whether the Earth, by reason of the Divine Benediction hath an Infinite, multiplicative Vertue, as Fire, and the Seeds of all things have? or whether the multiplicity of Opinions of learned Philoso∣phers (as Aristotle, Rupesc. Sendivog. Norton, Helmont, Des Car∣tes, Digby, White, Plat. Glaubre) concerning this Subject shew∣eth the great difficulty of this Question, which they at lea∣sure may peruse. I for my part dare not venture on this vast Ocean in my small bark, lest I be swallowed up; yet if an op∣portunity presents, shall venture to give some hints, that some more able Pen may engage in this difficult Question which strikes at the Root of Nature, and may unlock some of her choicest treasures. The Lord Bacon hath gathered stubble (as he ingenuously and truly affirms) for the bricks of this foun∣dation; but as yet I have not seen so much as a solid founda∣tion plainly laid by any, on which an ingenious Man might venture to raise a noble Fabrick: I acknowledge the burthen too heavy for my shoulders. FINIS.
A further Explanation on the foregoing Letter and Cards con∣cerning Division, or setting out of Land, as to the best form. With an Exposition of the words Sal Terrae, what is to be understood by them in the fore-mentioned Experiment of Husbandry. SIR, IN obedience to your Commands, I shall thus proceed to give you further hints of the Advantages that may be had by casting Lands into some such Forme, as the Plot or Card Presented you with formerly, doth more fully shew. If you set your house in the Centre of your Lordship, or great Farme, then are you equally distant (in a manner) to all the parts thereof, which I take to be no small conveniencie. Against this I know it may be objected, that (especially in such a place as the great Fenne) it will then be too far from the great Dreynes, neer unto which it hath been thought fit to set the Houses, that Boats may come to the door, which they may as well do, being with small charge let into your house, which charge or trouble being set against those other incon∣veniences of such as are made or continued by setting the house at the end of the Land for the Dreynes sake, will be found: inconsiderable. For Example. The common way of casting out their Levels or Proportions for Tene∣ments are into pieces of 100 acres; (this is taken from the level in the Isle of Axholm, the casting out of the hundred in the great Fen being worse then that;) this runs backwards from the great Dreyn, where your House stands, at least 2200 yards, and all the passage you have to any of your grounds is through all that is between that part and the House, so that part of your work or Harvest lies a long mile from home. Now the same proportion of 100 Acres being cast in a square Forme, the equall sides will be about
127 rods; the half of which is about 64 Rods from the Drayne to the House or Centre of your Land, to which to cast a ditch from the main Dreyne of 15 foot wide, and as deep as the Dreyn, may cost, say 5 shil. per Rod, which is too much, it amounts but to 16 li. and you have as good ad∣vantage by boat, as if your House had stood on the grand Dreyn and better. 'Tis true, every House that stands behinde you, which are two in number more, upon the same length, will cost just as much more either of them, but with that charge once for all, they are fitted with boatage for ever, and the whole land laid so much more dry. Now put in the other scale the Conveniencies and Profits, or prevention of losse or charge (thus:) whereas before all your ground sowed with corn, or lying for meadow, saving that next your House, must have cost you double, treble, quadruple, I, five times, six times in some cases, as far carriage as the same will do now, as oft in the day, week, moneth, year, or all years to come, as you shall have occasion; which well considered, is a most casie purchase. Secondly, as oft as your self or your servants have occasion to go to any of the farther Closes, much time must be lost in going and comming, which might have been much better spent. Thirdly, you cannot drive any Cattel to the farthest Closes, if they should lie for grasse, for which they are fittest, but through those neerer, which then may be sowed with Corn; and it is not easie to foresee the losse you may sustain by the carelessenesse of servants by so do∣ing. Lastly, (for there are many other Inconveniences and Wayes to losse, which for brevities sake I omit) if your own Cattel be gotten into your own Corn, or your bad neigh∣bours into either Corn, Meadow, or Pastures, they are not al∣together so soon discovered at so great distances, as that form allowes, and to put them out will prove half a dayes work almost; all which put together, will so abundantly repay that
small Charge, that I suppose I need enforce this no farther; and I believe, that the Landlord need not be at all the charge; for the Tenants conveniencie will invite him to bear a great part of it; for here as you see by the Card striking a Circle from your House, at the Centre as wide as your Square will admit, all your land (except the Corners, which are desti∣ned for pasture for your stronger Cattel, and of least present use) will be at one and the same distance from you, and the farthest (if there were any farthest) but the Semidiameter of your Circle, which is but 350 yards, or seventeen score and ten to the farthest end thereof, and but 130 yards, or six score and ten to the nearest end; the carriage alike easie and short, the inspection and use or drift alike easie and of quick dispatch, and no going through any one into the other, but having all in so close an order, and so ready at your Com∣mand for all purposes, that you will be incouraged to make more or better then common Uses of some parts of your Land, which may turne to your profit exceedingly, if you be but a little vigilant. If your ground being either sand (or any thing but boggy, morish, or peat Land) then may you plant Hedges, Orchards, Gardens, &c. your House stands in the midst, (which also I would build round, which Forme I suppose to be of most beauty, use, and least cost to him that will give his minde to consider it rightly) I would allow for the situation of my House, and some Gardens next it, of the delicater sort half an Acre of Land, and next without that for Orchards and Kitchin-Gardens, at least one Acre, and one half, or two Acres more, both cast into a round forme, one encompassing the other (for which and all that follow, I refer, to the sight of the Card it self, which sets it forth more fully to the eye) without that again, I would allow 9 Acres to be divided into severall little Closes for the Uses in the Card mentioned; some bigger, some lesser, as
I should see cause; and to binde all this together, I would again encompasse all those with one undivided ring, which should contain about four Acres (deducting out of all these proportions respectively so much as was taken up with or in hedges, ditches, walls, &c.) double fenced, inwards from the little Closes round about, and outward from the last Circle of great Closes, out of every of which great Closes (all of them at their neerer or smaller ends, butting upon this ring) I would have a bridge or gate strong and stanch, that I might let in what I would; but that nothing might get in without my leave. I would have from my House four equal∣ly quartered out-passages to this Middle ring, and from that again straight forwards to the Outside of my Lands well ditched, gated, fenced; I would set my Bake-house, Brew∣house, Wash-house, Darie, or the like, without the second Circle, viz. just without my Kitchin-Garden and Orchards, and within or at the neerer end to the House of the little Closes, and for the side of the House, as whether to set this on the North, or that on the South, &c. of the dwelling-House, I leave to every mans discretion. As for my Barnes, Stables, or Houses, if any Swine-coates, Hen-houses, Malt-Kilnes, and all that usually is called, or belongs to a Fold∣stead, as rackes to feed Cattel without doors, &c. I would place at such quarters as I thought fit, some at one quarter, some at another, but all on the girdle or middle ring, in or on which I would also make so many Coney-berries (where the ground will any way bear it) as I can fore-see, can there live, and be well maintained; where note; that they are not onely to be maintained by the grasse growing on the ring it selfe; but at discretion to be let into all or any the other great or small Closes, at such times, and for such purposes, as I shall finde convenient and safe, and when they shall do me good service and no hurt, and not otherwise; upon which
tearmes also I will let in my sheep, hogs, poultry, &c. ha∣ving them all alwayes at command to be driven out again at pleasure, when they can do no more good, or are like to do hurt there; thus will my dung be bred in such places, from whence with ease I can distribute it either inwards to my Or∣chards and Gardens, or outwards to my tillage, &c. with wonderfull ease. Thus shall my Houses not be in such eminent danger all at once, in case of any unfortunate fire; thus will those kindes of nastinesse, which is in many places too frequent, be avoid∣ed, and yet the uttermost part of my Foldstead for inspe∣ction not above fivescore, or a good stones throw from my dwelling-house, to which I can go at any time in a pair of mi∣nutes, and to the other Offices in lesse then one; the corner∣pieces that the grand Circle within the Square leaves, being farthest off, yet are within less then twice twelvescore, which being (in generall, for upon particular cause you may at plea∣sure plough them for a time, and lay them down again) al∣lotted to be pasture for your Milch-cowes, and all such stronger Cattel as you have not present use for, as I said be∣fore, they may be driven, as occasion serves, with much case: for this is highly worth consideration in Husbandry (for the thing is better known then considered) that a little difference in distance (though it be but one Acres length, which is but 220 yards) occasions a trouble or charge, not a little more when sowen with Corne, or let lie for Meadow, then when grazed with strong Cattel. For admit that piece to be square, then it contains 10 Acres, which may well yield at least 20 wain-loads, or Cart-loads of corn, every of which is worth six pence or foure pence at least to carry an Acres length, and so for every Acres length that shall be added; whereas to drive an hundred Milch-cowes, a flock of sheep or the like, will require but a man or a boy, and his dog. And of what advantage dispatch is, (or may some∣times
happen to be especially) is not easie to be valued. Now as it is apparent to me; so I think it is or may be to all men, that the Position is true, and that this Way meerly in the Contrivance, without or besides any other Improvement shall make 100 Acres, to all intents and purposes as usefull and profitable, as 150 Acres can be (that being also without any other Improvement then the meer common Forme of casting out and the uses that Form is capable of) in the com∣mon Forme. But that the common Forme is capable of good improvement, I deny not, but I affirm this to be much more; for this is apt for many Uses which are altogether un∣fit for, and not used, nor possibly to be used upon the com∣mon Forms of Farme, and to those Uses, to which com∣mon Farmes are, or may be put, these may be put also, but with more ease, safety, profit and pleasure abundantly. And If my new Invention for Setting of Corn, and all its Parts, were put in Execution (together with some other Inventions or Contrivances for, in, or concerning other the parts of Universal Husbandry, which God hath given into my hands (and for which I praise is great Name for ever) upon a par∣cell of good Land in this Forme, I fear it would be, or give but too much of profit and delight for men to enjoy in this life. I shall therefore, as to my own Interest, or action, in these things, and its extension or increase, wholly refer my self to God, and to his righteous will and wise dispensation how, how far, what friends or means he will raise for me, or with me to advance these works in themselves great & good, and doubtlesse to him acceptable, while not abused; but then like all other blessings becoming curses. And, Sir, ever rest Your most obliged, thankfull, and affectionate Friend and Servant, C. D.
An Exposition of the Words, What is meant by Sal-Terrae, in∣the fore-mentioned Experiment of Husbandry. SAl-Terrae is nothing but such Niter as we commonly use, and which is drawn out of fat earths, and boiled, &c. If you cannot get fat earth for that purpose, take common salt, and purifie it, for by so doing you shall strengthen its at∣tractive vertue. By which when it is in the earth, it will as it were magnetically attract to it self all the saltnesse that is neer it, and so make it selfe more strong. Another. Sal-Terrae is not Salt-Peter, but a salt of such earth, as owes not its fatnesse to dung, but was onely impregnated from heaven: therefore it is best seeking it upon such high Lands, where it is not likely that ever any man carried up any dung or compost to lay upon it. This Earth must be handled like Salt-Peter-Earth; but when you boil the liquor, it will not shoot like Salt-Peter, but must be boiled up like other com∣mon-salt, &c. Another. Sal-Terrae is no otherwise to be Englished, but word for word, Salt-of-Earth: and the manner of extracting of it is to calcine the earth, and to make a Lie of the ashes evapo∣rating afterwards the same, in the same manner as the Salt of all other Ashes is made. For to separate any salt from crude Earth (except what hath been converted into Salt-Pe∣ter, or commeth forth in the company of Salt-Peter) that is, absolutely impossible. As for the difference of that Salt from Niter, that consisteth herein, that Niter is a Salt extreamly spirituous and unctuous; of which two qualities the other Salt still subsisting in its own grosse, and as it were terrestriall nature, is very little participant.
An Advertisement to the Reader concerning the fore-going Expositions of Sal Terrae. Gentle Reader, BE pleased to take notice that to perfect the knowledge of the Experiment, I consulted with some Friends a∣bout the meaning of Sal Terrae, what it is, and received from them the three severall Answers, which I have here imparted unto thee: but because they are not yet clear and satisfactory to my self, as somewhat varying from each other, I hope to procure for the Publick Good a more full discove∣ry of this Subject, which one who is a great searcher into the mysteries of Nature hath an inclination to write of, & to shew that Fecundity and Nutriment as well in Vegetables, as in Animals, doth wholly depend on Nitre, the Nature where∣of he conceives to be known to very few, if to any at all. And as for Sal-peter, whereof hitherto the use hath chiefly been known in the making of Gun-powder, there are some endeavours a foot, whereby the usefulnesse thereof in hus∣bandry also will be made known, which in due time may be imparted unto this Common-wealth; for I finde some of my noble and worthy Friends of the same opinion with my self, who are perswaded (to use the words of one of them in his Letter to me.) That the Matter, by which men are killed and fed, is but one and the same, and differs onely in the minde and hand that uses it; and that God will go beyond the Devil in his own Materials of destruction, by changing the use of them into a Blessing; For that is most agreeable to his Power and Goodnesse, to raise best out of worse, by changing onely the Use: In whom I rest alwayes, Thy most willing and assured Servant, Samuel Hartlib.
AN ESSAY UPON Master W. POTTERS Designe: Concerning a Bank of Lands to be erected throughout this COMMON-WEALTH. Whereby Lands may be improved in a New Way to become the ground for increase of Trading, and of Publique and Private Revenues, and Accommodations. Represented thus briefly, by a Person of singular Zeal and Integrity to all PUBLIKE INTEREST: To the end, that the Author's own Conceptions may be taken notice of by others, and he draw'n forth to make out this Great Businesse more fully in due time. London, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street.
AN Essay upon Mr. W. Potters Designe con∣cerning a Bank of Lands to be erected throughout this Common-wealth. THere is no man, but must live by the fruits, either of his own labours or of what his friends have left him. And because no one person is fitted for all Vo∣cations, nor any one Vocation fitted to produce all kinde of necessaries for mans use, from hence there arose (from the beginning) a necessity of some such Medium of Commerce, which we ordinarily call Money, to be currant, between such as have, either no reciprocal want, of each others commodi∣ties, or no liking of each others conditions or price. This Universal credit or Medium of Commerce, hath been (through all former ages) placed in the metals of Gold and Silver; other metals (by being made currant money, (by the Authority of some States) beyond their intrinsick value) having approved themselves, to be very subject, either to the inconvenience of being counterfeited, by dishonest persons, or Neighbour Nations, or to be (by the injustice of the Prince) sometimes altered to a higher or lower value, a cheat too ordinarily made use of, by the Kings of Spain. The Inconveniencies that have bin found (by the latter ages) in, these two metals of Gold Silver, are, First, that there hath not bin (at least not yet) a sufficient quan∣tity of either of them, to supply all Nations towards that in∣crease
of Trade, which a greater quantity of money (if it could be had) would produce; It being an infallible Rule, that money being that, which every man (his petty occasions sup∣ply'd) seeks to employ in Land, Trade, at Interest, or some such other way, as may make him a yeerly return of gain) the more there is of money in any Nation, the quicker also must all those wayes be, wherein money is ordinarily im∣ployed. The second Inconvenience is, that all those Countries, that have inconsiderate Mines of Gold and Silver, or (perhaps) none at all, must (for the obteining of a thing, so necessary to the upholding of ordinary Commerce among themselves and with other Nations) part with so much of their best Staple-Commodities, as will purchase the Gold and Silver they want, from that great Merchant of Gold and Silver, the King of Spain; whereas, (could there be some such other Medium of Commerce found out, as this Common-wealth might (without paying or being liable, or beholding, to any other Prince) raise, to, and within it self) there would be ma∣ny Millions worth of our Staple-Commodities (now) saved, which must otherwise be parted with, to supply our present want of money. The third Inconvenience, which hath been found, especi∣ally in Silver (the most common metall of the two) is; that the keeping of it in a private Cash is dangerous; the continu∣all carrying of it from place to place, is both dangerous and troublesome; and the delivery and telling of it, from hand to hand, is none of the least businesses in a Common-wealth, especially if versed in Trade. Towards the obviating of these last Inconveniencies, arose that admirable Invention of a Bank; which (in short) is no o∣ther thing, then a transmitting of the Ownership of money, (deposited in a Publique Treasury, and secured (there) by
Publique Authority) from hand to hand, by assignation one∣ly; without the danger and trouble of keeping, carrying, or telling it. This way of assignation of the Ownership of money, or credit in Bank, hath, (among Merchants) approved it self, to be of excellent use, for the dispatch of all their businesse of payment. But the Inconveniencies, which this kinde of payment, (by way of assignation) hath not remedied, are 1 That it hath been (hitherto) applied, to the dispatch of businesse of payments, among Merchants onely, and not (ordinarily) to the concernments of the rest of the people, of the Nation, where the Bank is kept- 2 That it is a better way onely, of the use of Gold and Silver, towards the dispatch of the businesse of Payment; and not at all any new Medium of Commerce; money being still, that necessary requisite to a Bank, without or beyond which, a Bank can neither be raised nor extended; since the having of more Credit, to be currant in a Bank, then there is money to answer it, is no better then a publique Cheat; and to be accounted, so much worse, then in any private person, in that Rulers have (by their Office) a more immediate Image of God, and have been (in some places of Scripture) honour∣ed with that name, and shall not the Judge of all the earth or of all Nations do right? 3 That money (deposited (as above mentioned) in any one place) proves, not onely a temptation to the sword (as lately in Holland) but (if once surpriz'd) becomes a certain loss to all the Owners, and an invincible opportunity, (in the hand of the possessor) against the State or Common-wealth in which such Banks are kept. Having thus hinted; first, the absolute necessity (from the beginning) of some Medium of Commerce; Secondly, the
Inconveniencies of those metals (Gold and Silver) in which this Medium of Commerce or Universall Credit, hath for∣merly been placed. And thirdly, the imperfection of Banks, (thoug an excellent invention) because they are but a lame and short remedy to those Inconveniencies. That which re∣mains, is, (from a due consideration, of every part of the pre∣misses) to hold forth (if it may be) some such New Medium of Commerce (in the place of Gold and Silver) as, 1 Shall be (at least) of as true intrinsick value, as Gold and Silver. 2 May be raised by this Common wealth, within it self, without any parting with our Staple-Commodities for it, and without supplying the ing of Spain, (who in the judge∣ment of wise men) is likeliest to be our final and greatest e∣nemy. 3 May be extended, to ten times more, then ever this Nation was owner of in money; to the incredible increase of in-land Commerce, and (consequently) of exportation and forreign Trade. 4 May be managed, without any least danger, either (of loss) to the Owners, or (of conquest) to the Common-wealth. 5 May be transmitted, between person and person, and between place and place, with as much ease and security, as is to be found in forreign Banks. 6 Will leave all the money (which either is yet remaining, or shall hereafter (by a wise ordering of our Trade) increase within this Nation) free for the Peoples use, without bury∣ing of it, (as if the Rulers be just and true) is done in For∣reign Banks. 7 If to the premisses there can be added; first, how the private person may (readily without any trouble or charge) obtein money, at three pound per Cent. Secondly, how such
a Revenue, may be raised to the Publique, as may (in a great part, if not altogether) take away the necessity, of any future Taxes whatsoever from the people, the Proposiions may (perhaps) deserve acceptance. Now since the Proposition to be made, towards so great a scope, is no other, then a complication of several things, already practised in the World, and arises chiefly from the ground of reason, upon which Forreign Banks consist; I shall (therefore) by way of inlargement of what hath been above hinted, concerning Forreign Banks, say; 1 That the manner of the Banks beyond the Sea, is that one species of money (such as Authority appoints) is brought into a Bank, or Publique Treasury. 2 That the money thus deposited, is (instead of being ta∣ken out, carried and delivered) passed (from person to person) by assignation onely of the Ownership of so much money; which (in the language of the place) is called credit in Bank or Bank-credit. 3 That (because all payments of Bils of Exchange must (by a Law established) be made at the Bank, it (from thence) comes to pass, that the Owners of the money in Bank (though they may) do yet seldome or never take out their money, but make their payments by assignation onely of their credit in Bank, which goes (in a continual suit) from hand to hand, with seldome or never taking the money out of the Bank. Towards the raising of those Banks at the first, two Laws were necessary from Authority, and established (accordingly) by them; first, that all payments of Bils (above twenty or thirty pounds) should be made at one place or Bank. Secondly, that all Payments to be made at that one place, should be made (also) in one species of Coine. After the ex∣ample of publique Authorities, and of the Banks in For∣reign
parts, it is (towards a far more valuable end) proposed. 1 That there be (by Authority) a hundred several places (or more if occasion require) appointed in this Common-wealth, where all payments whatsoever (above ten or twenty pounds) shall be made and recorded, and this for avoiding of difference in all such payments. 2 That all payments (above ten or twenty pounds) be enjoyned by authority, to be made in Bank-credit. 3 That there be no way, to raise this credit in Bank, but by morgage of Land, for the security of those who (from time to time) shall be Owners of the Credit in Bank; And the condition of the morgage to be, either to pay so much mo∣ney with interest at six pounds per Centum, within a twelve moneth from the day, that Bank-credit should (any way) fail to be currant, or (in default of such payment) the Land to be forfeited without redemption, and to be divided, among the Owners of the Credit in Bank. From the premisses these consequences will follow; 1 The making of all payments, at the severall places a∣bove-mentioned, will raise so many Banks. 2 The injoyning of all payments above ten or twenty pounds) to be made in Bank-Credit, will make money (in payments above ten or twenty pounds) to be a seeker, to be turned into Bank-Credit, being (it self) not currant, in ten or twenty pound payments, till so converted. 3 The raising of Bank-Credit, onely by or upon Land, will avoid; all counterfeiting; (as in case of Copper-money) all danger of surprize (as lately in Holland) there being (by the Law of the Bank) no money to rest there; all hazard to them, that shall be (from time to time) Owners of all the credit in the Bank, because there is no credit in the Bank, but what is sufficiently secured in the same manners as money, that is now borrowed upon Land.
4 It will multiply Money, (or that which will supply the place of Money) in the Land to two thirds, three fourths, four fifths, (or (perhaps) more) of the value of the Lands of the Nation, which can amount to little lesse then a hun∣dred millions Sterling. 5 It will furnish the Landed man with Bank-credit (cur∣rant in payment) at two per Cent. 6 By two per Cent. payable (yearly) to the publique, for one thousand, six hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shil∣lings and four pence of Banke-credit, upon every hundred pound per Annum; the publique will receive (yearly) 33 pounds, 13 shillings, 4 pence out of every hundred pound, per Annum, that is, one third of the Rents of all the Lands, that are morgaged; which is almost or altogether double to what is now raised upon Lands, and which (the whole reve∣nue of Lands being rated but at six Millions per Annum) comes to two Millions per Annum to the Publique, for the defraying of all publique charges, without any necessiy of o∣ther Taxes. Memorandum, that all Lands, not morgaged to the Bank, are left to pay the present taxes; and so there will be no least disturbance to the present publique Revenue. FINIS.
