K63 12350481 59969
A FEAST OF Fat Things Full of MARROW. Containing several Scripture SONGS taken out of the Old and New Te∣stament. With others, composed by  . Together  one Hundred of Divine HYMNS, being the first Century. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord. London, Printed by B. H. 1696.
A TABLE OF CONTENTS Of the SONGS. MOses's song Page 1 The second part Page 2 Isaiah's song Page 4 Isaiah's joyful song Page 5 The song of Zacharias Page 6 The song of the blessed Virgin Page 7 The song of Simeon Page 8 The song of the Lamb Page 9 Part of Hannahs Song Page 10 The song of the Lamb Page 12 A song of Praise for the discovery of the Plot Page 18 Of the HYMNS. The Eternity of God Page 5 The Immensity of God Page 6 On the Omniscience of God Page 7 The great Wisdom of God Page 8
God's piercing Eyes Page 9 The Power of God Page 10 God's Mercy shining Page 11 The Covenant & Faithfulness of God Page 12 On God's Sovereignity Page 13 God's glorious Bounty Page 14 Abounding Mercy of God in Christ Page 15 The Patience of God Page 16 Another on God's Patience Page 17 On the Birth of Christ Page 18 The second part 25th Psalm tune Page 19 On the Deity of Christ Page 20 On Christ's Suretiship Page ibid. Of Christs Divine Love Cant. 1. Page 22 The Churches Spiknard Page 23 He's White & Ruddy Page 24 Deliverance from the Pit Page 25 Christ at the Sinners door Page 26 All Glory to God and the Lamb Page 27 God's glory display'd Page 28 The soul Rent, or glory shining Page 29 On the great salvation of the gospel Page 30 Look unto Jesus Page 31 The joy of Believers Page 32 Christ Exalted Page 34 Christ's Glory Page 35 The Saint indeed Page 36 At administration of Baptism Page 37
The Drooping Spirit Revived Page 38 Evil thoughts abhor'd Page 39 The Backslider healed Page 40 Ephraim mixed among the People Page 41 The good Samaritan Page 42 The voice of the Turtle Page 43 —Buy of me Page 44 A Bleeding Christ & bleeding Heart Page 45 Salvation great and glorious Page 46 The tender Hearts Triumph Page 47 The broken and contrite heart Page ibid Righteousness of Christ glorious Page 48 Christ's Peny or the Laborours hire Page 49 The Blessed death of the Saints Page 50 The happy Death of the Godly Page 51 A hymn on Psalm. 17, 15. Page 52 Salvation shining Page 53 The Saints Holy Triumph Page 54 The Power of God's Word Page 55 Boundless Mercy Page 56 A Call to Obedience Page 57 Spiritual joy encreasing Page 58 Christ our glorious Shepheard. Page 59 Truth in its Primitive Purity. Page 60 The spiritual Bridegroom Page 61 God's Temple plants. Page 62 Christ's Vine-yard Page 63 The Noble Vine Page 64
Redeeming Love Page 65 Spiritual Food Page ibid. The honour of Christ's servants Page 66 Christ the saints strength and guide Page 67 Hope for believers Page 68 The joy of believers Page ibid. Christ's green pastures Page 69 The fulness of Christ Page 70 To praise God becomes the upright Page 71 The Ax lifted up Page 72 A Hymn of Praise Page 73 Treasure in Earthen Vessels Page 74 Grace abounding Page 75 Hell in a rage. Page 76 Jacob's Ladder a Type of Christ Page 77 The wonder of pardoning grace Page 78 The unwearied saint Page 79 God's court, or, glory near Page 80 God pardons, guids, and leads Page 81 A call to Young-men Page ibid. Unity of Saints Page 82 Infinite Mercy shining Page 83 The joy of repenting Tears Page 84 The saints Triumph in Christ Page 85 Christ a believer's All Page 86 Go forth by the foot-steps of the flock Page 87 My beloved is mine. Page 88 A Hymn of praise for the new birth Page 89
A preparation Hymn Page ibid. Saints happy at death Page 90 Saints the Salt of the Earth Page 91 —He's altogether lovely. Page 92 The Rose of Sharon. Page 93 A Hymn on Cant. 5. 12. Page 94 Desert places rejoyce Page 95 A Ransom found Page 97 On the Resurrection &c. Page 98 A Hymn of Praise Page 99 On the answer of Prayers Page 100 Another Page 101 A sacred Hymn on Sanctification. Page 102
SEVERAL Scripture Songs Taken out of the Old and New-Testament. With some other Spiritual Songs; &c. Moses's Song, on Exod. 15. 1 I To the Lord, will sing, Triumph in him also; The Horses and the Riders he Into the Sea did throw. 2 Jehovah is my Song, And my Salvation; My God, for whom I will prepare An Habitation: 3 My Father's God was he, Whose Glory I'll proclaim, Jehovah is a Man of War, Jehovah is his Name. 4 Proud Pharoah, and his Host, Into the Sea are cast, And his great Captains drowned be, As through the Sea they past. 5 They down to th' bottom sank, Ev'n like unto a Stone; Jehovah thy Right Hand in Pow'r, Most Glorious is become: 6 Thy Right Hand hath destroy'd Those that against thee rose;
And in thy Glorious Excellency, Thou hast o'erthrown thy Foes. The second▪ Part. 1 Thou didst send forth thy Wrath, Like stubble them to waste, Lord, thou didst blow, and the proud Waves, O'erwhelm'd them with a Blast. 2 The Sea stood up in heaps For Israel, (on each side) The Enemy said, I will pursue, I will the Spoil divide? 3 My Lust I will fulfill, My Sword draw out will I? My Hand shall now cut them all off, And Ruin utterly? 4 Thou with thy Wind didst blow, And they were covered, They in the Mighty Waters sunk, As if they had been Lead. 5 Lord, who is like to Thee, In Holiness Glor'us, Fearful in Praise, and also doth Things that are marvellous. A Prophetical Part of Moses's Song, Deut. 32. 1 GIve Ear, O Heavens, I will speak, and let also the Earth,
Hear the good Words of my own Mouth, which now I shall bring forth, 2 My Doctrin like the Rain shall drop, my Speech distil shall as The Dew does on the tender Herbs, and showers on the Grass. 3 Because that I Jehovahs Name will publish and make known; I will ascribe greatness to God, yea, and to him alone. 4 He is the Rock, and Perfect too his Ways and Judgments be; A God of Truth, and without Sin, both Just and Right is he: 3 Because their Rock unto our Rock is not to be compar'd; Yea, though our Enemies themselves, as Judges should be heard: 5 Vengeance is mine, I will repay, in time their Feet shall slide, Their dreadful Day it does draw near, and Woe shall them betide. 6 Because the Lord his Saints shall judg, and for them he'll Repent, When none shut up, or lift he sees, when all their Powers's spent. 7 Then sing ye Nations with his Saints, revenge their Blood▪ will he, And render Vengeance to his Foes, but kind to his Saints be.
The Song of the Prophet Isaiah. chap. 5. 1 I To my Well-beloved, now, and of his Vine-yard (will Sing a sweet Song) which he has set, upon a fruitful Hill; 2 He Fenced it, and gather'd out the Stones that did offend, He Planted it with choicest Vine, and it he did defend: 3 A Tower in the midst he built, and made a Wine-Press too, And lookt that it should bring forth Fruit, his Glory great to show; 4 But it brought forth Wild Grapes: Alass! to thee, Jerusalem, And Judah also I'll appeal, and to all thinking Men; 5 'Twixt Me and my Vine-yard to Judge; what further do could I Unto my Vine-yard? when I loo'kt, no Fruit could I espy: 6 Instead of Grapes, it did bring forth Wild Grapes: O then go to, Unto my Vine-yard, I'll declare what 'tis that I will do. 7 I'll take away the Hedge thereof, my Anger shall be shown,
Eat up it shall, and it's strong Wall shall quite be overthrown; 8 And I will lay it Waste, and it not Dig, nor Prune again; But there shall come Bryers and Thorns, and on it fll no Rain. 9 For the House of Israel, and the Men of Judah be The Pleasant Vine-yard of the Lord; but when he lookt to see 10 Judgment and true Justice done, Oppression did espy; And when he look'd for Righteousness, behold! a bitter Cry. Isaiah's Joyful Song. Isa. 12. 1 JEhovah I will give thee Praise, this is the very Day, For thou dost sweetly Comfort me, thine Anger's turn'd away: 2 Behold thou my Salvation art, I will not be afraid, Jehovah is my Strength and Song, my Trust and saving Aid: 3 Therefore with Gladness I will draw Water out of the Wells Of Salvation (for they be thy People Israels.
4 And in that Day shall ye all say, praise the Lord, on his Name Not only call, but for his Acts lift up his glor'us Fame. 5 Sing ye unto the Lord, for he most excellent things has done; And this throughout the Earth also, is now most fully known. 6 Cry out, and shout, and joyful be, all that in Sion dwell; For great the Holy One's in Thee, O happy Israel! The Song of Zacharias. 1 LEt Israel's great God and King eternally be Bless'd, Whose come from Heav'n to visit us, and see our bonds, releas'd. 2 In Davids House a Saviour's rais'd, to sit upon his throne; This ever since the World began, his Prophets have foreshown. 3 That he would save us from the Pow'r and Malice of our Foes; The Mercy to perform to them, which he of old had chose.
4 He call'd to mind how he engag'd his truth, by Covenant, His Solemn Oath to Abraham sworn, that he his Grace would grant 5 To serve him without fear; from all our Adversaries freed; And to continue all our days, a Holy Life to lead. 6 By the Remission of our Sins, to make Salvation known, To all his People every where, his tender Mercy's shown. 7 The Day-Star from on high is rose, and those who also sit In Darkness, he in the right way of Peace will guide their Feet. The Song of the Blessed Virgin. Luke. 1. 1 MY Soul does magnify the Lord, my Spirit does rejoyce In God, my Saviour, who deserv'st the Praise of Heart and Voice. 2 For his poor Hand-Maid he regards, whose Mind was sore deprest; And all Ages from hence forth shall call me most truly Blest.
3 He that is great hath Wonders done, and holy is his Name; His Mercies hath for ever been to his Saints, still the same. 4 He with his Strength hath pulled down the Mighty from their Seat; And them of Low and Base Degree, are rais'd to Honour great. 5 He fill'd the Hungry Soul, with Good, the Rich Empty remain'd; His Mercy he has call'd to mind, his People help have gain'd. 9 The Promise to our Fathers made, in the which he long stood, Engag'd to Abraham and his Seed, he hath at last made good. The Song of Simeon, Luke, 2. 29. 1 NOw let thy Servant, Lord, depart in Peace, to quiet Rest, Since I have thy Salvation seen, and with the same am blest: 2 The Prophecies are now fulfill'd, thy Promises are true; And thy Mysterious Love's disclos'd, in all thy Peoples view. 3 A Light to lighten the Dark Earth, now this bright Sun appears,
The Gentiles shall enlighten'd be, sweet Comforts shall them cheer. 4 Well may the long expected Sight, make Israel's Joy abound; Before with special Favours Grac'd, but now with Glory Crown'd. The Song of the Lamb out of the Revelations 1 ALL ye that serve the Lord, his Name see that ye Celebrate; And ye that Fear him sing aloud his Praise both small and great. Rev. 19. 5. 2 O thou great Ruler of the World, thy works our Wonder raise, Thou blessed King of Saints, how true and Righteous are thy Ways, Rev. 15. 3. 3 Who would not Fear and Praise thy Name, thou only holy One: The World will Worship thee, to whom thy Judgments are made known. 4 Most holy, holy, holy Lord, Almighty is thy Name, Which was before all time, and is, and shall be still the same. ch. 4. 8. 11. 5 All Glory, Pow'r, and Honour, thou art worthy to receive;
For all things by thy Pow'r were made, and by thy Pleasure live. cha. 5. 12. 6 To thee, of right, O Lamb of God, Riches and Pow'r belong; Wisdom and Honour, Glory, Strength, and every Praising Song. 7 Thou as our Sacrifice was slain, and by thy Precious Blood, From every Tongue and Nation hast redeem'd us unto God. 8 Blessing and Honour, Glory, Pow'r, by all in Earth and Heaven, To him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb be given. Part of Hannahs Song, 1 Sam. 2. [as 100th Psalm.] 1 My heart doth in Jehovah joy, My Horn in Jah is lift on high; My Mouth's inlarged o'er my Foes, In thy Salvation joy will I. 2 There▪s none so Holy as the Lord, No, no, there is none beside thee Of other Rocks, there is not one; That to our God compar'd may be.
3 Talk ye no more so Proudly then, Let not Arrogancy once proceed Out of your Mouth, for God doth know, And 'tis by him Actions are weigh'd. 4 The Lord both Poor and Rich does make, He raiseth up and pulleth down; Thee Poor he up from Dust does take, And Beggars from the Dunghil Crown. 5 And sets them on a Princely Throne, In Glorious Power and Dignity; The Pillars of the Earth's the Lords, The World is his, him Glorifies. 6 He keeps the feet of all his Saints, Preserves them so they shall not fail, The Vile in darkness shall be still, For no man shall by strength prevail. 7 The Adversaries of the Lord, Shall broken be both great and small; The Lord from Heaven Thunder will, And in his Wrath destroy them all, 8 The Lord shall Reign most Gloriously, Unto the ends of all the Earth: And his Anointed Horn exalt, Therefore his highest Praise sing forth▪
The Song of the Lamb. 1 BReak out ye Saints with joy and sing, to the Eternal King; The Angels do blest Tidings bring, Hosannah in the highest. 2 In Bethlehem the Babe is born, cease, cease, your bitter Mourn, Your Sorrow nw to Singing turn, Hosannah in the highest. 3 He's come, he's come, O happy Day! dark Shadows fly away, The Substance's come to Christ I say, Hosannah in the highest. 4 See how the Cherubs clap their Wings, the Glor'us Host now sings; Th' Eternal Day, see how it springs! Hosannah in the highest. 5 Behold the Lord Baptiz'd by John, and what a Glory shone! The Father says, This is my Son! Hosannah in the highest. 6 He's come, he's come down from above, full of Eternal Love; And also sealed by the Dove, Hosannah in the highest. 7 The Dumb do speak, the Blind do see, the Dead they raised be;
And Lepers cleans'd of Leprosie, Hosannah in the highest. 8 He Preaches with Authority, God's Kingdom doth draw nigh, And pardons all Iniquity, Hosannah in the highest. 9 Behold him now beset with Grief, Angels bring him Relief, They him adore because he's chief, Hosannah in the highest. 10 Behold him in his Agony, our sins on him did ly, God's Justice he did satisfie, Hosannah in the highest. 11 Behold him now upon the Tree; he cry'd in Miserie, Oh! Why hast thou forsaken me? Hosannah in the highest. 12 Ah! hear him make most bitter Moan, hearken to his last Groan; For now for us his Life is gone, Hosannah in the highest. The second Part. 1 The first day now it doth begin; an end is put to Sin, Eternal Righteousness brought in Hosannah in the highest.
2 The Grave did ope thou didst arise, ye Saints lift up your Eyes, The Morning's come, all Darkness flies, Hosannah in the highest. 3 Infernal Spirits cry and howl, their overthrow condole, For ever now their hopes are cool, Hosannah in the highest. 5 Now, Sin, Death, Devils and the Grave, and th' World which did inslave, Are all all o'ercome, and their Death have, Hosannah in the highest. 6 Behold how his sweet Arms were spread, whilst his dear Blood was shed, That Sinners might be gathered, Hosannah in the highest. 7 Our sins upon thee, Lord, were laid, and all our Debts hast paid; Of Hell we need not be afraid, Hosannah in the highest. 8 God's dreadful Wrath thou didst appease, guilty Conscience to ease, And now canst save whom thou dost please, Hosannah in the highest. The third Part. 1 Christ will begin that Work, which he knows must be wrought, if we
Eternal Joys do ever see, Hosannah in the highest. 2 Lord thou wilt perfect it also, for very well we know, Without thee we can nothing do, Hosannah in the highest. 3 We that Polluted once did ly in Filth and Misery, Thou by thy Blood dost purifie, Hosannah in the highest. 4 We once were Cursed by God's Law, dreading Death, no help saw, From that sad state thou dost us draw, Hosannah in the highest. 5 All kind of Sin thou dost pass by, where there's Sincerity, When unto thee, by Faith, we fly, Hosannah in the highest. 6 From Death to Life, Saints raised be, once bound, but now set free, And made one Spirit, O Lord, with thee, Hosannah in the Highest. The fourth Part. 1 O happy Union! (is it done?) with the Father and Son, Are we United and made One? Hosannah in the highest.
2 Adoption is a precious thing, made Sons of th' Mighty King, Most precious Joy from hence doth spring▪ Hosannah in the highest. 3 Communion, Lord, also with Thee; nay, with th' whole Trinity, What higher Blessings can there be? Hosannah in the highest. 4 We at thy Table sit and Feed, and have what our Souls need, And find thy Blood, Lord, Drink indeed, Hosannah in the highest. 5 Thou Supst with us, and we with thee, a joyful sight to see; Sweet is the Food and Company, Hosannah in the highest. 6 Thou sayest, Thy Beloved's mine? ourselves, Lord, we resign Up unto thee, for to be Thine; Hosannah in the highest. The fifth Part. 1 Thy Righteousness, O Lord, Divine, imputed is to thine, By which they do most spotless shine; Hosannah in the highest. 2 Thou art the WAY to God to go, th' TRUTH by which we him know,
The LIFE which does to thy Saints flow, Hosannah in the highest. 3 By thee we Justified be, and from Sin are set free, And God accepts us all in Thee, Hosannah in the highest. 4 Thou art our Prophet, Priest, and King, a Prophet that does bring Such Light from whence true joys do spring, Hosannah in the highest. 5 A Priest that stands 'twixt God and Men, who hast Atton'd for sin. And hast us brought to God agen, Hosannah in the highest. A King that rules o'er all above, and all that here do move; He's King of kings, yet full of Love, Hosannah in the highest. The sixth Part. 1 Christ is our Meat, our Drink, our Health▪ our Peace, our Strength, Glory Wealth, All things besides thee are but Pelf, Hosannah in the highest. 2 Our Mediator Surety. and Advocate on high, Thro' thee, God passes all sin by; Hosannah in the highest.
3 Our Righteousness and Wisdom too, Redemption, from all Woe, Sanctification from thee does flow, Hosannah in the highest. 4 What shall I say? or Jesus call? for he is All in All, And Reign he shall o'er Great and Small, Hosannah in the highest. 5 He hath Redeem'd us by his Blood, when in our room he stood; And made us Priests, and Kings, to God, Hosannah in the highest. 6 And we on Earth with him shall reign (when all his Foes are slain) For quickly now he'il come again, Hosannah in the highest. A Song of Praise for the Marvellous Deliverance of our Sovereign King, WILLIAM, with the Church, an whole Kingdom, from the Hellish Plot, Discovered, Feb. 1695/6 1 NO change of▪ Time shall ever shock Our firm Affections, Lord to Thee; For thou hast always been a Rock, A Fortress and▪ Defence to me. 2 Our KING Preserved is, O God, By thy own hand and mighty Pow'r; Thou Shield'st him when he is Abroad, At home to him a lasting Tow'r.
3. The Chariot of the King of kings, Or Troops of mighty Angels round, Encompass him with Rapid Wings, And all his Foes with Shame Confound. 4 Black Thund'ring Clouds most thick conspir'd, With Threatning Rage our Face to Veil, But at thy brightness soon retir'd: Upon our foes falls Fire and Hail. 5 The Lord doth on our Side engage, From Heaven his Throne Our Cause upheld▪ And snatch'd us from the Furious Rage Of Threatning Waves that Proudly Swe'd; 6 God his resistless Pow'r employ'd, Our cruel Foes attempts to break; Or else they might have soon destroy'd The best Defence that we could make. 7 And Gods Designs shall still Succeed; Romes Bloody Sons can't stand the TEST, He's a Strong Shield to all tha need, And on his sure Protection rest. 8 Who then deserv'st to be Ador'd, But God, on whom our Hopes depend, Or who, except the mighty Lord, Can with resistless Pow'r defend. 9 O let th' Eternal God be Prais'd, The Rock, on whose Defence we rest O'er highest Heav'ns his Name be rais'd, Who with Salvation us hath bless'd'
10 Therefore to celebrate his Fame, Our greatfull Voices to Heav'n we'll raise Let Nations round dread his great Name And all be Taught to Sing his Praise. 11 God to our King and Nation sends (Tho' Vile we be) Salvation sweet, Deliv'rance to his Saints extends, To Praise his Name therefore tis meet. 12 Hosannahs we to thee do owe, Let all the Nations Worship thee, And thee adore, yea thee alone, The Father of Eternity. 13 Thy Name in Songs we will adore Protect thy Saints, and Keep them Pure; To thee lets live for Evermore, Since from Curst Plots we are secure.
A FEAST OF Fat Things &c. Containing, One Hundred Sacred Hymns, &c. CENTURY 1. HYMN 1. The Eternity of the Great GOD. IN th' Regions of Eternal Light, thou hast most Holy God; From everlasting in thy Self, had thy own bless'd abode: Before this World by thee was fram'd, or, Earth's Foundations laid; Or, the vast Heavens were spread forth or any Creature made.
3 Thou didst in Glory, Lord, abide; thy being hadst alone, In thy own Self, and none beside, was with the Holy One. 4 The Eternity of thy great Name, help us, Lord, to Adore: From everlasting thy dread Fame shone, and shall Evermore. 5 Thou Happy wast in thy own Self, and that in th' high'st degree; To thy essential Glory, Lord, nothing can added be, 6 Thou need'st not us; What canst the ha from any Creatures hand? Yet to ascribe all Praise to Thee, is thy most just Command. HYMN 2. The Immensity of GOD, THe Praise. of the dread Majesty of the great God above, With trembling Heart I would sing forth, O with him fall in Love! 2 But what am I? poor sorry Dust that I should God admire! Be silent then, and let's give place unto the Heavenly Quire! 3 Thousands, and ten Thousands more of glorious Angels, stand
Round thy high Throne, and Thee adore in Songs at thy Command. 4 Hosannahs they sing unto Thee, O Lord, continually. They worship and most perfect be; but, Ah! what, Lord, am I? 5 A Person of polluted Lips! how shall I then express The depth of thy Immensity? or thy Infiniteness? 6 I from thy Presence cannot go; what place, alass! is there To hide from Thee? for I do know, Lord, thou art every where! HYMN 3. On the Immensity and Omniscience of GOD. THy Knowledge, Lord, is infinite, there's nothing hid from Thee; Thou seest i'th' Dark as in the Light, our Thoughts before thee be. 2 From sight of thy All-seeing Eye, O whither can we go! In all dark Places thou dost pry, thine Eyes walk to and fro. 3 Thro' the whole Earth, where can we hide? O! whither can we fly? Lord, from thy Presence; for thou art far off, and also nigh!
4 Shall we to Heaven mount aloft, lo, Thou art present there? Or, if we should go down to Hell, ev'n there thou dost appear? 5 Yea, should we take us morning Wings and dwell beyond the Sea, There would thy Hand have hold on us, and quickly with us be? 6 Nay, if we say, The Darkness shall shroud us, Lord, from thy Sight, Alass! the thickest Darkness is to Thee, like to the Light? 7 Yea, Darkness hideth not from Thee, but Night doth shine as Day: Let's Praise Thee then both Day and Night, and sing to Thee alway! HYMN 4. The Wisdom of GOD great. 1 WE of thy Wisdom will, O Lord, not only speak but sing; For 'tis from hence that all true Good to us, O Lord, doth spring. 2 Thy Wisdom and most Sovereign Grace most gloriously do shine; Let us see it with open Face, and Praise that Name of thine.
3 In thy own Wisdom let's be Wise; thy Wisdom let's Adore, And trust in it, so shall we, Lord, sing Praise for Evermore. 4 Thy Wisdom is a mighty deep, which Angels do admire; Creation-Work demonstrates it, Redemption rises higher. 5 The wonder of thy Wisdom, Lord, and sublime Rule likewise, Tis o'er all Things, and Persons here, and marv'lous in our Eyes. 6 All Wisdom Saints and Angels have, from Thee it doth proceed; And from thy Wisdom we receive all good things we do need. 7 Of thy amazing Wisdom then we'll sing continually; And unto Thee, let Foolish Men for Wisdom daily cry! HYMN 5. GOD's piercing Eyes. 1 YE Saints remember God always, remember he is nigh; Nay, with us all in every place, and on us sets his Eye. 2 O Lord, out of thy piercing Sight there's none of us can go;
Thou seest in Darkness as in Light, and know'st all things we do. 3 'Tis thy most great and glorious Name we should for ever Fear; And unto thee loud Praise proclaim, when to thee we draw near. 4 Always let us, O Lord, we pray, set Thee before our eyes, And never grieve thy Spirit, Lord, by our Iniquities. 5 Let's have a reverent awe of Thee, and always Thee adore And worship in Sincerity; so sing for Evermore. HYMN 6. The Power of GOD. 1 WHo knows, Lord, what thy Power is thou Glorious art in Might; Can ought be hard for Thee to do, whose Power's Infinite. 2 Thine Arm of Strength, most mighty King▪ both Rocks and Hearts doth break; O God thou canst do every thing which thou dost undertake. 3 O'er Men and Angels thou dost Reign, all things thou dost uphold; Thou art the strength of all thy Saints, thy Power's manifold.
4 Thou power hast for to Create, redeeming Pow'r's in Thee; Thou soon canst too annihilate all things which we do see. 5 None can before thy Power stand, nor thy dread Strength resist; Thy Pleasure thou wilt do we know, yea, all things thou dost list. 6 We of thy Power therefore sing, and in thy Might Rejoyce; To God our strength, our hope and trust, we will lift up our Voice. HYMN 7. GOD's Mercy shining: Or, The Chanel of Divine Mercy over-flowing. 1 WE of thy Mercy, Lord, will sing, O it is Infinite! Of all our Joys it is the spring, let's Praise thee Day and Night: 2 Our Miseries will have an end, but thy Mercies abide From Age to Age, it does extend like to a swelling Tide, 3 That flows over all Banks and Bounds amazing to behold; O'er all the World thy Mercy sounds, O it is manifold!
4 But thy redeeming Mercy, Lord, we chiefly do admire; Christ is the Chanel where it runs, to raise the Wonder higher! 5 O Mercy then! Mercy we need, thy pardoning Mercy's sweet! Preventing Mercy does, in Christ, with every Mercy meet. 6 Sinners! take hold of Mercy then! let Saints Mercy adore: And for thy Mercy let all Men sing Praise for Evermore. HYMN 8. The Covenant and Faithfulness of GOD 1 O Lord we will exalt thy Name, and to thee we will sing; Thy Eaithfulness we will proclaim, from whence our Hopes does spring. 2 We with our mouths will, Lord, make known thy Faithfulness always; O help us for to trust in it, and that too all our Days! 3 Thy Covenant thou wilt hold fast, as thou hast Sworn of Old; Thy Promises from first to last, fulfill'd shall we behold. 4 The Heavens they shall Praise the Lord, for Wonders thou hast done;
And all thy Saints, with one accord, shall Praise thy Name alone. Thy Loving Kindness shall not fail; nor shall thy Faithfulness: sing unto the Lord, ye Saints, and him for ever Bless. HYMN 9. A Sacred Hymn on GOD's Sovereignty. 1 THou Lord who didst all Creatures make, hast Power to dispose Of them, as seemeth good to thee: some therefore thou didst Chuse 2 Unto Eternal Life and Bliss; and others didst Pass-by: Or didst them leave to their Hearts Lusts▪ and vile Iniquity. 3 If thou hadst left all Adams Race Unto their evil Way, And not have giv'n one Soul thy Grace▪ O who dur'st Thee gain-say! 4 Or have charg'd thee to be Unjust, since all deserv'd to Die, 'Tis Infinite Grace that any be saved Eternally. 5 Thou sendest thy Sweet Gospel Light to this, and to that Place,
But dost to many Lands deny the word of thine own Grace: 6 And some that hear it never feel its Power on their heart; All is as thou art pleas'd to act, and sovereign Grace impart. 7 We therefore Lord exalt thy Name, that with our eyes do see, Since thou hast made the difference, all Praise belongs to thee. HYMN 10. GOD's glorious Bounty: Or, Grace shining. 1 THy Love, O Lord, is very great to such vile Ones as we; Such who lay Dead in Trespasses, are quickened by thee: 2 Thy Bounty to these Souls of ours, who can of it conceive: And those thou dost Regenerate this Bounty do receive. 3. 'Tis they who are delivered from that Forelorn Estate, They once were in, when they lay Dead; whose souls, Lord, did thee Hate. 4 'Tis they whose Souls united be unto thy self, O Lord, And have Communion too with thee, thou dost this Grace afford.
Death can't dissolve this blessed Knot, this union doth remain; t Death such do to Jesus go, Death unto them is gain. Well may such say unto their Souls, Return unto your rest! or they at Death to Glory go, and ly in thy Sweet Breast. Their they do joyn with Seraphims, in blessed Harmony, To Sing and Celebrate thy Praise unto Eternity. HYMN 11. Abounding Mercy of God in Christ. IS there no Mercy in the Lord? sinners! can you say so? Of Mercy sing with one accord, Mercy doth overflow! 2 The Waters which are in the Sea, and Light that's in the Sun, Are sewer than thy Mercies are▪ to sinners quite undone. 3 Thy Bowels yearn in thee to those who in their Blood do ly; If they Believe thou wilt forgive all their Iniquity: 4 But some will not thy Mercy have, they it do not desire;
In the right Way, do it not crave; nor after it enquire! 5 But you that see the Chanel, where Mercy doth sweetly run, Exalt God's Name, and sing his Praise▪ until▪ your Lives are done. 6 At Death and in the Judgment-day, God's mercy you shall find, If you do leave your evil Ways and have a changed Mind. 7 Redeeming Mercy that is sweet, and▪ Pardoning Mercy sure; In Christ all Mercies joyn and meet, and evermore endure. HYMN 12. The Patience of God. 1 WHat Wrongs, great God, hast thou long born? (conceiv'd they cannot be!) By daring Rebels, who provoke Thee unto Jealousie! 2 All Evils done in every place, before thine Eyes they are Throughout the World; And yet dost thou these Foes protect, and spare. 3 Tho' for Man's Treason down he fell, by thy revenging Hand;
et he lifts up his bruised Bones his Maker to withstand; And, though a feeble Foe he be, whom thou like Moths can crush, et still against the Bosses of thy Bucklar he does rush. O what vile Monsters are Mankind! thus given to Rebel! Strange thou dost not, Lord, smie the Earth, and send them quick to Hell! 6 Man's sin for Vengeance loudly crys, yet Patience doth abound; Though Justice crys, Cut these Trees down! Why Cumber they the Ground? 7 Thy Patience still forbears, we see, O it is Infinite! Therefore of it, we, Lord, will sing, and Praise Thee Day and Night. HYMN 13. Another on God's Patience. 1 WOuld Man forbear to seek revenge on such a cursed Foe, Who stries to Murther him each Day, and work his Overthrow? 2 But God waves all advantages of wrath, and vengeance too; And, by amazing Patience, doth daring Man out-do?
3 The Creature doth disdain his God, by whom he's cloath'd and fed, Yet God still spares this rebel Worm, who by the Devil's led 4 To fight against his Sovereign with cruel spite and rage; Yet God doth still forbear with him, even from Age to Age. 5 Fools ask not where th' Almighty is▪ but Glory to him give: Is not his Being most fully prov'd in suffering thee to Live? 6 Was he not GOD, he could not bear such Weights as on him y; Weak Mortals soon are set on fire, and for revenge do cry! 7 Why should not Patience make us sing, and God's great Glory raise? Lord, let thy Patience joyn with Love towards me all my Dayes! HYMN 14. On the Birth of CHRIST. 1 A Wake my Soul, awake my Tongue, my Glory 'wake and sing, And celebrate the holy Birth, the Birth of Israels King! 2 O happy Night that brought forth Light, which makes the Blind to see;
The day Spring from on high came down to cheer and visit thee. 3 The careful Shepheards with their Flocks were watching for the Moth, But better News from Heav'n was brought; your Saviour is now born! 4 In Bethlehem the Infant lies, within a place obscure, Your Saviours come, O sing Gods Praise! O sing his Praise for ev'r. The Second Part, 25th Psalm Tune. 1 Heaven is come down to Earth Hither the Angels fly, Hark how the Heavenly Quire doth sing, Glory to God on high! 2 Blest News indeed, be glad; Simeon O'ercome with joy, Sings with the Infant in his Arms, Now let thy Servant die! 3 Wise-men behold the Star, Which was their stedfast Guide, Until it pointed forth the Babe: Let God be Glorify'd! 4 Heaven and Earth rejoyce O Lord! and shall not I? Christ he is Born! Sinners sing Praise, For you he came to Die!
HYMN 15. A Sacred Hymn of the Deity of CHRIST 1 IN Thee, Lord Christ, we may Thy Father's Glory see; Thou his brightness and glory art, The God-head dwells in thee. 2 Thou art a Man, yet God, In thee both Natures meet, That God and Man thou mightst Unite In Union great and sweet. 3 Thou must be Man to Die: Sing Praise, ye Saints, sing Praise! Christ must be God to Satisfie; His Glory therefore raise! 4 Such that behold Thee, Lord, The Father also see; And such a Mediator 't did Behove thee for to be. 5 Thou lay'st thy Hands on both, And dost to each display Most equally thy dearest Love; And therefore we must say, 6 There's none, Lord, like to Thee in thy Self does shine All ories which the Father hath, Sacred and Divine. HYMN 16. On CHRIST's Suretiship. 1 LOrd we've run out, and wasted all our Riches and our Store;
And now our Credit is quite gone thou wilt trust us no more: 2 Unless there is a Surety found we must in Prison ly, And bear thy dreadful Wrath, O God, unto Eternity. 3 And therefore Jesus thou didst send, no Friend had we to bring; All good from hence, we may perceive, doth from thy Bowels spring, 4 'Twas from the Worth and Dignity which in Christ's Person lay, He did God's Justice satisfie, and all our Debts defray. 5 O let Men dread how they despise such sovereign Grace and Love, Because Mysterious in their Eyes, and also far above 6 Depraved Reason to conceive, that such who guilty be, Should, by another's Righteousness, from Sin and Guilt be free. 7 All praise and glory unto God, and to the Son whom we Adore; And to the Holy-Ghost likewise, be Praise for Evermore.
HYMN 17. A Hymn of Christs divine Love, on Cant▪ 1 COme near, come nearer yet and mo thy sweetest Lips to mine? For why, thy Love, who art all Love, excels the choicest Wine! 2 Like to an Ointment Poured out, is thy sweet Name, and Favour; Wise Virgins compass thee about, for thy good Ointments Savour. 3 O Draw me with thy Cords of Love we will run after thee; The King into his Chambers hath in Love Conducted me. 4 Thy rays will make our faces Shine, in thee we will rejoyce; Thy Love is better far than VVine; thou art the vpright's Choice! 5 But O thou, whom my Soul doth Love! Tell me, O tell me soon, Where feeds thy Flock; where is the place thou mak'st them rest at Noon? 6 Why should I stray and lose my way? till I at last do fall Among thy fellows Flocks (as they themselves do proudly Call.) 7 O fairest One; if thou wouldst know where thou shouldst feed and ly, The foot-steps of the Flock will show the way asuredly?
HYMN 18. The Churches Spikenard, Cantic. the 1st. Sung at the Lord's-Supper. OUr King doth at his Table sit, and I that Love him well, Will pour my Spikenard on his feet, which gives a fragrant Smell. 2 My well-Beloved is to me a bundle of sweet Myrrh, And with me he'll make his abode, and from me never stir. 3 My well-Beloved is to me, like to the choicest VVines; Like Clusters of the Camphire Trees, amongst the fruitful Vines. 4 O blessed Jesus thou art fair, my beauty is from thee! Nay, thou art fair beyond compare, and precious unto me! 5 Let others on their Dainties feed, and drink the richest VVine; My feasts doth all their feasts exceed, when thou say'st I am thine. 6 I therefore will commend him still, and sing unto his Praise, He Dy'd for me, therefore shall be my Joy and Song always.
HYMN 19. He's White & Reddy, sung at the Sacrament 1 MY Hearts Delight is Red and white the Lilly and the Rose: So sweet a Grace adorns his Face ten Thousand he out-does! 2 Was he all VVhite and was not Red? no Sufferer for my Sin? My Blood would rest on my own Hea and no Joy have within! 3 But my dear Lord is VVite and Red▪ this mixture pleaseth me; Cause for my Sins he Suffered who from all Sin was free! 4 What a reviving Sight is this? a righteous Saviour's Blood Is th' bath of Sin, the spring of Bliss most Pure, most sweet and good! 5 His God-head, and his Government are infinite and Pure; His Eyes are like the Eyes of Doves, most constant, so indure. 6 His Mouth is most exceeding sweet, he's altogether so; Down from his Head unto his Feet all joys and comforts flow: 7 O Sing his Praise for this is he my soul doth so admire; This is my Friend, if you would know, this is my hearts desire!
HYMN 20. Deliverance from the Pit: Or, A Hymn of Thanksgiving for Gospel Salvation. HOw great is this Salvation, Lord, Which thou for us hast wrought, y Jesus Christ our dearest Friend, Who our poor Souls hath bought. Thou didst behold us when we lay polluted in our Sin; And to wash us found out a way to make us clean agin. 3 We Slaves of Sin and Satan were, and in strong bonds were bound; And when we were near to the Pit a Ransom then was found: 4 Thy Son out of Thy Bosome came, our Souls to set quite free: All Praise unto the blessed Lamb, and equal Praise to Thee. 5 Of this Salvation we will Sing, and will with one Accord Praise Thee, from whom all Blessings spring; ye Saints praise ye the Lord.
6 Thou Sav'st our Souls, O save this Land great things, Lord, Thou wilt do; O haste, O Lord, quickly appear, salvation-wonders show. 7 Our Dust shall wake, our Souls uni and then our Glory shine; Our Happiness shall be compleat; Halelujah; Amen. HYMN 21. Christ at the Sinners Door: Or, A So of Praise on Gospel Salvation. 1 WE, Lord, of thy Salvation have a Declaration had: O Sinners know Christ can you save; rejoyce in Him be glad. 2 Salvation is brought very near, your Saviour also stands Now, now, O Soul, ev'n at thy door, O yield to his Commands! 3 Open to him, before his Wrath is kindled in his Heart, And he from you, with angry Frowns, for ever doth depart. 4 If it a little kindled be, O happy, happy he, Tho holy ▪One, who doth believe, and pu his trust in Thee
Ye Saints Rejoyce, ye interest have in this Salvation; What is it you can further crave? sing Praise to th' Holy One: 6 Salvation is wrought out for you, your God and Christ adore, Blessings of life do over-flow; sing Praise for evermore. 7 Rejoyce that ye accepted be in your eternal Head, And quickn'd are, (and Union have;) who once in sin lay dead. HYMN 22. All Glory to God and the Lamb: Or, A Hymn of Thanksgiving for the great Salvation of Christ. 1 NOw let us sing our Saviour's Praise, and spread his Glory forth; His Honour wholly let us raise that shines through all the Earth: 2 Who would not fear and praise thy Name thou great and glorious One, The World shall worship Thee, to whom thy grace and goodness's shown. 3 All Glory, Pow'r, and Honour, Thou art worthy to receive;
For all things, Lord by the were made, and by thy pleasure live. 4 To Thee of right, O Lamb of God, salvation doth belong, Wisdom and Praise, Glory and Streng and every sacred Song. 5 'Tis thou alone Salvation wrought, by thine own Arm 'twas done, Sing Praise ye Saints whom he hath bought praise ye the holy One. 6 Blessing and Honour, Glory Power, by all in Earth and Heaven To him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb be given. HYMN 23. GODs Glory display`d: Or, A Hym▪ of Praise on the great Salvation. 1 WHat was thy End, O holy God, in our salvation; But thy own Glory? therefore we will praise thee every one: 2 Shall Man assume some part of it? let him assmed be; All is of God, all is of Grace, all glory be to Thee.
3 Thou art the sacrificer, Lord, the sacrifice also; 'Tis thou that dost sprinkle the Blood, and all things else dost do. 4 Lift up ye Saints, (exal on high) your great Redeemer, then He shall have the preheminence; ye Saints say all, Amen. 5 Sinners, will you praise Christ's great Name, to whom all praise belongs, And celebrate his glorious Fame with joy in holy Songs? 6 Of this Salvation then take hold, and of it get a part; Then shall ye sing, and not till then, with Grace in your own Heart. HYMN 24. The Soul Rent: Or, Glory Shining. A Hymn of Praise on Gospel Salvation. 1 ALL the seraphick Train above are stooping down so low, To learn o'th' Church that Mystery past Ages did not know: 2 But now the Vail is Rent in twain, the Mystery is Unfol'd, Justice and Mercy, reconcil'd we do herein behold.
3 We now in Gospel days may go into th' Holy Place, And in a bleeding JESUS see God's reconciled Face. 4 Ye Sinners then this Saviour view, that for your sins was sain; And this Salvation slight no more, O look, view him again! 5 How can ye see him bleed, and still retain your cursed sin? How can ye see him call to you and you will not come in? 6 O dearest Jesus, if a taste of Love be here so sweet, What will it be when we with Thee, our dearest Lord, shall meet? 7 O let us sing to him always, and him in Truth Adore, For the day's near when we shall be with him for evermore. HYMN 25. Wonderous Grace Shining. A Hymn of Praise on the great Salvation of the Gospel. 1 O Glorious and most Holy King, the mighty Prince of Peace, By thee alone, O holy One, from Sin we have release!
2 O wond'rous Love, yea, Love indeed, that Thou so great and high, Who didst proceed from God, should bleed, and for por Sinners dye. 3 The Curse which was, O'Lord, our due thou also didst endure; And in th' Grave y till the Third Day our freedom to procure. 4 O depth, O length, O  of Love, none may compare with Thee, So low to lye that we so high at last might raised be! 5 Shall Sinners slight thy Love, O Lord, salvation not regard? No sin like this so great it is, was ever known or heard. 6 Ye Saints love you your Saviour dear, sing forth his blessed Praise; O love him, and to him adhere, and serve him all your days. HYMN 26. Look unto Jesus. A Hymn of Praise. 1 LOok unto Jesus, Sinners look, if you'd salvation have, Who's God, the Saviour, and none else, 'tis only he can save.
2 Come let's Rejoyce with Heart and Voice before our heavenly King, Tribute of Praise let us always unto our Saviour bring. 3 Before the wicked World and Hell let us his Glory bear; Lord manifest thy glorious Name in Wonders every where! 4 Let sinners not neglect, O Lord, salvation thou hast wrought; For all that do thou wilt o'erthrow, to hell they shall be brought. 5 O sinners look, and fall in love with Jesus, him embrace; With wonder now his Glory view who's full of Grace and Truth. 6 Ye Saints and saved Ones rejoyce, and Hleluahs sing; For you are his and he is yours, O praise your God and King! HYMN 27. The Joy of Believers, and the Misery of Gospel-Neglecters. 1 MOst free rich Grace unmix'd and pure, the Gospel does proclaim; For which, O Lord, we do thee praise and sing unto thy Name.
2 Come Saints and Sinners also taste this Water, Milk, and Wine, Wine without dreggs that off the Lees our Saviour did refine. 3 Here's Pardon without Wrath at all, white Garments without stain; A Conscience purg'd we may have here, and Ease that's free from Pain. 4 We may have all if we receive the blessed Lord of Life; But such who do reject this Grace shall one Day meet with strife. 5 Wrath will pursue such wretched Souls▪ and they escape shall not; But bring upon themselves sad Woe, yea, an Eternal blot. 6 Stand not then to dispute and Die, free offered Grace receive; Then good and thankful you shall be when once you do Believe. 7 And you will say, Salvation's great, and the great Lord adore; And sing unto his holy Name praises for evermore.
HYMN 28. Christ Exalted. A Hymn of Praise. 1 LOve ye your lovely Lord, ye Saints, his praises also sing; We will exalt thy Name, O Lord our God, and heavenly King: 2 To him that Angels do adore be Glory, Honour, Fame; 'Tis he that did salvation work, O sing unto his Name! 3 To him that wash'd us in his blood, who lov'd poor sinners first; To him that was made Sin for us, and was for us accurst; 4 To him be Glory and high Praise, O worship at his Feet! n him G's Atributes do shine; in Union also meet. 5 Who would not honour and admire, who would not Thee adore; Who would not this Saviour desire, d prostrate f before? 6 Ce let us  sing unto this mighty One; bow to is King who sits upon the Throne!
HYMN 29. Christ Glory. A Hymn of Praise on Gospel Salvation. 1 SIng praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name; Among the people all declare his Works, and spread his Fame. 2 Sing ye unto the Lord, I say, ye sing unto him Praise; And talk of his Salvation great, exalt your God always. 3 In honour of his Holy Name rejoyce with one accord, And let the Hearts also rejoyce of all that seek the Lord. 4 Seek ye the Lord, O seek the strength of his Eternal Might; O seek his Face continually in Christ, for that is right! 5 Lord thou to us Salvation hath made known most Graciously; But such who do the same reject most wretchedly shall Die; 6 Wrath will break orth upon them all, that day is very near;
But all thy Saints, when Christ doth come, in Glory shall appear. 7 Ye Righteous then in God rejoyce, for you most happy be; Salvation great your portion is, and you the same shall see. HYMN 30. The Saint indeed. Or, A Hymn of Praise for Sanctification. 1 YE that are Holy and Sincere lift up your Hearts and Voice, Sing to the Lord and do not fear, you cause have to rejoyce! 2 The Fruit of Christ's blest Death in you most plainly does appear; Yea, that you are God's own Elect, and do his Image bear. 3 You shall ascend God's holy Hill who undefiled be; And shall with him in Glory dwell unto Eternity. 4 But as for you that have a Name, but live as others do, You, you shall fall and perish all, God will you overthrow.
5 When godly Ones shall joy in Bliss, and shall in Triumph reign, You mourn shall in that deep Abyss, God will your glory stain. 6 O glorious Lord, thy Spirit then pour out upon us, so That we may live to thee on Earth, and unto Heaven go! HYMN 31. A Sacred Hymn on Ephesians 4. 4, 5, 6. Sung at the Administration of Holy Baptism. 1 TO the One Lord and Father dear, who's high, and above all, We will sing Praise, and always fear, and on him ever call: 2 And the One Lord we will adore, and Divine Worship give, And sing his praise for evermore, by whom 'tis we do live. 3 To the One Spirit, by whose pow'r all Saints are Born again, We will sing to, and every hour under his Wings remain. 4 In the One Faith we will rejoyce, th' Doctrin of Faith is one;
And in that Faith we'll lift our voice and sing till Life is gone. 5 In Christ's One Babtism also let us establish'd be; Let these thy Children find it sweet who now have obey'd Thee: 6 Let such who for another plead, which is, Lord, none of thine, Ashamed be, and see the need of further Light Divine. 7 In unity of thy One Church let each of us abide, And find our Comfort to be such which none meet with beside. HYMN 32. The Drooping Spirit Revived. 1 Come drooping Saints, ve princely ones, why do your  hang down? Tho' some do  yet Gre shall you with Glory ever Crown. 2 Christ bids you er to Rejoyce, again he  Rejoyce, Whatever  or  saith 'tis your Beloveds voice. 3 Why should you be discouraged, O heirs of special Grace,
For goodly is your Heritage, and pleasant is your place! 4 What e'r discouragments you find, our Christ can answer all; His Arms are ready to lift up when you are near to fall. 5 You have had a sweet taste of God, he is to you most dear; You feel the power of his Word, be therefore of good Chear! HYMN 33. Evil Thoughts abhorr'd: Or, Heart-Purity 1 THy power, Lord, is very great, to change the thoughts of men; If evil thoughts so hatful be, O let us loath them then! 2 Lord, who can all his errors see? O cleanse my heart within From evil Thoughts; and keep thou me from all presumptions Sin! O let not sin have power to reign in me at any time; And so shall I be free from stain, and escape the greatest crime! 4 Blessed, O blessed, are the Pure, who Pure are still in Heart,
That keep thy Testimonies sure; and from all sin depart. 5 They're such that cause have to rejoyce, thy Praises forth to sing; And unto them new comforts shall from thee, Lord, daily spring: 6 They pardon'd are, and in thy Love do evermore remain; They born are also from above, and shall with Jesus reign. HYMM 34. The Backslider healed: Or, Merey for Backsliders. 1 BElievers now, what have you more, what have you more to do; But to sing Praise to God on high from whom your help doth flow? Lord thou art Good, thy Mercy's great, thy Promises most sure; Salvation 'tis which thou hast wrought, Christ's blood did it procure. 3 Exalt by Faith your Lord on high, through off your Unbelief; And trust in Christ conunually, in whom is your Relief: 4 Say there is hope, and we do come, we come, O Lord, to thee;
For thou alone, Lord, art our God; thy Name Exalted be! 5 Backsliders then return and sing, God will forgive you all; And make you so firmly to stand that you shall never fall. HYMN 35. Ephraim mixed among the People. 1 THE Pure in heart are thy delight O thou most holy One! All they that do what things are right may sing thy Praise alone. 2 All mixtures, Lord, in Doctrin and Practice, thou dost hate; Ourselves, therefore, with wicked Men let's not associate! 3 And so shall we, Lord, with much joy our hearts lift up to Thee; And nothing shall our Peace destroy whilst circumspect we be, 4 Let such that mingle not themselves thy Praises therefore sing; And to thy People let men join in Faith, to Praise our King. 5 Come out of Babel then all ye, and be ye seperate;
Depart all Godly ones, and flee before it is too Late! 6 O touch not the Polluted thing, and God will own you then; And drink you shall o  sweet Spring thus sing, and say, Amen. HYMN 36. The good . 1 SInners  be, your  ar; His  cheer, our  did bear: 2 'Tis  Praise that we will raise, and set his Glory forth; There's none like thee, all Saints do see in Heaven or on Earth. 3 Thy Blood's our balm, who hither came to Die upon the Tree! Therefore, O Lord, with one accord we will sing Praise to thee. 4 Thou hast a Salve for every sore; didst Dye that we might Live Therefore to thee continually all Praises we will give.
HYMN 37. The voice of the Turtle heard in our Land. 1 THy precious Blood was shed, O Lord, my soul to purge from Sin; Which purchas'd Grace my soul to change, when shall this work begin: 2 In sinners hearts, O now impart, that Grace that they may sing: O own thy word, most holy Lord, our God, and gracious King! 3 The harmless Turtle's pleasant voice is heard, Lord, in this place; Let Fig-trees put forth their green Figs, young Converts deck with Grace. 4 Arouse! the Summer will soon pass, your day of grace will end; O come to Christ, whilst he doth call, and does his love commend! 5 See how the Saints do bud in Grace, what gracious fruits abound, Upon this liberty for all to hear the joyful sound: 6 Arise, you who yet sleep in Sin, make hast to come and live; So shall you sing and joyful be, and honour to Christ give.
HYMN 38.—Buy of me. 1 COme buy of thee? Lord let us see what 'tis that thou dost sell! The Pearl of Price and Paradice, O Lord what Tongue can tell 2 What their worth are! what Fool is there who doth refuse to buy? A bargain's here! and 'twill appear so to Eternity. 3 This Pearl excells the rich Beryl, the Onyx and the Sapphire; Rubies so rare can't with't compare, no, nor the gold of Ophir! 4 Begone vile Lusts as things accurst, let every Soul then say, This Pearl will I purchase and buy without further delay? 5 Let's look about, our Glass runs out, and take such good Advice; What e'r you see the terms to be, to come unto the Price. Sing, Sing, God's Praise, you ought always, who this rich Pearl have; What would you be, what more can ye ask, seek, desire, or crave?
HYMN 39. A Bleeding Christ, and the Bleeding Heart. 1 HO gracious and how good, O Lord, art thou to Sinners vile; Thy rath is o', and thou on us, in Jesus Christ, doth smile? 2 Sing Praise ye tender-hearted ones, lift up God's Praise on high; For you shall live for evermore, yea, live and never die. 3 Behold a bleeding Christ! O see his side, how did it run With purple Gore? Can ye forbear to grieve, shed tears, and mourn! 4 But did he die, and in our stead, that we might never die? O love this Lord, and sing his Praise; and on him all rely! 5 The fruits of Christ's most blessed Death in bleeding Hearts appear; Their sins, they see, have wounded him, and pierc'd him like a spear. 6 They look to him, therefore they mourn, and yet by Faith rejoyce; They cann't but grieve, nor yet forbear to sing with cheerful Voice.
HYMN 40. Salvation great and Glorious. 1 GReat God of Love send from above thy new Jerusalem; On Jesus's Head cause thou to spread his sparkling Diadem. 2 Hosannah sing continually, our Jesus comes apace; Bow every Knee; all Hell shall flee from th' terror of his Face. 3 Salvation high is now come nigh, salvation great indeed; O Sinners see and Saved be by Jesus who did bleed! Here's Life for you that believe do, the terms most easy are; O come and Drink before you sink i'th' depths of Hell's dispair. 5 Sing Praise, sing Praise, God's honour raise, ye who salvation have; Dear Jesus love, who from above came, your poor Souls to Save: 6 Now Heavens work is here begun, the work of singing Praise; Most holy live, rejoyce and sing until you end your days.
HYMN 41. The Tender Hearts Triumph. 1 YOu tender - Hearted souls rejoyce, and sing God's Praises forth; n sacred Hymns lift up your Voice whilst here you live on Earth: 2 For God bestowed hath on such new Covenant true Grace; And though they grievs and sorrow much, they shall lift up their Face. 3 'Tis a new Spirit that's in you, your heart of Stone is gone; The bleeding heart shall sweetly sing when this sad Life is do. 4 Sin unto you most grievous is, you cannot it endure; O is it thus! then sing God's Praise, for you shall sing for ever. HYMN 42. The broken and contrite Heart. WHat cause of Joy ye Saints is here? have you a tender heart? Lift up your heads, be of good Cheer, you have a blessed part!
2 O Lord, we praise thy holy Name, for offering precious Grace; Let us believe, so let us sing, for happy is our case: 3 Thy Word can break a heart of Stone▪ O lay on gracious Blows, To Sinners, and also to Saints, let's see what Mercies flows. 4 A broken heart's a sacrifice most choice, O Lord, to thee A broken Christ, and broken hearts, most sweetly do agree. 5 Thou wilt, Lord, dwell with Contrite ones, and them revive also; Upon the humble sincere Soul all lasting blessings flow. HYMN 43. Righteousness of Christ Glorious 1 CHrist's Righteousness imputed is, to those who do believe; Sing Praise to Christ, and God on high, who do this Grace receive. 2 Your wedding garment is a sign of Joy and sweet Delight. Sing praise, O Soul, for thou art his, sing praise both Day and Night.
In this may Saints rejoyce always, 'tis this doth make them glad; uch may rejoyce well all their dayes who are so bravely clad. 4 Your wedding Robes they are, O know, richly Embroidered; No Princess was e'er cloathed so, that King did ever wed. 5 It shines bespangled with Gold; and such who have it on The King with joy doth them behold, and loves to look upon. 6 How may we then continually in Jesus Christ rejoyce, And sing to him melodiously, with Heart and cheerful Voice? HYMN 44. Christ's Penny: or, The Laborours hire. 25th Psalm Tune. 1 LOrd, happy are those Souls Who hired are by Thee; For such that thou approvest of They Saved all shall be: 2 Great's their Reward, O Lord, Their Penny is not small; They have a God, a Christ have they, A Crown; they shall have All.
3 Then sing ye chosen Ones, His Praises now set forth; And in his Vine-yard faithful be Whil'st you do live on Earth. 4 Rewards of Grace excell Such which from Debts arise; Rejoyce in God ye Saints always, And your dear Saviour prize. HYMN 45. The Blessed Death of the Saints: Sung at the Funera! of that Vertuous Gentlewoman Mrs. ELIZABETH BRIGHT▪ Decemb. 7th. 1693/4 1 THy Word, O Lord, doth comfort those who on thee do Believe; Yea, all of them which thou hast chose thy quick'ning Grace receive: 2 In Life it is a Cordial sweet, at Death it doth revive; Such Comforts do thy Saints meet with, of which, Death can't deprive. 3 A Door of Bliss to weary Saints, thou art (grim Death) become; Secured is the Jewel safe, whilst Earth the Corps intombs. 4 By Death the Saints do enter Rest, prepar'd ready above; They are for ever swallow'd up in endless Joys and Love.
Cease grieving then for such who are to blessed Jesus gone: or they in Glory shine most bright, and the blest Prize have won, HYMN 46. The happy Death of the Godly: Sung at the Funeral of Mr. JOHN TREDWEL. REturn to God, your resting place, ye sinners with all speed; By Christ, to God you must approach, for all things you do need. Lord there's no rest for to be found but in thy self alone; High Praises therefore forth shall sound to Thee the holy One! 3 We sing below, but they above, in Crowns excelling Gold, Triumph in their eternal bliss, amazing to behold: 4 And each of them in Majesty do represent a King; Yea, Angels like in dignity; and with the Cherubs sing. 5 Immortal Robes they all have on, and shine like to the Sun; Let us prepare to follow them; our Glass will soon be run,
6 Death is a sleep, it is a rest from all our sorrows here; Let's so believe that we with Christ in glory may appear. HYMN 47. Psal. 17. 15.—I shall be satisfied when awake with thy Likeness. Sung at the F¦neral of Mrs. SARAH WILMO July 14th, 1694. 1 SIng to the Lord, ye Saints of his, and thankfully express How sweet the due remembrance is of His pure Holiness: 2 And tho' his Anger burns apace it quickly slacks again; But, Lord, thy Favour and thy Grace for ever doth remain. 3 Tho' Sorrows lodge with us all Night, which makes us Weep and Mourn, Yet Joy comes in at Morning Light, and makes a Sweet return. 4 By Death thy Saints enter to joys prepar'd for them above; And the're for ever shall remain in endless Life and Love. 5 O there they see as they are seen, with clear unclouded views!
there they hear Lord! nothing else but sweet and Glorious News! Anthems of Joy, of Love, and Praise; and Hallelujahs sing; Who would be fond of this vain World, from whence such Sorrows spring? We shall be fully satisfied when we awake and rise: f we do Sleep in Jesus Christ we then shall win the Prize. HYMN 48. Salvation Shining. 1 O sing ye now unto the Lord, a new and pleasant Song; For he hath wrought by his Right Hand; to him doth Praise belong. 2 Salvation is, Lord, wrought by Thee, from Sin from Wrath and Hell; O sing to God continually, all who in Sion dwell! 3 'Tis thee, O Lord, we will exalt, and spread thy Glory forth. For thy Right Hand hast Wonders done For us, who dwell on Earth: 4 Our Enemies that are within, thou hast, O Lord, brought down; Our Foes also, that are without, by Thee, are overthrown.
5 Ye Righteous in the Lord rejoyce, his Holiness proclaim; Be thankful, and with Heart and Voice sing to his glorious Name: For why, the Lord our God is good, and he has heard our cry? Since on our side, Lord thou hast stood, let's praise thee till we Die. HYMN 49. The Saints Holy Triumph. 1 TRemble all you who rest upon a Form of Godliness; As also ye that do draw back, whether 'tis more or less: 2 Rejoyce ye Saints and do not fear you all are in Christ's hand; There's not a Soul that is Sincere but firmly it doth stand 3 Upon a Rock, and ne'er shall move, nor fall away; Besure Gods own Elect, who do him love, all trials shall endure. 4 Come Saints, Triumph, in the dear Lamb, your Lord, that once did Die; We that Believe in Jesus, have e'erlasting cause of joy. 5 Come Law of God, what hast thou now of us for to demand?
Thy Curses all did meet in Christ; who in ur stead did stand: 6 Tho' such d Sin thou canst not Curse, thy  id ly U  Lord,  he, die? 7 Come Justice, where is now thy Chage▪ Wh hast ou now to show? We do o thee present the blood which from Christ's sides did flow: 8 We shall not fall who do believe; well may such sing; therefore Draw back they can't so as to Die▪ sing Praise for evermore. HYMN 50. The Power of God's Word. 1 O Lord, 'tis matter of high Praise thy Word on us doth shine; But Happy they who fee! it's rays, and glorious Power Divine. 2 O let poor Sinners feel their Sin prick them, as with a sword; And Purge out all that Filth within; so will we praise thy Word. 3 Enlightened Souls have cause to sing, who Wounded were by thee; True cause of joy to such doth spring; for they, Lord, Healed be;
4 And now in Robes, most richly deckt▪ they to the King are brought; Surpassing Angels; for have they a Robe so richly Wrought. 5 We therefore throw our Crowns below thy High and Glorious Throne; And must all say, both Night and Day, thou Worthy art alone, 6 All Glory, Pow'r, and Praise to have, by us for evermore; Thus let us Sing unto our King, and him in Heart adore. HYMN 51. Boundless Mercy. 25th Psalm Tune. 1 OF Mercy still, O Lord, We will together Sing; And in sweet sacred Songs of Praise Exalt our glorious King: 2 Let Heart and Tongue rejoyce, And say, Who's like to Thee? Among the gods there's none that Thus Forgives Iniquity. 3 We did not Pardon crave, When in our Blood we lay; But t'was free Grace that moved Thee Our cursed Debts to pay.
4 This Pardon is this Day To sinners Offered; Oh! is there none that will come in, Whilst out thy Hands are spread! 5 You Happy are, O Souls, Who now forgiven be; And also over a short time You will it clearly see: 6 Then Sing, tho' in the Dust You ly a little while; A Day is near that will make all God's pardon'd Ones to smile. HYMN 52. A Call to Obedience. 1 THine Ordinances are, O Lord, like Pipes that run with Wine; We praise Thee now with one accord, for each Command of Thine. 2 Repent! Lord that's a mighty thing; but all who do not so, Thou down to Hell at last will bring, thy Wrath to undergo. 3 Believe! and shall we saved be? O Blessed be thy Name! For works can't not us justifie, since Sinners we became. 4 Baptized be! Lord, some we fear do not of that approve;
But such who are indeed Sincere, and truly do Thee Love, 5 Will do whatever Thou dost say; each Precept, Lord, is right; And That which some do loathe and hate, is Lovely in thy Sight. HYMN 53. Spiritual Joy increasing. 1 REjoyce ye that in Houses dwell, in Houses made of Clay, For Bodies of the Saints excell; and shall another Day: 2 Lord shew unto thy Servants all thy savour and thy Grace; And let us all both Great and Small Behold thy glorious Face. 3 O put great joy into our Hearts, so will we sing to Thee: And cause have more than those whose Corn and Wines increased be: 4 Sing to the Lord in Righteousness, his face do you behold; In Christ, God doth you richly Bless with Blessings manifold. 5 God is your God, you Union have through Christ, with him again; Your Bodies and your Souls are his, so ever shall remain:
6 Some joy in Wealth, and others do in Pleasures much abound; But such alone have cause of joy that have Gods favour found. HYMN 54. Christ our Glorious Shepheard. 1 NOw let us to our Shepheard sing; the Shepheard of the Sheep; Blessed are they, O Happy Souls, whom thou, Lord, Christ, doth keep: 2 And will you then go still astray, O see the Shepheard's come, He's come to seek, to search and find, and convey you all Home. 3 He looks about to see if he can find you in his fold; Can you forbear for to return, how can your Love be cold? 4 Ah! he for you did shed his blood, he for his Sheep did Die! And will you, Souls, your dearest Lord again now Crucifie! 5 Besides, the Wolves are got abroad; O hear your Shepheard's Voice! O Sing unto your blessed Lord, and in him all rejoyce: 6 Thou art our Shepheard and our Guide; our Prophet, Priest and King;
Thou art our Life, our Light our Hope, from thee, our joys do Spring. 7 Then Ravish'd with thy Sacred Love, let us thy Glory raise; And mount our Souls to Heaven above, in Songs of lasting Praise; 8 And hte to mind a Strangers Voice, thy Doctrine let us hear, That we with thee may all rejoyce, when thou, Lord, shalt appear. HYMN 55. Truth in its Primitive Purity. Sung at the Administration of Baptism. 1 NOw let us make a joyful Noise, and sing unto the Lord; And in God's Fear unite our Joys, in him with one accord. 2 O blesd Day, in which we see God's Ordinance restor'd! Worthy art thou, O holy One, to be in Truth ador'd. 3 Dark Clouds of Error God expells, and Truth shines splendently: O may our Brethren be convinc'd, give them a seeing Eye: 4 You that Believers are, arise, and all Baptized be;
Take heed you do not still dispise Christ's Holy Baptisme. 5 And let us all thy Name, O Lord, for evermore adore; That thy blest Institutions are restor'd as heretofore. 6 If every Truth, Lord, be by us receiv'd in sincere Love, It will to us an Evidence be, we born are from above. HYMN 56. The Spiritual Bridegroom. Sung at the Administration of Baptism. 1 HOw pleasant is it, for to see poor Sinners to espouse Their dearest Lord, who only is, the Blessed Sharons Rose. 2 'Tis thou, Lord Jesus, we do Preach, and thy high Praises sing; Thou art our All, all Grace's from thee, and spiritual Blessings spring. 3 O who is like, Lord, unto Thee, thy Beauty doth exceed; Thy Glory is so infinite; in Thee's all things we need: 4 There's none thy Glory can set forth, yet thou dost condescend To be the Bridegroom of our Souls, our Joy, our God, our Friend.
5 Be thou to us above all things; Chief of ten Thousand be; Let those enamouring Lips of thine, endear our Souls to Thee: 6 O let thy Saints be ravished with Love begetting Love; Fill'd with eternal Joys Divine, which flow down from above! 7 O then with Angels sing the Praise of your most sacred Friend: The Glory of Christ Jesus raise, until your Days shall end. HYMN 57. God's Temple Plants. 25th Pm Tune. 1 YE Sinners now come in, Christ doth invite you all; Return, return, make Angels sing, Return for Christ doth call: 2 Lord, thou art Merciful, Most ready to forgive, And Pardon all that come to Thee, And do thy Son receive. 3 O leave your wicked Ways Before it be too Late; For those that love, and live in Sin, God's Soul doth loathe and hate:
4 But like a Cedar Tree, Which Lebanon forth brings, The Just shall grow and flourish so As laden Palm-Tree springs. 5 God's Temple Plants shall thrive, In his blest Courts each one; And still produce their fruitful juice, When they to Age are grown▪ 6 Still Fat and flourish shall, God's Justice to express; Our Rock is he, most pure and free From all Unrighteousness. 7 Then sing his Praises forth, Him Honour and Adore; For you shall sing unto your King In Glory evermore. HYMN 58. Christ's Vine-yard. 1 THy Vine-yard, Lord, was purchased, though wild it once did ly, And Barren was as any Ground thou couldst on Earth espy; 2 But thou much cost and pains hast shewn, that it might fruitful be. Thy Sun doth shine, and Rain doth fall on it continually. 3 All Praise therefore to God on High, how great is thy blest Care
Of thy Own Church, and every Soul who truly are sincere. 5 We will the Praises of the Lord in sacred Hymns set forth; And sing therefore with one accord, whilst we do live on Earth, HYMN 59. The Noble Vine. 1 THere is on Earth a Noble Vine, set in a Fruitful Place; The root thereof is all Divine, and full of Precious Grace▪ The Lord by his right Hand did Plant this Vine, and Vine-yard too; And shines upon each Gracious Saint, and waters it also. 3 Into this Vine-yard we are call'd, whilst others Idle stand; Lord help as all to work therein, and yield to thy Command. 4 Thy care is great of thy own Church, thou watcheth it each day; But fruitless Trees thou wilt pluck up, and throw them quite away. 5 But wilt prune such that fruitful be, we therefore thee adore, And in sweet Hymns we'll sing to Thee, now and for Evermore.
HYMN 60. Redeeming Love. 1 O That we could as Angels do aloud God's Praises sing, For Wonders of Redeeming Love, from whence Soul Peace doth spring. 2 Shall Man, who at the Gates of Hell did Pale and Speechless ly, Not find a Tongue, and time to Speak? Stones against such will Cry? 3 Then ye, th' Redeemed of the Lord, your thankful Voices raise; Who Reconciled are to God; sing your Redeemers Praise: 4 Sing and Triumph in boundless Grace, which thus hath Set you Free; Exalt with shouts, all who Believe, your God continually. HYMN 61. Spiritual Food. 1 OUr Souls O Lord, think thou upon, let us not them forget; But cloathe them, O most holy One, and give them precious Meat: 2 Thou hast thought on our Souls, we know, when they in Blood did ly,
For which we praise thy Holy Name, and will thee magnify. 3 How Good art thou, to us, O Lord what plenteous Food have we; Our Paths drop Fatness, therefore well sing praises uo Thee. 4 Put us, O Ld in Remembrance the Needful thing to do; That Satan may never prevail, nor work our Overhw. HYMN 62. The Honour of Christ's Servants. 1 YE Servants of the Lord of Hosts who in his Vine-yard be; Who wait on him, and do his work, Praise him continually: Your honour, O it is not small, if you accepted are; And Servants be, then you are all both Sons, and Daughters fair. 3 Nay he Espoused hath you too, and in his Bosome will Lay you to all Eternity, your Souls with joy to fill. 4 O Then Sinners, yield now come in, Christ's Servants to become; So shall you have all Crowns at last, and shine in his Kingdom.
The Praises of this, Lord, let us with joyful Hearts sing forth; For there is none like unto him in Heaven  on Earth. HYMN 63. Christ the Saints Strength and Guide. 1 O Lord we praise thee with our Souls, thou dost us Warning give Of the great Dangers we are in, and tell'st us how to Live. 2 'Tis thou must give us Pow'r and Might, that we may Watchful be; O give us Strength, that Day and Night we may sing Praise to Thee! 3 Our Steps direct, our Souls protect, and in the way of Peace Lead us, we pray; then to th' last Day our Joy will never cease. 4 Thou wilt not leave us, we do know, to Fight, or War, alone; But wilt assist us evemore, until all Danger's gone. 5 Worthy art thou, therefore, O Lord, of Praise continually; Let all that is in us give Thanks, and Praise Thee till we Die.
HYMN 64.—But they said, There is no Hope. 1 LOrd, of thy Mercy we will sing, thy Mercy hath no bound; They that have said, There is no Hope, thy Mercy sweet ve found. 2 Sinners break forth, and in amaze, do you Rejoyce, and say, There's Hope, that we may Mercy find, believe, and do not sty. 3 O Lord, thou dt not look that Men should Worthiness obtain: Or sme inerent itness , much less e Born Before that they take  on Thee, but presently Believe; And on thy Promise lay ast hold, and Christ strait-way receive. 5 Glory to God, Glory to Christ, let Sinners say no more, There is no Hope; let all Believe, and thy free Grace adore. HYMM 65. The Joy of Believers: Or, The Power of Christ's Intercession. 1 THy Intercession, holy Lord, doth yield us Joy and Peace.
We therefore will with one accord, from Singing never cease: 2 O thou exalted Priest of God, who hast thy Father's Ear; All Glory and high Praise to Thee, who our sad shame didst bear. 3 Thy Blood was shed, and we are fed and nourished by Thee; And by thy Intercession are preserv'd continually. We need not fear what doth draw near, because thy Pray'r is heard; For thou, according to our Day, wilt Strength to us afford. 5 Ye Saints Rejoyce, lift up your Voice, Christ is at God's right Hand; Between God's Wrath and our poor Souls he evermore doth stand. HYMN 66. Christ's Green Pastures. Sung at the Ad∣ministration of Baptism. 1 O Thou Beloved of my Soul, thou hast a People free From all base Mixtures. cleansed Clean, O tell me where they be! 2 Thou hast thy Institutions, and Ordinances pure; Thou hast thy Churches; tell me when, and where I may be sure!
Au. Mr. M. 3 Thou hast Enclosures rich and fair, peculiar to thy Sheep, And dainty nourishing Pastures, where thou dost them always keep: 4 Thou in Communion fold's them up, in Winter keeps them dry; Thou giv'st them shades from heat of Sun; O tell us where they ly! 5 O add more Sheep unto thy Fold, Lord bring them in to Thee; That they thy Glory may behold, and Comforted all be: 5 Then shall they sing sweet Songs of Praise, and taste thy choicest Love; And ravish'd be too all their days, with Comforts from above 7 In height of Sion, Holy One, when shall we sweetly sing; Arise, O mighty Prince of Love, our Joy and Heav'nly King! 8 Bring in poor Sinners far and nigh; O fill thy House, O Lord, And we will Praise Thee evermore, with Joy, and one Accord. HYMN 67. The Fulness of Christ. 1 'TIs thy high Praise, O holy One, that we will ever raise, 'Tis Jesus we must Magnify, and live to all our Days:
2 Thou art our Life, our Hope, and Stay, our Sun that gives us Light; Thou art our Prophet, Priest, and King, Praise is thy due and right. 3 Lord, thou th' brightness of th' Father art, the God-head dwells in Thee, And of thy fulness dost impart to such, O Lord, as we. 4 Worthy art thou, all Praise to have, who for our Souls was slain: Thou art Exalted, and shall too, O Lord, for ever Reign. 5 Unto the Father and the Son, and Holy-Ghost, therefore, Be Glory, Honour, and Renown, Now and for Evermore. HYMN 68. To Praise God becomes the Upright. 1 COme let us sing most Joyfully to God of saving Might, To raise the Praise of the most High; becomes all the Upright. 2 'Tis he that justifies all those who justified be: But Woe to them who do oppose his Grace, his Grace so free! 3 Lord not to us, not unto us, but to thy Glorious Name,
Let all the Glory be ascrib'd, the Honour and the Fame. 4 Our works alass imperfect are, to Jesus we must fly, His Righteousness, and his alone is comely in thine Eye. 5 'Tis Faith whereby we do receive free Pardon of our Sin; 'Tis he alone who doth Revive that Glorious work within: 6 But Faith, which doth us Justify, most Precious Fruit doth bear, True Faith, O Lord, doth Purify the Heart, if it be there. 7 Ye Righteous sing unto the Lord, his Praise do you set forth And let all People look to him, to the ends of the Earth. HYMN 69. The Ax lifted up: Or, Wrath Pursuing the Sinner. 1 O Lord, thou Just and Holy One, wee the Admire do, That Fruitless Trees are not cut down; this doth thy Mercy show: 2 Thy Ax is up, O let us fear, for thou most Righteous art, The natural branches did'st not spare; therefore with trembling Heart
3 Let sinners now to Jesus fly, that grafied they may be In him, by Faith, most speedily; no other way can we 4 Find out, for to escape thy Wrath; and blessed be thy Name, That ever Jesus, out of Love, to Save us, hither came, 5 O let us all good Trees be found, and fruitful also be; Make thou our Hearts Sincere and Sound, and we'll rejoyce in Thee; 6 And sing thy Praise, O Lord, most High, for we have Blessings store; Help us dear God, our Wants supply, and we'll sing Evermore. HYMN 70. Hallelujah: Or, A Hymn of Praise on approaching Glory. 1 REjoyce ye gracious Ones, For God hath heard your Moans, And soon will ease you of your Groans, Sing then Hallelujah. 2 Your Sins are pardon'd all, Whether they're great or small; And you from God shall never Fall, Ttherefore Hallelujah.
3 To free you from your fear The mighty God is near, To Save you quickly he'll appear, Therefore Hallelujah. 4 In God you interest have, O therefore to him cleave; For he his Saints will never leave, Therefore Hallelujah. 5 To comfort great and small, Babel shall quickly fall; And Christ shall Rule and Reign o'er all, Therefore Hallelujah. HYMN 57. Treasure in Earthen Vessels: Or, All Glory to God. 1 O Praise the Lord, and look to him, sing Praise unto his Name; O all ye Saints of Heaven and Earth set forth his glorious Fame: 2 For sending his bless'd Word to us, and Ministers to raise, To Preach the Gospel of his Son; sing forth his glorious Praise! 3 We have thy Treasure Holy one, in Earthen Vessels, so That all the Glory might be known from thy own self to flow: 4 To thee of right, O Lamb of God, all Honour doth belong;
Wisdom, and Glory, Riches and strength and every Praising Song. 5 Most Holy, holy, holy, Lord; Almighty is thy Name, Which was before all Time and is and shall be still the same; 6 Come ye Redeemed of the Lord, your thankful Voices raise; Can you be Dumb, whilst Angels sing our great Redeemers Praise! 7 Come let us joyn with Angels then, Glory to God on High, Peace upon Earth, good Will to Men, thus sing Eternally. HYMN 54. Grace abounding: Or, A Call to come to Christ. 1 HArk sinners, hark, the Trumpet sounds A Call; it is to you To come to Christ; tho sin abounds, Gods Grace doth overflow. 2 Rebels! (saith God) lay down your Arms, and make your Peace with Me; O quickly ow, come in to Day, you shall Forgiven be! 3 With thee, O Lord, there's Mercy found, therefore we will Rejoyce;
God' grace, in Christ, it doth abound, sinners sift up your voice, 4 Let Pray'rs and Tears flow out amain, be overcome with Love; And never cease until you see your hearts to God do move. 5 O quickly now, agree with him, whom you offended have; O Saints praise him, and Sinners know 'tis Christ alone can Save 6 Your souls from Wrath, O Look to him! so may you sing likewise So you shall have true Peace and be free from all Enemies. HYMN 73. Hell in a Rage: Sung at the Administration of Baptism. 1 LIft up your voice, sing and rejoyce, where are your melting tears; Do Sinners turn, and to Christ run, this fills Satan with Fears; 2 This makes Hell sad, and Heaven glad, the Cherubs claps their wings; There's joy above to see what Love is in the King of Kings. 3 To such as we that Chosen be, and called by his Grace; Who Nat'rally in filth did ly, condemn'd with Adam's Race,
4 But now made near and sav'd from fear, being rais'd up on high; Wash'd in Christ's Blood, enjoying Good; sing Praise continually. 5 Lord let these know, and away go assured of thy Love: And live each Day that all may say, they Born are from above: 6 That we may see continually, cause to rejoyce in them, Who being Sincere, may each appear with Christ, Amen, Amen. HYMN 74. Jacob's Ladder, a Type of Christ. 1 BEhold, and Wonder now, in a most sacred Song; O let's Exalt the Name of Christ, to him doth Praise belong. 2 A Wonder sure it was, and that in every part; Eor while he lay ith' Virgins Womb he lay in her own Heart. 3 That Son the Mother bore, the Mother did Create; Both perfect God, and perfect Man, a Wonder to Relate. 4 Lord Christ, thou art the Priest, and yet the Sacrifice:
The Altar too art thou likewise, and Gift that Sanctifies. 5 Thou God-Man, King, and Priest, Almighty art yet Meek; Thou art most Just yet Merciful, the guilty cam'st to seek. 6 Thou never any fail'd, that sought thee in their need; Thou never quencht the smoking Flax, nor broke the bruised Reed. 7 Thy Life a wonder was; but here's a wonder more, That thou that didst all Kingdoms make, shouldst make thy self so Poor. 8 And wonderful it is, [that we this thing do see,] That thou, who art all Life and Love, yet few, alass! Love Thee. HYMN 75. The Wonder of Pardoning Grace. COme stand and wonder every one, the way that God hath found To Pardon us, it is such Grace, that strongly doth abound. 2 O let us of thy goodness sing, thy goodness let's adore; And with thy Grace exalt our King, and Saviour, evermore.
3 No Pardon, Lord, without thy Blood, for us, be poured out; By thy Atonement, Lord, thou hast our Pardon brought about: 4 Our Surety for us did Die, O blessed be thy Name! Let Saints Praise Thee with one accord, yea, highest Praise proclaim. 5 Sinners, your Pardon ready is, O fall at Jesus's feet; Believe on him, and you shall have his Pardoning Mercy sweet! 6 O let us say, O Lord, Who is it that's like unto Thee? Who Pardons all our horrid Sins, yea, all Iniquity. HYMN 76. ▪I will put a new Spirit within you: Or, The Unwearied Saint. 1 O Blessed Lord, what hast thou done? what kind of Spirit's this, That makes thy Saints with joy to run, and thy sweet Lips to Kiss? 2 How heavy and how dull are they, (how dead and carnal too;) Who in the Old Nature do abide, they nothing freely do.
3 Thy Saints are fired with thy Love, they in thy ways rejoyce; And upwards they to thee do move, and sing with cheerful Voice. 4 Thy acceptation, Lord, of us, thy Love and Favour kind, Is Wages now enough for us; this Blessing let us find. 5 And we will Praise thy Holy Name, and sing continually; And of thy Ways ne'er weary be, until we come to Die. HYMN 77. God's Court, or, Glory near. 1 O All ye Nations on the Earth, praise ye the Lord always; And all the People every where, set forth his glorious Praise. 2 For great his Goodness is to us, his Truth it does endure; Wherefore Praise ye the Lord our God, praise him ye Saints for e'vr. 3 Ye who attend God's holy Courts, and in his House do dwell. Sing forth his Praise ev'n all your days, bless him with Israel. 4 You'll quickly hear the Lord doth reign, look up, and ready be; Sion's in Travail, and ye shall her blest Deliverance see.
HYMN 78. God Pardons, Guides, and Leads. 1 SIng Praise ye Saints, ye pardon'd Ones your Debts forgiven are, For Christ hath Paid all you did Owe, sing Praise for evermore. 2 O Sinners fly with speed to Christ, God's Wrath in him is o'er, Take hold of him and you shall sing sweet Praise for evermore. 3 And let the Saints rejoyce in God, who cancels all their Score: Who heals all our Infirmities, and doth our Souls restore. 4 'Tis he that leads, 'tis he that guides, and gives us Rest and Peace; O sing Christ's Praise, you pardon'd Ones, your joy shall never cease! HYMN 79. A Call to Young-Men. 1 CHrist's Trumpet sounds yet once again, to bring poor sinners in; 'Tis Voluntiers he would obtain, to fight against their Sin. 2 And faithful Laborours he likewise, is come to seek and call:
Young Men, will you not now arise and enter's Vine-yard all. 3 Christ worthy is, his Service too, will raise you very high; His Wages is a Crown of Life, his Servants never Die. 4 O then desert and come away, you serve a cruel Foe; Desert his service now this Day, and unto JESUS go! 5 When any come, the Angels sing, it causes joy above; All such who come may also sing, for they enjoy his Love. HYMN 80. Unity of Saints. 1 UNite our hearts unto thy self, O Lord, we do thee pray, So will we sing thy Praises forth, and walk with joy each day. 2 Thy Saints above united be, they sing with one accord; O let us with one Heart and Voice sing to the living Lord! 3 Singing together clearly shews, thy People should one be;
For Union's a most lovely thing, unite us all to Thee! 4 And in thy Truth and bonds of Love, let us all live together In Unity, so will we sing thy Praises, now and ever. HYMN 81. Infinite Mercy shining. 25th Psalm Tune. 1 TIs of thy Mercy, Lord, Of Goodness and of Love. That we will sing and magnify, which shines from thee above. 2 We may, Lord, tell the Stars, And Sands on the Sea-shore; As we account thy Mercies can, In number they are more. 3 In Christ it is alone, The Fountain's opened, From whence thy Love and Goodness flows, And all things we do need: 4 Let sinners then believe, And know assuredly, Thou wilt forgive and pardon all, Their great Iniquity. 5 And let thy Saints rejoyce, And sing with joy of Heart;
For they shall one Day be with Thee, And never more Depart. HYMN 82. The joy of Repenting Tears. 1 THy ways, O Lord, most pleasant be, and all thy Paths are Peace; The joys of all that cleave to Thee, shall never, never, cease. 2 What are all sinful Pleasures here, which are sinners delight? Will they not hateful all appear when sin is in their sight? 3 More joy is there in leaving it, and in Repenting Tears; Then they do find who it commit, who filled are with fears. 4 O Young-Men, Young-Men, will you then Christ's gracious Call Obey? Now hear his Voice, I say again, no longer do delay! 5 All Praise to God, thus let us say and sing continually; Who says to sinners, Hear and Live: Believe and do not Die.
HYMN 83. The Saints Holy Triumph in Christ. 1 COme lets Triumph in the dear Lamb, our Lord, who once did Die; We that believe in Jesus, shall have everlasting joy. 2 Come Law of God, what hast thou now of Saints for to demand? Thy Curses all did meet in Christ, who did our Surety stand? 3 Come Justice, where is now thy Charge? what hast thou now to shew? We do to thee present the Blood that from Christ's sides did flow: O blessed Wisdom infinite, 'tis thou hast done the thing; Justice and Mercy now are join'd, by our most blessed King! 5 But woe to such who slight this Grace, Salvation to neglect; God's Attributes with angry face will them at last reject: 6 But Saints shall Hallelujahs sing, because they are set free; Their Crowns they throw, Lord, at thy feet, and will give Praise to Thee.
HYMN 84. Christ a Believers All: To be Sung at the Lord's-Supper. 1 NOw unto Jesus Christ let's sing, before him let us fall; He that did our Salvation bring, ev'n he is All in All. 2 Thou art, bless'd One, the Lord of Lords, thou art the King of Kings, Thou art the Sun of Righteousness, with Healing in thy Wings. 3 Thou art our Meat, thou art our Drink, our Physick and our Health, Our Light, our Strength, our Joy and Crown, our Glory, and our Wealth: 4 To Thee let us give all the Praise, thy Glory not divide, For God did thee to Glory raise, to pull down all Mans Pride. 5 Salvation is in Thee alone, which is a thing not small: Pardon and Peace, and Life's in Thee, O thou art All in All! 6 What is there more, what can we say, but in the great'st amaze, Even stand and think, and evermore sing forth thy Glorious Praise?
HYMN 85. Go thy ways forth by the Footsteps of the Flock. 25th Plm Tune. 1 O Thou my fairest One! Thus my dear Lord doth speak, If thou wouldst know what thou must do, And with my Saints partake; 2 Go up to yonder Mount, Thence look, and thou shalt 'spy, Clear as the Sun, what must be done, Presented to thine Eye? 3 Seest thou that Folded Flock, Whose Heart the Spirit tyes; Whom Gospel-Order calls into Distinct Societies? 4 Seest thou the Pastures where They do together Feed; The Shepheard stands with both his Hands To give them all they Need? 5 Their Magna-Charta is My Word; that is thy Guide; O follow them that follow Me, And thy Foot ne'er shall slide! 6 Thither I'll go, and join, There will I Feast and Feed; There will I sing my Shepheard's Praise, Who doth supply my Need!
HYMN 86.—My beloved is mine. Sung at the Re∣ceiving of the Lord's-Supper. 1 O Blessed Day when we can say, Lord Jesus thou art mine! O Blessed Day when we can say, Lord Jesus I am thine! 2 Christ he is ours by Deed of Gift, and that's a Title good; And Saints are his by Purchase Right, he Bought them with his Blood. 3 Say then, I'll have no Love but he, I like my Choice so well; And for his Spouse he will have Me, together let us Dwell. 4 He feeds among the Lillies White, there he doth most frequent; Amongst his Saints is his delight, to smell their fragrant Scent. 5 Their Graces are his sweet Repast, their Prayers and Praises are A Banquet to him, and their Faith, is his delicious Fare. 6 O Let but Me and this Church be, a garden of delight; To thee Lord, and with one accord, we'll Praise thee Day and Night.
HYMN 87. A Hymn of Praise for the New-birth. 1 YOu that are born again rejoyce, and sing God's Praises forth; With one accord lift up your Voice, who experience the new Birth: 2 And you that are not yet renew'd, have cause to sing also; Because God doth afford the means, through which this Grace doth flow. 3 But none sweet Music truly make, in God's most holy Ear, But such who do thy Grace partake, and truly changed are. 4 O Tremble then, and take good Heed, rejoyce with holy Dread; Lord whilst we live let's sing thy Praise, and do it as we read! 5 Ev'n sing with Grace in all our Hearts, and with thy Spirit too, Do thou inrich our inward parts, that we thy Praise may shew. HYMN 88. A Hymn on Preparation for Ordinances. 1 'TIs thou, O God, that must prepare our Hearts, we therefore cry,
Cleanse us from every Sin and Spot; O purge Iniquity! 2 That we may hear and sing to Thee; so as with thee to meet; And find thy Word and Ordinance to us exceeding sweet. 3 That so we may in thee rejoyce, and thy great Name adore; And filled be with inward Peace, and Praise thee evermore. 4 With Faith and Holy Diligence, let us attend thy Word; That cause we may have still to sing unto our blessed Lord. HYMN 66. Saints happy at Death. Sung at the Fu∣neral of Mr. JOHN LOYNS, June the 26th. 1692. Who (to the great▪ Grief of his Godly Friends) was ac∣cidentally Drowned in the River of Thames. 1 THe Length of all our Life and Age, O Lord, is in thy hand; And we must go when thou dost call, and yield to thy Command. 2 Our days are few, and pass away, like as a shadow flys; Let's ready be, O Lord we pray, and shun all Vanities.
3 When we go out of our own Doors, none knows what may befall, Or come on us, e'er we return; Life's uncertain to all. 4 O call to Mind, remember then, our Time consumeth fast; Why hast thou made the Sons of Men, as things in vain to waste? 5 What Man is he that Liveth here, and Death shall never see? Or, from the hand of the dark Grave, can, Lord, deliver'd be? 6 But blest are they, who die in Christ, their Death to them is Gain; Their Souls do go to Paradice; the Wicked go to Pain. 7 Praised be God for Jesus Christ, who gives such Victory Unto thy Saints, o'er Sin and Death; sing Praise continually. 8 The Godly ly in a sweet Sleep, they sleep in Jesus do; And no more Pain, nor Sorrow shall for ever undergo. HYMN 90. Saints the Salt of the Earth. 1 IF Saints, O Lord, do Season all amongst whom they do Live,
Salt all with Grace, both Great and Small they may Sweet Relish give; 2 And blessed be thy glorious Name, in England Salt is found; Some Savoury Souls who do Proclaim thy Grace, which doth abound. 3 But O the want of Salt, O Lord, how few are Salted well; How few are like to Salt indeed, Salt thou thy Israel! 4 Now sing ye Saints who are this Salt, and let all Season'd be With your most Holy Gracious Lives; great need of it we see. 5 The Earth will else Corrupt and Stink O Salt it well therefore, And Live to him that Salted you, and sing for evermore. HYMN 91. He is altogether Lovely. 25th Psalm Tune. 1 THe gracious Words that drop From Christ's sweet Mouth so free, Are sweeter than the sweetest Myrrh, To all that do Love Thee. 2 In short, This is the Man, He's altogether Love;
a, altogether Lovely's he To whom my Soul doth move! 3 You Daughters this is he, This my Beloved is? No Tongue can tell, no Language can Express that Love of his! 4 The Drops that fill the Seas, Go, count them every one? Then join the number, if you please, Of Stars till there is none? 5 To these, the Sands, the Hairs, And all things else in sight; Hyperbolize Immensity, And run to Infinite? 6 This my Beloved is, He is the total sum Of all Perfections, and the Bliss Of all that to him come. 7 Then sing his Praise, and say, Thou dost excell all Men; Thou fairer art than ten Thousand; Hallelujah. Amen. HYMN 92. The Rose of Sharon. SHaron the Garden of the World, the Pride of Palestine; Whose Natural soyl more Glory bore than Solomon could resign;
2 Could ne'er produce so sweet a Rose as I will be to Thee. So fair a Lilly never grew, Sharon must stoop to Me. 3 O Blessed Jesus, dost thou say, who'll have a Rose so sweet! Who will refuse our Sharons Rose, that knows its fragrant scent? 4 Upon the Cross thou was Distill'd, we taste in Distillation, The sweetness of the absent Rose, by Faith and Acceptation. 5 Thou art a Rose, my Soul's repose, O let me never be, My Dearest Lord, a Thorn to thee, who art so sweet to me. 6 Thou art the Lilly of the Vale, a matchless Purity. And I will sing thy Praise since thou dost in my Bosom ly. HYMN 93. Cant. 5. 12.—His Eyes are like the Eyes of Doves. 1 I'Ll tell you farther, that if such A Person you shall see, Whose Eyes like Doves are wash't with Milk and Water this is he?
2 He hath a killing Eye, 'twill Pierce through Adamantine Ears; And wound a Rock but with a look, and melt it into Tears. 3 Eyes that are clear and fitly set, that can see all things past, And all things present and to come, as long as Time shall last: 4 Whose Eyes are Pure, Holy and Chast, never defil'd with Sin; That never was in the least Promp't to take foul Objects in. 5 If such a One you meet, whose Eyes like Flames, and Lamps of Fire Strikes Dead, and yet gives Life thereby, tis he that I desire? 6 This is the Man I seek, and praise, All-seeing, and All-Eye: Tell him, if such a one you meet, 'tis for his Love, I Die! HYMN 44. Desert Places rejoyce: Or, Babel's down∣fall; the Snare broken and we are E∣scaped. 1 LEt England, and God's Sion now rejoyce and sing Christ's Praise, On whom the Gospel Sun doth shine, and send  glorious Rays.
2 Sing to the Lord, sing a new Song, praise him all ends of th'Earth. O let this Isle of the great Sea, his Glory great fet forth. 3 Let th' Wilderness and Desert place, lift up to God their Voice; And all that hear of thy great Acts, in thee always rejoyce. 4 Lord, we thy Glory will declare, and Praise Thee in this Land, For still to us thou art a Friend, and up for us doth stand. 5 Blessed are they who so do Hear, that for the time to come They are prepar'd, and ready be, before their dismal Doom: 6 God quickly will awake and rise, ye Saints rejoyce therefore; Great Babel and all Enemies, shall e'er long be no more. 7 In vain are all their Hellish Plots, thy Name, O Lord, we Praise; Our King yet Lives; we Saved are, let's Praise Thee all our Days.
HYMN 95. Beautiful on the Mountains: Or, A Ran∣some found. 1 HOw beautiful upon the Mount, are they that Peace proclaim, That unto Rebels offer Grace, in their great Masters Name. 2 That unto Captives do declare glad Tidings; and to tell To Sinners, there's a Ransom found▪ to save their Souls from Hell.Mr. D. 3 Who say to Saints, who interest have in Thee, their dearest Lord, Thou wilt them all for ever Save, such Grace thou dost afford: 4 Mount Sinai's fiery Law can't break a Heart that's like a stone; The Creature's Arrows at the Walls of Brass, in vain are thrown. 5 'Tis only Pardon that doth melt, and Love doth sinners draw: We therefore, Lord, will sing thy Praise; grace do's exceed the Law. 6 Those who are, Lord, united to thy self, in Faith and Love, May sing thy Praise on Earth, for they shall also sing above.
HYMM 96. A Hymn out of the Psalms, On the Resur∣rection and Joys at God's right Hand. 2th. Psalm Tune. 1 WHen I awake, O Lord, I shall behold thy Face In righteousness, be like to Thee, Ev'n filled with thy grace. 2 Full joys, Lord are with Thee, Yea, in thy Presence store, And at thy Right-hand also are Pleasures for evermore. 3 Ye Angels great in pow'r, Praise ye, and bless the Lord; Which to Obey, and do his Will, immediately accord.Psal. 103 21. 4 Yea, all in every place, Praise ye his holy Name; My Heart, my Tongue, and all my Soul▪ For ever do the same. 5 O praise Jehovah all Ye Nations far and nigh; For great his Truth and Kindness is, Praise him continualiy.Psa. 117. ▪ 2.
HYMN 97. An Hymn containing some Select Verses out of the Book of Psalms. 1 SIng Praises to our God, sing Praise▪ sing Praises to our King; Praise to the King of all the Earth, with understanding sing.Psal. 47. 6. 2 O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him with one accord; Praise him, praise him, all ye that be the Servants of the LordPsal. 135. 1. 3 My Soul give laud unto the Lord, my Spirit do the ame; And all the powers of my Soul, praise ye his holy Name. 4 For he it is that doth forgive all thine Iniquities; ▪Tis he that heals thy sad Disease, yea, all Infirmities.Psal. 10. 1▪ . 5 Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fail; And kneel to him, and him adore, for he hath made us all.Psal. 95. 6. 6 He is the Lod, he is our God, for us he doth provide: We are his Flock, he doth us Feed, his Sheep, he doth us Guide.
7 I will give thanks unto the Lord, because he hath heard me; And is become most graciously a Saviour unto me.Psal. 118. 21. HYMN 98. ▪A Hymn on the answer of Prayers, out of the Psalms. 1 TO render thanks unto the Lord, how great a cause have I; My Voice, my Pray'r, and my Complaint, he heard most readily.Psal. 28▪ 6. 2 Thou art my Strength, thou art my stay, O Lord, I sing to Thee: Thou art my Fort, my Fence and Aid, a loving God to me.Psal. 59. 17. 3 What thing is there that I can wish, but Thee, in Heav'n above; And in the Earth, there is, Lord, none like Thee, that I can Love.Psal. . 25. 4 For why, the Well of Life so pure, doth ever flow from Thee; And in thy Light we are full sure▪ thy lasting Light to see.Psal. 36. 9. 5 My Heart would faint but that in me my Faith is fixed fast; Thy goodness in the Earth I see, which doth for ever last.Psal. 2▪ 13.
6 For this God is our God, and he will ever so abide; He is our God, and he will be to Death, our sure Guide.Psal. 48. 13 HYMN 99. Another out of the Psalms. 25th Psalm Tune. 1 THe Lord is my Defence, My Joy, my Mirth, my Song; He is become my Saviour, and My Strength, and Refuge strong: 2 Thou art my God, and I Will render Thanks to Thee: Thou art my God, and I will Praise Thy Mercy towards me.Psal. 118. 13. 14. 3 O come let's to the Lord, Sing forth with joyful Voice; To th' Rock of our Salvation,: Lets make a joyful noisePsal 95. 1 4 Let us with holy Songs, Approach his Presence now; And sing Sweet Psalms Triumphantly, Before him let us bow. 5 For he will quickly come And Judge the Earth will he, Yea all the world 'tis he will judg,Psal 96. 13 In truth and equity.
6 O give thanks to the Lord, For Gracious is he Because thy mercy, does endure For ever we'll Praise thee.ver. 2 HYMN 100. A Sacred Hymn on Sanctification. 1 THe Fountain of true Holiness Jehovah is most high; His Name it is that we will bless and Praise continually. 2 Thou perfect art, in Holiness, thy Glory let us see, O shine upon us more or less, and make us all like thee, 3 Amongst the Fruitful Lillies thou dost love Lord Christ to feed, O let my Soul a Lilly be, no more a stinking Weed. 4 Until the Glorious Morn shall break, and shadows flee away, O let the Glorious Lord be mine, and I ne'er from him stray! 5 O perfect, Lord, thy handy-work, begun upon my Heart; Make up thy Jewels; unto me, thy Image, Lord, impart!
6 Turn, my Beloved, to my Soul, be like a pleasant Roe; And I will sing thy Praises forth, whilst in thy Paths I go. 7 A glorious Day is coming on, when all shall sing thy Praise; 'Tis Holiness thou wilt Perfect, in those longed for Dayes. The End of the first Century.
To Her Most Excellent Majesty Queen ANNE OF Great Brittain, France and Ireland, &c. I Dedicate this Little Book. WHEN I do see the Milk-white Swan, Of all our Fowls the Queen, Makes me to Praise that Noble Day That Crown'd our Illustrious Queen. When I do see the Eagle stout, That mounts above all Things, How happily our People be In cover of her Wings.
THE Swan's Song. 1. O Why are we afraid of Man, That's made of brittle Clay, And does forget our Maker great, Did Heaven and Earth Display?Isa. 51. 2. O let us learn a Publick Spirit, For good to Israel, And when our Bodies laid in Dust Our Memory shall not fall.Psal. 112. 3. O let us live a Holy Life, And still therein proceed; Tho' our beginning be but small, As Grain of Mustard Seed.Heb. 1. 4. O flee from Sin that is so Evil, And causeth Judgments fa; Us to Redeem the Lord of Life Did suffer at Golgotha.John 19. 5. O let your Light before the World In shining so excel, That others seeing your Holy Life May glorifie God themsel.Phil. 2. 6. When I have been in Straits so great, My Spirits almost sink, Yet God most high hath given to me A faithful loving blink.Psal. 54.
7. When I do Travel far and near For this my daily Bread, Makes me to mind the Travels sore That Christ had for his Seed.Isa. 53. 8. When I do see the Sower Sow, And makes his Casts so meet, Makes me to mind our Sower high Reveal'd by Peter's Sheet.Acts 10. 9. When I do hear the Thunder loud, Sees Fire tear the Sky, Makes me to mind Jehovah's Voice So loud to Men doth cry.Psal. 29. 10. When I the Glorious Sun do see Each Day his Race fulfil, Makes me to mind great Joshua's Day, When it so long stood still.Josh. 10. 11. When I do see the Godly kind, I love them with my Heart, Makes me to long to meet in Heaven, Where we shall never part.Eph. 6. 12. When we do fall in Troubles great, Sees Straits before our en, Let us then mind that Providence, On Mount it shall be seen.Gen. 22. 13. When I do see the Bulrush strong, Grows by the River's side, Makes me to mind that Ark of them Did Moses in Nilus hide.Exod. . 14. When I do see the Vine so Red, And Grapes that's in my Hand, Makes me to mind that Cluster fiue They brought from Canaan's Land.Numb. 13. 15. When I behold the Rainbow Red, With Colours Blue and Green,
Makes me to mind that Covenant That God has made with Men.Gen. 9. 16. When I am daub'd in Clay so deep, And all my Joints so sore, Makes me to love that Eternal Day; I'll rest for evermore.Heb. 4. 17. When I behold the Lamb so young, And pleasantly to Play, Makes me to mind that Immaculate Lamb That takes my Sins away.John 1. 18. O let us thankful be to God, And walk into his Way, Who from the Womb has fed and clad Us to this very Day.Psal. 22. 19. When I do mind that Joseph young They laid for him such Plots, How he did suffer innocently At loss of both his Coats.Gen. 39. 20. When I that servent Jacob mind Wrestling in the Night, Before the Day appeared clear He got a Glorious sight.Gen. 32. 21. When I do fall in Ditches deep As I do walk the Moors, Makes me to mind our Gallantries When they fall in with Whores.Prov. 23. 27. 22. When I do see the Light at Morn Begin for to display, Makes me to mind the Upright's Light, Like Noon-tide of the Day.Prov. 4. 23. When I do mind that Sodom great, Where was so many Men, Makes me to admire my God so kind Would sav't if Righteous Ten.Gen. 1.
24. When I do hear the Trumpet sound, Sees People in a Crowd, Makes me mind Mount Sina right, When it did sound so loud.Exod. 19. 25. When I do see the Thorns so thick As I do walk the Way, Makes me to mind how they spring up, And choaks the Seed away.Matth. 13. 26. To know how Moon doth wax and wein It is above our Reasons, But let us glorifie our God Appointed her for Seasons.Psal. 104. 27. When I do see the Frost and Snow So thick on Earth to lye, Makes me to mind those Treasures great That's in the Heavens high.Job 37. 28. When I do walk so dark at Night, And cannot see my Way, Makes me to mind that Darkness great, That was in Pharaoh's Day.Exod. 10. 29. When I the pleasant arks hear Sing By Dawning of the Days. Makes me to mind those Glorious Heavens Where Saints do Sing always.Rev. 14. 30. As Milk-white Swans do sweetly Sing When Death on them draws nigh, So I'll sing Praises to my God Here and Eternally. Cor. . 31. When I do meet with Kindness sweet That's Shown to me from Man, Makes me to mind that Love so great Of David and Jonathan. Sam. . 32. When I the Grave▪Stone do se Above the Saints that lye,
Makes me to mind the Souls above That's in Eternity.Rev. 6. 33. Assurance is a Glorious Crown, No Carnal Man can tell, No, not the Angels was in Heaven, Nor yet the Damned in Hell.Rom. 8. 34. When I do see a Furnace hot Would burn both Bone and Lyre, Makes me to mind those Children Three That were not hurt by Fire.Dan. 3. 35. When I do see the Wors so thick That's in the Earth all over, Makes me to mind my Bed of Dust When they me all shall cover.Job 19. 36. When I do see the Stones in Slings That throweth them so far, Makes me to mind 700 Men That threw them to a Hair.Judg. 20. 37. When I do hear the Sectaries With their Opinions fa's Makes me to think those Words more wise That spoke by Balaam's Ass.Numb. 2. 38. When I do see our Dyers fine So cast their Colours af, Makes me to mind his Garments Red, That came from Bozarah.Isa. 63. 39. When we do see the Godly rare With Sin and Trouble meet, Yet set us mind the Day to come, They shall not say I'm Sick.Isa. 33▪ 40. When I the Moorburn see so large, And Fire to spread it sell, Makes me to mind that Flame so great The Damned's in in Hell.Mat. 25.
41. When I behold the Willow-Trees, And Palms that grow thereon, Make me to mind those Children Dear That hang their Harps upon.Psal. 37. 42. When we do mind poor Ephraim, And his unurned Cake, Yet let us love those Mercies Bowels Did freely for him ake.Hos. 11. 43. When I do see the Gade so long That does our Ploughs so call, Makes me to mind that Hand so strong By it made Philistines fall.Judg. 3▪ 44. When I do read Electing Change In Romans 8th that be, Now God has given me the fist Link The Rest will come to me. 45. When I do mind the Heart's Zeal When Moses brake the Tables, Makes me t Thank my God so kind Renew'd them unto Rebels.Exod. 32. 46. When I do see the Morning's Dew, And all his Drops like Pearl, Makes me to mind that Hermon's Dew, Or on Sion Hill that fell.Psal. 133. 47▪ When I do mind that Plot so great In Ahasuerus Day, When Haman's Mind was fully bent All the poor Jews to slay.Esther 3▪ 48. When I do hear the Lion Roar, And sees his Paws so tear, Makes me to mind that Lion strong That guarded me from fear.Rev. 5. 49. When I do hear the Arguments That Carnal Men do show.
Yet I do know a Man in Christ Above Fourteen ago.2 Cor. 12. 50. When I see neither Sun nor Moon, Nor Stars glistering high, Yet I'll believe to see my King Of Glory Eternally.Psal. 45. 51. When I do see the Rivers swell Into so great a Flood, Makes me to mind those Waters all Of Egypt's turn'd to Blood.Exod. 7. 52. When I have seen the Godly rare In Dark and Gloomy Days, Yet I will mind the Hand so strong, Their Lives in all their Ways.Dan. 5. 53. O who art thou Goliah great, That does defie the Heaven! The Staff that in thy Hand thou wears, Is like a Weaver's Beam, E'er long my Foot thy Neck shall tread, And pull out both thy Een.1 Sam. 17. 54. When I a pleasant River see, And all her Streams to gleid, Makes me to long that River see Whose Streams makes Saints so glad.Psal. 4. 55. When I the Milk-white Rose do pluck, How pleasant does it smell, Makes me to mind those long White Robes Delivers Saints from Hell.Rev. 7. 56. When I do see the Hail so thick From Heaven to Earth fell, Makes me to mind the Showers so great That did the Amorites quell.Josh. 10. 57. When I do see the Blaver Blue That grows amongst the Corn,
Makes me to mind its Colour fine About the Ephod worn.Exod. 39. 58. When I do drink the Populent Spring, And Streams that are so fine, Makes me to long to see that Day Ile drink my Father's Wine.Mat. 26. 59. When I behold the Peacock proud, And his Oriental Train, Makes me to mind those glorious Robes That Saints do wear in Heaven.Job 39. 60. When I do see the Sectaries That will not press the Mark, Yet I am sure their Dagon still, Shall fall before the Ark.1 Sam. 15. 61. When I a Garden fair did see, And all her Flowers so fine, Makes me lament my Parent first Such Paradice did tyne.Gen. 3. 62. When I the Rose so Red do see, And all her Leaves so fine, Makes me to Love that Sharon's Rose That takes away my Sin.Cant. 2. 63. When I behold the Woods so Green, And all her Birds hears Chants, Makes me to long to see that Day I Sing in Heaven with Saints.2 Thess. 1. 64. When I do see the Sheaves so thick That stands on Ridges so even, Makes me to mind that Emblem right Of Joseph and his Dream.Gen. 37. 65. When I do see the Wine so Red That in the Cup they fill, Makes me to mind my Saviour kind For me his Blood did spill.Mat. 2
66. When I ou Sword so ine do see, And Bars with Yellow Gold, Makes me to mind how Magistrates Should for the Truth be Bold.2 Sam. 23. 67. When we behold the Gold Spink gay, With Colours deck'd so fine, Should we not spread our Maker's praise, On Things that are Divine?Job 39. 68. When I do see the Ravens stout, And nothing laid in store, Makes me to mind their Provisor, That Rings for evermore.Luke 12. 69. Though I be weary, and so vex't With this my daily Sin, Yet I'll believe that Glorious Day When none shall enter in.Rev. 21. 70. That Sons of God are now begun, From Scripture Truth is clear, And God himself at the Last Day Will make it full appear.1 John 3. 71. When I do hear the Harp so clear, And pleasantly to play, Makes me to mind that Player fine, David in Saul's Day.1 Sam. 16. 72. All Praise to God for Grace begun, It is a pleasant Thing, For quickly Glory Grace shall Crown, And Saints for ever Sing.James 1. 5. 73. When I do see the Cruelty, That Men to other shows▪ Makes me to mind Adonibezek right With his Kings Thumbs and Toes.Judg. 1. 74. When I do mind that Dalilah Brought Sampson mickle Strife,
Made him to lose his Precious Eyes, And likewise his sweet Life.Judg. 16. 75. When I do see the Lamps at Night That lets me see to Gang, Makes me to mind that Stratagem Of Gideon to Midian.Judg. ▪ 76. When I do meet the Brambles thick That hath my Cloaths so riven, Makes me to mind that Man so proud, Abimelech the King.Judg. ▪ 77. When I do see the Milstone run Within its Circle full, Makes me to mind how piece of one Did break Abimelech's Skull.Judg. ▪ 78. When I do mind that Sampson strong Which brought such Things to pass, How he did kill a Thousand Men With Jaw-bone of an Ass.Judg. 1▪ 79. When I do see the Stars so bright, And part of them down fa, Makes me to mind how in their Course They fought 'gainst Sisera▪Judg. ▪ 80. When I do see those Chariots So in their going fine, Makes me to mind how Sisera That had 900 Iron.Judg. 4. 81. When I do see the Dung so thick That lyes upon the Land, Makes me to mind the Jabin great That fell at Kishan Strand.Psalm ▪ 82. When I do see the Rocks so high Upon the Earth that stands, Makes me to mind those Christians wise That does not build on Sands.Matth. 7▪
83. When I do mind that Esther ine Came to the King in Silk, Makes me admire the Woman wise Fed Sisera with Milk.Judg. 4. 84. When I the Fire large do see, And all to Ashes turn, Makes me to mind the Fire great When God the Earth shall burn.2 Pet. 3. 85. When I do see the Coal-pits burn, That does the Earth so Tear▪ Makes me to mind the dreadful Day Of Cor, Dathan, and Abier.Numb. 16. 86. When I do hear how Zion Dear With Moans Lament hersel, Yet I will mind her Palaces, Where God delights to dwell.Psalm 48▪ 87. When I do hear the Frogs so croak In Water in the E'en, Makes me to mind the Plague of them That fell on Egypt's King.Exod. 8. 88. When I consider David young, Whom Samuel a Shepherd Fand, And set a Crown upon his Head For to Govern the Land.1 Sam. 16. 89. When I do mind the Whale so big That Jonah brought to Land, Makes me admire that Providence Of my Redeemer's Hand.Jonah 2. 90. When I do hear the People Lie, And feed themselves with Sin, Makes me to mind poor Ephraim That fed himself with Wind.Hos. 12. 91. When I the Candle-light do see, And Butter-flies burn themsel,
Makes me to mind the wicked Right That Dance in Sin to Hell.Psalm 55. 92. When I do see the orn so thick That on the Earth do grow, Makes me to mind that increase great That did on Isaac flow.Gen. 26. 93. O let us thankful be to God, That hath not made us Beasts, But instead thereof will give us Crowns, And make us Kings and Priests.Rev. 2. 94. When I do see the Morning Cloud And Dew so pass away, Makes me to mind that sad Complaint Of Ephraim in Judah's Day.Hos. 6. 95. When I do see the Brick-kilns burn As I do walk the Way, Makes me to mind that Bondage great Of Israel in Pharaoh's Day.Exod. 5. 96. When I do see the Mountains great That stands on Cheviot Fells, Makes me to mind their Maker great That weighed them in Scales.Isa. 4. 97. When I do see the Sea so rough, And all her Waves like Fire, Makes me to mind the Sea so Red Did Pharaoh's Chariots tire.Exod. 14. 98. When I do walk the Way with Saints, So pleasantly all out, Makes me to mind that Joseph kind, Who said, do not fall out.Gen. 45. 99. When I behold the pleasant Earth So Beautiful and Green, Makes me to mind that Pleasure great That Saints enjoy in Heaven.Rev. 21▪
100. When I the Play house see so fair, With all her sumptuous Fillers, Makes me to mind that Emblem right When Sampson pulled the Pillars.Judg. 16. Cent. II. 1. WHEN I the pleasant Lilly see, And all their Stalks so tall, Makes me to mind that Promise great Of God to Israel.Hos. 14. 2. When I do see the Scepter fine That does our Law so sway, Makes me to mind that Promise great Of Shiloh in Judah's Day.Gen. 49. 3. When I the Ram see better Fight, And hears their Horns so snell, Makes me to mind that Blast of them When Jericho's Walls down fell.Joshua 6. 4. When I the flakes on Roofs do see Our Country People dries, Makes me to mind that Rahab right When she did hide the Spies.Joshua 2. 5. When I the Covetous Worlding see, And no Truth in his Way, Makes me to mind that Judas right That did his Lord betray.John 18. 6. When I do hear the Birds in Cage So pleasantly to Sing, Makes me to mind great Babylon That was a Cage of Sin.Rev. 18.
7. O ye that are by Grace made Saints, Rejoice with one Accord, For shortly ye shall Angels judge, And likewise all the World.1 Cor. 6. 8. When I do mind that Moses great d Egypt's Wealth despise, And to the Recompence of Reward Did wholly set his Eyes.Heb. 11. 9. Abel has been 5000 Years in Heaven, And Glory yet to come, When he has been a Million of Millions more It's but as new begun. I'll throw away my Quill,Gen. 4. Such Compting's pass my Skill. 10. When I do see the Shepherds thick As I do walk the Land, Makes me to mind those Patriarchs great That dwelt in Goshen's Land.Gen. 46. 11. When I do drink the Waters sweet, It's to my Nature kind, Makes me to mind my Saviour Dear That turn'd it into Wine.John 2. 12. I Glory ye shall ever sing When Devils and Wicked's gone, That knows nothing of our new Name, Nor yet our Gift White-stone.Rev. 2. 13. When I do see the Hunter fierce Pursue his Chase so bold, Makes me to mind that Hunter great Which Nimrod was of Old.Gen. 10. 14. When I am hungry and hard sted I do forget to Sing, Yet I will mind Emanuel, My Everlasting King.Matth. 1.
15. When I do hear the Bells so loud, And pleasantly to Ring, Makes me to mind the Glorious Day That Christ shall Reign as King.Psalm 97. 16. Are not the Ravens fed, great God, by thee! And wilt thou cloath the Lillies, and not me? 'll ne'er mistrust my God for Cloaths and Bread, While Lillies flourish, and Ravens feed.Luke 1. 17. O let us live a Godly Life Through persecuting Rod, For every Thing shall work our Good If we but Love our God.Rom. . 18. When I do hear the Kine so low At Even when it is dark, Makes me to mind the Philistines Kine That did bring home the Ark.1 Sam. 6. 19. When I consider the Sparrows young, And Hairs that's on my Head, Makes me believe on God my King When I am scarce of Bread.Matth. 10. 20. When I do see the Dew so thick That covers all Earth's Face, Makes me to mind that Dew from Heaven That wet all Gideon's Fleece.Judg. 6. 21. When I do see the Greyhound fair, That every thing outruns▪ Makes me to mind my Time so swift That to Eternity turns.Psalm 19. 22. When I do see the Droves of Beasts All going to be Slain, Makes me to mind our Gracious God How he provides for Men.1 Cor. 10. 23. When I am by the Nettle stung▪ And Blrs upon my Skin▪
Makes me afraid that Pitch to touch Defiles my Soul with Sin.Mark 7. 24. When I do see the Rising Sun, With all his Glorious Beams, Makes me to love that Righteous Son With Healing under his Wings.Mal. 3. 25. Let us rejoice 'gainst roaring Devils, The Wicked Self and Strife, For they can never tear our Names, Out of the Book of Life.Luke 10. 26. O let us lift our Hearts on high, By Grace made Militant Saints, And practice the Promises cheerfully, Makes us wiser than Ancients.Psalm 119. 27. When I the tired Shearers see Do hardly lift their Hook, Makes me to mind that Harvest great Few Labourers has to work.Matth. 9. 28. When I the Fig leaves sees so broad That Pleasant are and Green, Makes me to mind our Cloaths at first Of neither Silk nor Seam.Gen. 3. 29. When I do see the Ocean deep, With all her Banks of Sand, Makes me to mind Jehovah high, That measures her in his Hand.Isa. 40. 30. When I do see the Flock so thick That's on bare Commons fed, Makes me to mind the Flock of Christ By World no better sped.Heb. 11. 31. When I do see the Chariots That's in so fine Attire, Makes me to mind Elisha's Guard, Those Chariots of Fire.2 Kings 6.
32. When I do see the Archers shoot, And Bows abiding strength, Makes me to mind our Joseph right, Whose Arms abode in strength.Gen. 49. 33. When we have eaten, and are full Of what is in our Hand, Let us be thankful unto God That gave this plenty Land.Deut. 8. 34. When I our pretty Children see With Coats of divers Colour, Makes me to mind our Joseph right Who had just such another.Gen. 37. 35. When I Sun, Moon, and Stars, do see So glorious in the Heavens, Makes me to mind our Joseph right With all his Noble Dreams.Gen. 37. 36. When I that Reuben right do mind, A tender-hearted Brother, Should we not Loving Christians be, Preserving one another.Gen. 37. 37. O how doth the hunted Hart For Water Pant and Bray, So was our David for his God When hunted in Saul's Day.Psalm 42. 38. When I did drink the Water sweet That comes from Jacob's Well, Makes me to love that great Reward That Jacob got himsel.Matth. 22. 39. When I the Light at Morn do see Come in the Window clear, Makes me to mind how Light of Saints Ought to the World appear.Matth. 5. 40. When I do mind great Joshua With God such Favour fand,
As to possess him fairly in Into that Canaan's Land.Deut. 1. 41. When I observe the Sabbath-day To my Eternal King, Makes me to mind that Sabbath still That Saints enjoy in Heaven.Isa. 5. 42. When I do hear our Ministers Those Gosepl-Tydings tell, Makes me to mind Jehovah high That spoke them first hmsel.Exod. 32. 43. When I do hear the Psalm so loud Praising Jehovah Ring, Makes me to long to see that Day When Saints shall Praise and Sing.Rev. 15. 44. When I behold the Promises great And on them cast my Eye, I think not much that Angels make it Thei Delight to pry.1 Pet. 1. 45. When I do lye on Cheviot Hills All Night among the Heather, Makes me to mid that Bethel right, And Jacob with his Ladder.Gen. 28. 46. Whatever Good God puts in thee, Quick not thy self bereave, There is no Power, Device, or Might, Into thy posting Grave.Eccl. 9. 47. When I do see the Birds in Nests So curiously to breed, Makes me to mind my Saviour Dear Knew not to lay his Head.Luke 9. 48. When I do see the Garden fair, And Flowers so pleasant in, Makes me to mind that Paradice Where first began our Sin.Gen. 3.
49. Hosanna's high Jerusalem, Your King comes on an Ass, With all those Palm-trees in your Hands, The Way that he is to pass.John 12. 50. When I do feel that pleasant Smell The Balm has under shade, Makes me to mind that Balm so fine That came from Gilead.Gen. 37. 51. When I do see the Stone so swift That from the Sling proceed, Makes me to mind how deep it sunk Into Goliah's Head.1 Sam. 17. 52. When I do see the Ax so sharp That cuts the Wood so green, Makes me to mind Elisha right That caused Iron to swim.2 Kings 6. 53. When I do see the Dew so thick Upon the Grass that's mowen, Makes me to mind the Duty right That Magistrates are owing.Psalm 72. 54. O let us chuse the Promises good They are our better Part, And run the Ways of thy Commands, Thou wilt enlarge our Heart.Psalm 119. 55. Make haste Zacheus, and climb the Tree, By comes Zion's King, Which to thy House Salvation This Day shall freely bring.Luke 19. 56. When I do hear a Flatterer For all his pleasant Words, Yet I will mind his Tales to me Is like to drawn Swords.Psalm 55. 57. When I behold the Worldly proud, And no Good in their Mien,
I think they're as great Fools to see As Cakers to the Queen of Heaven.Jerem. 7. 58. When I those Heads so high do see Our Fema e Sex do wear, Makes me to think the Judgment-Day Should make them all to fear.Isa. 3. 10. 59. When I do see them Patch and Paint That oes their Face so rear, Makes me t mind the sad lament Of Judah, tho' they wear.Jer. 4. 60. When I unthankful Men do see Fed in our Land so thick, Makes me to mind Jesurun right When he with Fat did kick.Deut. 32. 61. When we do hear Idolaters For all their fair Pretence, Yet let us look the Scripture clear It's wholly our Defence.Deut. 13. 62. When I do see Idolaters At their Devotion false, Makes me to mind Jeroboam so clear, His Dan and Bethel's Calves.1 Kings 12. 63. When I do see the Kine so Fat That's fed on Meadows Green, Makes me to mind that Emblem right Of Pharaoh with his Dream.Gen. 41. 64. When I do see the Smoke so thick That from the Chimney fly, Makes me to mind how Smoke of Sin Aseends the Heavens high.Isa. 66. 65. When I do see the raging Sea So chrowing out our Filth, Makes me to mind the Wicked's Life, With Pity in their Mirth.Isa. 57.
66. When I the Scarlet fine do see, So Curious and Red, Maks me to mind that Rahab's Sign Was by a Scarlet Thread.Josh. 2. 67. O let us Praise our Maker high With Joy and one Accord, For all in Heaven, on Earth, and Sea, With Might do Praise the Lord.Psalm 14. 68. Now keep these Promises fresh in Mind, And fear no brittle Clay, And the Beloved of the Lord shall dwell, And Angels guard all Day. Deut. 33.Psal. 34. 69. When I do see the Serpent crawl O Belly as a Slave, Makes me to mind it's Punishment Since it deceived Eve.Gen. 3. 70. O let us learn good Wisdom's Works, So Glorious a Peace, For all her Ways are Pleasantness, And all her Paths are Peace.Prov. 3. 71. When I do see the Fire burn With Colours Red and Blue, Makes me to mind how it consum'd Nadab and Abihu.Levit. 10. 72. Now when the Meadow's full of Grass It's pleasant to be seen, Makes me to mind our David right, With all his Pastures Green.Psalm 2▪ 73. Good Wisdom's Ways runs pleasantly, Her Worth cannot be told, She'll fill thy House abundantly With Treasures more than Gold.Prev. . 74. Into us happily the Lines In pleasant Places fell,
Because our Gospel firmly stands Against the Gates of ell.Psalm▪ 16. 75. When I Pearls, Tophies, Rubies, mind, And Ophirs, Yellow Gold▪ Yet Wisdom's Lips a Jewel is, More prcious manifold.Prov. 22 76. When I the Tiles on Mouses see▪ With all their crooked Forms, Makes me to mind how Luther Bold Went to the City Wormes. 77. When I do hear the Oxen Low, And Bleating of the Sheep, Makes me to mind such Sacrifice As Saul of Agag kept.2 a. 15. 78. When I do hear them Curse and Swear, Such Oaths would tear thy Sky▪ Maks me to think our God's most kind Does nt in ell them tie.Lev. 24. 79. Now I do Love good Wisdom's Ways, There's Pleasure in her and, She quick Inventions does find out Unto the Diligent Hand.Prov. . 80. When I am tempted from Day to Day With Enemies Merciless, Makes me to mind my Saviour Dear, How in the Wilderness▪Luke 4. 81. When I do drink the Water clear That's in the River Twede, Makes me to mind that River still That does the Saints so feed.Rev. 22. 82. When I behold the Chickens young, And He▪ their kindly Mother, How carefully her Wings she spreads Them from all Harm to cover,
Makes me to mind that Offer great Which Christ did give our Mother.Matth. 23. 83. When I do see the Swallow swift, So quick in Motion fly, Makes me to mind my Time so quick Posts to Eternity.Job 9. 84. If thou to the Almighty turn, And make him thy strong hold, Then shalt thou lay up Ophirs Dust, It's Colours yellow Gold.Job 22. 85. When I the Honey-suckle see, With all her Paps so fine, How she does feed the industrious Bee, Which makes her Honey mine.Mark . 86. When I behold the glorious Sars From Heaven downward fell▪ Makes me to mind proud Lucifer Like Lightning's dropt to Hell.Isa. 14. 87. When we the Poor hear at the Door, That cannot help themsel, Let us draw out our Bowels to such, Lest we get Dives Hell.Luke 16. 88. When I do mind the Leaves and Fishes few That fed so many en, Makes me to love my Make Dear That does take care of them.Matth. 14. 89. When I do mind that Sheba's Queen, Whom Solomon did behold▪ With all her Noble Gifts to him That was of beaten God.1 Kings 10. 90. When I do see the Lilies fair That in the Vallies grow, How pleasant all their Garments are, Of neither Flax o Tow.Matth. 6.
91. When I the Saints Graves do see, And Bones about them lye, Makes me to mind Ezekiel's Days, When more of them was dry.Ezek. 37. 92. When I do see the Salmons breed, And their innumerable fry, Makes me to praise my Maker Good, With his governing Eye.Gen. 1. 93. When I do see the Windmill clear, And all her Sails so wide, Makes me to mind that Grinder strong Which bruised the Philistines Head.Judg. 1. 94. When I do see the Dew so thick That on the Oxen lye, Makes me admire that Babylonish King That once did ring so high.Dan. 4. 95. When I do see the Peewits gay, With their Tops and white Breasts, Makes me to mind that rouzing Day Jehu with Baal's Priests.▪ Kings 10. 96. When I behold the Woods so Green, So purely spread and smell, Makes me to mind Jehovah's Praise, That made them all himsel.Gen. 3. 97. When I the Butterfly do see With her brave painted Wings, Makes me to mind my Maker great That did create all Things.Gen. 1. 98. When I the Robin-Red-Breast see, That pretty Bird of Fame, Makes me to mind the Sons of Men, Whose Tongues can never tame.James 3. 99. When I the Honeycomb do see So curiously wrought,
Makes me to mind my Maker's Praise, Who hath all Creatures taught.Gen. 1. 100. When I do see the Wheels so quick, And all its Spokes to turn, Makes me to mind that Fortune ly, Whose Wings are on the Wind.Prov. 23. Cent. III. 1. WHen I do see the Stars so clear, That were the Wisemens Guidings, Makes me to mind the glorious Night Brought Heaven and Earth Glad-tydings.Mat. 2. 2. When I do see the glorious Stars, In Number so excell, Makes me to show my Maker's Praise That all of them do tell.Psalm 47. 3. When I do see the Bread so broke Communicants before, Makes me to mind Christ's Body broke, Our Sins upon him bore.1 Cor. 11. 4. When I do see the pleasant Dew So thick on Grass to fall, Makes me to mind that Promise sweet As due to Israel.Hos. 14. 5. When I do think on that Tyrus proud, So Building her strong Hold, How she did heap up Gold as Dirt, And Silver as Dust untold.Zech. 9. 6. Thugh we have Line amongst the Pots, Afflictions manifold,
Yet shall we all appear as Doves Their Feathers Yellow Gold.Psalm 86. 7. When I do see the Weeds so thick Amongst the Corn that grow, Makes me to mind that wicked Crew Amongst God's Plants that flow.Mat. 13. 8. When I do see the Birds on Earth So plenteously to breed, Makes me to mind my Maker good Them every one does feed.Mat. 6. 9. When I do see the Oxen strong So calm in Yoke does draw, Shall I not love the Yoke of Christ That keepeth me in awe.Mat. 11. 10. When I do see the Embroider's Gold, And all his Works so clear, Makes me to mind the glorious Robes, Kings Daughters are to wear.Psalm 45. 11. When I the Doves among the Rocks So carefully do spy, Ought not the Doves of Christ much more Fly to their Rock most High.Cantic. 2. 12. When I do drink the Water clear That comes from Trinity Well, Makes me to mind those Persons Three That all in One do dwell.1 John 5. 13. When I am by the Bee so flung That all my Face do swell, Makes me to hate these Roaring Devils Would sting us all to Hell.1 Pet. 5. 8. 14. When I do see the Hornets thick That does our Beasts so sting, Makes me to mind their Plague so sore Who drove the Amorites King.Josh. 24.
15. When I the Leviathan see That in the Water plays▪ Makes me to magnifie my God That made her for his Praise.Psalm 104. 16. When I the Behemoth do see, Which does all Beasts excel, Makes me to Praise Jehovah High Which did Create them all.Job 4. 17. When I do see the Sky so clear, And Sun so bright excel, Makes me to mind those glorious Heavens Where Saints so many dwell.Rev. 21. 18. O let us thankful be to God For good Things we possess, Then shall our Barns all filled be, And Wine burst from the Press.Prov. 3. 19. When I do see the quaking Asp Continually to shake, Makes me to mind those Conscience guile, Made Cain and Judas quake.Gen. 4. 20. When I do see the loving Mother Preserve her Child from Harms, Makes me to mind my Saviour Dear Who bless'd them in his Arms.Mark 10. 21. When I do hear the Wind so loud, With its Rebounding sound, Makes me to mind those Treasures great, God in his Hand hath bound.Prov. 30. 22. When I do see the Fox-tree Leaves, And all her Beauteous Bells, Makes me to mind the glorious Robes That Aaron wore with Bells.Exod. 8. 23. O let us thankful be to God or good Things we possess,
Left turns the Scale of Providence, And Enemies us oppress.Deut. 28▪ 24. When I do see the Fire burn, And all its Smoke exel, Makes me to thank my Glorious Lord Delivers Saints from Hell.1 Sam. 33. 25. And let us fly from carping Cares, And Drunken Surfeit Strife, For the Last Day approaching Night, Will ut that wicked Life.Luke 21. 26. When I the Truth see sore opprest, And Providences dark, Makes me to mind that Ichabod When Philistines took the Ark.1 Sam. 4. 27. When I do see the Wicked Men, That Sins with such desire, Makes me to mind the Swine so vile, That wallows in the Mire.2 Pet. 2. 28. When I the Rocks and Mountains see Upon the Earth so tall, Makes me to mind the wicked's Wish Upon them all to fall.Rev. 6. 29. When I the Trading Chapmen see That Travels thro' each Land, Makes me to mind how that of Old They brought Gold to Solomon's Hand.2 Chron. 9. 30. When I do see our Bodies fine, Yet come to Death we must, Makes me to mind both First and Last They are but very Dust.Gen. 3. 31. When I do see them throw the Stores, And hit the Mark so even, Makes me to mind those wicked Crew That stoned our Glorious Stephen.Acts 7.
32. When I do hear the Trumpet clear My Fancy does effect, Makes me to mind how Angels sound When gathers the Elect.Matth. 24. 33. When I perceive the Whirlwind quick That wheels about, about, Makes me to mind the Wicked's Crew God whirls from Earth quite out.Prov. 10. 34. When I the Cock at Morn do hear, That Crows so pleasantly, Makes me to mind that Apostle great, That did his Lord deny.Matth. 26. 35. When I do see the Sabbath broke, And People play such Tricks, Makes me to mind the Punishment Of him that gather'd Sticks.Numb. 15. 36. When we are drunk to Morrow next I think we're worse than Beast, That drinks no more of Water clear Than fully quench its Thirst.Psalm 104. 37. When I do see the Rocks so high, And Goats that on them climb, Makes me to mind that Scape-goat high That takes away my Sin.Levit. 16. 38. When I do see the Sun-beams shine So brightly through the Clouds. Makes me to mind that Glorious Day When Christ comes thro' as Judge.Matth. 24. 39. When I do see the Water clear, And Fish so pleasant play, Makes me to mind that Ocean deep That wash my Sins away.John 1. 40. When I do mind my God so kind Rose for his Israel's Good,
His Judgments on Mount Seir great For shedding Innocent Blood.Ezek. 35. 41. When I do see the Stump of Trees So pleasantly to Spring, Makes me to mind Nebuchadnezzar high, That Babylonish King.Dan. 4. 42. When I do see the Ocean great That still does Ebb and Flow, Maltes me to mind that Mystery great That no Man living know.Isa. 40. 43. When I do see the Beelzebub, That poisonous, nasty, fly. Makes me to hate great Beelzebub That casts his Darts so fly.Eph. 6. 44. When I do see the Sea so rough, And all her Waves hears Roars, Makes me to love my Maker kind That keeps her in at Doors.Job 38. 45. When I do see the Stones so thick That on the Way do lye, Makes me to mind that Stone so great Makes Men to Powder fly.Matth. 21. 46. When I do see the Nonsuch Flower, For all it is so fine, Yet I do love the Lilly more, Because she's granted mine.Psalm 127. 3. 47. When I the Saints Graves do mind That formerly I have seen, Makes me to long that glorious Day We'll meet again in Heaven.1 Thess 4. 48. When I do see the Marygold, The Clover, and Sun's-flower. How carefully they open and shut According to its Hour:
An Emblem to Watch and Pray, That knows not our Son's Hour.Matth. 24. 49. When I the Cockhead Red do see That grows amongst the Corn, Makes me to mind that dreadful Night Of Egypt her First born.Exod. 12. 50. When I do see the Blood so Red That cometh from the Lamb, Makes me to mind that glorious Night Of Israel's Paschal Lamb.Exod. 12. 51. O let us Love these Angels good, For kind they are to Man, For Hezekiah's Help to come, And kill the Syrian.2 Kings 19. 52. When I do see them cleave the Wood They in the Fire burn, Makes me to mind that Offering Of Abraham with his Son.Gen. 22. 53. When I the greatest Host do read, The Ethiopian, When Asa pray'd unto the Lord He kill'd them every Man.2 Chron. 14. 54. When I do see the Feet of Men Upon the Ashes go, Makes me to mind how Feet of Saints Shall tread the Wicked low.Malachy 3. 55. Though all the World go after Sin, As Daniel saw full well, Who rather than offend his God Chose Lios Den to dwell.Dan. 6. 56. When I am hungry, and so faint, And cannot help my sel, Yet I'll believe in God my King, In whom all Falness dwell.Col. 2.
57. When I clear Water in Ditches see, Heavens Stratagem so good, Makes me to mind great Moab's Host Like Fools did lose their Blood.2 Kings 3. 58. When I go thro' the Thorns so thick That do my Cloaths so tear, Makes me to mind that Crown of them My Saviour did wear.John 19. 59. When I do see those Garments fine Our Gallantries do wear, Makes me to mind that Garment gay Cost Achan's Life so dear.Joshua 7. 60. When I am wet with Rain so thick I am in sorry Mood, Makes me to mind that Rain so great That did begin the Flood.Gen. 7. 61. When I do see the Snail so slide, And House upon her Back, Makes me to mind that Emblem fair What Care we ought to take.1 Tim. 5. 62. When I do see the Husbandman The Land to Plow and Sow, Makes me to mind that Seed of Grace Which God in Hearts do Sow.1 Cor. 15. 63. When I do see the Chrystal clear That's beautiful and clean, Makes me to mind the Sea of Glass That's spoken of in Heaven.Rev. 4. 64. When I do wade the Water deep, And feel it is so Cold, Makes me to mind that Ocean deep That Pharaoh found of Old.Exod. 14. 65. When I do hear the Thunder loud, Sees Fire like a Fle
Makes me to mind that Storm so great That Sodom overcame.Gen. 19. 66. When I do see the Spider's Web How she does catch the Flies, Makes me to mind those Sectaries fly Would catch us as they please.Isa. 59. 67. When I the Bees on Flowers do see So careful for their Hive, Should we not careful Christians be That would for ever thrive.1 Tim. 5. 68. When I do mind that Haman great On Gallows high to swing, Makes me admire that Providence Of my Eternal King.Esther 7. 69. When I do see the Flocks so thick That Shepherds bring to Fold, Makes me to mind that Shepherd Fine That David was of Old.1 Sam. 17. 70. When I do hear the Wicked mock Those that God so fears, Makes me to mind Elish's Curse Performed by the Bears.2 Kings 2. 71. When I consider Zion's Case, Tho' she be brought so low, Yet I will mind those Mercies Dowels To her do overflow.Isa. 51. 72. When I do see the Widows poor▪ That seareth God most high, Makes me to mind their Promise sure, That's spoken in Isaiah.Isa. 54. 73. When I the Chaff before the Wind So quickly sees give Way, Makes me to mind the Wicked Race So quickly fles away.Psalm 1.
74. When I do see the Chariots thick As I do walk along, Makes me to mind that Host so great Had Thirty Thousand strong.1 Sam. 13. 75. When I a pleasant Horse do see, That pretty Creature tall, Makes me to mind King Solomon Had Forty Thousand Stall.1 Kings 4. 76. When I do mind that Elim Fine, With her Wells and Palm-trees, How to the weary Israelites She gave refreshing Ease.Exod. 15. 77. When I do see the Dagger clear, So dangerous a Thing, Makes me to mind it shath'd so deep In Belly of Moab's King.Judg. 3. 78. When we are dipt in Straits so deep, Can no Evasion see, Then let us mind his Strength for HelpGod All-Sufficient. That's called Ell-Shadi. 79. When I think on the Palm-tree Fine, So Beautiful and Green, Makes me to mind the Righteous Ones Go flourishing to Heaven.Psalm 92. 80. When I do find the Rain so thick, Sees Waters great to grow, Makes me to mind that Noah's Flood The Earth did overflow.Gen. 7. 81. When I do walk the Road along, And not a Peny of Money, A small Refreshment unto me, Is like to Jonathan's Honey.1 Sam. 14. 82. When I do see the Birds so catch'd, And taken in a Gin,
Makes me to mind that Emblem right When we are snar'd in Sin.Eccles. 9. 83. When I do see the Godly rare That's in Affliction soure, Yet I will mind those Angels kind That Guards them every Hour.Psalm 34. 84. When I do see the Worldly-proud In Sins Career go on, Makes me to mind our General calls To them a Stumbling-Stone.1 Pet. 2. 85. When I do see the Adder deaf That closely stops her Ear, Makes me to mind the wicked Crew No Gospel-Charms will hear.Psalm 58. 86. When I consider David King, Whose House such Troubles fand, Yet I will mind his Covenant, That shall for ever stand.2 Sam. 23. 87. When I the Flocks on Mountains see, And Shepherds them to turn, Makes me to mind that Moses Fine When he the Bush aw burn.Exod. 3. 88. When I do see the Doves so White, Those pretty pleasant Things, Makes me to mind our David Fine That wish'd he had such Wing.Psalm 55. 89. When I these Mountains great do see, So covered all with Ling, Makes me to Praise their Maker high, How they and Hills do sing.Isa. 58. 90. When I do see the Righteous▪ With Trouble from Wicked meet, Yet I will mind that Day to come His Blood shall wash his Feet.Psalm 58.
91. God an Eternal Refuge is To those that are his own, And the Everlasting Arms underneath Shall fully to them be shown.Deut. 33. 92. When I those pleasant Blooms do see Upon our Pease that' Green, Makes me to mind the Garment Fine When Babylon sat as Queen.Rev. 18. 93. When I do see the Bees so thick About the Hive that's flying, Makes me to mind that swarm of them In Carcass of a Lion.Judg. 14. 94. When I do drink the Water Fine From Mffat-Well that fa, Makes me to mind that Pool for Health That was at Bethesda.John 5. 95. When I behold the Turky-flower So largely spread it sel, Makes me to mind his Dominions great, Where once the Saints did dwell.Rev. 1. 96. When I do see the Spaniard proud; For all his Silver Mines, Yet I my Climate would not change In which the Gospel shines.Psalm 16. 97. When I do see the Flower-de-luce, And His Blue stinking Flower, Makes me to mind Saints Blood he sheds, Cries Vengeance every Hour.Rev. 6. 98. When I do see the Trees so thick As I do walk the Road, Makes me to mind those foolish Men That makes of them a God.Isa. 44. 99. When I do see Idolaters, Which on False Gods do call▪
For which I mind that spoiling great God sent on Israel.Judg. 2. 100. When I the Government do mind By which our Church now stands, Wish God the like may plnted be Thro' all Earth's utmost Lands.Psalm 2. Cent. IV. 1. IN Scotland my First Breath I drew, My Lines so pleasant fell, By those in Africa that be, And Asia that dwell.Psalm 16. 2. It does rejoice my Heart to see The Godly in good plight, For God is making them so meet Partakers of the Saints in Light.Col. 1. 3. When I their false Opinions hears, So tumbling hither and thither, Now God is mine Inheritance, The Promises for ever.Psalm 119. 4. O let us suck these Promises good, So we them cannot Merit, Yet Faith and Paierce milks them ou, The Industrious them inherit.Isa. 66. Rom. 6. 5. When we Sun, Moon and Stars, do see That Rules both Day and Night, O let us Praise their Maker great For giving Earth such Light.Jer. 31. 6. When I do the Ships so swift The Water cut away,
Makes me to mind our Days on Earth Like Post or Eagles fly.Job 9 7. When I do hear the Sea so roar, Sees Floods come from the Lands, Makes me to Praise their Maker great, How they do clap their Hands.Psalm 98. 8. When I a pleasant Garden see, And Fruit and Leaves so hing, Makes me to Praise my Maker great, How all the Trees do sing.1 Chron. 16. 9. When I that Chapter sweet do read, It is a pleasant Thing, How Mountains, Hills, Trees and Woods, Do clap their Hands and Sing.Isa. 55. 10. O Cruel Persecutor cease, Leave off that wicked Mood, Lest that the Tongues of hungry Dogs Be dipt into your Blood.Psalm 68. 11. From Malice, Strife, Melancholy, Passion, And carping Cares keep off, That Threatning think upon, That Anger rests in Bosom Fools, And Envy slays the Silly one.Job 5. 12. How pleasant Wisdom's Ways to us, Her Gains cannot be told, She's better than the Onyx Pearls, Or Topaz Diamond Gold▪Job 28▪ 13. When I that Providence great do mind To Israel of Old, How they from Egypt did bring forth Their Silver and their Gold.Psalm 105. 14. When I see Hills and Mountains great So coming through the Fans,
Makes me to mind Old Israel, They skipt like Lambs and Rams.Psalm 114. 15. As pleasant Swans do sweetly sing When Death draws nigh themsel; So David bowing down his Head, Whose House in Troubles fell; Yet God's Eternal Covenant, Made all his Grief to quell.2 Sam. 23. 16. When I that Rock so high do seeEdinburgh. On which our Castle stands, Makes me to mind these Buildings high That is not made with Hands.2 Cor. 5. 17. When I that pleasant Hospital see, Our Herrit Lent the Lord, That to the Poor and Fatherless Such Succour does afford.Prov. 19. 18. When I our pleasant Cross do see Of Stones with Yellow Gold, Makes me to mind that Pillar Fine Of Absalom's of Old.2 Sam. 18. 19. When I our Abby pleasant see, And all her Gates so roul'd, Makes me to mind that Temple Fine That Solomon cover'd with Gold.1 Chron. 22. 20. When I that Famous Pauls do see,London. So Founded by our Kings, Makes me to mind our House above, Eternal in the Heavens.2 Cor. 5. 21. When I that Monument high do see Came by a Firebrand, Makes me to mind Lot's Wife of Old In Salt a Pillar stand.Gen. 19. 22. O thy most Holy Law I Love▪ And from it will not flinch,
Tho' Wicked compass me about, Like Dogs against me Belch.Psalm 59. 23. If thou be present when Strife begins Thy Back turn quick about, Before it rise to such a Storm As Waters gushing out.Prov. 17. 24. If thou hast Business with Wicked Men Keep Heart, Tongue, watchful Eye, Beg Wisdom still from God above, Like Eagles seize thy Prey.Job 9. 25. O be thou Righteous in thy Life With thy Gray Hoary Head, A Crown of Glory to receive It will thee safely lead.Prov. 16. 26. O let us Praise our God most High In Words and Works with Might, Who Guides us all the Day throughout, And gives us Songs at Night.Psalm 42. 27. When I the Vale of Baver pass, Sees Waters Pools to fill, Yet I will go from Strength to Strength Unto Zion's Hill.Psalm 84▪ 28. To see the Wicked thrive apace To me it seemeth odd; They have no Changes in their Life, Therefore they fear not God.Psalm 55. 29. Hast thou a Secret to reveal? From Wicked close it keep, For they're as Ravens to devour, As Wolves the harmless Sheep.Matth. 10. 30. Storms, Winds and Waves, so beats on me I'm ready for to Choak, Yet God most high me safely keeps, They dash against a Rock.Matth. 7.
31. When I think on these Latter Days As the Apostles hath us told, How they were esteem'd as Scurf of Earth, And Gazing-stock in the World.1 Cor. 4. 32. To see how Carnal Worldlings Jumps About their Earthly Toys, O Christians draw you near your God, No Stranger knows your Joys.John 16. 33. To talk with Carnal Worldly Men, Their Words are soft as Silk, But speak of Fundamental Truths, Like Babes, they need of Milk.1 Cor. 2. 34. O beg for Charity from above To Love thy Brethren now, For Faith, and Works, and all, shall fail, But Charity goes throw.1 Cor. 13. 35. Thou that desires on Earth a Blessed End, And seeks the Heavens to ascend, This Promise sweeter unto me Than all the Wicked's Mirth, It feeds me Jacob's Heritage, I ride on highest Earth.Isa. 58. 36. If thou keep wicked Company I plainly to thee tell, Thou art riding Post undoubtedly Unto the Gates of Hell.Psalm 9. 37. Whatever Business thou takes in Hand Quick do not prove a Sl, For wherefore should a Price be put Into the Hands of a Fool.Prov. 17. 38. If thou would Prosper in thy Way Bring Treasures  of Sands, Seek God alone establisheth The working of thy Hands.Psalm 90.
39. In all Things here beneath the Sun A Man may run excess, But seek to glorifie God in all thy Ways Thou never can fully express.1 Cor. 10. 40. O ye my Children whom I Love, Turn, hearken unto me, I'll make your  lick the Dust Your Peace will .Psalm 34. 41. Let our affections be Above, And not on Earthly Things, Lest that with Holy Job's they all Do take the Morning's Wing.Job 1. Col. 3. 42. O be thou faithful unto Death, Mind not the Wicked's hissing, And whatsoever thou takes in Hand It shall abound God's Blessing.Deut. 28. 43. Let the Eternal Word of God Like to a Light you guide; Keep's Law alive into your Heart None of your Steps  slide.Psalm 37. 44. When that the Wicked mocks me still It grieves me sore enough, Yet God mst  me safely keeps For all that they can puff.Psalm 12. 45. When I do hear them aunt so much With cursed Words and Idle, Yet I will keep me Tongue and Mouth As with a Bit and Bridle.Psalm 39. 46. With Cheerfulness seek to the Lord, And chuse the better Part, Keep Faith and Works alive on Wing, He'll give desire of Heart.Psalm 37. 47. I'll bend my Bow thy Word in Heart To let an Arrow fly,
When wicked Devils, Self, and Lust, Assaults me cunningly.Psal. 119. 11. Psal. 11. 48. When I think on the Prodigal Was driven to herd the Swine, In Justice I am in Poverty For drinking too much Wine.Luke 15. 49. Yet I will mind the Father's Bowels Was to his Son so kind At his returning Prodigal, This very Case is mine. 50. A welcome turning Prodigal By Grace that is so Fine, Bring forth the fatted Calf and kill, Given Robes and Rings of mine. 51. If thou seek God with Diligence, And use an Industrious Hand, Thou'lt Honour have from Kings and Prince; No Idle Drones can stand.Prov. 22. 52. If thou have run with Footman faint, And wearied thy sel, Then how wilt thou contend with Horse, And Jordan when it swell.Jerem. 12. 53. When I great Frosts and Drought do see, Plants, Trees, Beasts, Birds, consume, Makes me to mourn God's Punishment For Sins that we have done.Jerem. 12. 54. O shun bad Company as the Devil, They are as Imps of Hell, They ruined me my outward State, I Melancholy tell.Prov. 13. 55. If a Rich Blessing thou wilt have On Body, Goods, and Lands, By Faith and Prayer looking up It comes to Industrious Hands.Deut. 28.
BOOKS Printed for John Marshall, at the Bible in Grace-Church-Street. 1. THE Regular Architect: Or, The general Rule of the five Orders of Architecture of M. Giaco∣ino Barozzio da Vignalo. With a new Addition of Mi∣chael Angelo Buonaroti, rendered into English from the Original Italian, and explained by John Leeke, Student in the Mathematicks; for all ingenious Persons that are concerned in the famous Art of Building; con∣taining above forty Copper-Cuts. In Folio. Price bound 8 . 2. The Art of Defence, in which the several sorts of Guards, Passes, Inclosures, and Disarms, &c. in their Postures, the truest Original and best Books of Fen∣cing extant. In twenty five large Copper Cuts. In Folio. Price 2 s. 6 d. 3. Gospel Mysteries Unveil'd, or an Exposition of all the Parables, and many express Similitudes contain∣ed in the four Evangelists. By Benjamin Keach. Price 20 s. in Folio. 4. Novae & exquisitae florum Icones buus Generis Artium cultoribus perutiles maximam curam delineatae, & per Jeremi∣am Falck Hamburgi: or, A Book of Variety of Flow∣ers fit for drawing, price 1 s. 5. Delaune's Plea for the Nonconformists, shewing the true State of their Case, and how far the Conformist's Se∣paration from the Church of Rome for their Popish Su∣perstitions, &c. Introduced into the Service of God, justifies the Nonconformists Separation from them for the same. In a Letter unto Dr. Benjamin Calamy, upon his Sermon, call'd Scrupulous Conscience Inviting Hersto; With a Narrave of the Remarkable Tryal, and Sufferings he underwent for Writing, Printing, and Publishing hereof. By Tho. Delaune, who died in Newgate during his Imprisonment, for this Book. Price 1 s. 6 d. 6. Christ exalted: Or, Dr. Crisp vindicated in seve∣veral Points called Antinomian; being cleared from Ne∣onomian
Suggestions, by Samuel Crisp, a Branch of the said Doctor's, 4to. price 2 s. 7. A Red Copy-Book for the Instructions of the ignorance of young Beginners, in writing over the red Letters with black Ink▪ thereby teaching them to write without a Master, price 1 s. 8. A Copy-Book with Copies ready set on the top of the Book, price 1 s. 9. A Character of an Ecclesiastick, and Observations on the late Controversies of the Dissenters. price▪ 2 s. 6 d. 10. The History of the Union between the Presby∣terian and the Congregational Ministers in and about London, with the Causes of their Breach. 4to. pr. 6 d. 11. A Cyphering Book, or a ready Way to attain the Art of Arithmetick, with the Sums ready set In∣terleaved with Blanks, printed from Copper-Plates, price 2 s. 12. Fundamentals without Foundation: Or, a true Picture of the Anabaptists, in their Rice, Progress, and Practice: Also an Answer to the said Book, by Joseph Stennet, price bound 5 s. 13. Daniel Dfoes Consolidator; or, Memoirs of sundry Transactions from the World in the Moon, price bound 3 s. 14. The Believer's Triumph over Death: n a Sermon preached at the Funeral of the late Mr. Rich. Robins, Minister of the Gospel, in Petty-coat-lane, in White∣chappel, Jan. 11, 1702. The 2d. Edition. By Job. Noble. 15. God Acknowledg'd: or, the true Interest of the Nation, and all that fear God; open'd in a Sermon, on a Day appointed by Authority for publick Prayer and Humiliation, with some Additions, 4to. price 6 d. 16. The Danger of Hypocrisy, open'd in 2 Sermons. By Benjamin Koach. 17. A Confutation of some of the Errors of Mr. Daniel Williams, by the Reverend Mr. Vincent Asop, in a Letter to the Revernd Mr. Daniel Bugess, 4to. price 6 d.
18. All Mr. Jacob Bomen's Works abridg'd, 4▪ Price bound 6 s. 19. The Art of Patience, and Balm of Gilead un∣der all Afflictions. With the Government of the Thoughts, Prefatory to the Government of the Tongue; by the Author of Thwhol Duty of Man. Be∣ing Appendixes to the Duty of Man's Works. The third Impression, with additional Prayers suitable to the several Occasions, 8 vo. price bound 5 s. 20. The History of England: Giving a true and impartial Account of the most considerable Transacti∣ons in Church and State, in Peace and War, during the Reigns of all the Kings and Queens, from the com∣ing of Juw Caesar into Britain; with the Maps of all the Counties and Islands belonging to England, be∣ing in all above seventy Copper Cuts; with a Table of Contents, by John eller▪ Hydographer to Her Ma∣jesty. The third Edition 8 vo. price bound 8 s. 21. The Christian's Duty; or, Divine Meditations and Essays; designed for the Encouragement of a De∣vout Life, and the Promotion of true Piety, 8 vo. price bound 3 s. 22. The Royal Diary; containing, 1. King Wil∣liam's Secret Devotion. 2. His Practice of Self-Exami∣nation. 3. His Performance of Relative Duties. 4. Enquiries into the State of his Soul. 5. Religious Con∣ferences. 6. Table Talk. 7. Occasional Speeches. 8. The private Minutes relating to his last Sickness. Part of this Diary was written by King William, and sound amongst his Papers since his Death. The third Editi∣on. To which is prefix'd, the Character of his Roy∣al Consort, Queen Mary 11. With her Memorable Speeches and Sayings, from her Childhood to the time of her Death, price bound 1 s. 23. The Western Martyrology; or, Bloody Assies: containing the Lives, Trials, and Dying-Speeches of all those Eminent Protestants that Suffer'd in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the Year 1678,
to this time. Together with the Life and Death of George Lord Jffeys. The Fifth Edition. To which is now added to make it compleat, an Account of the barbarous Whippings of several Persons in the West. Also the Trial and Case of Mr. John Tutcbin, (the Author of the Observator) with the Cruel Sentence passed upon him; and his Petition to King James to be hang'd. Never before Printed, price 3 s. 24. The newest, plainest, and best Short-hand ex∣ant, Containing a brief Account of all the Short-hand Books already extant, with their Alphabets and Fundamental Rules. (2.) A plain and easy Me∣thod for Beginners, less Burthensom to the Memory than any other. (3.) A new Invention for Contra∣cting Words with special Rules for Contracting Sen∣tences and other ingenious Fancies, both Pleasant and Profitable unto all, let their Character be whose or what it will. By E. Coles late Schoolmaster in Covent-Garden, price 1 s. 25. Ziglographia, or, A new Art of short Writing, never before Publish'd, more easy, exact, short and speedy, than any heretofore Invented or Composed. By Thomas Shelton, price 1 s. 26. Tachygraby, the most exact and compendious Method of short and swift Writing, that hath ever yet been published by any. By Tho. Shelton, price 1 s. 27. A Funeral Sermon, Preached upon the Death of the Reverend Mr. Francis Fuller, who Died July the 21st. 1701. Aetat. 64. By Jeremiah White, sometime Fellow of Trinity College Cantab. and late Preacher in London. 28. A Caution against Youthful Lust in two Dis∣cours. By J. Portr of Aulster, 8vo. price sticht 6 d. 29. The Seasonableness of Religious Societies a Ser∣mon Preach'd to the Supporters of the Lecture on the Lord's Day Mornings, at little St. Hellens, upon April 23, 17 14. By Edmund Calamy, D. D. price 4 d.
30. Select Proverbs, Italian, Spanish, French, English, Scotch, British, &c. Chiefly Moral, the Foreign Lan∣guage is done into English, price 2 s. 31. The New Practice of Piety: or, The Christian Virtuoso; discovering the Right Way to Heaven, be∣tween all Extreams. Together with the Character of a Moderate (or Right) Christian, in all the Degrees of Perfection attainable in this World. The Third Edition, price bound 1 s. 32. Comfort for Believers about their Sin and Troubles: or, An Antidote against Despair: Shewing, that True Believers, how weak soever in Faith, should not be oppress'd, or perplex'd in Heart, by any thing what∣ever befals them in this Life. Together with divers other comfortable Observations. By John Archer, some∣time Preacher at Alhallows Lombard-street, London. The Third Edition, price 1 s. 33. A Funeral Sermon preached at the Merchants Lecture, at Pinners-Hall, in Brostreet, upon the Death of the Reverend Mr. Tho. Gouge, who deceased Jan. 8 1700. By John Nesbit, price 6 d. 34. A Sermon on Occasion of the Death of the Re∣verend and Learned Mr. Stephen Lobb, who died June the 3d. 1699. By Th. Goodwin, price 6 d. 35. The Pen's Dexterity; or, The ready way to attain the Art of Short-writing by incomparable Con∣tractions, by which a Sentence may be writ as soon as a Word. Allowed by Authority, and past the two U∣niversities with great Approbation and Applause. In∣vented by Jeremiah Rich, price 1 s. As also, the Te∣stament and singing Psalms in Short-hand by Jer. Rich. The Testament 6 s. and the Singing Psalms 3 s or bound together 8 s. Also Bottly's, Stringer, Metcalfe, Mason, and Addy. 36. The Jewish Sabbath abrogated: or, the Satur∣turday Sabbatarians confuted, in two Parts. 1. Proving the Abrogation of the old Seventh-Day-Sabbath. 2. That the Lord's Day is of divine Appointment, where∣in
in is many new Arguments not found in former Au∣thors. By Benjamin Keach, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 37. The Breach repaired in God's Worship: or, Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, proved to be an Holy Ordinance of Jesus Christ, wherein the chief Arguments of many Learned Divines who have wrote on that Subject are recited. By Benjamin Keach, 8vo. price bound 2 s. 38. A Declaration of the Congregational Ministers in and about London, against Antinomian Errors, and ignorant and scandalous Persons intruding into the Ministry. The Second Edition, to which is added the Testimony of Mr. George Griffith, Matthew Mead, Ste∣phen Lobb, Richard Taylor, John Nesbitt, in behalf of the rest, 8vo. price bound 1 s. 39. A body of Divinity: or▪ The Sum and Sub∣stance of Christian Religion in Man's Integrity▪ Fall, and Restoration, by the Mediator Jesu▪ Christ. Also the Christian Duties, with the difference of the two Covenants. By A. Burnet, M A. 8vo. price 1 s. 40. A Description of the Covenant of Grace▪ to which are added, The Author's Experiences and Ad∣vice to his Children, which he desires to leave as his last Legacy, 8vo. price 2 s. 41. The Substance of several Sermons from John 9. 39. Preached at the Request of a Friend. By N. Wyles, 8vo. price 1 s. 42. Four Discourses on Isa. 32. 2. wherein is shown, 1. How Christ is a Hiding-place and Covert to his People from the Wind and Tempest. 2. A River of Water in dry Places. 3. A Shadow of a great Rock in this weary Land. By Nath. Wyles. price 1 s. 43 The Sinners Folly discovered and detected, in making a mock at Sin: In two Discourses from Pro∣erbs 14. 9. By Nath. Wyles, Minister of the Gospel, Sice 1 s. 44. A Discourse of the Nature and Excellency of the Grace of Patience, delivered in two Sermons, by
Elias Keach; the Saints Deliverance from the Evil to come; opened at the Funeral of Mr. Elias Keach, Minister of the Gospel, who died Octob. 27. 1699. By Nath. Wyles, price 1 s. 45. The Young Man's Remembrancer, and Youth's best Choice: In two Anniversary Discourses from Eccles. 12. 1. being the last Sermons of Mr. Matthew Mead, price 1 s. 46. Youth's Recreation: or, a speedy Help to Wri∣ting, displayed, in a Compact Number of Copies of Round-hand, price 6 d. 47. Youth's Recreation: or, a speedy Help to Wri∣ting, displayed, in a Compact Number of Copies of Secretary, price 6 d. 48. Variety without Vanity: or, a Set of Round Hand Copies in double Lines, according to the best Masters, fit for Nurseries of Youth in City or Country, pr. 6. 49. Grace, Grace: or, The Exceeding Riches of Grace, manifested to the chiefest of Sinners, being a faithful Relation of the Dealings of God with the vi∣lest of his Creatures, by Joseph Taylor. In Four Parts: 1. Experiences in Childhood. 2. Those which he took for Conversion. 3. Of his sad and lamentable Falls into Sin afterwards. 4. Of his present Conversion, and Call to the Ministry. 50. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of the Re∣verend Mr. Francis Fuller, who Deceased July the 21st. 1701. By Jeremiah White, sometime Fellow of Trin. College Cantab. and Chaplain to Oliver Cromwell. 51. Yet plainer English: or the shortest way to Con∣vert the Atheist, Murtherer, Thief, Whoremonger, Strumpet, Drunkard, Swearer, Lyer, Sabbath Brea∣ker, Slanderer, Persecutor, Gamester, Ungrateful Scold, and other scandalous Livers. The Fourth E∣dition, price bound 1 s. 52. Free Graces: or, The Flowings of Christ's Blood freely to Sinners. Being an Experiment of Jesus Christ Upon one who hath been in the Bondage
of a troubled Conscience at Times, for the space of above twelve Years. By John Saltmarsh. The Tenth Edition Corrected. price 1 s. 53. The Doctrine of Justification truly Stated, Practically opened and applied, from Romans 3. 25. The Second Edition Corrected. By Tho. Loc. price 1 . 54. The French and English Impostours detected: or Zach. Housel tried by the Word of God, and cast. Wherein the Errors of Dr. Coward (in is late Book, called, Second Thoughts) are lade open. Shewing what Cause he hath to think again. And the Immor∣tality of the Soul fully evinced. In the Form of a Tryal. By the Author of War with the Divil. 55. A Token for Children: Being an exact Ac∣count of the Conversion, Holy and Exemplary Lives, and Joyful Deaths of several Young Children. By James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel. price bound 1 s 56. A Token for Youth: or Comfort to Chil∣dren; being the Life and Christian Experience of the wonderful Workings of the Spirit of God upon Cart. Rede: From her Infancy, to her last Moments, as it was faithfully taken from her own Mouth by a par∣ticular Frind. price bound 6 d. 57. A Confession of Faith put forth by the Elders and Brethen of many Congregations of Christians, Baptized upon Confession of their Faith, in London, and the Country. The Third Edition, price bound 1 s. 58. A brief Instruction in the Principles of Chri∣stian Religion, agreable to the Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many Congre∣gations of Christians, (Baptized upon Profession of their Faith) in London and the Country, owning the Doctrine of Personal Election, and Final Preseverance. The Tenth Edition, price bound 6 d.
60. An Essay of the Form and Constitution of a particular Christian Church, according to the Mo∣del of the Apostolick Age, and as it is describ'd, in the Writings of the New Testament. The Third Edi∣tion. price 6 d. 61. Multum in Parvo: or, A compendious Spelling-Book, to be used so soon as Children know their Letters; by the help of which▪ in a very short time, Children may be able to divide and read the hardest Word that is set forth, for Benefit of all little Chil∣dren, and the Rules may help those that are of bet∣ter Capacities. The Second Edition. D. C. S. M. price 6 d. 62. An awakening Call from the Eternal God to the Unconverted: or, Seasonable Advice to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their Miscar∣rying in Conversion; and some Scruples of the Tempt∣ed resolved. Recommended as suitable for all those under a Sentence of Condemnation. By Samuel Corbyn, M. A. The Fourth Edition. price 6 d. 63. A Looking-Glass for Children, By Abraham Cheare, price bound 1 s 64. Findiciae Faederis, or; a Vindication of the Interest that the Children of Belivers, as such, have in the Covenant of Grace, with their Parents under the Go∣sple Dispensation. By Francis Mence sometime of Pem∣brooke College in Oxford. price bound 1 s. 65. Sacramental Hymns, in Commemoration of the Lords Supper By Joseph Stennett price bound 1 s. 66. A Help to Prayer, or Right Prayer, Discoursed from the several Questions following, (1) Who is that Man God will Vouchsafe to hear, &c. With Answers to the most Material Objections made by the Believers against himself▪ price bound 1 s. 67. A Breif discovery of the Falseness and Unscrip∣turalness of Anabaptism, as the same is now Practised by those of that perswasion; Wherein are plainly pro∣ved from God's Word▪ from Five particulars the Un∣doubted
Right way of Administring Baptism; Un∣der the Gospel. The Third Edition, price bound 1 s. 68. The Only Refuge of a Troubled Soul in time of Affliction: or the Mistery of the Appletree Ex∣plained from Canticles the Second and Third, the Second Edition, price bound 1 s. 69. The Doctrine of Particular Election before time, asserted and proved by God's Word, that this Doctrine Rightly understood and Beleived with Apli∣cation to ones self, is the Great Enemy of Sin, &c. The Second Edition, price bound 1 s. These Four by James Barry. 70. Spiritual Songs: Being the Marrow of the Scrip∣ture, in Songs of Praise to Almighty God; from the Old and New Testament. With an hundred Divine Hymns on severals Occasions: As now practised in several Congregations in an about London. The Se∣cond Edition, with a Table of Contents. By B. Keach, Author of The War with the Devil. 71. Animad versions on Mr. Baxter's History of his Life and Times. With some Remarks on Occa∣sional Conformity. Dedicated to Mr. Sylvester. 72. A Discourse of the Pharisee and the Publican: By John Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress. price 1 s. 73. Faith the Grand Evidence of our Interest in Christ, or the Nature of Faith and Salvation, opened, from John 6. 40. By Rich. Davis, of Rowel in Nor∣thamptonshire, 12 s. price bound 1 s. 74. Arestotle's New Book of Problems, set forth by way of Question and Answer. To which are added, A great Number from other Famous Philo∣sophers, Astrologers, Astronomers, and Physicians. Shewing the Secrets of Nature and Art, Together with the Interpretation of Dreams, Signification of Moles in any Part, the Nature of Ghosts, the Reason of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon; as also of all the Wonders in the Creation, an Earthquake, Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, &c. price bound 1 s.
75. Reformation: or, A necessary Companion for the Evils of the present Times, exposed in a Scriptural Apprehending Tryal and Condemnation of three grand Criminals, viz. Idleness, Pride, and Whispering Backbiter. By G. Brown. price 1 s. 76. The Heavenly Foot-Man: A Description of the Man that gets to Heaven: By John Bunyan. The Second Edition. To which is added, the Life and Death of the said John Bunyan, with a Catalogue of all Mr. Bunyan's Writings. price bound 1 s. 77. Instructions for Children: or, The Child's and Youth's Delight, teaching an easie way to Spell and Read true English: containing the Father's Godly Advice; directing Parents in a right and Spiritual Manner to Educate their Children. With a Scrip∣ture Catechism, wherein all the chief Principles of True Christianity are clearly opened. Together with many other things, both pleasant and useful, for the Education of Children. By B. Keach, Author of War with the Devil. Recommended to the Use of all Pa∣rents and School-Masters, by H. Knowls. The Fifth Edition Corrected. price bound 6 d. 78. The Beauty of the Lord in his Temple, &c. In Three Parts. 1. Of its External Frame, Beauty, and Order. 2. Of its Internal Mystery, Beauty, and Glory. 3. Of its being fallen down among Us, in both these Respects; and of the only Means to Build it up again. With a Table of Contents. By Joseph Taylor. 79. Solomon's Temple Spiritualiz'd: Or, Gospel-Light fetch'd out of the Temple at Jerusalem. To let us more easily into the Glory of New-Testament-Truths. By John Bunyan. The Fifth Edition. price bound 1. s. 80. The Jerusalem-Sinner Saved: Or, Good News for the Vilest of Men: being a Help for, Despaiaing Souls; shewing that Jesus Christ would have Mercy
in the first place offered to the biggest Sinners. The Sixth Edition. By John Bunyan. price bound 1 s. 81. The Acceptable Sacrifice or, the Excellency of a broken Heart, shewing the Nature, Signs, proper Ef∣fects of a Contrite Spirit. By John Bunyan, price 1 s. 82. The Works of Jesus Christ as an Advocate Clearly Explained and largely Improved for the Bene∣fit of all Believers. By John Bunyan, price 1 s. 83. One Thing is Needful; or, Serious Meditations upon the Four last Things, Death, Judgment Heaven, Hell, unto which is added Ebal and Gerizzim, or the Blessing and the Curse with Prison Meditations. The Fourth Edition, by John Bunyan, price bound 1 s. 84. A Warning to Youth in the Life and Death of Tho. Savage, Imprisoned in Newgate, Justly Con∣demned, and twice Executed at Ratliff for the Murther of his Masters Maid, on October 28th. With what passed between Him, and these Ministers that were with him in his Imprisonment, and at his Execution, viz. Mr. Hugh Baker, Mr. Robert Frankling, Mr. Tho. Vincent, Mr. Tho. Doolittle, and Mr. James Janeway, Illustrated with Cuts: To which is annexed a Ser∣mon Preached at his Funeral. The Sixteenth Edition. With an Account of the Vicious Life and Ignomi∣nious Death of Hannah Blay, who was Condemned and Executed, for being Guilty of the same Murther Committed by Tho. Savage, with other New Additi∣ons, price bound 1 s. 85. A New Years Gift, or Youth's Engagement, and Youth's Encouragement, in a Sermon to young People, Jan. the First 1715. And now Published at their Desire. By Samuel omfret. The Second Edition. 86. The Accomplisht Secretary's Guide, Contai∣ning Letters on almost all Subjects, with Love-Let∣ters between a Gentleman and a young Lady, un∣der the Names of Octavio and Emelia; with Variety of other Matters, done by an Eminent Hand, price bound 1 s.
