M2793 12758936 93472
A MODEST ADVERTISEMENT CONCERNING The present CONTROVERSIE about Church-Government; Wherein the maine Grounds of that Booke, intituled, The Ʋnlawfulnesse and Danger of Limited Prelacie. Are calmly examined. LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, Anno 1641.
A MODEST ADVERTISEMENT CONCERNING The present CONTROVERSIE about Church-Government. THe blessed Apostle Saint Paul wri∣ting to Timothy, Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, (as is confessed by all Writers, though in this last age of the world it is at length di∣sputed, what the meaning of that word Bishop is) among many instructions that hee gives him concerning the direction of the Presby∣ters, and People committed to his care, begins first with this Exhortation, that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thankes, be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in authority; that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty. Teaching us thereby, both that all Go∣vernment is the Ordinance of God, and that it is an effect of his great love to his children, to be placed in such a State, where temporall peace and true Re∣ligion are so joyned together, that they are not put upon the fiery Triall, to lose the contentment of this life, to attaine the happinesse of that which is to come. Neither is this onely a great blessing of Almighty God, but a duty also that belongs both to our care and wisedome, and even to our Piety and Devotion it selfe, to indevour, as much as in us lies, to preserve a quiet and a peaceable life, together with all godlinesse and honesty. This therefore seemes to me to be the end that all religious Prudence ought to aime at, that men be not in their consultations so mis-led, either by some appearances of godlinesse, and faire colours of extraordinary zeale, as thereby to hazzard the disturbance of the publick quiet; nor, on the other side▪ so wedded to the enjoying of their temporall good, as to neglect the attaining of that which is eternall. This foundation being laid, let us apply it to the Controversie now in hand, and so eagerly pursued by those, who are swayed by different Interests and Opinions, concerning the retaining, or amending, or totall changing of Ecclesiasticall Government. And first, let mee have leave to propose a few Questions to those, who so earnestly desire a totall change, and to bring a new face of things into the Church of England. Of which I humbly desire
them, that they will (as in the presence of the Lord) consider with all godly Wisedome, Passion and Prejudice being laid aside, and then make answer with truth and sobriety. First therefore, Is the Discipline already esta∣blished so ill, that they who live under it are not ca∣pable of salvation? May they not enjoy the vertues of Faith, and Hope, and Charity, and Humility▪ and repentance from dead works? May they not be justified and sanctified in this Church of ours? Are they inforced by it to any Action which is in it selfe a sin? or to omit any work in it selfe very good? If so, certainely those great Lights of our Re∣formation have beene in a great darknesse; and those our Episcopall Martyrs who have laid downe their lives for the love of Truth, have beene excee∣ding miserable. Secondly, the Discipline they so much desire in stead of it, are they all agreed of it what it shall be? Or if they be, is it of Divine or Humane instituti∣on? If of Divine, can this be plainly proved out of the holy Scriptures? And shall the sense of the places thence alledged, be made evident and neces∣sary by true Logicall inference (not to perverse gain∣sayers, but) to such as seeke for truth with indiffe∣rency and sincerity? Or if the sense be probable only, is it such a sense as is countenanced by all ho∣ly and learned Writers, through all ages of the Church? Or is it a late sense acknowledged by all Protestant Churches? Or by some onely, and by o∣thers accounted to have little probability? Or is there any place of Scripture that will not admit of
a sense which to some men will appeare probable, especially if they bee ingaged by Faction or in∣terest? Lastly, is their Discipline commanded plainly by God, upon paine of Damnation, or the contrary plainly forbidden? For so it must be, if it be unlaw∣full (as is pretended;) for nothing is unlawfull in Di∣vinity, but what is against some Divine Law. And the Episcopall Discipline being already in possession, is it not just and equall, that the argu∣ments brought against it be much more convincing, than those that are brought for it; seeing Possession it selfe is one reason why it should continue? For though those Principles which are laid for proving the unlawfulnesse of limited Episcopacy, were gran∣ted, namely, that All Officers in Gods House must be of Gods institution: That man can no more make the Office, than give the Grace: but That the Institution of the Of∣fice must proceed from Him that gives the blessing to the work. (For these are the maine grounds of that Booke, concerning the unlawful∣nesse of limited Prelacy, which is written with much Art & Eloquence to insinuate into unwary Readers.) I say, if these Propositions were granted, the sense of them will be but this; That none may administer the Sacraments, impose hands, preach the Word, nor use the Keyes, but such as Christ himselfe hath appoin∣ted to doe so. And that it is otherwise practised in the Church of England, is not yet proved; and
when it is proved, may easily be amended without noise or scandall. But that among these, who are by Christ ena∣bled to execute Duties, some may not be higher, and some lower, during life; is the thing that is required to be proved out of plaine Texts of Scrip∣ture, or sound grounds of uncontroverted Divinity: when this is done, this Controversie will be ended. But it will be required also, that the same proofes be brought for the whole Discipline, and every part of it which shall be established. In the meane time many places of Scripture are alledged by those who maintaine Episcopacie, and these places are interpreted, not by a few late Writers in a little spot of the World here in the West, but by all Christian Writers since the time of the Apostles, for fifteene hundred yeeres; and by the agreeable concurrent practice of all Churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa; though flowing from different fountaines, and ha∣ving beene founded by severall Apostles, which a∣lone shewes the Order to be Apostolicall: and that as the Creed for Doctrine, so this for Practice, was delivered from the beginning. So that the proofes of it are all Ages of the Church, divers Empires, very many Kingdomes (in which there are many Pro∣vinces, whereof some one is bigger than Scotland, and the Netherlands, and those parts of France in which the Presbyteriall Discipline is accepted) and above a thousand Bishopricks, many of which were the Chaires of the Apostles, Disciples, and other Saints in Scripture, among different Sects of Chri∣stians,
that are of severall Communions, and recei∣ved this Order from severall beginnings, not all from one, and whereof many as much detest the Bishop of Rome, as any Protestant in England. Among all these I say there are some Elders, which being separated to holy things by the laying on of hands, are ruled, and these are called Priests, or Pres∣byters: and some which during their life doe rule, and these are called Bishops. And no reason can be given why all Churches should agree in this, unlesse they received it together with their Christianity. So that Episcopacy is supported by these three Props, Time, Place, Persons. All Histories confirm it, the very Maps of the world beare witnesse to it, and the Scriptures themselves are not delivered to us with a more universall, unquestioned Tradition, than the Order of Bishops is. As for the Presbyteriall Discipline, we can name the Time, the Place, and the Person that began it. The Time, for ought we can finde, was within this last Age; the Place, Geneva; the Person, Iohn Cal∣vin, of whom I will onely say thus much, That he was a wise man, and knowing what was fit and neces∣sary for that Citie, stood not upon Names, so he had the things. But for my owne part, I should be sor∣ry to see any Bishop in this Land have such autho∣rity over other Ministers, as he had at Geneva, or Iohn Knox in Scotland. And therefore for any man or Church to say, that Episcopacy is A Plant that God had not plan∣ted, but that it is Antichristian, is to condemne
all Christians as Antichristian; and to say that Christ has not been rightly worshipped upon the earth, till this last age; which, whether it be a so∣ber and charitable opinion, I submit to conside∣ration. In the meane time, wee account these proofes which follow, insufficient either against Episcopa∣cy, or for the Presbyterie. 1 That the Office of a Bishop, is not found in Scripture, because not in the Epi∣stles to the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians; for it may bee, and is found somewhere else; namely, in those to Timothy and Titus. Secondly, though it were not, it being a matter of practice, discipline, and government, the universall Tradition of the whole Catholique Church, is sufficient to prove it. 2 That all Officers of the New Testa∣ment are designed, and distinguished by Names (but by the way, then where are Lay-El∣ders) therefore there are no Bishops: for we thinke Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, are so di∣stinguished, and that those who are not properly Bishops, are no more called Bishops in Scripture, than those are called Apostles, who are not properly Apostles; Nay this Author sayes so himselfe. For he sayes in one place, that a Pastor, and a Bishop are one thing, pag. 4. line 11. and in another, that an Apostle is in degree before a Pastor, and a Pastor before a Presbyter, and Deacon, pag. 4. line 20. therefore if a Pastor and a Bishop be but one
thing (as indeed the words were anciently used) and a Pastor be in degree before a Presbyter, (as is confessed;) a Bishop also is indeed before a Pres∣byter: which was the thing required to be pro∣ved. This we take to be as good a Demonstration as any in Euclids Elements. That power Ecclesiasticall is not given to one, but to many. If hee meane any Power Ecclesiasticall, wee deny it, for a Presbyter may preach, and administer the Sacraments alone: If hee meane of some onely, the sense will be, only that a Bishop in the laying on of hands, and use of the Keyes, ought to bee assisted by Presbyters; in the former he is already: The other wee shall not much stand upon. In Gods name let it bee so, and then those places of Scripture which seem to give Presbyters a share in imposing of hands, and use of the Keyes, will be no objection. As for that place of Kings of Nations, the sense will bee but this, that those who are greater, i. e. higher in degree than others, ought to doe all things, nor for their owne glory and greatnesse, but for the good and utility of those whom they go∣verne, rather serving them, than ruling them; ac∣cording to our Saviours example, who though he were greater than his Disciples, yet was among them as one that ministred. That all incentives, causes, provocati∣ons, and beginnings of evill are forbidden; wee acknowledge, if they bee in themselves so; and not by the craft and malice of the Devill;
for if so, the Sacraments and Scriptures themselves, the Law and the grace of God, must be removed: For these by his malice have been made so. That the rules of reformation, must be taken from the prime times; if the pattern be a thing framed by God, we grant: but Presbyte∣riall government is not proved such: but that all the Fathers, and all Christians in all ages through∣out the world, have agreed to bring forth Anti∣christ, we cannot beleeve. Nor that Prelacy, and Popery, are unsepa∣able; for the former is in many Churches that detest the later: Yea, according to this Authors sence of Prelacy, even in many Churches of Pro∣testants. And whereas he sayes, that Episcopacie is a step to Popery, those who have read Histories with judgement, may remember that the abasing of Episcopacie, has beene a great and constant de∣signe of the Papacie; and that it was so in the Trent Councell: no one thing having more exalted that Mother of abominations, the See of Rome, than the exempting of Presbyters, as Jesuits and others, from the power and government of Bishops. And I pray God that as villifying of Bishops on the one side, by setting up the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome above them, has begot an Antichristian Mo∣narchie, and tyrannie; so the casting them off on the other, and setting up Presbyters without Bi∣shops over them, doe not produce the greatest confusion, Anarchy, and Schisme, that ever was
yet in the Church of Christ. Which lest it may bee thought, I speake more out of interest than rea∣son, I shall desire this Author to looke over his owne principles once againe, which are these: That whatsoever God has not established in his Church, is unlawfull; but God has not established, that some Pastors should be over others; therefore this is unlawfull. Now (to say nothing of the weaknesse of ei∣ther proposition) I desire him to consider, whether the Divines of New England, doe not hence ra∣tionally conclude, that since no Pastors by Gods Word have authority over others, therefore no Classes, nor no Synods, have authoritie over others; for that every Minister has his power, both of Or∣der and jurisdiction, immediately from Christ Je∣sus; and therefore to him onely, he is responsable for the doctrine that hee teaches, the discipline that hee exercises, and the censures that hee in∣flicts: and therefore though it may sometimes bee usefull for Ministers to meet in Synods to consult; yet, the Decrees they make, being but of humane authority, doe binde none but those who assent to them, and those also no longer than till they alter their opinions, and that therefore for any number of Ministers in a Synod, to take to themselves au∣thoritie over others, who are equall to them in Dig∣nitie, have their commission from Christ, as well as they, and partake of the Spirit as much or per∣haps more than they, (for the Spirit is not tyed to any number) is to set up a humane authoritie
that Christ never instituted, and to exercise a ty∣rannie, and Poperie of the Presbyterie, as bad, nay worse than that of the Bishops. For the Apo∣stles indeed (whose successors the Bishops pretend to be) did meet in a Synod, and make Decrees to binde the Church: but that the Disciples onely or Presbyters ever did so, cannot be proved out of Scripture. Thus this Author may see what is con∣cluded out of his principles, by those who have very logically driven them home to the conclusion, they naturally produce, that is (not from one ty∣rannie to an other) but to an absolute libertie. But as for us, I pray him to remember, that the state of the question between him and us, is not (as hee pre∣tends) whether in the prime times, a Bishop were without a Presbyterie under him, but whether down from the Apostles, a Presbyterie was ever heard of, without a Bishop over it. This is the thing we de∣sire to see solidly proved. That no limitations are sufficient, because those of the Assemblies in Scotland, were not so, is a weake argument. Where Assemblies will not tie, Parliaments may. Whether Prelacy be a cause, or a cure of Schismes; look but into New England, and the divisions that are there among Ministers, and their Churches. That it is easier to root up the tree, than to lop off the branches; is perhaps true: So it is easier to pull down a House, than to repaire it: but
wee consider not what is easiest, but what is best to doe. That that government of the Church is most usefull for Kings, and Kingdomes, which is warranted by Gods Word, which is most for preservation of piety, righte∣ousnesse, and sobriety, which makes the face of the Church and Religion glorious, not with outward pomp like Kings of Na∣tions, but with sound Faith, pure wor∣ship, holy life, which conduceth most for truth, and peace, against schisme and heresie; wee heartily confesse; and together with all the Christians upon the face of the earth (except a few in the West of Europe) wee esteem the go∣vernment by Bishops, to be that government. That it is no good government, which a wise man would not indure in his owne house; wee acknowledge: and wee know who ap∣plyed that saying, first against a Democracie, and thinke it very fit to be retorted upon those, who de∣sire a parity of Ministers; for no wise man would indure a parity in his Family. As for other arguments, that if wee admit not the Presbyterie, there will bee jealousies be∣tween us and Scotland, that there will bee changes and Periods of States, of Families, and Kingdomes; (for these are insinuated in this Book; and some are reported to have said that the
Bishops must downe, or much blood will bee shed) these we think not proofes, but threat∣nings; and fitter for the mouth of a Turkish Dervise, who plants Religion by the sword, than for a Minister of the Gospel of Christ; the summe whereof is Love: and therefore cannot be forced, but perswaded. In the meane time, we desire men seriously to consider, whether it bee not true and proper Popery to persecute Christians, not for publishing but for holding Opinions onely, and in what degree the Presbyteriall government, uses to bee guilty of this pressure and tyrannie upon the soules and consciences of men. As for that Objection, that otherwise there will be a schisme betweene us and the re∣formed Churches (though we are heartily grie∣ved at the name only of such a thing) we answer, that there may bee mutuall charity in those that have a different Discipline; and therefore this argu∣ment has no good consequence. Secondly, that the Church of England, has hitherto had that prudent Moderation, to desire the esteeme and affection, not onely of the reformed, but of all the Prote∣stant Churches, who are more in number, and equall in learning and piety to the Reformed. Thirdly, that it is better for us (if it bee Gods will that the reformed doe continue as they are) to bee divided from them in this particular onely, than from all other Christians of the first three hundred yeeres, under persecution of the Heathen Emperours, to which ancient Church, we desire to
be excused, if we account the late reformation of Scotland, to bee much inferiour in learning, in Piety, in Patience, in Humility, in Charity, and ma∣ny other Christian vertues. That though the Parliament be for Bi∣shops, yet all the godly and religious will be against it; we cannot beleeve till it be made plain to us, that to resist lawfull authority is a matter of godlinesse, or that there is any humility in those that think no Christians are godly and religious, but those who are for the Presbytery. That the reforming abuses in Episcopall govenment will take long time, that we are apt to beleeve; but we think this to be no objection. But that it being a great and a weighty work, and likely to have great influence upon the civill estate, it ought to be a businesse of much debate and long deliberation: and that it imports not so much to be quickly done as well done. Lastly, we think the time of perswasion to bee, not when men by fraud or force shall effect their ends, but when all parties having beene first heard, and their Reasons maturely weighed, things are setled according to Justice and Piety; and this only will produce a setled and well grounded peace, not only for the present, but for future times. And is a con∣sideration well worthy the wisedome, and greatnesse of the English Parliaments. Thus much be said to those who pretend the ne∣cessity, the profitablenesse, and the divine instituti∣on of the Presbyteriall government which they pre∣tend
to introduce; and of the unlawfulnesse of Epis∣copall government which they so eagerly oppose. Now to those who desire a change, and yet con∣fesse their discipline to be a humane institution. I shall humbly desire them briefly to consider of this, whether they can demonstrate the advantage of that they would introduce, to be so exceeding great above this already received (the abuses being reformed) that it will make abundant amends, not only in the present, but in all times to come, for the danger the Change will produce. This that wee have, is rooted in the lawes, the people are inured to it. It has so long agreed with the constitutions of this Monarchy. Nay, it is agree∣able even to that in other states, as in Venice to a Republick. It is the same that almost all Christians are governed by. It has produced men of as great learning and piety, and as able oppugnors of the Ro∣mane Church as any the Christian world affords, and has made our Church so reverenced by the Churches abroad, that in the last Archbishops time, even as farre as from Alexandria, the Patriarch sent a Greek to be educated in our Church, to be thereby better fitted for the government and defence of their own. So ready are all Christians (but the Romane) to desire our Communion, which certainely when we cease to have Bishops, they will cease to doe. Secondly, will the conveniences of the new di∣scipline prove so great in effect, as they are in pro∣mise? or (as it happens in all humane affaires) will not the inconveniences bee much greater in the practice, than they are in the speculation? or though
for the present they doe not, yet will they not fall out, and multiply daily hereafter? Nay, is it not a part of prudence to stay some few yeares at the least, and in the meane time (mending our old discipline as well as we can) to consider, and looke on upon the effects which that new one will produce in our Neighbour Nation. For that the effects of it will not be so great for the temporall happinesse, we have some reason to feare, remembring the great unquietnesse they suf∣fered, even in the height of it. And for the eternall happinesse (which is infi∣nitely more to be weighed) we have some reason also to doubt that this discipline will not produce such marvellous effects as are propounded, since many of us can remember heretofore, that those persons who had been bred from their youth under a Presbyteriall government, though they have beene indeed Persons of great honour and merit, yet have not so very farre exceeded either in Truth or Holi∣nesse or Sobriety, or Chastity, or Charity, or Humi∣lity or Sweetnesse of a religious conversation, those of the same rank in our Nation, who had their breeding under this so much detested Episcopall go∣vernment; neither doe we finde more piety abroad under a Presbytery, than under a perpetuall presi∣dency of protestant Episcopacy or superintendency; and therefore I say, it is well worthy a weighty con∣sideration, whether there be so great an excellency in that above this, as is pretended. As for the objection, that unlesse we receive this new discipline there will bee heart-burnings
between us and the Scotish Nation. I an∣swer, that I am confident that the Commissioners whom they employ, are persons of so great honour and justice, that they will account it as unreason∣able for their discipline to be pressed upon us, as they have done for our Liturgy to be pressed upon them. And that there is no more cause why it should be necessary for us to receive their Ecclesiasticall, than it is to receive their temporall Lawes: they being as much interested to procure with us the change of the one, as of the other. And wee doubt not the wisdome of the English Parliament to be so great, that they can finde a bet∣ter expedient to secure that Nation in their liberty and Lawes Ecclesiasticall and Civill, than by a change of ours heere at home, and by taking away from this Church an Apostolicall Institution which it has retained since its first Christianity. Otherwise the Scotish Church being by their absolute inde∣pendant power at liberty to frame new orders daily, we also shall consequently be obliged ever to con∣forme to them or (by this reason) no peace will be betweene us. Thus have I briefly and in a plaine manner un∣folded my thoughts for the peace of this Church; and such, as I hope will rather bring water than oyle to the flame that is kindled. If the Author of the Book which is here conside∣red, shall think that it is Ambition, and desire of Pre∣eminence that causes this short Treatise, as he has in∣sinuated to be in all who oppose his designe, I shal de∣sire him to remember one thing, & to know another.
To remember, that there may bee as much ambiti∣on in Corah, as in Aaron, and as much pride in refusing to be governed, as in desiring to govern; and to con∣sider whether these two speeches are very unlike (is there none in the Assembly fit to be president but one?) page. 15. line 4. and this, the Congregation is all holy, wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Numb. 16. 3. The thing that I desire him to know is this, that the Person who writes this, is one of them who is to be governed, and not to govern, and therefore would not have written it, had he not bin perswaded that it was most agreeable not only to justice, and equity, but to the holy Scriptures, and all antiquity. And for the light which he saies, pag. 7. has discovered to the reformers, that at the begin∣ning there was no difference of a Bishop from a Presbiter, wee desire him not to be too confident of any light which will not abide the discussion of sober Reason; and does so suspiciously balke all the ancient writers to be Judges of that, (namely whe∣ther a Bishop were above a Presbiter) which they might not only discerne with their minds aswell as we, but even see with their eies, and as it were, experi∣mentally feel with their hands, which we cannot; but rather that he will remember that of the Apostle, that Satan sometimes changes himself into an Angel of light; and causes that to be reverenced as an illumi∣nation, which many times is but an illusion. Lastly to those who are obstinate, to retain what∣soever
is established, I shall onely say this, that false∣hood cannot subsist without some truth to uphold it, that something certainly is amisse that causes this generall and constant clamour, in which the voice of the whole people, being perhaps in some few particu∣lers, the voice of God, As that the Lords day be intirely kept holy by pub∣like prayers, hearing the word, and other exercises of Devotion, That pietie and godlinesse (the sub∣stance of Religion) be more attended than rites and ceremonies, the shadow of it onely, That residence on Benifices with Cure and the instruction of souls be mainely attended; That the Clergie wait diligently on the Spirituall function without hunting after secular imploiments; That the censures of the Church be not issued by Lay-men, and that in them reformation of life be more aimed at: Especially that all Church government be by Rule and Canon, and none left Arbitrarie. it would be a sin in us not to hearken to it, and I fear it is one cause of our chastisements, that we have bin deaf to it so long. And here I cannot but commend in this one par∣ticular, though in some things I must crave leave to diffent from him, the prudent Moderation of the Author of the ANTIREMONSTRANCE, namely, that he fetches his pattern of reformation, not from the times of persecution, nor from the Eastern Em∣pire, being times and circumstances unfit for our Case; but from the times of Charles the Great, a Prince of great valour, and piety, and wisdom, and learning; and governing a people in Customes, and Constitutions not unlike to this of ours. To conclude, that abuses may be taken away and good uses continue, and be restored, is the desire and prayer of all good and wise men; and there being but three things to be considered in the Bishops, their
Order, their jurisdiction, their Persons; the first is an∣tient and universall almost to all Christians: the se∣cond where it is extravagant, may be limited by good and prudent Laws, and their Persons are not so great but the offender may be corrected by a higher Au∣thority. I have done, humbly submitting whatsoever I have written to the judgement of the holy Catholique Church, the Spouse of Christ, to my deare Mother the miserably distracted Church of England, be∣seeching God to amend, and forgive the Au∣thors, and causes of it, and to the wisdom and Justice of the High and most Honourable Court of Parliament. FINIS.
