N1216A 12495798 62498
The Noble SOULDIER's Answer TO Mr. Walker's Speech, IN LONDON-DERRY, Before the last FIGHT. Most Noble and Victorious Governour, I Prostrate my self at your Feet, in behalf of my self, and the rest of my Fellow Souldiers, who are all willing to venture our Lives, and all that is dear to us, in Defence of the Protestant Religion, King William and Queen Mary, this Place, and your Self; whose most Noble Courage, Wise Conduct, Great Success, Divine Orations, Courteous and Obliging Kindness, hath Infus'd into each of us the Hearts of Ten. And You, most Valiant Sir, have exceeded all the great Heroes of our Times: Nay, we cannot compare you to none but a second Sampson, a Goliah, a Hannibal, a Scipio, or rather a Tamberlain, who with but a poor handful of Men, did vanquish and overcome Armies that were innumerable. So when we consider of the small quantity of Men we are to our Enemies, we cannot but be astonish'd and amaz'd at the over-ruling Providence of the Almighty, who hath led us out to Battel, and given us such unheard of Victories over our Idola∣trous Enemies. And now, most Dear Sir, We are again to Encounter our Inhumane Foes: Heaven and you, have whet and sharpened the Teeth of our Hearts and Souls against them; and if every Man had Ten Thou∣sand Lives, we should not grudge, but willingly Sacrifice them all for our Religion, You, and this Place. O with what amazing wonder do we think of their Barbarity! Here is scarce a Tree, Field, or House, but are Witnesses of their Cruelty! They have Painted our Houses,
Water'd our Gardens, Dung'd our Fields, and Colour'd our Rivers with the Bodies and Blood of our most Dear and Christian Parents. And let us look back and behold the Massacres of Paris and Piedmont, as well as of this Kingdom; their Damnable Inquisition, Worshipping of Stocks, and Stones, Ridiculous Pagentry, Invocating Saints, pretended Miracles, Praying for the Dead, allowing common Harlots, Pardons, and many other Diabolical and Idolatrous Practices, not becoming Men professing Christianity. When we think of these their Principles and Practices, we rather think them Turks than Christians, and Devils than Men. And now again, Reverend and Renowned Sir, We are going to Engage the Enemy once more, Our Hearts Bleed within us to think of the Too Great Danger You Expose your Self to, and if you should be Cut off (which we pray God to prevent) we are all lost, and our Hearts will burst our Bodies, and our very Souls will melt away with Heaviness. Besides, Sir, Your very Name is a Terror to them, and an Encouragement to us; and your looks, like Caesars, overcome where ever you approach; Your preservation, is ours; Your de∣struction, is ours. The greatest of our Ambition is, to see You Live and be preserved as the greatest Miracle of our Age, for Valour, Conduct, Piety and Learning. To conclude, We Humbly beg your Pardon, for presuming so much upon your Goodness and Patience; and beg of God to bless, keep, and preserve you in the Day of Battle, and give us Victory over our Enemies. Which God Grant for his Son Christ Jesus sake, Amen. London, Printed for J. W. in Ludgate-street. 1689. FINIS.
