N387 12409242 61469
A DISCOURSE Concerning SCHOOLS And School-Masters Offered to publick Consideration. By M. N. LONDON, Printed for H. H. Anno Dom. 1663.
A Discourse concerning Schools, and School-Masters, Offer'd to publick Consideration. THat the Education of Youth is one of the great∣est concernments of the Nation, is a Truth so obvious to every ordinary understanding, that I shall not need to insist upon the proof of it. Since 'tis plain, that the Scholastick State lays the ground-work and foundation of the other three States, viz. Oeconomical, Ecclesiastical, and Political; wherein the So∣cieties take their measures of goodness and felicity, from the na∣ture of those Methods which were used and that success which hath bin obtained in Schools; all persons generally behaving themselves in their several stations, (which providence fixes them in) according to those Principles their childhood was first season'd with, and that improvement of parts and manners they brought from thence. What is it that furnishes Families with dutiful children, industrious servants, discreet Masters? that supplies the Church with able Teachers, devout Hearers? that keeps Subjects in obedience to their Prince, in a quiet and just demea∣nour towards one another; but the powerful impressions of an early Institution, which being once well settled grow into ha∣bits, and become cor-natural to the temper and very constitu∣tion of the mind, not to be removed without great violence, and the continued efforts of ill company and constant debauches or diabolical infusions. Again, 'tis no less observable, that 'tis eve∣ry mans care and main design, to provide well for his children after him, and to transmit happines to his posterity: and this care is visible enough in their leaving honors and estates many times purchased with their own disquiet and sin to boot. Now let me ask, what those Legacies of the Parents love will avail, what the laws themselves, which by bounding property are to secure those estates to them, will signifie; if our Children that are to suc∣ceed us, are not rightly principled in Piety and Obedience and the rules of honesty, & so prepar'd to a due observance of those Laws; which if not kept by them as well as us, all our care & pro∣vision for them wil come to nought, and the next age that treads
upon our heels, if let loose to licentious or factious practices and opinions, cannot but ruine all the benefits of our Peace, and the interests of our Religion; with this advantage, that their Prede∣cessours must bear the blame of those miscarriages which pro∣ceeded from a neglected education of their children. Nay, I shall appeal to the Story of our late villanous changes, whether a few phanatick ill-principled spirits may not get partly power to destroy, partly credit to corrupt the rest of their fellow sub∣jects from known rules of duty; as frequently those currs, which spend upon a wrong scent, are apt to mislead the whole pack. This being, as it is amongst all men, who guide themselves by reason, agreed on; It may justly provoke the admiration of any considering person, that all sorts of people should be so re∣miss in this point, that amongst other provisions they seem to look upon education as the least necessary, and think that charge lost which is spent in breeding their children; which their ex∣tream lavishness on other occasions and their sordid thrift in this doth abundantly testifie. Res nulla minoris Constabit Patri, quàm Filius. Nothing shall stand the thrifty Dad In less then th' breeding of his Lad. Not to mention those of quality, & take notice only of the rabble we meet with in the streets; it must needs pity any Christian heart to see the little dirty Infantry, which swarms up and down in Alleys and Lanes, with curses and ribaldry in their mouths, and other ill rude behavior, as if they were intended to put off their humanity, and to degenerate into brutes. What hopes may we en∣tertein of posterity, when the better sort are sent over to forreign Schools of vice, to learn fashions, to court mistresses, dance à la mode and swear with a grace; and the worser sort are sent no whither, but learn to imitate and outdo those sorry examples they have at home. Nor is this neglect to be charged only upon particular per∣sons in their private sphere; but the publick also may be thought to partake in the same guilt: when we consider 'tis the only way to ascertain to our posterity the fruits of our late blessed and wonderful Restauration, and that so little has bin done towards it, and that that little too has bin so little look'd after and ob∣serv'd. Indeed it must be confess'd, that the Publick Counsels have
in the main bin very worthy and just and industrious in order∣ing the great concerns of our peace, and in re-estabishing the Church in its antient Revenue and Reverence. And somthing by the by has bin toucht at for the Catechizing of Youth, for the Masters abjuration of Covenant and subscription to Church Or∣ders. But that either so imperfectly worded, as to afford an easie evation; or so poorly put in execution through negligence or corruption of Officers, that the law had as good never bin made. I do not speak this with any imputation to the Henourable Assembly of Parliament; but with some resentment of this in∣advertency bewail the fate of Schools, (which either have no patrons or their patrons no will to assist & promote their cōcern∣ments) and pity the condition of posterity, which is no neerer lookt to, no better provided for. It must be acknowledged, our worthy Patriots have business enough before them, to fill their hands and hearts, to take up their thoughts, and to imploy their discourses. But when I find grievances of a meaner alloy consi∣dered and redressed; I could not but conclude, that they would in their wisedome have judg'd (had there stood up any one to represent) School-grievances and fraud and cozenage in that Mystery of as great and ill a Conse∣quence to the publicke, and as worthy their debate and a speedy remedy as many of those which are come into Acts. Whereupon in the silence of all others, I thought my self obliged to take notice of this subject, and rather to extimulate some o∣ther, who being better acquainted with these things may make out further discoveries, then out of any confidence of an ability in my self to speak much to purpose in a thing of such moment, I have adventured to tender to publick consideration my unpo∣lished thoughts concerning the ordering of Schools to the bene∣fit and improvement of Youth, and the advancement of Learn∣ing and Religion. And first, to speak of Stipend: reward being the very life of action, and the main incouragement of diligence. Quis enim virutem amplectitur ipsam, praemia si tollas? For who imbraces virtue's self, If you take away the pelf? 'Tis the Salary which makes Schools and Learning flourish. Chi ben paga ben impara, sayes the Italian. The conscience of doing publick service, and satisfaction of discharging ones duty, is not a sufficient recompence for the toil of teaching. In Courts
of Law and equity no under-Clerk or inferiour Officers place, but may vie, for the profits of it, with the fairest pension of any publick School. Ministers themselves, who instruct us to expect fu∣ture rewards, yet without a fair present maintenance would fall into the contempt of the vulgar, and their labours prove ineffe∣ctual. And this is the case of Schools: no imployment more publickly useful, none more toylsome and painful; yet no one more sleighted even to reproach; no one less rewarded or regar∣ded. 'Tis a great scandal to the Nation, and certainly as great a grievance (if rightly considered) that no one sort of men are greater sufferers in this kind, then Schoolmasters. Yet this must be said in commendation of our Ancestours, that their provision was very competent, and that the indowment of Schools was in proportion to the estates of those times very fair and honorable. When workmen wrought for a penny a day; when that Land which is now worth 40. or 50. s. an Acre, was then thought a dear bargain at ten groats; when every thing was cheap but money; forty pound per Annum was a fair livelyhood, and bet∣ter then, then 200. l. now perhaps. But what do we add to our forefathers stock? The Trustees and Governours in the several Corporations share the Improvements amongst themselves, take all above the Salary for lawful prize, and leave the Master to the bare old allowance, notwithstanding the vast increase of the old Rents. So that by this means Schools are become Impropri∣ations, and lay men (ignorant fellows) run away with the in∣couragements of Learning, & receive the rewards of the Masters industry. This abuse would deserve the Parliaments notice, and a severe account to be taken of the Revenues of Schools; which might be done by requiring all Masters and Governours to give in a perfect Inventory of School-Lands, Houses, &c. with their yearly value, and setling accordingly an honourable Salary up∣on the Master, with reasonable abatement for Repairs and the Charges of the Overseers. This course would invite men of e∣minent parts and abilities into School-work; whereas now 'tis made the Sanctuary of many idle insufficient persons, who have no hopes elsewhere; or by those, which have any merit, design'd a step to some Church-preferment. It cannot then be expected, as things are, that the Schools of this Nation (excepting some few, which are Illustrious, and of Royal Foundation) should be in any tolerable condition.
Having taken notice of the mean support and slender mainte∣nance, let us next take a view of the Methods of teaching used in Schools; and see what disorders may be met with in them. I shall not pretend to be able to judge and give definitive Sen∣tence, what is the best method; though we ought to have that regard to Antiquity and the custom of former times, that we are to be very tender, how we prefer our own novell conceits to their tried and approved usages; and that we do constantly ad∣here to that method and way which their practice, back'd with publick authority, hath chalked out to us, till authority do re∣commend another. They do almost in all Countries entertain the same Grammar, and go by a certain rule of teaching; De∣spauter obtains in France, Alvarez in Spain; and all England over heretofore, Lilly and Camden were in the hands of Youth. And indeed there is the same reason for Ʋniformity in School, as in Church: the variety of Methods (supposing they were all se∣verally in themselves very good) doing very much mischief, by not only distracting young heads, and discouraging them, and putting them back upon their removes to new Masters; but also making a fundamental difference in their course as they proceed to other studies. I have heard that a Bishop, at an examination in a publick School, receiving an answer out of the common road, from a child, which had come lately from a private School, made this Reply, What, says he, Puritanism in Schools too? And so it is with us now, since these licentious times have overthrown all order, and broken us into so many sects and factions; the Schools have been infected with that Fanatick Itch, and like In∣dependent Congregations have bin variously administred by new Lights, according to the fancy of the several Teachers, that I dare say there are as many Grammars taught as there are Grammari∣ans to teach, if not more. It would be well if these loos brooms were gather'd again, if not into the old, yet into some one Model. 'Tis likely enough the old way may have some inconvenience, many defects and redundancies; why may not the same course be taken by us, as by the States of Holland, who upon such an occasion imployed Vassius to revise and mend and complete the old Grammars both Greek and Latine, which are now accord∣ingly read in the Low-Countrey Schools; or, for better sa∣tisfaction, what if the Convocation would please to order some of their number, taking to their assistance some of the most able
Masters, well experienced in teaching, either to correct what is amiss in the old Institution, or to draw up a new body of Rules and System of that Art, with the advantage of later inventions. It would be a thing not unworthy the care of Church-men, and that for which posterity would pay thanks to their memory. Some eminent Divines in former ages have descended to that care, Dr. Collet, Dean of Pauls, Erasmus, Card. Woolsey, &c. In the mean time, I shall appeal to any man of sober Judgement, whether it be consistent with the Nations good, to banish schism out of the Church, and countenance it in Schools; and whether our English Youth, which is thus nursed up in faction, is like to be well taught. When the Stipends and Methods are thus established, I should further propose, that there should be no allowance for any one whatsoever to keep a private School upon his own account, un∣less it be the Clerk of the Parish, whose office it should be (with an allowance for it) to teach all the Children of the Parish at certain hours each day to write and reade, and that by the direction and under the inspection of the Minister; and on Sa∣turdays to prepare thē for their publick answering in the Church to the Catechise-question: and that when children are thus far instructed in their own Parish, they should be then sent to some publick School, unless the Parent were of an Estate to keep a Tutor (to be approved by the Bishop) in his house, or were of so low a fortune, that he could not be at the charge of breeding his Child a Scholar. For without question many of those whif∣fling undertakers, that appear not in publick Stations, but ven∣ture out upon their own private bottom, besides that they drain the publick Schools, to their great hindrance and discouragement, Citizens being easily pleased with any thing that is new-fangled; may very well be suspected to have no honest warrantable de∣sign, if they be well inquired into. I shall readily crave pardon of any one which shall be injured in that information which I have received; but must think my self oblig'd▪in justice to the publick, to let it be understood, what ill offices may be done it (as I have heard) in private. There are at this time about the City several Masters of private Schools, which have bin and are still Covenanters, Presbyterians, Non-Conformists; some of whom have been outed out of their other mens places for Schism: who yet are incouraged by the confluence of youth from the City, and
the favour of some Noble Families: One at Clapham. One at Totenham High-Cross. One or two at Chelsey. One or two at Newington. One at least at Hackney, &c. and so (as I am told) throughout the whole Kingdom those of that party are designing the same course. Whether this be the fault of the under-Officers, a sort of men that by ill execution of good Lawes have alwayes brought an odium upon the Episcopal Au∣thority, which imployes them, and the sacred Order it self, up∣on which they depend: or whether it be the craft and cunning of those Merchants of the Faction, who rather then sit out will play any game, I am not able to discern; Authority may be satisfied, if it may be at leasure but to make the inquiry. However, it hath a very ill face, and portends unluckily e∣nough to the peace of the Nation, that there are suffered such Seminaries of Faction, as if it were designed, that Posterity should retrive the Good Old Cause, and the Children should car∣ry on the Work of the Lord in the following Generation, which hath proved too hot in ours (Thanks be to God) for the Father's fingers. Will not these suffering Brethren have a fair Opportunity of being revenged on the Reverend Fathers of our Church, for their severity in turning them out of un∣just Livings, by training Youth to a contempt of Church-Authority and Order, and keeping on foot Nurseries (like Barksteads Regiment) of those who may hereafter make up a Schismatical Army? My Lords, You had much better have continued them in the Pulpit; they will do ten times more mischief now amongst the Lambs, then they could have done amongst the Sheep. What they did then, was like stealing of standing Corn out of the Field, but rubbing the Ears; but what they do now, is stealing the Seed, the next years Crop, which the Civil Law hath determined to be a far greater theft. They have suffi∣ciently spoiled the present Age, must they now be turned loose to spoil the next Age too? If those Spirits by their Religious canting could carry away Men and Women from their Obedi∣ence to the Father of their Country, and from the bosom of their Mother the Church, ah! My Lords, Are they to be trusted with the Children? I am of Opinion, that if the Vicar General would instead of School-Licences give them Licences
to practise Physick, he might doe the whole Nation  good Office: For by this means, those of their own Tribe be∣ing the onely persons that would probably make use of them, they might in some reasonable time give a fair account of the whole Fraternity; as we use to rid our houses of Rats, by teach∣ing one to eat Rats flesh, and then hanging a Bell about his neck he will never give over till he have ferreted all the gang away. In good earnest, it would be more prudent to advise his Majesty to allow all that have suffered in that kind, and are otherwise unprovided, (which will not be many) a mode∣rate Pension out of his Exchequer, then thus to admit them to an imployment, which may be of so dangerous a Consequence to the publick Peace. And whereas they pretend not to inter∣smeddle with the Instruction but leave that to a little Officer, some puny Fellow they get from the Ʋniversity, who may sub∣scribe according to the Act, while themselves keep their own Conscience free to the Godly Design: besides, that it is plain enough what danger there is in their very Converse and Exam∣ple, in their Hums and Haws, in their Graces and Family-Exercises; it being so familiar with Men of that Principle, to sow Sedition in their very Prayers, and to make Religion it self a Stale to Faction: I say, besides this, it will be found upon inquiry that they do too execute the Teaching Part, by spending considerable portions of their time in examining and taking account how their Children profit; though this must be said in their behalf, that for their teaching of Letters there is not that fear of a Presbyterian's doing much mischief, seeing it may be supposed they cannot be very comunicative of what most of them have not; but it is believed, it was the intention of that Act to take from them the Opportunity of spreading the Leaven of their Factious and Disloyal Opinions, which they can more effectually do in the Duties of the Family: And it may be easily guessed by the Relations, on what errand those Children are sent to such Masters or Landlords, namely, that they may learn to fear God, and disobey the King and the Church, (as their Fathers before them have done.) I am somwhat the more earnest on this Subject, because it must be confessed, that those who were censured unfit for Church-work, ought to be judged much less fit for the work of the School: and if the
Priests are denied to the Fathers, much more should the Chil∣dren be kept from them, unless we would verifie that Pro∣verb, that The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and now the Childrens teeth must be set on edge. To come then to the last and chiefest Consideration; How School-Masters themselves are to be qualified, that they may laudably perform the great Trust and Duty which is charged upon them. What difficulties the Work hath in it, to encoun∣ter all kind of Tempers, and improve all sorts of Wits, to be ingeniorum & morum artifices, to fashion Minds and Manners, to cultivate rude Soil, and dispose Youth to Virtuous behaviour against their Natural inclinations; what cares and pains, what great abilities of Prudence and skill and all Virtue, what a Cycle of Knowledge it requires to instruct others in the grounds of Literature, to raise their Parts, to heighten their Fancy, to fix their thoughts, and to crane their Genius to the pitch, and so prepare them for publick Service, is a thing more easily dis∣coursed then considered, more talked of then taken notice of. It is a great wonder of Providence, when we look on the pre∣sent Constitution of Schools, how much contempt, and how little incouragement is shewn to the Profession, that there are any able and worthy men of that way; and sure whoever they are, it was at first not the spontaneous Election of their own mind, but some outward necessity of Fortune, or some other Fatality that condemn'd them to those Galleys, and tied them to that Oare, seeing those that are ingaged do most upon the stocke of their own credit work through the flint: So true is that, Quem Jupiter odit, Paedagogum facit. To whom a spite▪ Jove takes, Him Paedagogue he makes. Were Parents obliged but for some time to the trouble of instructing their Children, (they think it trouble enough to have them in the same house;) they would quickly be con∣vinced, what respects were fit to be paid to him, who under∣takes
such a charge, and what pardon he would deserve at their hands for small failings, when themselves cannot secure them from great ones. But were the forementioned course taken, of proportioning the Salaries to the improvement of Rents, there is no question to be made, but Schools might be well provi∣ded with gallant and able men, who might discharge that Na∣tional trust with brave success, and yet with great Splendour and much ease. Were that done, young Scholars at the Ʋniversitie would prepare themselves for School, as for a handsome Prefer∣ment; whereas now nothing but pure necessity can put them upon that way: They would practise to talk Latine fluently, that they might readily entertain any stranger, (which now many that have the Reputation of good Scholars are but clumsy in) and poure forth Verses and Declamations extempore; they would study the Classical Authours thoroughly and digest them, acquaint themselves with all the Critical parts of Phi∣lology, and the Elegancies of the Language, and the Cu∣stoms of Antiquity: How many Erasmusses, and Melan∣cthons, and Scaligers, and Puteans, and Vossiusses, should we have amongst us in a short time, if Literature were but thus encouraged? whereas now generally the Pulpit is made their ultimate Design; and when they set once a preaching, they lay their studies of Humanity aside. Before I part with this, I must not forget one thing, which I take to be a main Cause of the Masters toil, and the Scholars non-proficience; that as Schools now are, the Ma∣ster takes too much upon him, and more then he can possi∣bly with any credit discharge: For you shall see in most Schools but a Master and an Usher, and sometimes but one set over a Company of Boyes, whose Capacities and Inge∣nies may be sorted perhaps into seven or eight Classes. It is not possible one or two men, (let them work their hearts out) should suffice to this Duty: Wherefore, if it were so ordered that every great School might have for each Form a Master, who might be as the Intelligence of that Sphere, and wheel it about with him through the whole Encyclopedy of School-Learning, (with a Rector or President over them all) the work would go on with great facility and cheerfulness, and no less success.
This is the course which the Jesuites take, and which makes them look'd on as the greatest Masters of breeding up Youth: And this would be very feasible, to have in every great Town almost such a School, at least one or two in a County. To instance. What were it for Kings-Colledge to supply Eaten-School, New-Colledge to supply Winchester-School with half a dozen young Masters, who might, as they ripened each his Com∣pany, return back to his Colledge, and there, if his Superiours shall judge fit, go on with those that are taken for the Ʋni∣versity, through the course of Philosophy: And so out of Christ-Church in Oxford, and Trinity in Cambridge, seven or eight, or half a score young men would not be mist; who if they were imployed in Westminster-School, which furnishes both thos Colledges, might by dealing the work amongst so many hands make it very light and prosperous; and so of other Free-Schools, especially those that send Scholars to certain Col∣ledges. And this would be a pretty Introduction of young Ma∣sters of Arts and Batchelours into the World, and prepare them for a serious Scene of Action; and keep them from growing musty in the Ʋniversitie, where Colledge-Com∣mons, and the Walks, (if not good fellowship) indispose many for the Duties of an Active life; and to say Truth, what have they those Fellowships and Allowances for, but to serve the publick, which they cannot do better at first setting out then in this way. And for places of lesser note, Servi∣tors, when they are arrived at Degrees, may be sent to Offi∣ciate for a time appointed, and not have Orders present∣ly given them, and to be put to their shifts (as heretofore) in the Ministry, when their necessities recommended them to Presbyterian Families or poor populous Corporations, where for a livelyhood they studied placentia, preached down the Church and preached up the Kirk: for it hath been obser∣ved, that your factious little Chaplains, and the Lecturers of your great Towns proved the Boutefeus of our late Troubles. There being one or two such Schools in each County, how easily will the Gentry fall in, how readily the other sort of people, especially if such Schools have some Colledges in ei∣ther Ʋniversity allotted for their preferment upon solemn
Probations; which may be easily contrived without breach of any Statute. Nay, many Colledges we see are already so allotted, as those I mentioned before: so Saint Johns▪ for Merchant Taylors: Jesus Colledge for the Welsh: Exceter for Devonshire men, &c. and why may not the rest be so ordered? And then for places of lesser Note, as little Market-Towns, &c. where there is great number of Children, and some that their Parents would wish should do more then barely write and read, which we suppose is the Clerks work to teach them: there as was said before, may be one or two meaner persons with a less Salary, who may be stinted too in their work; so as to teach onely Latine according to Grammar-Rule: for those who would design further, should be obliged to attend the great Schools; and no other School should have Priviledge to fit Scholars for the Ʋniversitie, by which means there would be a great concourse thither; and if the Gentry were nume∣rous, there might be provided Masters of other Faculties to take up their leasure hours and intervals of study; viz. A Catechist, an Arithmetician, a Writing Master, a Master of Fence, a Dancing Master, Musick Masters, a Rider of the great Horse; some old Souldier to teach them their Postures, and to handle their Arms, &c. And besides this (which is the other advantage of your boarding Schools) the benefit of Aire might be procured, in the Summer quarter at least, by removing two or three miles out of the Town to some con∣venient seat, which might with those Improvements easily be purchased; as also other requisites provided for the ease and Reputation of the Masters, and the benefit & advantage not of the Scholars alone, but of those Towns also where the Schools are kept. Nor would this Academical way tend at all to the diminution of the Ʋniversities, but much advantage them in their Repute, by certain constant Homages from all the Schools in the Nation, holding from them in Capite, governed by their Missionaries, and by their Rules; and at last accord∣ing to their demerit upon Trial, expecting Preferment from them; to which Repute the mutual Emulation of the Masters in their several Provinces being alwayes in Fluxu, and not Stationary; and the account that they must make to the Col∣ledge which sent them, would very much conduce. Now
those Provinces or Classes might be ordered according to the several Stages, Scholars go in their School-learning, after some such Draught as this: The first Classe, Grounds of Grammar, declining Nouns and Verbs. The second, Congruitie of Latine. The third, Proprietie and Phrase. The fourth, Oratory and Rhetorick. The fifth, Poetry and Verse. The sixth, Greek grounds. The seventh, Dialect. The eighth, Antiquity and Philology. But this Course may be left either to the Arbitrary discretion of the present Master, or else Regulated by the Head and Seni∣ors of the Colledge, to which that School shall appertain ac∣cording to occasion. To make short, this last Paragraph is offered as a Scheme on∣ly upon sudden thought, on purpose to suggest to some more ingenious and better experienced Head, to find out an expe∣dient for preventing the Masters toyl, and yet assuring the suc∣cess: Nor hath the whole Discourse any other Design, then barely to represent some inconveniences in the managing of Schools, which are very visible to any one, but have not been taken publick notice of by any; not that the Writer of this is at all an Opiniator of himself, or hath the confidence of ob∣truding his crude and undigested Sense upon the great Council of the Nation, or hath indeed any concernment in the Grie∣vance, further then his own Children, whom he shall provide for, whether this have any effect or no; or can entertain any great hope to have this Paper considered or lookt on by any of those who may be concerned in the Redress; much less was it in his aim to level Satyre at any one, any otherwise then honestly to discharge his own burthened thoughts, in resentment of
that which his mind told him deserved to be the Object of a publick care, with the same Freedome as he thought them. And if any one find himself aggrieved at the Writer, he must not blame him for having a greater tenderness for the publick good, then for any private person; and withal let him take this Character of him, that he is one bears that love to his Country, that Faith to his Prince, that Reverence to the Church, and that Honour for all true Worth and Desert, that he shall not be grieved himself to see his own Interest, his Reputation and dearest Concerns lie bleeding for their sakes; and will readily allow his forgiveness for any unkindness any one shall do him upon such a score. Much more might be said concerning the Exercises, especial∣ly such as are to be performed publickly; and concerning the Discipline of Schools by reward and punishment: wherein I should particularly advise that whipping might be, if not totally laid aside, at least very sparingly used, and that upon Moral transgressions; as Swearing, Thieving, &c. and then too by the hand of some Servant, the Bedle or Lictor of the School; as an Office in it self servile, not at all beseeming either Gen∣tleman or Divine to execute; or indeed becoming any thing of Ingenuity, either to act or suffer. Indeed the great indiscre∣tion and intemperance of Masters in that, hath brought a very great contempt and hatred upon the Profession it self: and not to speak of the ill use some have made of it to lewdness (of which Instances are not wanting, but that they are odi∣ous) it being a kinde of uncovering nakedness: it doth ge∣nerally more hurt then good, by making those that are dull more dull, and dispiriting the ingenious; and truly, wicked Boys (to whom it properly belongs) are by the frequency and commonness of it hardened; and being grown after a while shameless, and senseless of the Rod, having past the last remedy (as this is accounted) doe become incurable: where∣as such are to be kept in a course of Discipline, as not to be mended with the most severe inflictions of present smart, which is quickly worn off. To these Heads, and other Expedients, I do not want store of Observations taken up both abroad from other Countries, and at Home, in our own: but think it best to reserve them
till some other time, if occasion shall be offered. Again, I consider, this is but a needless work peradventure: for when Salaries are improved, the Grounding Methods settled, and Masters well qualified, as to their Abilities and Affections, these Masters will in their several Companies for Superstru∣cture and Discipline, and other Prudential wayes, better pos∣sibly consult for themselves, then any by-stander can. Let me add, that in that Method by me laid down, there is not any prejudice in the least intended to those Masters, who are at present in Possession of publick Schools; but on the con∣trary great advantage of Ease, of Honour, and of Profit. For supposing the number of Schools should be reduced to that paucity there mentioned, out of those Masters might be chosen the Scholarcha or Rector of each School, and his Col∣leagues too, pro hâc vice, whose single Forms would bring them in better returns, then their whole huddle of Scholars doth now. Those of the lesser note might be planted in the lesser Towns, and nothing to their loss. After these old standers were worn off the Stage, then Ʋniversitie men might take their Qu. I shall Conclude with an humble Address to those in place and Power: (it being not impossible that some such may chance to let fall their Eye upon this Paper.) That the Honourable Court of Parliament would, as they tender the Peace of three Kingdoms, and the preservation of their own good Laws, lay to heart, and take into serious Con∣sideration the necessity of wholsome Institution for our Children; that they would give publick Schools a publick Countenance, and remove those Grievances, which they labour under, by settling handsome Salaries, and establishing some kind of Uniformity; That they would not suffer those seeds to be scattered in the minds of Youth, which have in these late years produced such a Harvest of mischiefs and confusi∣ons; (upon this ground, that Royal Clemency is to be li∣mitted to Persons, not to be extended to Principles:) That they would take up that Noble Design of perpetua them∣selves in a well bred Posterity: and Lastly, That they would not be slow in a Business of so great and quick Concernment;
the hopes of the next Age lying at stake, Children grow¦ing up into Men apace; and what is taken in now being hardly cured hereafter, the Elder sort affording very few examples of Conversion. That especially, the Right Reverend the Bi∣shops, would not onely provide for the Sheep, but take care that the Lambs may be fed, as the great Shepheard and Bishop gives them Order: That they would in their Dio¦ceses Visit Schools, as well as Churches, and incourage Youth in Vertue: That they would please to use their Power for dete¦cting the Frauds of Trustees, and for restoring to Schools thei Rights: And in fine, That they would injoyn their Ordi¦naries to be very strict and careful what Masters they admit how they are qualified, and affected to present Governmen both of Church and State: For he that is an Enemy of on can be no Friend to the other: And to call, especially all pri¦vate Teachers, and School-Masters (what ever their pretenc may be) to a publick Account; it being found a task al¦most impossible by all Methods the Church of England ca¦use to recover those persons to a sound Orthodox Sense whose Childhood hath been poysoned, and prepossessed with Schism. FINIS.
