N76 R10204 11817191 49539
A Modest CENSURE OF THE Immodest Letter TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of His Majesty's late Gracious DECLARATION FOR Liberty of Conscience. By T. N. a true Member of the Church of England. Published with Allowance. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor. 1687.
A Modest Censure of the Immodest Letter to a Dissenter, &c. SIR, THE Letter to a Dissenter by T.W. which you sent me the last Week, I have perused, and find it very spitefully en∣deavoring to persuade the Dissenters, 1. To suspect the Kindness of His Majesties late Gracious Declaration; And 2. To use their Interest against the Establishment of that Liberty by Law, which he therein Graciously Indulges to all His Subjects. The Letter it self is like a Pleasure-Boat, richer in the Trimming than in the Lading. The Language of it, I confess, is very smooth and Gen∣tile, but his Suggestions are too sowre and severe, and his Style too sharp when it touches upon the Government; nor could any Man speak so Evil of Dignities (as he do's) without Scandal, even tho' it could be said with truth. The Character T. W. gives of himself in the first Page, is, That he is a Protestant at large, who will not let his thoughts for the Public be so ty'd or confin'd to any Subdivision of them, as to stifle his Charity, which is become so necessary at this time for their mutual Preservation; and yet one would think by his Letter, that his tender Conscience had catch'd the Cramp with his too much stretching, and that he was insensible of what dropt from his Pen; for after he had charg'd the King with the worst of Crimes, One that would not only falsifie his Word with them at first, but give them no Quarter at last, and drawn his Picture like one of the Squint-ey'd Italian Pieces, which present us with a Saint on the one side, and a Monster on the other, and the Church of England with haughtiness, and the rigidness of her Prelates towards Dissenters, and the Spirit of Persecution, he would make us believe, pag. 4. that no sharp∣ness was in his Style, nor any Gaul mingled with his Ink, because Heal∣ing was the only thing he intended, and that he would not expose any par∣ticular Men, how strong soever the Temptation might be, and how clear the
Proofs to make it out, whereas in truth, for what appears to me by his Lower, his Skill seems Chiefly to lie in a quick Hand for Lancing and Cut∣ting; and pag. 3. he is the worst at Healing of any Writer that ever pretended to it; Never any State-Mountebank offer'd more improper Plaisters for Tender Consciences, and should he ever set up his Protestant Bills, I should rather send the Dissenters to his Friend Burnet or Fergu∣son, than to him, for a Cure of their Distempers, neither of which ever Preach'd up more Vengeance against the Church of England, pag. 5. than he has done, at which, he must forgive me, if I am both surpris'd and provok'd, and startled to have an Eye upon him; for when a Man comes so quick from the one Extreme to the other in such an unnatural Motion, he has taught me how much it concerns me to be upon my guard, pag. 3. I can as little guess at the Author's Religion, as at his Name; he seems to me to be some degraded Courtier, who having been outed of his Employment, begins to Harangue upon what he has lost, and to satis∣fie, not his Reason, but his Revenge, resolves to plume his towring Fancy over the King's and Churches Interest, and doubts not but to make a Prey of both in the end, if by his Seditious Methods he can hin∣der a good Correspodence between the King and his two Houses of Par∣liament, when he shall think sit to call them, or at least to make him∣self more considerable than now is he, by being troublesom; whatsoever he be, I dare say he is no legitimate Son of the Church of England, nor will she ever give him her Blessing, till he beg the King's and her Pardon for the Disloyalty of this Letter. Now, tho' I am not at all accountable for the Dissenters, whose Separati∣on from the Church of England I have always lamented and condemned; yet my just zeal for that Church, makes me impatient to find one who pre∣tends to be of her Communion, by his sly Insinuations Libelling both the Government and Her too. The Father's danger makes Craesus's dumb Son to speak; and on what better occasion can I (hitherto a silent Spectator) begin to speak, than for the Vindication of the Father of my Country, and my dear Mother, which will, I hope, Apologize for all my other Weaknesses, whilst I represent to you, how ill it becomes a Member of the Church of England, to persuade any Subjects into an ill Opinion of their Prince, and to represent Her as an Enemy to his Clemency to any of his Subjects, of what Persuasions soever in Religion. I begin with the First Design of this Letter, which is to persuade the Dissenters into a suspicion of his Majesties Kindness. This is the first thing he offers to their Consideration, pag. 2. What reason they
have to suspect their new Friends. Now by the sequel of the Discourse it is manifest, that by their new Friends he means those whom the Decla∣ration represents for their Friends, and that being the King's Declaration, it's the King and his Council, whom he must needs mean by their New Friends, and consequently it is the King's Expression of Kindness to them in his Declaration, that he would have them to suspect. But how ill such a Design becomes a Member of the Church of England is very apparent. For she hath always taught her Children not only, not to Resist, but to Honor the King, and consequently never allows them to speak evil of, much less (upon weak Surmises) to charge him with the basest Disin∣genuity, viz. a Design to cheat all that trust him. At his Majesties first approach to the Throne, we all unanimously concluded it our Duty to believe and trust to his Royal Promise, and seem'd with a becoming Zeal to suspect the Loyalty of all such as distrusted in the least the sincerity thereof. And what reason can we have to be weary of well doing? There was a time when we thought any, the least diffidence in the King's repeated Promises to be the most disobliging thing in the World, and such as would be resented accordingly; we had then Courage and Conscience enough to stick to our Principles, and shall we now be so easily frighted out of our Wits and Loyalty, as some Neuter-passive-Royalists are, whom we see driven from their old Principles, as some silly Birds are from their Food by Men of Clouts, an empty windy Noise, or a sensless Scare∣crow dress'd up by any Pamphleter, who envies their Happiness. O fool∣ish Galatians, you did run well at first, who has hindred you of late from holding on in the same good old way of Duty to God and the King, who has been Indulgent to you beyond a President, and done no∣thing to disoblige you, but in keeping you from biting and devouring one another you know not why? And who will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good? I am one of those, who am so valiant as to have none of those Fears and Jealousies about me which our Author speaks of, nor do I think, that he himself who acts this timorous Part before the Dis∣senter, do's believe himself, but only pretends it, in pursuance of some other dark Designs, for which his Letter (as black as it is) would blush if they should be brought to light. The King has done all things that in him lies, to create a Confidence in him, and all things conspire to give us Ease, Satisfaction and Security, if we are not wanting to our selves; and therefore we have great reason to be extreamly pleas'd and oblig'd, and to shew the Nation (that part of it which is without, as well as that within the Pale of the Church) that we are so; for this is such a piece
of Good Manners as will be a ian Duty, and not a Court Complement; and the Vertue of it is the gloater, because it is now become necessary for the preservation o the Church of England, and the justification of her avow'd Principles of Loyalty. We have hitherto been taught absolute and uncondition'd Obedience for Conscience sake, and practis'd it in oppo∣sing the black Bill of Exclusion, for which our Divinity as well as our Policy was arraign'd by some such Protestants at large, as the Author of this Letter, at least our want of Foresight and palpable Inadvertency. And shall we not now retain the same Integrity and Wisdom, and the same Con∣sciences void of offence towards God and Man? Wherein hath our Gra∣cious Sovereign been worse than his Word to us? Ours is the National Religion still, our Revenues and Privileges are as great as ever, our Churches are as well fill'd, our Sacraments as much frequented, our Mini∣sters as much respected, at least, as they were in the late King's time, the present State of the Church of England is as flourishing as ever we knew it, and so Exemplary is the King's Self-denyal in the Exercise of his own Religion, that he hath not taken any one Church or Chappel throughout the Kingdom for himself, or those of his own Communion, which was ever dedicated or appropriated to ours by Law, so little cause do's he give us of Repining, and so much of Rejoycing and Gratitude. The first Reformers in Germany (as whoever peruseth Sleidan's Com∣mentaries may observe) repeated their Addresses of Thanks to the Em∣peror, as oft as he renew'd his Promise of Protection: and when some∣thing had been done in the Chamber of the Empire, that seem'd to them an infringement of former Grants,Sleid. Comment. l. 10. Edit. Ar∣gentor. 8. p. 292. and some sug∣gested his Design to oppose them by a War, upon his Gracious Declaration, in a Letter to them, of his Reso∣lution still to Protect them, they made a new Address of Thanks for delivering them from their new Fears, by renewing his Promise. And tho' in like Circumstances some of the Church of England, who had put such Bounds to their good Breeding, as our Author cautions others to do, prov'd resty, and refus'd to repeat their grateful Acknowledgments for his Majesty's late Gracious Declaration to Protect them in the first place, lest such an innocent and usual piece of Good Manners should be interpreted to be the Approbation of the King's whole Declaration; yet others acted more agreeable to the forecited President, by renewed Addresses on that occasion: whereby they declar'd, that they still believ'd him sincere in, and faithful to his Promise, notwithstanding all the Suspicions, that by Malecontents were whisper'd to the contrary.
And let the World judge, whether  have not acted more agreeable to the Loyal Principles of the Church o England, than this Author, who not only suspects the Ingenuity of his Sovereign's Promise, but writes on purpose to propagate his Suspicions among the rest of his Fellow Subjects. They cannot by Words or Writing treat the King worse, who have an opinion of his Idolatry, than he do's; nor can the Church of Rome her self be worse at Healing than he is, who pretends so much to it; and therefore 'twill be fit for Dissenters to pause upon his Methods, before they believe them, or have so good an opinion of them or him, as not to be upon their guard when he accosts them, like one fully resolv'd that his over-merits of the Crown should never do him prejudice. And if it be Moral Parricide to wound the Reputation of him whom these three Kingdoms deservedly Honor for their Common Parent, and Father of their Country (except his licencious Pen can give us a Dispensation for that too, and secure us by a Non obstante to the Divine Law, that God will not think the worse of us for it) the true Sons of the Church of England will not take his Judgment to be any intellectual Standard, nor be seduc'd into so crying a Sin by his subtil Devices. His whole Letter be∣trays such groundless Fears and Jealousies of the King, and drives on an Interest so very destructive to the Crown and Church of England (of which I profess my self to be a Member) and declaims with so deep a Resentment against her Persecuting Humor, that how sincere soever his Address may seem to them, who judge of his Sincerity by the clearness of his Style, more than by the weight of his Reasons, and have Minds pre∣par'd to be deceiv'd by his malicious Insinuations, because he tells them; that they come from a friendly Hand; yet I am one of those who have nei∣ther Faith nor Charity enough to believe Him to be either a good Subject, or a true Son of the Church of England. And I must beg his pardon, if I am both surpris'd and provok'd, to see that in the Condition we are now put into by the Laws, and the ill Circumstances we lie under, by having the Persecu∣tion of Dissenters, and the want of Loyalty to the King laid to our charge; We who pretend to be true Sons of the Church of England, should endeavor to make our selves and others more uneasie, and obnoxious to the Present Authority which God hath set over us. And methinks he seems to be sore put to it, when out of a desire of revenge he teaches Dis∣senters to run to their old Methods of Embroyling the Kingdom, with too much haste to consider all the Consequences, and hopes to instigate us of the Church of England to run along with them to the same excess of riot. They must be unreasonably valiant who dare follow such Advice, and such an
extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable time, to say no more, is too dangerous a Vertue to be commended by any good Christian or good Subject He had need to go upon certain Evidence, who charges his Neighbor, much more his Prince, with sinister Intentions and Treachery in his Kindnesses; otherwise he violates the natural Obligations of Justice and Charity, as well as the Loyal Principles of the Church of England. What then may we judge of T. W. who in the Name of the Church of England takes such pains to persuade the Dissenters that their New Friend, their Gracious King, is a treacherous Man; especially consi∣dering the weakness of those Reasons wherein he grounds his Suspici∣on, and which come now to be Examin'd? The First I find pag. 2. That the Dissenters are not the King's Choice, but his Refuge, after the Church of England hath refus'd his Courtships. That he might the better teach Dissenters to cast off their new Lovers, he persuades them that they had before made their ineffectual Court∣ships to the Church of England, and been scornfully rejected by them, and must either drive a Contract with them, or despair of good Fortune for ever; and that if their sudden Passion have not blinded them, they must needs see, they Court them not for Love but Interest. Which to me seems (to speak as softly as may be) a very rude Insinuation, such as T.W. would never have us'd, had he not wanted the Bounds to his Ill Breeding, which he would have others put to their Good Breeding. An Insinuation that equally wrongs the King and the Church of England, who would no more be guilty of putting her King to his Shifts, than such a King as ours would stoop to such mean ones. Did not his innate Cle∣mency and Compassion to his Subjects (perhaps to an Excess) prompt him to it, I see no necessity of his Circumstances that could drive him to Court the more despicable part of them, as the Dissenters are reputed to be. What Courtships of the King, or from Men of his Communion, the Church of England hath rejected, I know not; and what Applications so∣ever shall be made to her in the first or second place, I doubt not but she will receive with that Respect and Duty which becomes her. But the next Insinuation is more considerable; That there is no Alliance between Infallibility and Liberty, pag. 4. That it is the bringing together the two most contrary things in the World; and that their Absolution for the mortal Sin of promising it, is to be had upon no other Terms than their Promise to destroy them;
which they will be the easier tempted to do, because in truth they have no Inclination, no not so much as to give them any Quarter, but to Usher in Liberty for themselves under that Shelter; for which he refers them to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and the Journals of Parliament, where they may be convinc'd, if they can be so mistaken as to doubt; And that they cannot forbear, even in the height of their Courtship, to let fall hard words of them, because their cruel Nature is not to be re∣strain'd from starting out, as disdaining to submit to the Usurpation of Art or Interest. Now to shew the weakness of all he suggests on this Head, I shall offer these Two Considerations. 1. Whether there be not some difference between the Church of Rome offering Liberty to Heretics, and a Gracious King of that Com∣munion, promising Ease to his Subjects? For however cruel toward Dissenters, the Principles of the Church of Rome can be suppos'd to be, the Sweetness of his Nature may correct them, or the Generosity of his Courage over-bear them. A Papist may be a Friend to Liberty, and a known Enemy to Persecution, and our present King, upon whom you squint, was always so, and ever will be. There is no Religion so bad, but there may be very good Men among the Professors of it; however inexorable to those it calls Heretics, Popery can be thought to be, there are many Papists (we know) merciful Men. And who more worthy of that Character than this Prince, whose Clemency hath hitherto so flatly given the Lye to all former Characters of a Popish Successor? Were it not then more fair, and just, to believe this Declaration sincere, because made by so good a Prince, than to suspect it of Treachery, because we have a bad opinion of his Religion? And that the Obligations of Na∣tural Religion will prevail more with him to be still merciful in his Pro∣ceedings, and faithful to his Promises, than the supposed Principles of Popery, to betray those that relie on his Royal Word, which is as cur∣rant as his Coyn? Our Confidence in our Prince's Word, which is as sacred as his Per∣son, will be our greatest Prudence. We can never trust our Lives and Fortunes in safer Hands than his, to whom by our Addresses we have so unanimously tendred them, at which his Enemies and ours are not a little netled. If we are any of us afraid of his Power, it is not his Fault but our own; take not mine, but St. Paul's word for it, Do that which is good, and you shall have praise of the same; but if you do that which is evil, you may well be afraid your selves, and make us so too, for he bears not the Sword in vain, but is the Minister of God for revenge, to execute
wrath upon them that do evil. He has oblig'd us ever since he came to his Throne in such a Princely manner, as to puzzle our Understand∣ings, as well as our Gratitude, we are as safe and secure as we can desire to be, whilst he lives, and he is content we should be as true to our God as to our King. 2. And yet it is no such Paradox as he pretends, pag. 4. that Popery should be a Friend to Liberty, or the Pretenders to Infallibility tolerate Dissenters, and live peaceably with them. That there have been great Cruelties acted by Men of that Communion, is out of question; and this Author acknowledges (p. 10. l. 16.) that there have been Prelates of our Church too rigid: And as these are now convinc'd of their Error, in being severe to Dissenters, (as he saith p. 16. l. 1.) is it not possible that those may see their Mistake too? especially since they pretend to Infallibility only in Matters of Faith, not in Fact, or the Conduct of their Practice. However, what hath been practis'd in other Places, is not altogether unfeazable among us. For besides the Toleration of the Three Religions in Germany by the Treaty of Munster, Dr. Burnet (whom he will not deny to be an authentic Historian) in a late Account he gives of his Travels (pag. 289.) acquaints us, That Charles Lewis, late Prince Palatine, seeing of what advantage Liberty of Conscience is to the Peopling of a Country, not only allow'd the Three Religions (the Cal∣vinist, Lutheran, and the Roman) to be Profess'd there, but built a Church for them all Three, which he call'd The Church of the Concord; in which they all had (in the Order above set down) the Exercise of their Religion; and yet he maintain'd the Peace of his Principality so entire, that there was not the least Disorder occasion'd by this Toleration. The like Toleration, without the least Disorder, the same Person tells us (p. 286.) is maintain'd at Francfort. And who is so great a Stranger abroad, as not to know, that the Cantons of Switzerland are made up of Protestants and Papists, all united by their common Interest, notwithstanding their Differences in Religion. And in two of those Cantons (as the forecited Author assures us, pag. 27.) Apenzel and Glaris, both Religions are to∣lerated, and capable of equal Privileges. And in some Bailiages, con∣quer'd in common by the Cantons of Bern and Friburg in the Wars with Savoy, the two Cantons name Bailiffs by turns, and both Religions are so equally tolerated, that in the same Church they have both Mass and a Sermon, and that with such equality, that on one Sunday the Mass be∣gins and the Sermon follows, and on the next Sunday the Sermon begins and the Mass comes after it, without any disorder or murmuring.
These Instances are undeniable Evidences of the consistency of Popery with Liberty of Conscience, so that whatsoever Arguments can be pro∣duced to prove the contrary, are like Zeno's Reasonings against the possibility of Motion, confuted by the noise of Diogenes's Tramplings, that disturb'd his Lectures. It's in vain to argue that Papists cannot live peaceably where they are tolerated, or that they cannot tolerate others, where they have Power, since we can produce such plain Mat∣ter of Fact both for the one and for the other. And since some Papists live peaceably with Protestants, and allow them to enjoy equal Free∣dom with themselves, in the Exercise of Religion, a Pretence to Infalli∣bility may be consistent with Liberty, without building upon a Founda∣tion of Paradoxes, which he says is so dangerous; And this Suggestion is no concluding Argument, that the King intends to deceive the Dissen∣ters, and oppress all other Parties but his own. You have seen plainly, that the Papists do allow Living and Liberty to Protestants under them in Germany, by the Treaties of Munster and Osnaburgh, that they have alternative Election of Magistrates, and that neither Party do's, or is allow'd to disturb other in the Exercise of their Religion in Publick, and that all others with a free Conscience, with∣out Disturbance or Inquisition, shall Exercise their Religion in their own Houses privately, and in the Neighborhood, where, and as often as they please; and therefore we have less ground to suspect their doing it sincerely here in England, where 'tis more their Interest, because the King is so great a Lover of his Country, that he will never give the Power into those few Hands of the Catholics, against the more numerous Party of his Protestant Subjects, and consequently more able to Serve him against his potent watchful Neighbors, who would catch at such an opportunity to stir up. Wars against him both Abroad and at Home. The King knows that he is sure of the Hearts and Hands of all the true Sons of the Church of England, and he will never oppress them to make them Hypocrites, or to lose their Services. His next Suggestion of Suspicion is from the Instruments of this new Friendship, pag. 4. whom for Arguments sake (designing to make them out of love with them, and to question their Integrity) he supposes to be suspicious Persons. And are not all such Hypothetical Arguments as ea∣sily blown away by supposing the contrary? I will easily grant him, that they are bad men, who Preach up Anger and Vengeance against the Church of England, pag. 5. But as the King discourages all such kind of Discourses in his own Chaplains, so we may charitably suppose, that
whoever use them, are none of his Instruments, who designs Ease to Dissenters without Vengeance against the Church of England. And therefore they who act that cholerick Part, are, I am sure, none of the King's Instruments. You maliciously suggest, that the Mediators of this new Alliance have been formerly Employ'd in Treaties of the same kind, and there detected to have acted by Order, (by whose you do not tell us, but leave us to our guess, nor by whom so detected) and to have been impower'd to have given Encouragements and Rewards, and that this is an Argument to suspect them. Nay, you come farther home, and insinuate that the King hath given them a Commission, and not improba∣bly a Dispensation in the Case of Truth, when it may prejudice his Service that Employs them, (Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit) and would have the Dissenters look upon them as Embassadors sent to lie Leiger, i. e. Ad mentiendum Reipublicae causâ. You suppose there are some Men Employ'd by him who have Means and Authority to persuade by Secular Arguments, and that they in pursuance of that Power, have sprinkled Mony among the Dissenting Ministers, and that this is an Evidence of the Deceit intended; and that many unfortunate Men (whose Names you will not be tempted to discover) have fall'n under this Temptation, who for fear their Frailty should be discover'd and expos'd, will continue it, whose Arguments, tho' never so specious, are to be suspected, because they came from them who have Morgag'd themselves to severe Creditors, who expect a rigorous observation of the Contract, let it be never so unwarrantable; and these are the Dog-Stars of all the malignant Influence against which you declaim: But how came you to be privy to all this, unless you were once One of the same Cabal, and one who hir'd them to Preach up Anger and Vengeance against the Church of England? If there be any such inflaming Elo∣quence in the Conventicles, I will easily grant it to be as unseasonable as your Pamphlet, and they who act this cholerick Part, upon what For∣feiture soever they are oblig'd to it, are very corrupt Men, no doubt, (almost as bad as your self) and their Wages in the next World, with∣out Repentance, will be Death, and that Eternal, whatsoever they hope to get by it in this. The last of his Insinuations, is from the great Endeavors that are us'd to Court Addresses, it being improper for the Benefactor to press Men to be Thankful, and an Argument that he intends to Snare them by their own Acknowledgments, as he suggests pag. 7. But to allude to his own Comparison (a little after,) our Great Sovereign is not of so mean a
Spirit, as to sollicit for Love-Letters; He entertains the Grateful with Respect, but when did he ever Court the Ungrateful to give him Thanks? I have heard of Instances, wherein he forbad the moving of some to Address that needed Courting, but never the contrary, except from this Author. It may be some Persons, asham'd of the Ingratitude of some of their own Party, were active to remind them of their Duty, but it is an incredible Calumny, that the King should Court, much less Threaten, or cause to be Courted or Threatned (as this Man affirms, pag. 7.) any to Thank him for those Favors, which not the expectation of Applause, hut his own innate Goodness hath produced. No, it's the more Glorious to be Thankful to him, because such is his Clemency, that with safety to our Temporal Interest we may be Ungrateful. I have heard indeed, that as many Bishops as were then in London, did meet together, upon the sense of their Duty to draw up an Address of Thanks to the King; which having done, they sent down Copies of it to some of their Brethren, one of which, and he as good a Casuist, and as far from the Court as any of his Bench, having seriously perus'd and consider'd it, gave this Judgment of it, That he highly approv'd it, as pru∣dently Penn'd, and such an Acknowledgment of his Majesties Signal Favors to the Church of England, and all her Members, as their Gratitude and Duty indispensably oblig'd them to pay. And he not only Subscrib'd it chearfully himself, but us'd his best Diligence to procure Subscriptions of the Clergy to it in his Diocese, and having receiv'd some nameless Letters (like this of T. W.) to dissuade him from Addreses, and among the rest those call'd the Oxon. Reasons, he answer'd them all, to the satisfaction of all thinking Men, who saw them, and concluded, That he saw no∣thing in them that look'd like a Reason against it, only some groundless Fears and insignificant Jealousies; and that if the Clergy at this time, and in these Circumstances we now are, should generall and obstinate∣ly deny in an humble Address to give his Majesty Thanks for so Graci∣ous a Promise of preserving that ALTAR from being overthrown, at which yet he did not worship, he fear'd it would give him too much cause to say, That he had little Reason to protect them, who so peremptorily refus'd, as the Motion of their own Bishop, to Thank him for it. And others wish'd, that the niceness of particular Men, where in truth no need was, did not at last hazard the whole; and so indeed it must have done, had not his Majesty, in imitation of HIM whom he Represents among us, of his great and undeserv'd Mercy been Kind to the Ʋnthankful, and according to his accustom'd Goodness
spar'd the Church for the sake of the smaller visible number that were in it; so great Grace may, if they are not past cure, heal their Infidelity and Revolt from their Duty, especially when they are thus invited to be∣lieve, and adhere to a Prince, of whom we have had sufficient Experi∣ence, that he will no more recede from his Promise, than he would fly from his Enemy in the Day of Battel. If the nature of Thanks be so un∣avoidable a Consequence of being pleas'd or oblig'd, (as our Author confesses) and they will presently shew themselves in Looks, Speeches, Writing and Actions; then they from whom Thanks do not naturally flow, upon so just and great an Occasion, are to be reckon'd among the , those unholy and unthankful Men, whom the Apostle fore∣tells us will arise in the latter days, who not only will give no Thanks, but have none to give, If our Obligations were less, and our Sense of the Religion of Gratitude, as little as our Authors; yet I wonder he should be offended at such an innocent and usual piece of Good Manners. He would make us suspect him for one of the Members of Forty Eight, who Voted no more Addresses to be made to the King; for he is so mightily netled at these weekly Addresses of Loyal Men, from all Parts of the Kingdom, that he would make us believe, if we consulted the Bills of Mortality, we should find some numbers murder'd by them. He tells us that the Priests (who are not proper Secretaries for the Protestant Re∣ligion) made the first Draughts of them; A Scotchman would take the liberty to tell him, that he were very good Company, and an English∣man would wonder how he came to be so privy to this Secret, unless he were at their Elbows when the Priests Indited them. These extrava∣gant Acknowledgments (as he calls them, extravagantly enough) which he pretends all the Post-horses are tir'd with carrying Circular Let∣ters to solicit, give us a Copy of his Countenance; And that where Per∣suasions cannot delude, Threatnings are employ'd to fright Men into a Compliance (but where, or by whom, he knows not); And that the manner of getting them did extremely lessen their value; And that the Thanks which fill'd the Gazetts, were either Trifles or Snares, which either signifi'd nothing, or a great deal more than was intended by them who gave them. By all which he proves himself a greater Master of his Pen than his Passions, that his Wit is more than his Manners, and that his Republican Zeal has, like a Cormorant, devour'd his Charity to his Fellow Subjects, and his Loyalty to his Prince. Do not his Objections to his Majesties Belief now hinder him from seeing his Vertues, whilst he instigates others to discredit and disobey him? One would think he
himself, who pretends to be a Son of the Church of England, made but a Jest of the Doctrin of Non-resistance, whilst he is so fearful of the Sub∣mission of his Fellow Subjects, to the King's so just and reasonable Ex∣pectation from them. Is not our Peace at Home, and our Prince's Re∣putation abroad, of more value than to be hazarded for want of a Com∣plement, as he calls it? If I did not think it a Task too hard for me, to persuade a Man so bewitch'd with a turbulent Spirit as he is, to grow more peaceable; and thought he were not so far gone in his new Passion, but that he would hear still; I would not be discourag'd from dissuading him to relie on a Death-bed Repentance. If he have not engag'd him∣self in the Ways of Faction, in an Association beyond Retreat, and be not hurry'd on by his first Heat, I would request him to look back upon what he has written, before it be too late, and not sacrifice the true public Interest of the Nation to his private Revenge; which will speak him a Man of good Morality and Understanding, as well as a great Wit: But I fear, that as he has betray'd too much Weakness, in enter∣taining and propagating these groundless Fears and Jealousies, by which he speaks his Spleen, and not his Conscience; so he will shew too much Obstinacy to forsake and recant them, being none of those who thinks himself oblig'd to obey for Conscience sake. And now I leave T. W. to review his own Reasons, and consider, whe∣ther they be not too weak to acquit him from Uncharity and Disloyal∣ty, in charging his Sovereign with Treachery in the Declaration of his Mercy to Dissenters, or (which is much the same) in persuading Dis∣senters to suspect him: And the worst I wish him is, that the sense of his Guilt may make him a true Penitent. I proceed to the Second Part of his Design, which is To excite the Dissenters to use their Interest against the Establish∣ment of that Liberty by Law, which his Majesties Clemency hath In∣dulged to them. If he can persuade the Dissenters to throw the King's Declaration of Indulgence at his Head, which is within the Bounds: he has set to his Good Breeding, and to throw away their present Advantages, and to stay for the Liberty of the public Exercise of their Religion till the Parliament allow it them, and to satisfie themselves with those ima∣ginary Advantages of which they can hardly fail in the next probable Revolution, if by an unseasonable Activity they lose not the Influence of their good Star, which promises them every thing that is prosper∣ous, for that all things seem to conspire to their Ease and Satisfaction, if
by too much haste to anticipate their good Fortune, they do not destroy it; Such a prevailing Eloquence as this, would speak him an Orator beyond compare, and would give us cause to conclude by the Effect it had upon them, that the Dissenters had not yet been so long restrain'd from their Liberty, as to have any strong Appetite to enjoy it again: but the Indians, I believe, may as soon catch Monkies with a Mousetrap, as he can draw in the Dissenters with such a dull Device as this, to de∣stroy themselves by using their Interest against the Establishment of that Happiness by a Law, which his Majesties Clemency hath already Indulg'd them. For this purpose, pag. 8. he insinuates the Irregularity of the Declaration in point of Law, which whether it be so or no, is certainly not so fit to be determin'd in a Pamphlet, as in Westminster-Hall, which already hath given its Opinion in favor of the Prerogative. And after that, it is (methinks) no small Presumption to Censure the King's Actions as irregularly done, which proceed upon such special Verdict for their Legality. As the King do's not need the Dissenters Thanks to justifie his De∣claration in point of Law, so neither do the Papists doubt of the Lega∣lity of his Power of Dispensing with them for his Time, but they desire to have the Royal Favor made more lasting to them by a Law. Besides, is it not very strange, that Men should generally acknow∣ledge the King a Right to Dispense with Penal Laws against Theft and Murder, which are founded upon a Divine Sanction, yet question his Right to Dispense with those against a Conventicle, which can make no such Pretences? Or that this should lay a Foundation for the breach of all Laws (so saith this Writer, pag. 9.) and that should not? Or that Dissenters should look like Council Retain'd against Magna Charta, for thankfully receiving the Benefit of this, and Felons never be so Cen∣sur'd for that? But if (as he presumes to affirm) the Declaration be irregular, it's not a little difficult to comprehend, how this becomes an Argument against Endeavoring to have the Liberty granted by it, Con∣firm'd by a Law; since the Invalidity of their present Grant should in all reason make them more sollicitous for such a Confirmation, as may preserve the Liberty they are so desirous to enjoy. His Arguments to me seem very weak against this mighty Power of Dispensing, which needs not the Justification of a Parliament, tho' the Penal Laws and Test want their Repeal, which I hope they may have in good time, without endangering or destroying our Religion, or Pro∣perties. But our Author thinks this a proper time to put the Prero∣gative
in Pickle, for some other Generation that can better digest it than the present; and in pursuance of his Designs, he makes the Laws spurn against their Maker; which is not the way to secure our Reli∣gion, but to make our Church the more odious, by practising that which she professes to abhor: She has taught her Sons to believe, that no Power on Earth can give Licence for the doing of that which is Malum in se, an Offence in its own nature, and so declar'd by the Di∣vine Law; but that Malum prohibitum, which in its own nature is in∣different, and becomes an Offence only because some Law of the Land makes it so, she thinks may be dispensed with, according to the King's Discretion, whom she allows to be the proper Judge of Public Necessity. 'Tis impossible for Human Law-makers, who have no pretence to In∣fallibility, or a perpetual Divine Assistance, to foresee all particular Ac∣cidents, Mischiefs, and Inconveniences which may happen in particular Circumstances by or from the making of any particular Law; And therefore there must be some Power always visible and in being, to Suspend or Dispense with such Laws, as the Public Good and Safety of the People, or an emergent Necessity requires, which is by Law in the King, who is the Head of the Public Good, and the Fountain of Justice and Mercy; which Power is so united to his Royal Person, that he cannot transfer, give away, or separate the same from himself, as all the Judges of England resolv'd, (Lord Coke lib. 7. fol. 36.) nor can he bar himself from that which is so inherent in him, and inseparably annex'd to his Royal Person, no not by an Act of Parliament; for by so doing he would cease to be King, (Coke lib. 7. pag. 14.) the most he can do, is only to agree, that he will not use that Right but in extra∣ordinary Cases and Occasions, when in his Princely Wisdom he shall find it necessary for the Public Good: Nor is his reassuming to Exer∣cise such a Right, any Breach of his Promise or Oath at his Coronati∣on, but a making use of that Condition imply'd in his Agreement, as to such particular Cases, and such present Circumstances. The King can∣not Repeal, and totally make void the Law by his own single Power without a Parliament, but Relax, Suspend, and Control it for a time, with respect to the Advantages or Necessities of his People he may, which is a temporary Repeal, or the laying the Law down to sleep for a time in a legal way, which is a sufficient Discharge to them who are Commission'd under him, and by his Authority, to put them in Execution. Our Author knows, that the strict keeping of Lent is enforced by great Penalties in our Laws, viz. 2 & 3 Ed. 6. cap. 19.
& 6 Ed. 6. cap. 33. 5 Eliz. 5. and yet that the King was never que∣stion'd the Power of Dispensing with them all, either by Judges, Bi∣shops, or Parliament, but his Power in these Points has had an univer∣sal Admittance, with a Nemine contradicente; and why then should it be arraign'd only in Dispensing with those Penal Laws relating to Re∣ligion against Conventicles or Recusants? In his next Attempt he seems to imitate the last and desperate Shift of the King of Moab, when he took his eldest Son that should have Reign'd in his stead, and offer'd him a Burnt-offering upon the Wall, to move the Israelites, by that Instance of his Misery and Desperation, to pity him, 2 Kings 3.27. For, to move the Dissenters Compassion, he sacrifices the Reputation of his own Mother the Church of England, confessing, pag. 10. that she out of revenge, for the rough usage she met with from the Dissenters in the time of their Reign, upon the late King's Restauration made the Penal Laws against them; and lest they should imitate her Faults, he cautions them against seeking to be re∣veng'd, by attempting the Repeal of them. Whether this Instance of his Desperation will be as successful as the King of Moab's, and prevail with his Adversaries to quit their Advantage, I know not; but if it do, they are certainly very good-natur'd Adversaries in both the Ac∣ceptations of the Phrase, whether it denote the excess of their Kind∣ness, or the defect of their Understandings. Some Men are so Spider∣spirited, as to suck Poyson out of the sweetest Flowers: For my part, I cannot think so ill of those Great Men, who suffer'd with so much Christian Patience for their Loyalty, as that they came from under the Rod breathing nothing but Revenge against their Persecutors. It is a more just Account, and suitable to the Character of their Piety and Loyalty, that what they then did in Severity against the Dissenters, was not from private Revenge, but from the Necessities of the Kingly Government, to which the Dissenters had been very pernicious, and which they thought could not be safe, at that time, without the sup∣pressing of them. But if his Suggestion were true, that the Penal Laws against Dissen∣ters were made out of Revenge, what Argument is this against their endeavoring the Repeal of them? Unless it were Criminal to seek for a Release from the Injuries that Revenge hath laid upon them, or a Sin to flee from the Avenger of Blood into the City of Refuge. To Reta∣liate Injuries is a Crime, but to seek for Protection and Ease from them is not. And I see not but that the Dissenters, if they be (according
to his Character of them, pag. 10.) Men of good Morality and Under∣standing, may thus argue, The Church of England, after the late King's Restauration, sacrific'd its Interest to Revenge, in making the Penal Laws against us, and therefore we may lawfully, for our own Ease, endeavor the Repeal of them, and not lose the present Opportunity to rescue our selves out of her avenging Hand. But to mend the matter, he tells us, pag. 10. that the Common Dan∣ger had now so laid open the Mistake, that all former Haughtiness of the Church of England toward them, is for ever extinguish'd, and hath turn'd the Spirit of Persecution into a Spirit of Peace, Charity and Condescention. A fit Argument to infer this Conclusion, There∣fore the Dissenters ought not to endeavor their own Ease. Whereas this seems the more natural Inference, That therefore the Church of England will now joyn her Endeavors with them for the Repealing of those Laws, the Enacting and Execution of which he imputes to a Spi∣rit of Persecution. But to do the Church of England right against these malicious Sug∣gestions, I am sure her Principles are against Persecution, or any thing of Violence and Cruelty toward any for Religion; And whatever may have been the Practices of some rigid and violent Persons of her Com∣munion, the most Wise, Pious and Learned of them, have still declar'd it unlawful to make any Sufferers for their Conscience, unless where it interferes with the Peace and Safety of the State: They would have no Man's invincible Persuasion in Religion be made High Treason, as it was in Sir Tho. More's and the Bishop of Rochester's Cases. The Opi∣nions in Religion that are inauspicious to the Government, they think ought to be punish'd, not because they are Errors in Religion, but be∣cause they are Seditious and dangerous to the Government. Now when they are, and when they are not so (as the change of Circumstances in the State may alter their Prospect on it) the Government is more pro∣per to judge than the Church, and when that thinks its Safety not en∣danger'd by the toleration of them, she is not for punishing them. Ac∣cording to which Principle, by the same Reason that she was for ma∣king the Penal Laws formerly, she may now be for their Repeal, be∣cause the Government thinks it self safe without them. And this (I think) is almost the only thing wherein T. W. doth not Misrepresent her, That now she is really for the Ease of Tender Consciences; not (as he brings in her Enemies suggesting, p. 12.) because she wants Power to Oppress, but because the change of Circumstances in the Govern∣ment,
makes the Opinions of Dissenters, whether Protestant or Popish, not so dangerous to the Peace of the State, or the Authority of the Ci∣vil Powers, as formerly they have been. And this she may modestly conclude, because the King and his Council have thought fit to Indulge them, whose Interest obliges them to be most Impartial, and whose Experience in State Affairs makes them most able to judge of such things. The State was then in such real or imaginary Dangers as it is not now; The Succession of the King to the Crown is not now in Dispute, nor is Dominion believ'd to be founded in Grace, if such Times should come again, the old Severities might be soon reinforced: Whilst we are in no danger of them, let us put them into a Condition of Ease and Safety frankly, that they may have no just Prejudice against us or our Religion, and that the King, who is intitled to the Service of every Subject of his, of what Persuasion soever, by the Law of Nature, and the Common Law of the Land (of which no Act or Parliament can, or ought to bar him) may make use of their Persons and Services, accord∣ing to his own Discretion. Why should not his Catholic Subjects be equally capacitated to render him Service, and be united with us in the same Bonds of Duty and Allegiance, tho' they cannot accord with us in Matters of Religion? Why should we shew so much Violence in those Points of Faith, of which, perhaps, we can shew no certain Evidence? The decrepit World, in the twilight of its declining Age, may be easily mistaken in the Colours of Good and Evil, true or false. Their Merits have been great of the Crown, and their Sufferings more than Ours, and why then should we repine, to see the long deserv'd, & deferr'd Rewards of their Loyalty conferr'd upon them at last? Let our onely Emulation be who shall serve him best. Princes are not to be Catechis'd in bestow∣ing their Honors or Offices, nor could we think he had any true Zeal for his Religion, if he should not countenance and preserve them, at least caeteris paribus, with others, if not before them. Suppose our repining should provoke him to turn the Tables upon us, and to employ no Offi∣cers or Servants about him but Roman-Catholics, whom could we reaso∣nably blame but our selves. Let the King unite them and us in one Camp and Court in God's Name, and let there always be a Religious Corre∣spondence between them and us in the Service of so great and so good a Master. To dispute his Power in this Case, were to deny him the choice of his Servants, which we should think a Wrong to the meanest of us to be depriv'd of; and also to rob him of the Militia of the Na∣tion,
to diminish his Regal Authority, and to deprive him of the Ser∣vices of a great part of his Subjects, from which no Act of Parliament can restrain him, because the Law of Nature gives it him. As to the Men of Taunton and Tiverton, who were formerly Stigma∣tiz'd for their Rebellion, they are now the more eminent for return∣ing to their Loyalty, from which they made so notorious a Defection, and should be embrac'd by us accordingly with great joy, as returning Prodigals. And some of the Quakers, who were formerly known to be accomplish'd Men, of good Parts and Breeding, are with a Non ob∣stante to their Religion, taken into his Majesties Protection, for which they give him Thanks with a Grace that very well becomes them; which, as new a thing as it is, and as much as our Author is surpris'd at it, is not a thing utterly incredible. It is far from a Miracle to see so Gracious a Prince as King James the Second is, to cherish and reward the Loyalty of his Subjects Hearts in spite of their Hats, or their more shameful Mistakes in Matters of Religion. The Princes Power is not limited to his morose Humor; He can, as oft as he is so dispos'd, be Gra∣cious to them, who have been undutiful to him, Reprieve and Pardon whom he has justly Condemn'd, without acquainting him or the Confes∣sor with the Reasons of so sudden & effectual a Change, he may alter his own Mind without altering the Nature of other Things. If a Man repent of his Crimes and the King Pardon him, and he amend his Life in or∣der to obtain God's Pardon too, our envious Author laments his entire Resignation, and looks upon his Endeavors, now he is Converted him∣self, to strengthen his Brethren, as an unwelcom Task, and looks upon them as squeez'd out of him by the weight of his being so obnoxious; by which he squints at a Person who has Honor and Courage enough to call him to an account for it, if he knew where his humble Servant T.W. were to be found, whom he believes to be better at his Pen, than any other Weapon. What he saith of the Church of Englands Provocations, p. 12. may be subscrib'd to by all, as an Instance of her excellent Temper, if his Letter, which is an Exception against it, do not hinder, if yet there be any reason to blame her for the Rashness and Indiscretion of one of her Members, when the rest bare the Reproches of so many malicious Pamphlets, with∣out quarrelling eithere the Government or the Dissenters: These Provo∣cations like a Storm of Hail upon a strong House, cause more Noise than Prejudice. She is ready (he saith pag. 13.) rather to suffer, than to receive all the Advantages that can be gain'd by a criminal Compliance, And if she refuse only criminal Compliances, I am persuaded she will
never suffer under this merciful Prince, who requires no Man to play the Hypocrite, or act against his Conscience. The Reflection, pag. 13. savors much of T. W's Spirit, who cannot forbear Libelling the Government; for what ground hath he but his own Fancy to insinuate, that the next Parliament will not be Elected freely, but by Conge d'Eslire, and the Men Return'd whom the King nominates, whether Elected or no? And that when Return'd, they will not be allow'd the liberty to Debate freely in Parliament, but oblig'd, without Examination, to do whatever they are desir'd. For doth not he in his very next Paragraph contradict himself? wherein he saith, that the Papists themselves do not rely upon the Legality of the Decla∣ration, and therefore are so very earnest to get it Establish'd by Law. For they are not so blind, but that they can see there will be no more Security in a Law made by a Parliament illegally chosen, and under re∣straint in their Votes, than in a bare Declaration; and that the next Turn of Government would regard that less than this. So that if it be their Interest to have a Parliament to secure their Liberty by Law, it is equally their Interest to have one freely chosen, and free in their Votes. And what reason is there to suspect Men will act contrary to what they know to be their Interest. Our Author knows who they were who were Return'd out of every Burrough, by virtue of the Letters Missive from the Faction in the City, and instead of Election were satisfi'd if they could get but a double Re∣turn, when the Power of the Committees of Election was more signi∣ficant, and to worse Purposes, than the King's Conge d'Eslire; And whereas he farther suggests, that our Methods of Enacting Laws in England will be reduc'd to those of Scotland, and that the Papists shall be made Lords of the Articles over us, and yet endeavors to wheadle the Dissenters into a fond Persuasion that the Parliament will offer them an Indulgence without including the Papists: To give him a Cooler for his Conceit, they have told him already, that this Way of his will catch none but Woodcocks, and that they can see and break thro' it at plea∣sure, and so his Road is quite spoil'd: And for our parts, the Church of England has taught us to value the Merit of Obedience above the Li∣berty of Debate, which such Men as he would turn into Licenciousness, and Liberty of Aspersing, if not Altering the Government. What he insinuates, pag. 15. of the danger, lest if the King, and those of his Communion, be gratifi'd by the legal Establishment of their Li∣berty, they will at the next Step attempt theirs that helped them, and after the Dissenters squeaziness in starting at a Surplice, force them to
swallow Transubstantiation, is another of those malicious Suggestions, which have been sufficiently Answer'd at the beginning of this Di∣scourse, it looks like a Plot to pelt out the Protestant Religion with Sugar-plums, so ridiculous is it and unreasonable. The sum of all is, that T.W. pretends to be an Ambassador from the Church of England, to invite the Dissenters to joyn with her in a League against the Roman-Catholics, promising every one Liberty when the Parliament meets, ex∣cept only the King and those of his Religion: which makes me to que∣stion his Credentials, and suspect him for a Cheat, since all the genu∣ine Sons of the Church of England have their Good Breeding better bounded, than to be civil and obliging to all Men but their Prince. He is like a Man in a Trance, rapt into the Religious Cause of the Church of England none knows how; he blames her Sons for going too far in compliance with the Romanists, and yet complains, that they are not only deserted, but prosecuted, but when and how he leaves us to guess; nor do we know what Weight of Power it is they lie under to avoid the Burden of being Criminal; which whilst he maliciously sug∣gests, he speaks like Council Retain'd by his old Friends the Republicans in Forty Eight, against the Prerogative, which has done nothing yet in this King's Reign or his Predecessor's, to fall thus under his Displeasure. Our Gracious Sovereign hath already done more for our Church, than the most sanguine of her Sons ever look'd for, which gives us reason to believe that he will never be sorry for doing what we desir'd. Liberty of Conscience is more than pretended to be given by him, and yet there is no Freedom or Property to be sacrific'd for it neither, as far as yet appears, or we believe is ever like to do. The King intends not to un∣hinge the Establishment of the Church of England, for that he can no more do, than he can be unfaithful; He only desires Safety, and the Protection of the Laws for those of his own Communion, and other Dissenters too, which (however peevish Men may be, at the first mo∣tion) will appear so reasonable upon second and more sedate Thoughts, that however (p. 17.) the odds be Two hundred to one in the number of us and them, yet there will be no such odds in the Votes for and a∣gainst their Indulgence. I am as loth as he is, that we should throw away all Human Means of preserving our Religion (p. 17.) and I doubt not but that the Wisdom of the Nation may find Human Expedients to secure it to us, without Infringing the natural Liberty of Subjects by severe Tests, or tyranni∣zing over their Consciences by Penal Laws. Sure I am, a peevish provo∣cation of a Prince, whose Spirit and Power are equally great, is no Hu∣man Means of its Preservation.
Our Author's great fear is, that the Thankers of the King will be Repealers of the Test in the next Parliament, which would bring them under such a Scandal as would make them odious to all Mankind; from which that he may the better deter them, he tells them, that by rescuing themselves from the severity of one Law, they will necessarily give a blow to all the rest, and that the Price of their Liberty will be no less than the giving up their Right in all the Laws, which were a losing Bargain indeed, to draw such a Mischief as this upon themselves. But whether those Methods which he proposes to them, will not more infallibly destroy them, I hope the Dissen∣ters and the Church of England men will consider well, before they follow them, It concerns us all to take heed, that in acting for the preservation of our Religion, we do not expose it to more imminent and apparent danger. Tanti non est ut placeam Tibi perire. Martial. If nothing will gratifie our Author but what will displease and disserve the King, let his Pretexts be never so specious, he shall not intice us into a sinful Compliance, we will follow the Golden Rule, to do to others as we would have them do to us in like Circumstances. Arma tenenti, omnia dat qui justa negat. Our obstinate and unseasonable stiffness hath made some Alterations already in Public Affairs and Administrations, and may provoke his Majesty to do those things in his Displeasure, which may be more prejudicial to our Religion than the Repealing of the Test can be, the making whereof she abhorr'd and oppos'd as much as she could, and cannot remember the Author or Occasion of it without Detestation. And I hope the King's Old Friends will not put the King to such shameful Shifts, as to fly to his New for any Justice they can do him in this or any other kind. If they should fail of their Duty in this kind, their Mother Church will not bless them, nor be dis∣pleas'd to see the Father of the Country correct such ill-nurtur'd Children as are too big for her Discipline. I question not but that the next Parliament will do what the King and all good Subjects expect from them. The King is assur'd of the Affections of his People in gross, they have already Presented him with their Lives and Fortunes in their repeated weekly Addresses, and therefore he will be sure to find it by their Loyal Representatives, who will never sail to give him that Satisfaction in a Parlia∣mentary way, which they have already done in a Popular one; for they would wrong us as well as him, if they should not give him that Satisfaction in Formalities of Law, which our Devotion hath already design'd and dedicated to him. All true Sons of the Church of England rejoyce, and are pleas'd in his Majesties Government, and doubt not but a good Correspondence between him and his two next Houses of Parliament will put the Ballance of Europe into his Hands; but if once a Spirit of Jealousie should be rais'd between him and us, to fright us from the Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws, what Disadvantages may accrue to our Nation or our Religion, I trem∣ble to think. We had need do something more than ordinary, to atone for the inno∣cent Blood that has been shed upon the Testimony of a few perjur'd Villains. Thus, Sir, I have given you my Opinion of the Pamphlet you sent me, which was cer∣tainly writ with a very ill Design against the King, & no good Intention for the Church of England, whom it represents (as it would persuade her to be) obstinately engag'd, not only against the Religion, but against the Interest of her Prince too, attempting to draw Men to suspect his Mercy for Treachery, and inviting Dissenters to Combine against his Gracious Designs for the Ease of all his Subjects; which I am persuaded the Church of England by her Compliances without obstinacy, as far as without deserting her Religion she may, will in the Event demonstrate to be black-mouth'd Calumnies. FINIS.
