O83 99826619 31022
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT THE Oaths of Allegiance & Supremacy. The Oath of ALLEGIANCE. I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testifie and declare in my Conscience before God and the World, That our Soveraign Lord King CHARLES is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other His Majesties Dominions and Countries: And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, hath any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of His Majesties Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or His Countries, or to discharge any of His Sub∣jects of their Allegiance and Obedience to His Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to His Majesties Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of His Majesties Subjects within His Majesties Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that not withstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommunicati∣on or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or His Successours, or by any Authority derived or pretended to be derived from him or his Soo, against the  King; His Heirs or Suc∣cessours, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I will bear Faith and true Allegi∣ance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successours, and Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made against His or Their Persons, Their Crown and Dignity, by reason or colour of any such Sentence or Declaration, or other∣wise; and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Suc∣cessours, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against Him or any of Them. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murthered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved; That neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever hath power to absolve me of this Hath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Autho∣rity to be lawfully administred unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely Acknowledge, and Swear according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, with∣out any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever: And I do make this Recogni∣tion and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God, &c. The Oath of SUPREMACY. I A. B. Do utterly testifie and Declare in my Conscience, That the Kings Highness is the onely supreme Governour of this Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath, or ought to have any Iurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-emi∣nence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign Iurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise from hence∣forth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and lawful Successours, and to my power shall assist and defend all Iurisdictions, Priviledges, Pre-eminences and Authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings Highness His Heirs and Successours, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1672.
