P1219 12005780 52304
MY Soul hath stil in remembrance the grievous shakings and rendings that have been in this Nation, which entred deep into the bowels of it, and made every heart ake, and every mind astonished. This Nation was setled in religi∣on and outward peace, in such a way as was pleasing to most: but yet there was a spirit within, which had been long groaning under oppression, whose sighs and cryes entred into the ears of the Lord; and he arose up in his fury and jealousie, and rent the heavens, and rent the earth, so breaking the very foundations of both, that men generally were amazed, and wondred what would become of all. The former Religion was almost buried in confusion, and in dan∣ger of being utterly lost: a long-spun corroding war were we en∣tangled in, which administred no hopes nor likelihood of peace. The hand of the Lord reacheth through all these dominions; Mastracy, Ministry, the common people, the people of God (both such as were accounted so, and such as were indeed so) the line of confusion was stretched over them all; they did all reel and tot∣ter like a drunken man, as if they had been so to fal, as to rise up no more: But behold how suddainly and unexpectedly was there a settle∣ment of al again! The Nation setled in peace, Magistracy setled, Ministry setled, the common people setled; and those which were shaken in their Spirits, got into their several waies in religion and setled again. Thus there was a general healing of all again save onely of a few, whose Spirits God had so reached, that their wound was incurable: and unless somewhat of God had been brought forth, which the world cannot know (nay the religions spirit of man which is below, can no more reach it, then the common spirit of the world) they had remained miserable, lost, scattered, and confounded to this day. But the Lord hath in infinitemercy visited them, in the season of distress; and there hath a little foolish thing broke forth (at which all the wise, and religious in the Spirit of this world cannot but stumble) which hath administred relief, and discovered the foundation whereupon they also can settle. So that
now there is as it were an universal settlement, as every creature is gathered into that center, which is proper and sutable to its Spi∣rit to bottom on. Now this I have to say to all; Let every one look to his foun∣dation, for the Lord can arise again, yea and will arise again and shake once more; and then the heavens and the earth which have not a true foundation, cannot but fall. If the earth be not founded upon and settled in righteousness, its present establishment will not stand: if the heavens be not founded upon and setled in truth, they will melt and pass away before the fire of the Lord. There is a spirit that mourneth deeply to the Lord, groaning in∣wardly, and his ears are open to it, and he will plead the cause of his seed: and the Churches and religions, wherein the seed of the Serpent can live and flourish, shall wither and come to an end. Dust is already become the Serpents food; the Spirt of man in all his exercises of religion, knoweth not the bread of life: but the dead feed upon the dead, and the dead spirit of man loves to have it so. But this cannot continue, for the Lord hath been at work all this while, and when he brings forth the people which he hath been forming, and their religion, the religion of man will appear what it is; and shame and sorrow will be the portion of all who have pleased themselves therein, and trifled away the day of their visitation. Be wise now therefore, O ye wise ones; be religious, O religious ones! Open the eye and ear that hath been shut, shut the eye and ear that hath been open: Stumble no longer, least ye fall and rise no more. I know ye cannot see, for the wrong eye is open, and the Lord hath designed to hide his wisdom from that eye. If it be pos∣sible for you, become poor in spirit, least ye at last prove to be the rich, whom the Lord will send empty away. Sell all apace, that ye may have wherewith to buy the Pearl. Ye have not known the appearance of the Lord, but in your wisdom have disdained it, and he hath disdained to make use of you in this great work; but it hath been pleasant to him to lay stumbling blocks before you, that ye might fall and be broken. The children, the fools, the blind can see the way, and enter into life: but ye that are men, that are wise, that have both your eys, that can judge in religion, and de∣termine what is Orthodox and what erroneous, yet cannot.
O hear, that your souls may live! Ye know not how short your time is, the day of your visitation passeth away faster then ye are aware. The cry hath long gone forth, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, and his Spouse hath been preparing for his bed. Ye must off with your old Garments, and have the new Garment on, ye must have the true oyl in your Lamps, or the door of the Kingdom will be shut upon you, and there will be no entrance for you. In plain terms, ye must part with all your Religion which ye have gathered in your own wisdom, which hath grown up in the Aposta∣cy, and which onely can make a fair show in the dark, but cannot endure the searching light of the day of the Lord; and ye must purchase the true religion, the true righteousness, the true inno∣cency and purity of Christ: the old must be done away, truly done away, and the new come in the place; so that flesh and self may be quite destroyed, and nothing but Christ found in you, and you found no where but in Christ, if you enter into his Kingdom: for no unclean thing can enter. Therefore put away pride, and passion, and enmity, and fleshly reasonings; and seek out that which is pure, and enter into it, and take up the cross against all that is contrary, that so you may be wrought into it, and found in it. And turn from all imaginings, and conceivings about the meanings of Scripture, in the uncertain and erring mind, and come to that which is infallible. And know the silencing of the fleshly part, that the spiritual part may grow in the wisdom, that so ye may learn in the spirit, and know the word of God, and be able to speak it. My bowels are toward you, and in bowels hath this been writ: not to anger or shame you, but to provoke you to jealousie against that dark and evil spirit, which leads you to destruction, under the guise and appearance of a light and good spirit. Nor is it to glory over you, for my soul lyeth down in shame and sorrow before the Lord, and the reproach of my own Apostacy and seeking re∣lief from the world (turning from th Lord, who had wounded me, to earthly vanities for ease) will not easily be covered. The Lord had been kind to me in breaking of me in my religion, and in visiting me with sweet and precious light from his own spirit, but I knew it not. I felt, and could not but acknowledge a power up∣on me, and might have known what it was, by its purifying of my heart, and begetting me into the image of God: but I confind it to
appear  a way of demonstration to my reason and earthly wise∣dom, and for want of satisfaction therein, denyed it and rebelled against it; and so, after all my former misery, lost my entrance, and sowed seeds of new misery and sorrow to my own soul, which since I have reaped. So that I have no cause to boast over others, but to lie low in abasement of spirit. And what I write, is not in any dominion or authority of my own, but to bring others unto that dominion and authority, which it is good for me, and for every one else to be subject to. The Lord strip us of our own understand∣ing, and of that righteousness which is but ours (though we have called it his) that so we may be gathered into, and receive his un∣derstanding, and be cloathed with his righeousness, and feel his rest and peace. And happy is he that loseth all to gain this; but he that keepeth what he hath too long, shall in the end lose all, and yet not gain this neither. Therefore be no longer wise in the eye of flesh, or according to what man calleth wisdom, but be truly wise.
If the Reader (before he peruse this Book) would be perswaded to amend with his Pen these Errors and mistakes of the Press (some whereof make the sense difficult, some wholly pervert it) it may prove for his own ease and benefit. Smaller errors, as of adding or substracting letters, or mistaking the stops, the sence may somewhat help him in. PAge 13, l. 7. r. And, l. 31. r. It: p. 16. l. 2. r. when. l. 11. r. man. p. 17. l. 3. r. light. p 18 l 15. r. is profitable. p. 19. l 33. r. moving. p. 21. l. 13. r. known. p. 24. l. 11. r. enjoyed. l. 36. r. cherished. p. 27. l. 31. r. found. p. 28. l. 19. for this, r. the. p. 24. l. 15. r. of help. p. 36. l. 8. r. to light, p. 38. l. 27. r. pant. p. 39. l. 1. 2. r. in simplicity. l. 38. r. And then. p. 40. l. 28. is, dele. p. 41. l. 2. got. p. 44. l. 29. if ye. p. 45. l. 1. thou that. l. 23. were formed. p. 51. l. 38. 39. would reach. p. 53. l. 4. knew. l. 20. he. p. 54. slighted. p. 60. l. 1. and witnesses. p. 61. l. last, Answ. p. 66. l. 2. one of. p. 67. 68. for the, r. thee, where the sence requires. p. 68. l. 17. these, l. 24. the, delc. p. 70. l. 7. as he doth. p. 73. l. 14. as. l. 24. betrayers of the life. And so p. 75. l. 9. bringing forth. p. 76. l. 16. world. p. 77. l. last, r. this. p. 81. l. 6. seat. p. 96. l. 19. this day. l. 20. that Scripture. l. 27. then they.
Some POSITIONS concerning the Apostacy from the Christian Spirit and Life. Position I. THat ther hath been a great Apostacy from the spirit of Christ, and from the true light and life of Christianity; which Apostacy be∣gan in the Apostles dayes, and ripened apace afterwards. That the Apostles, and Christians in their days, had the true Spirit, the true Light, the true Life, I think will not be denyed. We know that we are of God, and that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternall life, 1 Joh. 5. 19. 20. They wer truly born of God, and knew the Son of God come, receiving from him a true understand∣ing, and the true light and knowledge in that understanding, and both the understanding and knowledge was rooted and seated in him that is true, wher their scituation & abiding was (we are in him that is true) wher they met with the true Spirit, the true God, the true Life, even life eternal. That they had the true spirit from God, (because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4. 6.) that they had the true light from God (God who commanded the light to shine out of darknesse, hath shined in our hearts, &c. 2 Cor. 4. 6.) that they had the true life from and in the spirit (if we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25.) is gene∣rally acknowledged concerning them. Now of an Apostacy from this, beginning even in their dayes, and to be compleated not long after, the Scriptures also make mention. The Apostle Paul speaks expresly of the
thing, that ther must come a falling away, and a revealing of the man of sinne, the son of perdition, 2 Thes. 2. 3. Christ the man of salvation had shewed and declared the path of life, had discovered the true Church, which was the pillar and ground of truth, against which the gates of he I could not pre∣vail; had sent the true spirit, which could lead into all truth, and preserve in the truth: but ther must spring up a man of sinne, a son of perdition, who in a mystery should work against this, and cause a falling from this to another thing. And this the Apostle did not onely give a touch of here in writing, but he had likewise told them of these things by word of mouth, to which he refers them, vers. 5. This wer enough to an ey opened; but for further illustration to the thick understand∣ing of man, which is surrounded with fogs and mists of dark∣nesse, some more evidences from Scriptures may be given. Christ foretold of false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inward∣ly they are ravening wolves. The Lord sent true Prophets un∣der the Law, and gave them true visions to declare: Christ sent true Apostles and Ministers under the Gospel, and gave them the truth which they should preach and propagate. But then ther wer false Prophets, false Apostles and Ministers to come after, who never wer sent by Christ, nor never re∣ceived the truth from his spirit. Now these do not come to gather into the life and truth of Christ, but to scatter from it; and so either to begin, or uphold an Apostacy. And, saith Christ, beware of them, for they come very subtilly, they come in the sheeps clothing: They get the garment of the sheep upon their backs, even that very garment which the sheep did wear; but they have not the nature of the sheep, but the nature of the wolfe, which is ravenous after the life of the sheep. Mark wher ther is the Garment without, but not the nature within; wher ther is the form of God∣linesse, but not the power; wher ther are Scripture-words and practises, but not the spirit of life from which they came, ther's the false Prophet, ther's the Wolf, ther's the Apo∣state, ther's the Seducer from Christ. Aagin, Christ fore-tells of many false Prophets, Mat. 24.
11. And many false Prophets shal rise, and shal deceive ma∣ny: and vers. 24. For ther shal arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they shal deceive the very Elect. And as Christ himself, so his Apostles also after him, by the same spirit, foretel of the same thing. The Apostle Paul speaks of seducing spirits in the latter times, and of Doctrines of Devils, which should prevail to cause a departure in some from the faith, 1 Tim. 4. 2. And if in those days the power of Seducers was so great, as to draw from the truth, which was then so manifest and living, how easie would it be to keep from the truth afterward, when it had been long lost and out of remembrance, and thereby de∣ceit got into the place and name of it. The Apostle Peter also foretold of false Teachers, who should privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them: and that they should so prevail, that their pernitious wayes should be followed by many, and the way of truth evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Again, Paul in his 2d Epist. to Tim. speaks of the last days, that the times therin should be perillous, Chap, 3. Christ had said, The love of many should wax cold, and iniquity abound, Mat. 24. 12. And Paul showes how the times would prove very perillous by the abounding of iniquity. In the last dayes perillous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their owne selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Pa∣rents, unthankeful, unholy, without natural affection, truce-brea∣kers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, traytors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, 2. Tim. 2. vers. 1. 2, 3, 4. Behold what kind of fruit sprung up from the false doctrine of the false Teachers in the Apostacy from the truth. And yet al this un∣der a form of godlinesse, Having a form of Godlinesse, but de∣nying the power therof, vers. 5. Christ sent the power of God∣linesse into the world, to subdue the root from whence al this springs, to kil the evil nature inwardly: but in the A∣gostacy the evill nature is not killed, but the power denyed which should kil it, and the form kept up to cover the evil
nature with. The inwardly ravening nature, which devours and destroyes the stirrings and shootings forth of the just one in the heart, that gets the sheeps clothing, the form of God∣linesse to cover it selfe with. Look any wher among the A∣postates from the Apostles spirit and doctrine, and see; Is selfe-love killed? is covetousnesse killed? is boasting and pride killed? is the love of pleasures killed? are Persecutors and oppressors killed? and is your honour and glory laid in the dust? Nay they are but covered with the form, there life is stil in them; the power wherewith they should be killed was at first denyed, and now is lost and not known, wher there is the life, ther is the power; and wher ther is the power, the evil nature is killed: but wher the evil nature is not killed, ther is onely a form of godlinesse, a covering, a painted Sepulchre, but rottennesse within. Now those last dayes and last times were not far off, but begun then: For the Apostle exhorts Timothy to turn away from such, vers. 5. From such turn away; intimating that even then there wer such to be turnedaway from. And he saith, vers. 8. that they did then resist the truth like Jannes and Jam∣bres, who with a likenesse of what Moses wrought, but with∣out life, did strive to resist the life and power that was in Moses. (And this is the work of all deceivers, to get their own spirit into the likeness, and then to make use of the like∣nesse to oppose and suppresse the true life and power.) So that they were come even then, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle to Timothy. And Jude saith, that ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousnesse, and denying the onely Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, were crept in already, vers. 4. of his E∣pistle. And the Apostle John speaks very expresly, 1. Joh. 2. 18, 19. Little Children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shal come, even now are ther many Antichists, wherby we know that it is the last time., They went out from us, &c. Christ instructing his Disciples concerning the last times, tells them ther shall arise false Christs, with great power of deceit, Mat. 24. v. 24. Now saith John here, ther are come
many Antichrists, wherby we know it is the last time, Mark, Ther wer many Antichrists to begin and lay the foundation of the apostacy, and make way for the great Antichrist (who was to be their successor in the apostacy., and not the successor of the Apostles in the truth:) And these did not. a∣bide in the doctrine of the Apostles, who preached the ever∣lasting Gospel, nor in the spirit and principle which they were in; but went out from them, from theit spirit (from the a∣nointing to which they kept, and by which they were kept) into another spirit, and preached another Gospel; a Gospel which was not the power of God to kil the earthly, but con∣sisted in such a dead literal knowledge of things, as the earth∣ly might be fed and kept alive by. And as the great Anti∣christ was to come, so there Antichrists who were to make way for him, were already come, and were already laying the foundation of, and beginning the apostacy. So that the Spirit of Antichrist (that very spirit wherein Antichrist succeeded, and in which he grew up, and perfected the apostacy) was then in the world, as this Apostle saith yet more manifestly, 1 Joh. 4. 3. This is that spirit of Antichrist, wherof ye have heard that it should come, ànd even now already is it in the world. Nor was it idle, but it was at work, working it selfe into the form of godlinesse, that it might eat out the power, drive out the true spirit, and make a prey of the life. The mystery of iniquity, saith the Apostle Paul, doth already work, 2 Thes. 2. 7. This spirit did work in a mystery of iniquity to eat out the mystery of godlinesse, and to set up this mystery of iniquity in the world instead of the mystery of godliness. And it did pre∣vail to wind it self into the form, & get possession of the form, and also to trample upon & keep under the life. It gained the outward Court, (for when that spirit had corrupted it, the Lord did not regard it, but gave it up to it) and it trod down the holy City, Rev. 11. 2. And this mystery of iniquity did not begin to work many ages after the Apostles, but even then, in their dayes, already: The mystery of iniquity doth already work. And look now into the estate of the Churches then, ac∣cording to what the Scripture records of them, and the sym∣ptoms of its working will plainly appear. The Church of
Ephesus (among whom some of the grievous wolves had encred, Act. 20. 29.) had left their first love, Rev. 2. 4. The Churches of Galatia wer bewitched from the Gospel, Gal, 3. 1. The Church at Coloss was entangled and made subject to the rudiments of the world, and ordinances (which perish with the using) after the commandements and doctrines of men, Col 2. v. 20, 22. (Mark. When once one comes to be subject to the commandments and doctrines of men, to pe∣rishing ordinances and worldly rudiments which men teach and command, the true state is lost, and the apostacy is en∣tred into. Here the wrong Teacher is teaching, and he teach∣eth the wrong thing, the wrong doctrines, the wrong Com∣mandments; and the wrong ear is hearing, which hears the wrong voice, and knoweth not the true: and so the more it heareth and practiseth, and the hotter its zeal groweth, the deeper it stil runs into the apostacy.) The Church at Corinth also was haunted with false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. v. 12, 13. in∣somuch as the Apostle was afraid lest that Church should be corrupted by them, vers. 3. The Church in Pergamus had them that held the doctrine of Balaam, Rev. 2. 14. The Church in Thyatira suffered the woman Jezebel, which cal∣led her selfe a Prophetess, to seduce and bring forth children in the apostacy, Rev. 2. v. 20. and 23. The Church in Sardis had a name to live, but was dead, Rev. 3. 1. having defiled her Garments, vers. 4. The Church in Laodicea, looked up∣on her self as rich, and increased with goods, & as having need of nothing: but was wretched, miserable, poor, blind, (so then the ey was put out) and naked, wanting the gold, wanting the rayment, wanting the eye-salve, Rev. 3. 17. 18. And lastly all the Gentiles were warned by Paul, in his Epi∣stle to the Church at Rome, (whereby that Church might look upon her selfe as more particularly concerned therein) to look to their standing, lest they falling from the faith, from the truth, from the life into the apostacy (as the Jewes had done) might also feel the severity of God, as the Jewes had, Chap. 11. ver. 20, 21, 22. Thus it is evident that the apostacy had got footing, and began to spread in the Apostles dayes: and the Apostle John
in the spirit beholding the future state of things, sees it o∣verspread and over-run al, al Nations drunk with the cup of fornication, Rev. 18. 3. The way of truth had been evil spo∣ken of long before, 2 Pet. 2. 2, and the rock of ages, which alone can establish in the truth, had been forsaken, and al be∣came as a Sea, and up gets the beast (which could not rise while the power of truth stood) and the woman upon the beast, with the cup of deceit, and of errour from the life, in her hand; and this she gives all the Nations to drink, and they drink and are drunk with it, so that al Nations have been intoxica∣ted with the doctrines and practises of apostacy. They have took that for truth, which the Whore told them was truth, and they have observed those things as the commands of God, which the Whore told them were the commands of God. And by this means they have never come to be married to Christ, to be in union with him, to receive the law of life from his spirit, and to know the liberty from the bondage of cor∣ruption, but have been in the bed of fornication with the Whore, and have pleased, glutted, and satisfied the whorish principle in themselves with this fornication. And thus cor∣ruption did over-spread al the earth: for taking in a corrupt thing in stead of the truth, it cannot purifie the heart, but cor∣rupt it more. A corrupt profession, corrupt doctrines may paint, and make a man to himselfe seem changed, but the corruption still lodges within, which a spiritual ey can easily discern, though he that is in the corruption cannot. The Pha∣risees did seem glorious to themselves, but Christ saw through them. And every sort of people now, in their several strains and forms of apostacy, seem glorious to themselves, but the spirit of Christ sees through them al, to that which lies under∣neath (in whom it raigns) and ther it finds corruption in∣creased and strengthned in its nature by the form; though outwardly painted with it. Doth not fornication defile, cor∣rupt? so doth the fornication of the Whorish spirit: the earth was corrupted with it, Rev. 19. 2. So that this hath been the universal state of Christendom since the apostacy, the errour, the deceit, the fornication of the Whore hath corrupted them, and withheld their eys from the sight of that life and truth
which hath power in it to purifie them. Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, Tongues, have been al waters; weak, unstable, with∣out any foundation in religion, but fit to be swayed and tos∣sed up and down with every wind or breath of the Whore, of whose cup they had al drunk, and by whose spirit they were all guided: for the whore sate upon them, Rev. 17. 15. The whore, which had whored from God, and so was not the true Church, sate upon Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues. She sate upon them, she had them under her, she ruled and gui∣ded them by her cup of fornication, and with her spirit of for∣nication, as a man would guide the beast whereupon he rides. So that al that the Nations do from henceforth, in religion is under the Whore, according to her guidance, by virtue of the wine that they have drunk out of her cup. And though God reserved to himselfe a remnant to wor∣ship him, and give so ne testimony to his truth al this time, yet the beast (which was managed by the Whore) had power over them: power to make war with them, power to overcome them, Rev. 13. 7. The beast had power over all kindreds, tongues and nations, every wher to overcome the Saints, and suppresse the truth they at any time were moved to give testi∣mony to, and to set up the worship of the beast, and make al the earth fal down before that, Rev. 13. 7. 8. And the se∣cond beast had and exercised al the power of the first beast, and set up his image, and gave it life, and caused men gene∣rally to worship it, Rev. 13. 12. And he caused al both smal and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive his mark, some way or other, either in their right hand or in their forehead, vers. 16. And such as would not receive his mark, nor worship him, he had power to persecute and kil, and he did kil them, vers. 15. and the Whore drunk their blood, Chap. 17. 6. and God required it at her hand, Chap. 19. 2. though she made the hand of the beast execute it, and would seem to wash her own hands of it. So that now since the dayes of the Apostles, even al this time of the Apostacy, since the man child hath been caught up to God, and was not to be found in the earth (which makes it seem such a strange thing for people to say Christ
is in them) and the woman hath been in the wilderness, and not in the habitable part of the world, Rev. 12. 5. 6. if al this time, any one wil look for the true religon, for the true Church, for the true knowledg and worship of God, he must not look on any Nation, or any People, or among the Tongues, which are cried up in Nations and people, for the original, and as the chief interpreters of the original; for they are al drunk with the whores cup; they are under the power, dominion, authority and service of the whore, who rides upon the beast, to whom power was given over al kindreds, tongues and nations. But look among the Nations who was persecu∣ted, whose blood was drunk, whom the powers of the Nati∣ons made war against, ther alone the testimony of Jesus is to be found, Rev. 12. 17. ther alone are the witnesses against the present idolatry and corruption, and to some truths or other of Christs which God enlightned them with, and wherto he, stirred them up to give their testimony, though with the loss of their estates, liberties or lives. Now by what hath been expressed, is it not manifest to e∣very ey, that hath room but to let in the letter of the Scrip∣ture, in simplicity and plainness, that there hath been a great apostacy from the true knowledge of Christ, and an universal corruption & power of death sprung up, instead of the power of his life and grace? The grace of God which bringeth salvation, hath disappeared; and the abomination of desolation hath took up its place, and filled it with deadly venome against the truth and against the life, so that enmity against God, under a pretense of love and zeal to him, hath reigned generally in the hearts of men, from the times of the Apostles to this pre∣sent day. And as the light breaks forth, and their eys come to be opened, they wil see that they have been and are ha∣ters of God, and of his life and spirit, but lovers of the world, and of such a religion as suits the worldly Spirit.
Position II. THat in this great Apostacy, the true state of Christianity hath been lost. This must needs be: for if ther was an Apostacy from the thing, ther could not be a retaining of the thing, about which the Apostacy was. If they apostatised from the spirit, from the light, from the life; then they wer gone from it, they lost it. Now it may be instanced in every particular, how the state of Christianity was lost, but that would be too vast and tedious: it may suffice therfore to instance in some considera∣bles ones, which may lead into the discovery of the rest. 1. The true rule of Christianity, or the rule of a Christian, which is to direct, guid and order him in his whole course, was apostatized from and lost. What is a Christians rule, whereby he is to steer and order his course? A Christian is to be a follower of Christ, and consequently must have the same rule to walk by, as Christ had. A Christian proceeds from Christ, hath the same life in him, and needs the same rule. Christ had the fulnesse of life, and of his fulnesse we al receive a measure of the same life. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephes. 5. 30. yea we came out of the same spring of life, from whence he came: for both he that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified, are al of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to cal them brethren, Ebr. 2. 11. Now what was his rule? was it not the fulness of life which he received? And what is their rule? is it not the measure of life which they receive? Was not Christs rule the law of the spirit, the law which the spirit wrote in his heart? And is not their rule the law of the spirit, the law which the spirit writes in their hearts? How was Christ made a King and a Priest? was it by the law of a carnal commandment? or by the power of an endles life? And how are they made Kings and Priests to God? Rev. 1. 6. Is it by the law of a car∣nal commandment? or is it by the power of the same endles life?
Lo I come to do thy will, O God, saith Christ, when he cometh into the world, Ebr. 10. ver. 5. & 7. but by what rule? by what law? thy law is within my heart, Psal. 40. 8. And the same spirit who wrote it ther, is also to write the new Covenant with al the laws of it, in the heart of every Christian from the least to the greatest, Ebr. 8. 9. 10. yea the same spirit that dwelt in Christs heart, is to dwel in their hearts, according to the promise of the Covenant, Ezek. 36. 27. This was Pauls rule, after which he walked, the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8. 1, 2. This made him free from the law of sinne and death. Wher is the law of sin writ? wher is the law of death writ? is it not writ in the heart? And must not the law of righteousness and life be writ ther also, if it be able to deal with sin and death? The spirit forms the heart anew, forms Christ in the heart, begets a new creature ther, which cannot sin (He that is born of God sins not) and this is the rule unto righteousnes, the new creature, or the spirit of life in the new creature, Gal 6. 15. 16. In Christ Jesus neither cir∣cumcision availeth any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new crea∣ture. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them. Mark, ther's the rule, the new creature which is begot∣ten in every one that's born of God. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; and this new creature is to be his rule. And as any man walks according to this rule, according to the new creature, according to the law of light and life that the spirit continually breathes into the new creature, he hath peace: but as he transgresses that, and walks not after the spi∣rit, but after the flesh, he walks out of the light, out of the life, out of the peace, into the sea, into the death, into the trouble, into the condemnation. Here then is the law of the converted man, the new creature; and the law of the new creature is the spirit of life which begat him, which lives and breathes & gives forth his law continually in him. Here's a Chri¦stian, here's his rule: He that hath not the new creature form∣ed in him, is no Christian: and he that hath the new creature, hath the rule in himselfe. Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know al things, 1 Joh. 2. 20. How came they to know al things? doth not John say, it was by the unction? the a∣nointing
was in them, a foundation or wel-spring of light and life, issuing forth continually such Rivers and streams of life within, as they needed no other Teacher in the truth and way of life, ver. 27. The Comforter did refresh their hearts sufficiently, and lead them into all truth. Search the Apostles Epistles, and ye shall find them testifying of the Lords send∣ing his spirit into the hearts of Christians, and exhortations to them not to grieve or quench the spirit, but to follow as they were lead. They were to live in the spirit, and to walke in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25. and the spirit was to walk, and live, and bring forth his own life and power in them, 2 Cor. 6. 16. And what can be the proper and full rule of Gods Sons and Daughters, but the light of the spirit of life, which they receive from their father? Thus God did advance the state of a believer, above the state of the Jews under the law: for they had the law, though written with the singer of God, yet but in tables of stone; but these have the law, writ by the finger of God in the tables of their hearts. Their's was a law without, at a distance from them, and the Priests lips were to preserve the knowledg of it, and to instruct them in it: but here is a law within, nigh at hand, the immediate light of the spirit of life shining so immediatly in the heart, that they need no man to teach them, but have the spirit of prophesy in themselves, and quick living teachings from him continually, and are made such Kings and Priests to God, as the state of the law did but represent. The Gospel is the substance of al the shadowes contained in the law; A Christian is he that comes into this substance, and lives in this substance, and in whom this substance lives, and his rule is the substance it self, in which he lives, & which lives in him. Christ is the substance who lives in the Christian, and he in Crhist: Christ lives in him by his spirit, and he in Christ by the same spirit: ther he lives, and hath fellowship with the Father and the Son, in the light wher∣in they live, and not by any outward rule, 1 Joh. 1. 6. 7. But what is the rule now in the Apostacy? Among the Papists the rule is the Scripture, interpreted by the Church (as they cal themselves) with a mixture of their own precepts and traditions.
Among the Protestants the rule is the Scriptures, accor∣ding as they can understand them by their own study, or ac∣cording as they can receive the understanding of them from such men as they account Orthodox. And hence arise conti∣nual differences, and heaps, and sects, one following this in∣terpretation, another that. An this is a grievous apostacy, and the root, spring and foundation of al the rest: for he that misseth in his begin∣ning, he that begins his Religion without the true rule, how can he proceed aright in any thing afterwards? Object. But are not the Scriptures the word of God? and is not the word of God to be a Christians rule? If every one should be left to his own spirit, what confusion and uncer∣tainty would this produce? Answ. The Scriptures are not that living word, which is appointed by God to be the rule of a Christian; but they con∣tain words, spoken by the spirit of God, testifying of that word, and pointing to that word which is to be the rule. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testifie of me: and ye will not come to me that ye might have life, Joh. 5. 39. 40. The Scriptures are to be searched, for the testimony which they give of Christ; and when that testimony is received, Christ is to be come to, and life received from him. But the Pharisees formerly, and Christians since (I mean Christians in name) search the Scriptures, but do not come to Christ for the life; but stick in the letter of the Scriptures, and oppose the life with the let∣ter, keeping themselves from the life by their wisdome and knowledg in the letter. Thus they put the Scriptures into the place of Christ, & so honor neither Christ nor the Scriptures. I had been no honour to John to have been taken for the light, his honour was to point to it: nor is it any honour to the Scriptures to be called the word of God, but their ho∣nour is to discover and testifie of the word. Now hear what the Scriptures cal the word: In the beginning was the Word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, Jho. 1. 1. and the word was made flesh, vers. 14. This was the name of Christ, when he came into the world in the flesh, to sow his life in
the world. And when he comes again into the world, out of a far Country, to fight with the beast and false Prophets, and to clense the earth of the Whores fornication and idols, wherewith she had corrupted it, he shal have the same name again his name is called, The word of God, Rev. 19. 13. So Pe∣ter calleth that the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And this word that liveth and abideth for ever, was the word that they preached, ver. 25. And they that believed, did not cry up the words that the Apostles spake, for the word; but received the thing they spake of, the ingrafted word, which being received with a meek, quiet, and submissive spirit, is able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21. This is the word of faith that is nigh,, in the heart and in the mouth, Rom. 10. 8. This is the word that stands at the door of the heart, and speaks to be let in (Behold I stand at the door and knock:) and when it is let in, it speaks in the heart, what is to be heard and done. It is nigh, it is in the heart and in the mouth, to what end? that thou mightest hear it, and do it. The living word, which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, divides in the mouth, and divides in the heart the vile from the precious, yea it reacheth to the very inmost of the heart, and cuts between the roots, Ebr. 4. 11. and this thou art to hear and do. Thou art to part with al the vile words, the vile conversation, the vile course and worship of the world outwardly, and the vile thoughts and course of sin inwardly, as fast as the word discovers them to thee, and to exercise thy selfe in that which is folly and madnesse to the ey of the world, and a grievous cross to thine own worldly na∣ture; yea when the word reaches to the very nature, life, and spirit within, from whence al that comes; that strong wise root of the fleshly life in the heart, must not he spared, nor that foolish weak thing (to mans wise ey) which is brought in stead thereof, be rejected: which when it it received, is but like a little seed, even the least of all seeds; and when it growes up, it is a long while but like a child: and yet keeping in that childishness, out of the wisdom, it enters into that Kingdom, which the greatest wisdom of man (in al his zealous waies and forms of religion) fels short, and is shut out of. This is the
word of life, this is the true living rule, and way to eternal life; and this is the obedience, this is the hearing and doing of the word. He that hath an ear, let him hear. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. Are ye in the faith? then Christ is in you. Is not Christ in you? then ye are in the reprobate state, out of the faith. Is Christ in you, and shal he not hold the reins, and rule? shal the living word be in the heart, and not the rule of the heart? shal he speak in the heart, and the man or woman in whom he speaks, run to words of Scripture formerly spoken, to know whether these be his words or no? Nay, nay, his sheep know his voice better then so. Did the A∣postle John, who had seen, and tasted, and handled, and prea∣ched the word of life, send Christians to his Epistles, or any other part of Scriptures, to be their rule? Nay, he directed them to the anointing, as a sufficient Teacher, 1 Joh. 2. 17. He that believeth on me, as the scriptuce hath said, out of his belly shal flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7. 38. He that hath the fountain of life in him, issuing up rivers of li∣ving water continually, hath he need to go forth to fetch in water? The Kingdom of heaven is within you, saith Christ, and he bids seek the kingdom. Light the candle, sweep thine own house, seek diligently for the kingdom; there it is, if thou canst find it. Now he that hath found the kingdom within, shal he look without, into words spoken concerning the kingdom, to find the lawes of the kingdom? Are not the lawes of the kingdom to be found within the kingdom. Shal the kingdom be in the heart, and the laws of the kingdom writ∣ten without, in a book? Is not the Gospel the ministration of the spirit? and shal he who hath received the spirit, run back to the letter to be his guid? shal the living spirit, that gave forth Scriptures, be present, and not have preheminence a∣bove his own words? What is the proper intent of the let∣ter? is it not to testifie of the spirit, and to end in the spirit; The Law, the Prophets, John led to Christ in the flesh, and he was to be the increasing light, when they should decrease. Christ words in the flesh, the Apostles words afterwards, and
al words since are but to lead to Christ in the spirit, to the e∣ternal living substance; and then the words of Christ, of the Apostles, or any words spoken from the same spirit in these dayes, have brought to the spirit, to the feeling and setling of the soul in the living foundation, and to the building and perfecting of the man of God therein, they have attained their end and glory. But to cry up these, not understanding their voice, but keeping at a distance from the thing that they invite to; the words hereby are put out oftheir place, out of their proper use and service, and so attain neither their end nor their glory. And though men put that upon them which seems to be a greater glory, namely to make them his rule and guid, yet it being not a true glory, it is no glory, but a dishonour both to them, and to the spirit who gave them to another end. Now for the other part of the Objection, that if men should be lest to their own spirits, and should follow the gui∣dance of their own spirits, it would produce confusion and uncertainty: I do acknowledge it, it would do so. But here is no leaving of a man to his own spirit, spoken of or intended, but the directing and guiding of a man to the word and spirit of life; to know and hear the voice of Christ which gathers and translates man out of his own spirit into his spirit: and here is no confusion or uncertainty, but order, certainty and stability. The light of Gods spirit is a certain and infallible rule, (and the ey that sees that, is a certain ey) whereas mans un∣derstanding of the Scriptures is uncertain and fallible; he having not the true ear, receiveth such a literal uncertain knowledg of things, into his uncertain understanding, as de∣ceives his soul. And here man in the midst of his wisdom and knowledg of the Scriptures, is lost in his own erring and un∣certain mind, and his soul deceived, for want of a true root and foundation of certainty in himself. But he that is come to the true shepherd, and knows his voice, he cannot be decei∣ved. Yea he can read the Scriptures safely, and taste the true sweetnesse of them: for he being in the life, can taste the sweetnesse of the words that came from the life; but
man who is out of the life, feeds on the husks, and can receive no more. He hath gathered a dead, dry, literal, husky know∣ledg out of the Scripture, and that he can relish: but should the life of the words, and things there spoken of be opened to him, he could not receive them, he himself being out of that wherewith they were wrote, and wherein alone they can be understood. But poor man having lost the life, what should he do? he can do no other, but cry up the letter, and make as good shift with it as he can, though his soul the mean while is starved, and lies in famine and death for want of the bread of life, and a wrong thing is fed. The Scribes and Pharisees made a great noise about the law and ordinances of Moses, exclaiming against Christ and his disciples as breakers and profaners of them; yet they themselves did not truly honor the law and ordinances of Moses, but their own doctrines, commandements and traditions. So these now who make a great noise about the Scriptures, and about the in∣stitutions of the Apostles, do not honor the Scriptures, or the institutions of the Apostles; but their own meanings, their own conceivings, their own inventions and imaginations there∣upon. They run to the Scriptures with that understanding which is out of the truth, and which never shall be let into the truth; and so being not able to reach and comprehend the truth as it is, they study, they invent, they imagine a meaning; they form a likeness, a similitude of the truth as neer as they can, and this must go for the truth: and this they honor, and bow before as the will of God; which being not the will of God, but a likeness of their own inventing and forming, they worship not God, they honor not the Scriptures, but they ho∣nor and worship the work of their own brain. And every Scripture which man hath thus formed a meaning out of, and hath not read in the true and living lights of Gods eternal spi∣rit, he hath made an image by, he hath made an idol of: and the respect and honor he gives this meaning, is not a respect and honor given to God but to his own image, to his own idol. Oh how many are your idols, ye Chri∣stians of England (as ye think your selves to be!) how many are your idols, ye gathered Churches! how full of images and idols are ye, ye spiritual Notionists, who have run from
one thing to another, with the same mind and spirit wherewith ye began at first! But the founder of images hath never been discovered and destroyed in you, and so he is still at work a∣mong you all: and great will your sorrow and distress be, when the Lords quick eye searcheth him out, and revealeth his just wrath against him. In my heart and soul I honor the Scriptures, and long to read them throughout with the pure eye, and in the pure light of the living spirit of God: but the Lord preserve me from reading one line of them in my own-will, or interpreting any part of them according to my own understanding but only as I am guided, led and enlightened by him, in the will and un∣derstanding which comes from him. And here all Scripture, every writing of Gods spirit, which is from the breath of his life, profitable to build up and perfect the man of God: but the instructions, the reproofs, the observations, the rules, the grounds of hope and comfort, (or whatever else) which man gathers out of the Scriptures, (he himself being out of the life) have not the true profit, nor build not up the true thing; but both the gatherings and the gatherer are for destruction. And the Lord will ease the Scripture of the burthen of mans formings and inventions from it, and recover its honor again, by the living presence and power of that spirit that wrote it: And then it shall be no longer abused and wrested by mans earthly and unlearned mind, but in the hand of the spirit, come to its true use and service to the seed, and to the world. 2. The true worship was lost. The true worship of God in the Gospel, is in the spirit. The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall wor∣ship the Father in spirit, and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him, Joh. 4. 23. The true worship is in the spirit, and in the truth, and the true worshippers worship there, and such worshippers the Father seeks, and such worship he ac∣cepts: but all other worship is false worship, and all other worshippers are false worshippers, such worshippers as God seeks not, nor can accept their worship. Did God refuse Cains sacrifice formerly, and can he accept any sacrifice, or worship now that's offered in that nature? why, he that wor∣ships
out of the spirit, he worships in that nature. But he that worships aright, must have his nature changed, and must worship in that thing wherein he is changed in that faith, in that life, in that nature, in that spirit whereby and whereto he is changed. For without being in this, and keep∣ing in this, it is impossible to please God in any thing. He that is the true worshipper is a believer, and in his worship he must keep to his rule, the law of faith, the law of the spirit of life in him, the law which he receives by faith fresh from the spirit of life continually. He must heat and observe the voice of the living word in all his worship, and worship in the presence and power and guidance of that, as that moves and as that carries on, or it is not worship in the spirit. I shall in∣stance only in prayer. Praying alwaies with all prayer and sup∣plication in the spirit, Ephes. 6. 18. Mark, all prayer and suppli∣cation must be in the spirit, yea it must be alwaies in the spirit, which speaks in the heart to God, and makes the intercession, or is is no prayer. If a man speak never so much from his own spirit, with never so much earnestness and affection, yet it is no prayer, no true prayer, but only so far as the spirit moves to it, and so farr as the spirit leads and guids in it. If a man begin without the spirit, or go on without the spirit, this is out of the worship; this is in his own will (and so will-worship) and according to his own understanding (and so fleshly worship) both which are to be crucified, and not to be followed in any thing under the Gospel. Wee are the Circumcision, which wor∣ship God in the spirit, (here are the true worshippers, the circum∣cision; and here's the true worship, in the spirit; and they have no bounds and limits in the flesh, wherein their strength and confidence is broke) and have no confidence in the flesh. If a man address himself to any worship of God without his spirit, hath he not confidence in the flesh? If he begin without the ving of his spirit, doth he not begin in the flesh? if he go on, without the spirits carrying on, doth he not proceed in the strength and confidence of the flesh? But the worship of the spirit, is in its will, and in its time, and is carried on by its light and power, and keeps down the understanding and affectionate part of man, wherein all the world worship, and offer up the unaccepted sacrifices, even the lame and the blinde, which Gods soul hates.
Now this worship, as it is out of mans will and time, and in that which continueth, so it is continual. There is a conti∣nual praying unto God. There is a continual blessing and prai∣sing of his name, in eating, or drinking, or what ever else is done. There is a continual bowing to the majesty of the Lord in every thought, in every word, in every action, though it be in worldly things and occasions, yet the spirit of the Lord is seen there, and the tongue confesseth him there, and the knee boweth to him there: this is the true worship. And this is the rest or sabbath wherein the true worshippers worship. When the creation of God is finished, when the child is formed in the light; and the life breathed into him, then God brings him forth into his holy Land, where he keeps his Sabbath. They that are in the faith, which is the substance of the things hoped for under the Law, are come from all the shadows and types of the Law, and from all heathenish observation of dayes and times in the spirit of this world, where the spirit of man is hard at work, into the true Sabbath, into the true rest, where they have no more to work, but God works all in them in his owntime, and according to his own pleasure. We which have be∣lieved, do enter into rest, Ebr. 4. 3. and he that is entred into his rest, hath ceased from his works, as God from his, vers. 10. He that hath the least taste of faith, knows a measure of rest finding the life working in him, and his soul daily led further and fur∣ther into life by the working of the life, and the heavy yoke of his own labouring after life taken of from his shoulders. Now here's the truth, here's the life, here's the sabbath, here's the worship of the soul thats led into the truth, and preserved in the truth. But what is the worship now in the Apostacy? Among the Papists a very grosse worship, a worship more carnal then ever the worship of the Law was: for that though in its nature it was outward and carnal, yet it was taught and prescribed by the wisdom of God, and was profitable in its place, and to its end: but this was invented by the corrupt wisdom, and set up in the corrupt wil of man, and hath no true profit, but keeps from the life, from the power, from the spirit in fleshly observations, which feed and please the fleshly na∣ture. Look upon their daies consecrated to Saints, and their
canonical hours of Prayer, and their praying in an unknown tongue, with their fastings, feastings, saying of Ave-Maries, Pater-nosters, Creeds, &c. are not all these from the life, out of the spirit, and after the invention, and in the wil of the flesh? Ah their stink is greater then the flesh-pots of Egypt. And the worship of the Protestants comes too near them: for their worship is also from a fleshly principle, and in their own times, and wils, and according to their own understand∣ing and apprehension of things, and not from the rising up and guidance of the infallible life of the spirit in them (for that they will quench.) They also observe dayes, and times, and perishing ordinances, and are not come out of the flesh into that spirit, where the worship is to be know and to be in. 3. The Faith, the true faith was lost. The faith which gives vi∣ctory over the world; the faith which feeds the life of the just, and slayes the unjust; the faith which is pure, the mystery whereof is held in a pure conscience; the faith which gives en∣trance into the rest of God; the faith which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; this hath been lost, and is not yet to be found among those who go for Christians. For those who challenge the name of Christians, and say they believe in Christ, and have faith in him, cannot with their faith overcome the world, but are daily overcome by the world. Where is there a Christian, but he is either in the honours, or in the fashion, or in the customes, or in the worships of the world, if not in them all? He is so farre from overcoming these, that he is overcome with them: yea so overcome, so drunk therewith, that he hath even lost his senses, and thinks he may be a Christian, and in a good state, while he is there. And the life of the just is not fed by their faith, but the un∣just nature is fed, and the righteous witnesse (which is raised up and lives by the true faith) is kept down, and cannot bring forth his life in them, because of their unbelife: for that is the proper name of their faith; for being not true faith, it is not faith, but unbelief. And the faith of Christians (so called) is not a mystery, (they know not the mystery of it, which is held in a pure con∣science)
but consists in believing an Historical relation, and in a fleshly improving of that, and can be held in an impure con∣science. Neither are they entered into rest by their faith: for they know not the Sabbath in the Lord, but are still in a shadowy Sabbarh. Neither is it the substance of what they hope for, but the substance of what they hope for is strange to them. They are not come to Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, the hea∣venly Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of Augels, to the general assembly and Church of the first born, to God the Judge, Christ the Mediator, and the blood of sprinkling, and so to uni∣ty and certainty in the life: but are in opinions, waies and practises suitable to the earthly spirit which may easily be sha∣ken, and must be shaken down to the ground, if ever they know the building of God, and the true faith. 4. The love, the true love; the innocent love, which think no il, nor wishes no ill, much lesse can do any il to any; but suffereth long, and is kind, meek, humble, not seeking its own, but the good of others, this love is lost. The love unfain∣ed is banished, and a fained love, such a love as enmity and violence proceeds from, is got in the place of it. The true love loves the enemy, and cannot return enmity for enmity, but seeks the good of them who hate it: but this love can perse∣cute and hate that which it calls the friend, nay the brother, because of some difference in opinion or practice. The love that was in Christ, taught him to lay down his life for his sheep: and he that hath the same love, can lay down his life for his brother. But the love that is now among Christians, tends rather to the taking away of life. What is the love among the Papists? See their Inquisitions, their wraths, their fire and fagot, &c. What is their love in New-England? is it not a love that can imprison or banish their brother, if he differ but a little from them in judgement or practise about their worship? yea they can whip, burn in the hand, cut off ears, just like the Bishops of old England. If one had told them, when they fled from the persecution of the Bishops here, that they themselves should have done such things, they would have been apt to reply with
Hazael, what, are we dogs? But they fled from the Cross, which would have crucified that persecuting spirit, and so carri∣ed it alive with them; and being alive, it grew by degrees to as great an head there, as it did in the Bishops here. And what is the love here in old England? is it not a love that whips, stocks, imprisons, stones, jeeres? yea the very Teachers (which should be patterns of love to others) they will cast into prison, and distrein the goods of their brother, even almost to his undoing for maintenance, according to a Law of the Land made in the Apostacy. See the Record of Suf∣ferings for Tythes in England, which may make any tender heart bleed to read it, and is like to lie as a brand of infamy on the Magistracy and Ministry of England to succeeding ge∣nerations. Is this the love of the righteous seed? or is it Cains love which is in profession, in word, in shew; but not in deed and in truth? And how can these love God? nay if the true love of God were in them, this enmity could not stand, nor such fruits of it shoot forth. But they have not seen the father or the Son, and that life of them which appears in the earth, the evill spirit in man seeks to destroy, that he may keep up his own image and shadow of life, which the nature of the true life (in its appearance) fights against. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciple, if ye love one another. And by this may all men know, that those that now go for Christians are not Christs Disciples, in that they do not love one another. They are not in unity in the light, and so cannot love one another there; but are onely in unity in forms, in opinions, in profes∣sions, in practises; so any difference there stirs up the enmity, causing risings in the heart against them at least, if it proceed not further. The true love grows from true union and fellow∣ship in the light, where that is not known, there cannot be true love in the spirit, but a fained love in the flesh. 5. The true hope, joy, and peace is lost. The true ground of hope, is Christ in the heart, and the true hope is that hope which ariseth from this ground, from the feeling of Christ there, Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27. What is the true Christians hope? it is Christ in him, he hath eternal life abiding in him, and he knows that cannot but
lead to glory. But what is the common Christians hope? He fastens his hope upon the relation and his beliefe of an History. He that believeth shall be saved: I believe, therefore I shall be saved. And thus as he hath got up a wrong faith, and a wrong love, so he gets up a wrong hope. And this hope will perish: for this is the hope of the Hypocrite, or an hope in the hypocri∣tical nature, which complies with Scripture-words, but is not in union with God, nor with the life of the Scriptures; and so being without the anchor is tossed in the waves of the Sea. And the true joy is in he spirit, from what is felt, and in∣joyned, and hoped for there. But the common Christians joy is from things which he gathers into, and comprehends in his understanding, or from flashes which he feels in his affectionate part, from a fire and sparkes of his own kindling, from whence he fetches his warmth and comfort. And the true peace stands in the reconciliation with God, by having that broken down which causeth the wrath, and to which the wrath is, where ever it is found. The Lambe of God breaks down the wall of separation in the heart, the blood of Jesus (wherein is the life) clenseth away the sin there, ma∣keth the heart pure, uniteth the pure heart to the pure God: here's union, here's fellowship, here's peace. But the common Christians peace is from a mis-understanding of Scriptures, while the wall of separation is standing, while wickednesse lodges in the heart. They reason themselves (from Scripture words) into an apprehension that God is at peace with them, and that they are in union with him, while that of God which is in them witnesseth against them, and checks them, and wars with them: and they are not one with it, nor cannot be in that nature and understanding wherein their life lies, to which belongs no peace. 6. The true repentance, conversion, and regeneration hath been lost. The true Repentance is from dead works, and from the dead principle whence all the dead works proceed: but these have not been repented of; but perished in the apostacy. The pray∣ing, the striving, the worshipping, the fighting hath been from the dead principle. The building up, and whole exercise of Re∣ligion
in the Apostacy, hath been in that understanding which is to be destroyed: and the will, which should have been cru∣cified, hath been pleased and fed with its religion. The true Conversion is from the power of Satan to God, from the darknesse to the light. But in the Apostacy men have not known God or Satan, the light or the darknesse, but have mis∣took, taking the one for the other, worshipping the Devil in stead of God, Rev. 13. 4. and following the dark conceivings of their own and other mens minds concerning scripture, and calling them light. Regeneration is a changing of man, whereby the birth is born of the Spirit: the stripping of the creature of its own nature, of its own understanding, of its own will, and forming it anew in the wombe of the Spirit: so that the old creature is passed away, and there comes forth a new thing, which growes up daily in the new life towards the fulnesse of Christ. But men have been so far from being born of the spirit, that they have not so much as known the gift of the spirit in them; but to this day are enemies, and at a distance from that of God in them which is pure. And if they could but open their eyes, they would see that their birth is fleshly, and consists (at best) but in such a conformity to the letter, as the old nature may imitate and attain: but the immortal seed is not sprung up in them, nor they dead to the mortal, or alive to the immortal. 7. The true wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification and re∣demption is lost. The true wisdom stands in the fear of God and departing from evil: This, those that are taught of God learn, and there∣by are made wise unto salvation. But most that are called Chri∣stians, are not come to the fear of God, and many are got a∣bove it, looking upon it as legall, and not appertaining to the Gospel; but the Gospel state is love, which casteth out fear. Doth the love of God refuse, or cast out the fear of God? Nay it casts out the fear that, brings bondage, the fear that came in by transgression, which fear is stirred up and discovered by the Law. And this is a fear of sin, or a fear arising from sin, through the Law's manifestation of it, and the wrath against it, which causeth both the fear, and much bondage from the fear: And
this the Gospel (which discovers the love, the mercy, the grace, the power, and unites to them) frees from and casts out. But then there is a fear of God, a fear wrought in the heart by his spirit, a fear which is part of the new Covenant, (I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me) a fear which is part of the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6, 7. and endu∣reth for ever, Psal. 19. 9. And this fear is not bondage, but liberty; it is indeed bondage to the unjust, but liberty to the just: for where this fear is, sin is departed from; it sets free, it delivers the feet out of the snare of iniquity: there's true liber∣ty. Can sin prevail in that heart, where the pure clean fear of God is placed by God to keep it down? The love of God doth not cast out this fear, but keeps in this fear: and this fear keeps the heart clean from the evil which defiles, and preserves the love from the enmity, which springs up where this fear is not. Now this fear in the Apostacy was lost, or else what needed there an especial ministry to be raised up to preach it again, Rev. 14. 6. 7? And the estate of Christians every where doth ma∣nifest this loss, for their hearts are not kept clean, which sheweth that the fear, (which doth keep clean, where it is) is wanting in them. There's pollution, there's filth, there's deceit, there's high-mindedness, self-conceitedness, and love of the world and worldly vanities, and many other evils to be found in the hearts of those that go for Christians; and the purity of heart (which comes from the fear, and stands in the wisdom) is not known They are wise to do evil, but want the knowledge to avoid the evil, and do the good: They are wise to get and en∣joy the world, but know not the true riches: They are wise to gather together many Scripture-words against sin, and yet still keep the nature and life of it in the heart, and it as a sweet morsel under the tongue: They are wise to apply promises to comfort themselves with (when sometimes they receive a just wound in their hearts from the righteous one) but know not that nature, or that estate and condition to which all the pro∣mises are made, but are yet in that nature, and in that estate and condition to which the curse appertains. The true righeousnesse stands in the faith, in hearing and o∣beying the word of faith. How comes the righteousnesse of the law, but by hearing and obeying the voice of the Law?
And how comes the righteousnesse of the Gospel, but by hea∣ring and obeying the word of faith, who is preached, and the Preacher of righteousnesse in the heart? The Apostle Paul makes this comparison, Rom. 10. The righteousnesse of the Law speaketh on this wise, The man that doth those things, shall live in them: But how speaketh the word of faith? The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, he that doth that, he that heareth that, shall live in that. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voyce of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. Disobedience to the Law is unrighteous∣nesse, and brings death; and disobedience to the living word is unrighteousnesse, and cannot be justified, but condemned: and obedience to it cannot be condemned, but justified: So that when the soul hears, believes, and obeyes, then it is justified: then its former sins are forgotten, and this is imputed to it un∣to righteousnesse. But when the soul will not hear, will not believe, will not obey; this unbelief is judged in him, and his sins retained, and not remitted. Now is not this a just and e∣quall way of justification, O ye sons of men? is not your way unequal? shall a man continue in the unbelief and rebellion against Christ, against the light, against the faith; and yet be justified by Christ, by the light, by the faith? This cannot be, Gods way of imputation will stand; but mans invented way of imputation, which sprung up in the Apostacy, will not stand. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light; the blood clen∣seth, but not otherwise. If we walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh, there is no condemnation, and not otherwise. The true Baptism is the plunging down of the old thing, with all its filth; and the raising up of a new thing: and it is the new thing, the circumcision, the baptism which is justified. God justifieth his Son, and man onely so far as he is bound in his Son. The true sanctification consists in the growth of the seed, and its spreading (like a leaven) over the heart, and over the whole man. By faith Christ is formed in the heart, the hid∣den man in the mistery is formed there: and as this seed, this leaven, this man growes; so he makes the man holy in whom he grows. The seed of life, the Kingdom of heaven is an holy thing; and as it grows and spreads, it purgeth out the old lea∣ven,
and makes the lump new. But now, in Christians that have grown up in the Apostacy, this seed is not known, this leaven is not so much as discerned; but their holinesse con∣sists in a conformity to rules of Scripture, received into the old heart and understanding. And what a noise hath this made in the world, all this night of the Apostacy, as if this were the heir, and should inherit the Kingdom: Nay, nay, The heir hath appeared (by whose presence it is seen, that this is not the heir) and ye shall not be able to kill him, but he shall live to enjoy his inheritance, and the inheritance shall not be yours. Redemption consists in being bought, by the price of the life, out of sin, out of death, out of the earth, out of the power of the devil. It is a casting off the strong man out of the heart (with all that he brought in) and a delivering from his power. It is a dissolving of the work of sin, which the Devil hath wrought in the heart, and a setting the soul (which is immortal) at liberty; free from sin, and free unto righteousnesse: this is the true Redemption. But this redemption in the Apostacy is a fained redemption; wherein salvation from sin, and the Devil, and his power, is not felt: but the strong man is still in the heart, and keeps the soul in death, and brings forth fruits of death daily. The Christians formerly (in the first day of the breaking forth of Gods power) had Christ in them, the living word; opened their hearts to him, received him in, felt him there, sound him made of God to them their wisdom, their righteous∣nesse, their sanctification, their redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. They had the thing that these words signifie, and speak of, and knew the meaning of the words by feeling of the thing. But Chri∣stians now, in the Apostacy, have got several apprehensions from the words, without feeling the thing the words speak of, and ther lies their Religion. And now the true heir being come, holding forth the thing they have been all talking of, all Sects upon the earth are mad against him, and would fain kill him. They would not have the living substance (which is the heir) live, and nothing be esteemed life but that; but they would have their dead apprehensions from the words live, and their dead forms and practises owned: and the heir of life must
come in their way, in the way that they have hoped and wait∣ed for him, or they will not own him. Awake, awake, O ye Sons of the Apostacy, and of the night, rise up out of the flesh∣ly wisdom, out of the dead fleshly interpretations of Scrip∣tures, out of the dead invented forms of worship, and bow to the Heir, kiss the Son, lest ye feel the force of that dreadful sentence, Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. For of a truth the great Prophet is arisen, and speaks in the heart, and his sheep hear his voice (there are many faithful witnesses thereof) and he that will not hear his voice, must be cut off; there is no avoiding of it: for the two-edged sword is in his hand, and he will cut down the transgressor. 8. The Church, the true Church was lost. The true Church was a company gathered out of the world into God, begotten of and gathered into his life, by the living word, and so had a true place and habitation in God. The Apostle Paul writing to the Thessalonians, stiles them a Church in God. A Church under the Gospel is made up of true Israe∣lites, gathered out of their own spirits and natures, into the measure of the spirit of God in them, as Christ was into the fulnesse. They are such as are begotten of God, born of his spirit, led by him out of Egypt, through the wildernesse to Sion the holy mount, there they meet with the elect precious corner stone which is laid in Sion, and they being living stones are built upon it into Jerusalem the holy City, 1 Pet 2. 5, 6. Ebr. 12. 22. This is the true Church. Every one that believes in Christ, is a living stone, and being a living stone, he is laid upon the living foundation, and so is a part of the building in the Temple of the living God. Yea his body and and spirit be∣ing clensed, he himself is a Temple wherein God dwels, ap∣pears, and is worshipped. And the gathering of any of these together at any time in the life, in the name of Christ, is a larger Temple, and such a Temple as Christ never fails to be in the midst of. But the great Temple, the ful Church is the general assembly of the first-born. This is the unerring pillar and ground of truth. This alwaies bare up truth, truth never failed here; but when it was at any time lost in the world, it
might from hence be recovered again when God pleased, and as far as he pleased. Indeed the Law of the Lord hath alwaies gone forth from this Sion, and the living word from this Je∣rusalem: But what hath the Church been in the Apostacy? a building of stone, say some: and that not onely among Papists, but here in England also, many have called the old Mass-house a Church, a Temple, the house of God, pleading for it to be a holy place; and have showed it by their practises, keeping off their hats while they were in it. Others say, not the stone building, but the people that meet there, is the Church: whereof many are openly prophane, yea so far from being gathered into the spirit, and so ignorant of his motions, that they are ready to scoffe, if they hear a man speak of being moved by the spirit. What are these? are these living stones, whereupon the true Church alone can be built? are these children of the day? Nay these are children of the night, children brought up in the Apostacy from the true light, the true life, the true rule of Christianity, the true wor∣ship, the true faith, the true love, &c. and so are dead stones in that building, but not true living stones in Gods build∣ing. Other sorts separate from these, and gather Congregations out of these; but still in the same spirit, in the same nature, being not themselves gathered out of the Apostacy from the spirit, into the spirit again; and so they build but with the same stones as were in the old building, and not with the new and living stones, and so are but a more refined appearance of a Church, but not a true Church. Not a Church in God, and by the gathering of his spirit; but of their own gathering, after a form, according as they have imagined from their reading and studying of the Scriptures, 9. (Which may be the last instance) The Ministry, the true Ministry hath been lost. The true Ministry was a ministry made and appointed by the spirit, by the gift of the Spirit bestowed on them, and by the spirit sending of them, and appointing them to their work. Christ bid his Apostles and Disciples wait at Jerusalem for the promise of the spirit; and when he had given them the
spirit, he gave them to the Church for the work of the Mini∣stry, Ephes. 4. 11. 12. Act. 20. 28. And if none can be a mem∣ber of the true Church, but by being begotten out of death into life by the spirit, surely none can be able to minister to him who is so begotten, but by the same spirit. So these receiving their Ministry of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20. 24. and the gift of the spirit from him, they were made able Mini∣sters of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. They were able in God, to minister from his spirit to the spirits of his people. And they did not minister a literal knowledg of things to the understanding of man: but they led men to the spirit of God, and ministred spiritual things to that spiritual understanding which was given them of God. Neither did they make use of their own wisdom and art, to tickle the natural ear; but spake to the conscience, with the demonstration of the spirit, in the sight of God, as it pleased the spirit to give them utterance. But how have Ministers been made in the Apostacy; By or∣ders from men, set up in their own wils, after their own inven∣tions. And how have they been qualified, but by humane arts and languages, which have been of high esteem in that which men call the Church, since the language and skill of the spirit of God hath been lost; God (who chose in his own Church) doth not chuse here, who shall be his Ministers; but any man can appoint his Son to be a Minister, if he will but educate him in learning, and send him to the University, and so bring him in∣to that way of order wherein men make Ministers: and then he is able to minister unto man, the things of man, according to human skil. And this in the dark night of apostacy, must go for a true call to the ministery of God. Indeed they are as true Ministers, as the Church is to which they minister: but they ne∣ver were, nor never can be thus made Ministers of the Church of God: but as God alone can form and build his Church, so he alone can fit and appoint the Ministers thereof. And though others, having seen the grossenes of this, make their ministers by a call in their Church, yet neither is that out of the aposta∣cy, but onely a striving of man to get out of it, which man can∣not possibly do, till he meet with the spirit of God to lead out of it. So that that Ministry also is but an invention of man
made by man, and comes not from the spirit, nor is able to mi∣nister spirit to the spirit. Object. But hath there been no true Religion since the daies of the Apostes? no true rule, no true worship, no true faith, no true love, no true hope joy or peace, no true repentance, conver∣sion & regeneration, no true wisdom, righteousnes, sanctification and redemption, no true Church, no true Ministry? What hath become of all our fore-fathers? did they all perish? And hath not this ministry converted many to God? were not yee your selves converted by it? Nay have not many of them been Martyrs, and witnessed to the truth of God? And though some of them are bad, yet are not many of them zealous and consci∣entious Preachers of the Word at this day? By such reasonings as these, the wisdom of man much strengthens and hardens it selfe against the truth. Answ. The rule in Nations, the worship in Nations, the faith, love, hope, joy, peace, repentance, conversion, regenera∣tion, &c. which have been cried up in Nations for the truth, the Churches in Nations, the Ministry in Nations; all these have been corrupted, and never recovered their true state to this day. There have been changes from one thing to another, but the restauration hath not been known. The whorish spirit hath been hunted & puriued, and so run out of one form into another, traversing her way, and changing her ground and gar∣ments, but hath not been taken and judged to the death: and the true spirit hath not been able to find the bed of her hus∣band, but hath wandered from mountain to hil, all the time of this cloudy and dark day, forgetting her resting place. Yet, though the whole earth was corrupted, and false do∣ctrine and worship set up every where among the Nations, which continued the fornication and whoredom from the spi∣rit of life in the publick wayes and national worships; not∣withstanding this, even all this while God reserved a seed to himselfe, which he caused to spring up in a remnant, and which he moved and carried on to witnesse against somewhat of these corruptions, in their several ages and generations. And as fast as the beast killed and knocked down these, God raised up more: yea though the whorish spirit, in some Nations, painted her self curioussy, leaving some of the grosse Doctrines and Wor∣ships
of Popery, and got into a more refined way: yet God raised up witnesses against her there also, and still doth into what form soever she gets: for though of late she hath decked her self very pleasingly, as she think, and covered her selfe round with scripture-words and professions, and practises as like as ever she can form them to the practises of former Saints, yet quick and lively is the spirit of God that searcheth after her, who hath found her out, and raised up witnesses against her there also. Now this seed, this remnant, though they were not able to recover the possession of the life and power that was lost, yet they had a true taste of it, and their testimony which they gave out from that taste, was true: and so far as they kept to this testimony, in the faith and in the patience which they had lear∣ned and received from God, (though but in a low measure) they were accepted of him. So that all were not lost in this night of darkness, but such as feared God, and knew and heark∣ned to his voice, had the testimony of his presence with them, and tasted of his life and power in measure: God was not an hard master to them, but tender and gentle, and contented to reap what he sowed. But the appearance of God, in this dark time was weak, and low, and easie to be made a prey of. And this is very observable, that so long as the simplicity ran pure it was preserved, but so soon as ever the spirit of man was tem∣pted either into any old, or into any new invented form, the wisdom of the flesh got in with it, grew up more than it, and when it had gathered strength, corrupted the vessel, betrayed the simplicity, and lost the life. Thus many pretious beginnings and buddings forth of life, have been betrayed in these late daies. There was a pretious thing stirring in Queen Maries dayes, the life whereof was more hurt, and suppressed, by that dead form of Episcopacy, succeeding afterwards, then by the foregoing persecution. The persecution did clear and brighten it, but the fleshly form of Episcopacy brought death over it. And the forms of Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, have been little lesse then graves to bury and keep down the life. How many spirits, that had a precious savour in them at their entrance into those forms, did soon become fleshly, earthly, and very unsavory, loosing the quicknesse and fresh∣ness
that was in them before, and falling into the deadness of the form, withering with it. And as touching the Ministry, though in it self it was evill, being in the degeneration from the true Ministry, all this time of the Apostacy; and the persons therein for the most very cor∣rupt, being brought up to it as to a trade, and making use of it as a trade: yet I do believe that there was a simplicity of heart in some persons among them, which did cause them in some degree of faithfulnesse, to seek the Lord, his service, and the good of souls. And in the time of ignorance and darkness, it pleased God to wink at, and over-look the evill; and to cause good to passe from the good in them to the good in o∣thers, through the evil that hung about both. And this was the great tenderness of the Lord, in pitty to his poor creatures (who were very destitute to help in the thick night of dark∣ness) and should not now be made use of to justifie and keep up the evil. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unkind? Because his mercy and goodness extended to you not∣withstanding the evil (which might have hindered) will ye make that an argument to keep up the evill, and to oppose the light which discovers it? Because God causeth light to shine through the darkness, and visiteth man in the dark, wil ye ther∣fore set up the darkness as his proper way of ministration? The corrupt way, call, and exercise of the corrupt ministry, could not keep out the tender love of God, but he had respect to the simplicity of some who were found in it, and to the simplicity of others who waited on him for instruction there, and did please to give some answer to both. And will ye make this uningenious use of it, to interpret it as his approba∣tion of that ministry, which sprung up in the Apostacy from him, among those that were apostatised, and is a great dishonour to him, and the abhorring of his soul? A ministry of Christ, a ministry set up by his spirit is precious; but a ministry made by man, according to his will, and ministring in his wisdom, the soul of the Lord beareth as a burthen, and is pressed with it; and as he raiseth up his own life, wil ease himself of it. And what do they minister from, but the literal part of the Scriptures, which killeth and cannot give life? and what do they minister with, but their own understanding part? what meanings they can invent, what deductions the wisdom can draw from the
Scriptures, but do not see the true meaning in the infallible and unerring light: and what do they minister to, but the understan∣ding part in you? whereas there is somewhat else to be mini∣stred to by the true Minister; and what do they minister to you, but food for the understanding, food for the serpentine wisdom, which alwaies fed upon knowledge, but never upon the true bread? and hereby another thing is fed in you, and not your souls, but they are kept in leanness and barrenness, under death and the bondage of corruption (which Paul cryed out upon as a wretched state, and could find no ease, rest, or free∣dom from condemnation there) and without the true life and redemption. I do do not deny but ye may there meet with some kind of warmth in the affectionate part, which may be heated by a fire and sparks of mans kindling and blow∣ing up, and this may go for life with you now: but in the presence of the truth, where the eye is opened, it vanisheth: yea the spirit of the Lord hath so blown upon it, that it is even withered in the sight of a more inferiour eye in many peo∣ple. Position III. THat there is to be a recovery, a true recovery out of this state of Apostacy, into the true state of Christianity again. God will not let the desolations of Sion remain for ever, but he will again build up Sion, and appear in his glory. He will set his King upon his holy hill of Sion. The new Jerusalem shall a∣gain come down from heaven. The Man-childe which was taken up, shall come down again conquering and to conquer, & the Lamb shal get the victory over the Whore, and over all her apostati∣zed Nations and Churches, that have a name and not the life; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and make them a de∣solation which have made his holy city desolate, and trample them down which have trampled upon it. The lofty City he will lay low, he wil lay it low, even to the ground, he wil bring it even to the dust: The foot shall tread it down, the feet of the poor, the steps of the needy. The whore shall be judged, with the beast
whereupon she rode: the life, which they trod upon, shall rise up in the mighty power of the Lord, and over-turn them. The everlasting Gospel shall be again preached to them that dwel on the earth, and to every Nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Rev. 14. 6. Mark, the Gospel that was preached to the Nations, all the time of the Apostacy, was not the ever∣lasting Gospel, that Gospel did not bring life and immortali∣ty to life, but they were hid from mens eyes, and men had only a sound of words in stead of the thing: And thus poor Nations, kindreds, people, tongues, were every where bewitched with a form of things, with an outward knowledg, a perishing know∣ledg in the perishing part, a vain traditional invented worship, which stands in the wisdom and will of man, but had no uni∣on and fellowship with that which is everlasting. And thus all the Nations in the smoke of the bottomlesse pit, run into the pit from whence the smoke came. But the Lord hath a time to pitty the poor Nations, and to send forth his true everlast∣ing Gospel again, to deliver the Nations from that witchery, and sorcery, and spiritual inchantment which got up in the dark. And as this everlasting light springs up, then down goes Babylon, down go all invented doctrines, all invented forms, all invented worships, and that wisdom and evill spirit that raised them up. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drunk of the wine of the cup of her fornication, Rev. 14. 1, And now the new wine of the kingdom, which is tasted of in the everlasting Gospel, purges out the old wine; and the drunkennesse, which thereby came upon the Nations, wasts. And they that have tasted of this life, and know this life, can never be bewitched back again, by the whorish spirit, to dead forms nd likenesses without life: Nay, when Babylon falls, she can rise no more. Though the life fall often, it can rise again; but when the witchery from the life is discovered and cast into the pit, it can get out no more. Indeed the beast hath had all the strength of the Nations, and the whore hath had all the wisdom, all the esteem, all the honor: who can make war with the beast? who can shew miracles and won∣ders like the false Prophets? who can teach but the wise, learned, orthodox men, that have the arts, and know the ori∣ginal?
yea there's another that can make war, and a Prophet, that can preach better then them, one that can preach life, one that can preach the everlasting Gospel, and knows the origi∣nal of it, one that is wiser and stronger then the whore, and by his wisdom and strength is able to judge her, and cast her out of the Nations, though she hath got very strong posses∣sion, Rev. 18. 8. Now learn wisdom, know the parable of the fig-tree, come to the life that is arisen, and abide not in the death, that is passed, and passing away. Ye have heard the voice of the Whore, ye have drunk of her cup, ye have been bewitched, ye have set up her inventions, but have wanted the thing which cannot be invented, and which the inventing un∣derstanding cannot comprehend. But if the force of the wine still remain upon you, so that ye cannot hearken after, or let in that which is everlasting, assure your selves, as the life rises, ye will meet with plagues and wrath from it, in stead of the refreshments it brins to others, and know what it is to sit down under a dead talk of, without feeling the living power of redemption. Therefore be wise, and know the times and sea∣sons. That will not be born with now, which was born with formerly: but as the love and power of God to salvation hath more appeared, so the severity against those who now resist, will appear more also: And death shall have its sting, which they that will love darknesse and hate the light, shall feel, Position IV. THat they that are in those things which have been set up in the times of the Apostacy, are not yet come to the reco∣very from the Apostacy. They that are in the Doctrines, and bodies of Divinity, which have been formed since, are not in the true Doctrine. They that are in the rules of life which wise Church-men, or Synods, or Councils have given, or which they themselves have gathered by their industry out of the Scriptures, are not in the true, living and everlasting rule. They that are in the
worship, or under the Ministry, or of any Church which hath been set up since by the power of man, or from the inventing wisdom (though this wisdom hath founded its inventions up∣on the Scriptures) are not in the true worship, in the true Church, or under the true Ministry. They that are in the faith, which hath since been gathered into the understanding, and did not spring up from the mystery of life, in the heart, are not in the true faith. The same may be said of love, hope, joy, peace, and all the rest mentioned before, yea and all other things in religion, for all hath been corrupted, even the inward part. And while here hath been a great contention about forms of worship, and Church-Government, the power of godlinesse, and the Government of Christ in the heart hath been lost. Observe diligently what I have now to say. When the Apo∣stles, who had the true Ministry, preached the Gospel, they stirred and raised up the power of God in the heart, and the power of sin, corruption and deceit sunk down, and was un∣der foot, and trampled upon by the power. But when Anti∣christ and the false Prophets arose, they raised up the corrupti∣on again, and fed it with doctrines of deceit, but the power sunk down, and was not felt, but buried all that time of the pre∣vailing of the corruption and deceit. Now the power was not lost all this while in it self, but onely lost to man, so that he knew not where to find it. Yet this power in this time of loss did stir and move, and make men in some degree sensible of the losse, causing them to part and seek after the living truth. And this was good, this was of God. But then there was an evil spirit, which was neer to the good, and lay lurking in the serpentine wisdom of the heart, and that drew the mind (which was bent toward the seeking of a right thing) a wrong way, that cryed loe here, loe there; look into the Scriptures, the Church was so and so; go get into such a thing: the Christi∣ans there did so and so, go do such a thing: there's the way, there thou shall meet with the life and the power. And thus it drew from that which stirred within, into an imitation of a form without, and there they came to a losse. I dare appeal to all honest hearts, Was there not a good thing stirring in you,
when ye went into your Church forms? were ye not led into simplicity, hoping to meet with life and power there? did ye find it so? did ye meet with the life and power there? nay did ye not lose it there, and become deader? I know, if ye have not forgotten the taste of life, ye will confesse to me, that that which now ye have is not life, but far short of that which ye had, when ye entred into your form. Ah poor hearts, the whore betwitched you, the harlot in your bosomes, and the false Prophets without, helped to increase the witchery, crying lo here and lo there, but ye knew no that the kingdom of hea∣ven was within, from whence that stirring of life was in you, where ye should have kept, and not have gone forth. But now ye are dead and buried in your graves, lying there without sense and are now got into the spirit of the world, and into the en∣mity against that life in others, which was then your own life. And do ye know where ye are, and what ye are doing? Can ye bear to hear it? Of a truth ye are in the snare of the enemy, in the inchant∣ment from the life, in the whores bed, in the strumpets bo∣some, and not in the bosome of your beloved. And your practi∣ses are branches of the sornication, parcels of the whoredom, inventions which have been gathered in by that understanding, and set up by that will which whored from God. They are the effects and products of the whores cup, which gets new dres∣ses, new habits, new forms, new wayes to cosen and deceive the simple with; but still she remains the whore, and those who are seduced by her, are led into her whoredom. For when God discovers and hunts her out of one form, then she decks her self with another, perhaps more seemingly spiritual, more Scripture like, and so more likely to take with the simple heart: and then she lies in wait for the young man to entrap him a∣gain, saying, Come in hither, This is the true way of God without doubt; did not the Saints meet with life here formerly? Come thou hither also, heres the bed of thy beloved, take thy fil of life, thy fill of love. And thus the poor honest simple heart followes her, going like a fool to the correction of the stocks not know∣ing that it is for his life, until he come to feel the loss of life. And there if she find she cannot keep him there, but fresh stir∣rings of life spring up in him again, and withdraw him from
that which had deceived him, then she paints again, and lies in wait for him again, to catch him in some more refined appea∣rance, or in some elevated notion, or at least in the shadow of that which was true: for the whore hath not onely art and power to invent forms and likenesses of that which is true, and make Idols and Images of them: but it hath power also given it over the outward Court, so that that which is found there, it can make idols and images of. That which is corruptible, it can get into and corrupt, and make an enemy to that life, which lived in it before it was corrupted: and when it is corrupted, then there is no more truth or life to be found there, but the Idol, and the idolatry. The Apostle John who fore-warned of Antichrist, and gave a mark whereby he might be known, namely by his not con∣fessing Christ come in the flesh, 1 Joh. 4. 3. (which he that setteth up any thing of the old Covenant, or any invention or imitation of any thing therein, doth not) he bids also beware of Idols. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, 1 Joh. 5. 21. Now what is an Idol? The Apostle Paul saith, An Idol is nothing in the world. An Idol is no true thing in its place, but a false thing set up in stead of the true. A false conception of God in the mind, is an Idol. A false Church or Temple, is an Idol: a false Minister, who is not made according to the ap∣pointment of God, and by the gift of his Spirit, but came in another way, by the appointment of men, is an Idol-shep∣herd: and the worship in this Church, and by this ministry, is publique Idolatry; and all the worship in families, which hath been erected after the same maner, is without the guidance of the spirit of God, is private Idolatry. Were the heathens Tem∣ples, Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, and other inventions of theirs (in imitation of the Jews) Idolatrous? and are not the inven∣tions of the heathenish spirit, or Antichristian nature in man, are not they also Idolatrous? Object. But is praying Idolatry, preaching Idolatry, singing Idolatry, Baptising of Infants Idolatry, breaking of bread Ido∣latry? Answ. The praying which God appointed is not Idolatry. Praying in the Spirit of God, when he moves, and according to the will of God, which is onely known in the Spitit, is not I∣dolatry;
but thy praying in thine own spirit, and at thine own times, and according to thine own wil (perhaps in way of imi∣tation of the Jewish morning and evening Sacrifices) this is Idolatry. This is that which thou hást set up, in stead of that which God set up, and so it is not the true thing which God set up, but an Idol of thine own making: and so thou wor∣shippest not God therein, but that spirit which helped thee to invent and set up the Idol. The same might be said concerning preaching, singing, washing with water, breaking of bread, and what ever else is practised in Religion upon these terms. Object. But doth not the Scripture mention these things? and did not the Saints practise these things? surely they were not Idolaters. Can I be an Idolater in practising that which they practised? Answ. Nay, thou art mistaken; they are not the things which they practised. The stress of their Religion lay in the life of it, in the presence of the spirit of God in it: it was his breath made it the truth. Now if thou couldst have the same things that they had, yet without the same living breath, they would be but dead things, but Idols. But thou hast not the true form of things neither, thou hast not the true Church, the true Ministry, the true Ordinances according to the form, but things set up in their stead, by the invention of man, in the time of the Apostacy from the true things, and what can these be, but Idols; The world wondered after the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, Rev. 13. 3, 4. Behold what was worshipped at the time of the Apostacy! That which arose from the beastly invention of man, and not from the true spirit of life. And the inventing and setting up of these, and worshipping according to these in∣ventions, is worshipping the Dragon, (for he getteth in and lodgeth in mans inventions) and not the living God. And ther∣fore God, at the end of this Apostacy, raiseth up a new mini∣stry to recal the Nations from worshipping the Dragon, to the worship of God again, ver. 6. 7. of that Chapter, What the Gentiles sacrificed of old, they sacrificed to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. 20. And what the late Gentiles sacrifice, (I mean Christians in the heathenish nature, Christians to
whom the outward court was given, Rev. 11. 2. and who have not a profession of the Saints words and practises, but with∣out life) they sacrifice not to God neither, but to that spirit that helped them to invent, and form a likenesse or image of the truth. Transgressing the principle of God within, they go from God, and from his worship; and the Devil (who went out from the truth) gets in, and they go into his power, and whatever they perform, in worship there, is to him: for when they go from the principle of God in them, the Devil gets into their hearts, and God goes out, and his true life, po∣wer and worship is not known, but an image or likeness which the Devil sets up in stead of the true thing. So then, in that state, let men consider what they worship: for there they cry up ordinancies and duties, and kill one another about them, thinking that they worship and honour God thereby; but know not, nor are come to that wherein God alone can be worshipped and honoured. I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, saith the spirit, Rev. 2. 9. is this blasphemy? For a man to call himself a Christian, who is not, what is that? to call that a Church which is not, what is that? to call him a Mi∣nister of Christ, who is not, what is that? to call those the Or∣dinances of Christ which are not, what is that? to call that faith which is not, that justification which is not, &c. what is that? Can ye spy out the blasphemer? ye have made a great out-cry against him long, are ye willing now he should be put to death? The Lord hath lighted his candle, he is searching for him, and he will find him out: and as he have desired, so it shall be; the Lord will not spare him. O be awakened, be a∣wakened, ye heathenish Christians; Open the eye that can see, and behold where ye are, and what ye are doing, and how fast ye are running into the pit. Ye have forgotten God, ye have lost the true line of judgement, ye have lost the key of knowledg, and the light that is in you is darkness, and leads to darkness, though ye cannot possibly believe it. Oh come back to the re∣membrance of God, and and to true holinesse (without which no man shall see him: for the wicked shall be turned into hel, and all the Nations that forget God, and ye have forgotten him days without number.
Position V. THat the onely way of recovery out of the Apostacy, is by re∣turning to, and keeping in that spirit, from which the A∣postacy was. The Apostacy came by leaving the spirit of God, and run∣ning after another spirit: and the recovery must be by leaving that other Spirit, and returning to the spirit of God again. How did Christians formerly begin their Religion? They began in the Spirit, Gal, 3. 3. and so they were to go on to perfection, and not intermix any thing of the flesh. And had the anoint∣ing been kept to, Antichrist and the mystery of iniquity had been kept out; and where that is returned to, the Antichristi∣an spirit is purged out by degrees, and the wayes thereof dis∣covered and forsaken. Therefore know the whorish Spirit in thy self, which is busy to form likenesses in thy mind to se∣duce thee, and to make thee fall in love with the likenesses which she hath formed in other mens minds: and let her not deceive thee with her paint and gawdy appearances: but know likewise the little seed of life, from which truth springs up in thee, and in which the spirit of truth dwels, and is to be found; and take heed least the serpentine wisdom teach thee to de∣spise and turn from it. From this spring it was that truth sprung up in the witnesses, all the time of the Apostacy: for they had their testimony from the spirit of Prophesie, Rev. 19. 10. So far as they kept to that, they gave a true testimony: so far as their own spirits mixed with it, they corrupted it. But to abide in that was very hard, and there was need of much affliction and persecution to keep the flesh down, and to preserve the life pure. But as the life springs up more strongly, and overcomes that spirit inwardly, (I mean the wise, fleshly spirit) there wil be less need of outward afflictions or persecutions, yea or in∣ward either; but there will be a safe entrance into, and abiding in the joy, the rest, the peace, where the whore within (which seduced from the life, where the power is, into some form, where the power is not) is burnt. Learn then, and know in
thy self that spirit of prophesy, which spake in all the Mar∣tyrs. Hear that, come to that, keep to that: feel the union, the fellowship, the spreading of that in thee. When that bids thee go, go▪ when that bids thee come, come: when that bids thee do this, do it. But the flesh is grown strong, and strongly resisteth this spirit, both inwardly and outwardly; and will not suffer him to rise up in the heart, or to rise up in the Nation: but at any time when he stirreth, and offers to speak, or lead to God; there's a reason rises up in the fleshly wisdom, that knocks him down, and denies his voice, and hearkens to ano∣ther voice in stead of his. Thus they first give way to the flesh∣ly wisdom, and suppress the truth in themselves, and then they would go forth and suppress it in others: and they think them mad, and their rage riseth against them, where the truth is suf∣fered to grow, and mans reason or fleshly wisedom denyed. And thus is the Lord of Glory evil intreated, and slain at this day by this generation of Christians, as he was by the Jewes slain formerly in the Prophets, in that his appearance in a flesh∣ly form, and in his Apostles: and his blood will be required; for the earth shall not alwaies drink it up and cover it, nor the adulterous woman be alwaies able to wipe her mouth, and say she hath done no wickedness. Ye have saved alive the unjust, and killed the just. The murthering nature is alive in you, O ye Christians, but the holy one is slain, and lies buried in your graves: and ye have painted your graves, and speak good words of him, but still keep him down, and let another rise up and live in you. Ye cry up that appearance of Christ in the flesh, and the words he then spake, and the words of his Apo∣stles, and think that if he had lived in those dayes, ye would not have killed either him or his Apostles, and yet ye resist and oppose the same life in your selves and in others, with such a kind of wisdom in the letter, as the Pharisees had. O what will ye do! the uncircumcised ear is got up in you, and ye cannot hear; and the uncumcised heart, and ye cannot understand; but when this is told you, ye despise, and wonder, and go on in the perishing state. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my bowels! O England, England, thou that killedst the Mar∣tyrs in Queen Maries dayes, thou that persecutedst the non∣conformists
afterwards, that thou wouldst not suffer the peo∣ple of God to meet together, to seek him with an honest heart, but wouldst confine them, to thy gross formal wayes of wor∣ship? Though the Lord hath appeared and broken the horns of the Oppressors, yet the persecuting spirit is not broken in thee, but thou still huntest after the precious life of the seed, and wouldst not let it spring up in the Nation. The spirit of enmity is still up in thee, which knows not the Lord of life, but by a natural instinct opposeth him, and would fain keep up some grave or other, it cares not what, so it might but thereby keep down the life: for thou canst now bear with any form, and cherish it: and thy onely enmity is against those, who are sent by the Lord, to gather out of all forms into the life. How often would the Lord have gathered thee, but thou wouldst not! and yet seeks to gather thee, but still thou wilt not; but as if the former laws, made in Queen Maries dayes, were not suf∣ficient, desirest new laws to ensnare and entangle the innocent! What wil become of thee! or what wil thou say to the Lord, when he ariseth to plead the cause of the innocent? for that Spirit, which he raised up to witness against the whorish spirit, (which lies hid in thy forms of worship and religion, & appears in all thy Laws, Councils and waies of Government, so far as they formed, and so far as they are guided by the wisdom of the flesh) is innocent: even as that spirit, which witnessed former∣ly against Popety and Episopacy, was innocent before the Lord, though accused by them as guilty of error in it self, and of di∣sturbance to the publique peace, as this is now by thee.
Some Principles guiding out of the Apostacy to the Christian Spirit, and Life again. 1. THat there is no salvation but by the true knowledg of Christ. The Jews had received the ordinances of God, and knew of the Messiah to come, and believed it, and were very zealous in their worship, in observation of Circum∣cision, the Passeover, New moons and Sabbaths, &c. (Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?) and yet God complains of them by his Prophet, My people perish for lack of knowledg. And the state is the same un∣der the Anti-christian Apostacy, wherein the whore hath made all nations, kindreds, tongues and languages drunk with the cup of her fornication, the true knowledg and worship hath been lost, though the eyes of them that have been in the apostacy, and drunk with the cup could not see it, no more then the Jews could in their day. But to come close to the thing. The knowledge of Christ is not litteral, traditional, or fleshly; nor can it be received by the natural understanding: but it is spiritual, and the understanding must be given by God which receives it. He hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. A man may read Scriptures, hear Sermons, &c. and thereby gather a knowledge into the old understanding: but neither this understanding into which the knowledge is gathered, nor the knowledge it self which is gathered is spiritual, but fleshly, and so cannot save. He that comes once to receive an understanding from Christ, and to have the knowledge of Christ powred forth from Christ into his heart, knowes the difference between that, and the under∣standing into which he gathers things. The knowledge of Christ after the letter (and a faith in him answerable to such know∣ledge) will not save: but a man must know him in that spirit, life and power wherein he lived, if he groundedly hope to be saved by him, 2 Cor. 5. 16. 17. 2. That Christ saves by the new covenant: Not by any thing
got into the minde by the oldness of the letter, but by a life begotten which is new. There are two covenants made men∣tion of in Scripture, one whereof is called the old, the other the new. The old belonged to the Jewes, which is done away with their ceremonies, state and polity: the new, which is better then the former Christ is the mediator of, Heb. 8. 6. By mediating between God and the creature, or by bringing them together in and according to this covenant, he saves. Man by his disunion and distance from God, he perisheth: by being brought again to God, he lives again; which thing Christ effe∣cteth by the new covenant. So then, he that is not lead by Christ into that covenant, is not in the state of salvation. 3. That the new covenant is written in the heart, or there is no other way of coming into the new covenant, whereof Christ is the High-priest and Mediator, but by having the Laws of God written in the heart. This is the covenant, &c. I will put my Laws into their minde, and write them in their hearts, &c. they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the grea∣test. Heb. 8. 10. 11. He is speaking of the covenant whereof Christ is mediator, ver. 6. which he cals a new covenant, ver. 8. and saith it is not like the old ver. 9. instancing in two main particulars, wherein it is very unlike. 1. The old was writ out∣wardly in letters, to be read by the outward ey: but this is writ inwardly in the heart and minde, and so can only be read by a spiritual ey. 2. Under the old they needed teaching from men, the priests lips were to preserve knowledge, and they were to seek the law at his mouth; but now they should have the law so neer them, so cleerly written in them, that they should need none to teach them. From the law is the knowledge of God; the law is in the heart; and from the law in the heart springs up the knowledge of God in the least, and in the greatest that are within this covenant, that they need not say know the Lord. This is the state of the new covenant, which the Christians came to in those dayes. 1 Joh. 2. ver. 27. but it hath been a strange thing in this dark night of Apostacy, and is yet a strange thing to many. But let such consider, can a man be a Christian, and be out of that covenant, whereof Christ is the mediator? Can a man be brought back again to God by Christ, and yet
be out of▪that covenant whereby Christ brings men back to God? O how hath Satan deluded poor souls in this thick night of darkness, to make men believe they have faith in Christ, and shall be saved thereby; while they are quite ignorant of, and strangers to that covenant, whereby Christ the mediat or saves. They shall all know me, from the least to the greatest. Marke, there is not the least in this covenant, but hath the law so writ∣ten in his heart, that he need not seek out for knowledge. 4. That the spirit of God alone can write the covenant in the heart, or that Christ writes the covenant by his spirit. Man by all his wisdom cannot attain it. Man is driven out from God, and cannot finde the way back again to him, without the teachings and leadings of Gods own spirit. It is not the being educated in any way of Religion from ones childhood, or the leaving of that, and running into any sect afterwards, that will avail any thing hereto; but the alone hearkening to the true voice of the true spirit. It is written in the Prophets concer∣ning the children of this covenant, that they shall be all taught of God, And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. It is the Lord alone, who by his spirit teacheth them to come to Christ, and to receive the new covenant into their hearts from Christ: For man is in an incapacity to know or receive Christ or his covenant, until the spirit hath fitted and taught him: John 14. 17. but when he hath prepared and fitted his heart, then with his own finger he writeth the pure law of the na∣ture and life of Christ therein, by the receit where of he cometh out of his old dark spirit and nature into the true knowledge of God, and union with him. I will put my spirit within you, Ezek. 36. 27. This is part of the covenant, and indeed that part whereby all the rest is wrought. 5. Therefore the first proper step in Religion, is to know how to meet with Gods spirit. There is no progress (no true progress) to be made in the true Religion, till a man comes into the co∣venant: and there is no coming into the covenant, but by the spirit: therefore the first thing that is absolutely necessary to be known in Religion is the spirit, his writing, or at least his mo∣tions and stirrings in the heart. It may further be evidenced thus, all things in Religion, acceptable to God, flow from the spirit: All knowledge is to come from him; for he alone hath
revealed and can reveal truth, and is appointed by Christ to lead into all truth: All worship is to be offered up in him they that worship the father, must worship him in the spirit, and in the truth, for the father seeketh such to worship him, but rejecteth all other worshippers and worship, how glorious soever their worship may seem to them: Particularly praying is alwayes to be in the spirit, Ephes. 6. 18. Jude 20. so singing, &c. yea the whole life and conversation is to be in the spirit, Galath. 5. 25. The mortifying of all corruption is to be done by the spirit, If ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Rom. 8. 13. Indeed a Christian is nothing, and can do nothing without the power and presence of the spirit of God in him. So then, if nothing in Religion can be done (with acceptance to God) without the spirit, then the spirit is the first thing to be looked after, by him who would be truly and well-groundedly religious. 6. The first way of meeting with the spirit of God, is as a Con∣vincer of sin. (Here is the true enterance, This is the Key that opens into life eternal; He that can receive it, let him. It is not by soring alost into high imaginations and forms of wor∣ship, but by coming down to this low thing.) This is the first and most proper work of the spirit of God toward fallen man (whereby he makes way toward the writing of Gods Law in the heart) namely to convince of sin. And where should man look first to meet with him, but in his first work upon him? When Christ promised the comforter, the spirit of truth, he said this concerning him, that he should convince the world of sin, John 16. 8. They who are created a new in Christ, and be∣come his Disciples, receive comfort from the spirit: but what is he to the world? or how may they feel any operation of him? why he is to them a convincer of sin, and they may finde him checking them for, and convincing them of their sins. So that the great work for man, while he lies in the darkness (for when he is translated into the light, it will be easy) is to know how to distinguish the movings and stirrings of the spirit of God: And this is the best way for man in this state to know them by: That which discovers that which is evill, that is good: that which discovers that which is spiritually evill, that must needs be spiri∣tually good: for evll is darkness and cannot make it self mani∣fest.
That which discovers that which is undoubtedly pure, and inclines to it, that must needs be of God. Now to know this, and be joyned unto it, is a joyning of the creature unto God, by some what of him that comes from his spirit, and so is a true beginning of life eternal. 7. That whereby the spirit of God convinceth of sin, is his light shining in the conscience. Fallen man is darkness; The light shines in the darkness, and shews man the evill which otherwise would ly covered in him. Man fel from God, lost the image of God, and became wholly darkness: but the spirit of God is light, and shines in the darkness, and strives with man to reduce him back again to that light from which he fel. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, &c. 2. Cor. 4. 6. Where did the Apostles, and Christians in those dayes, meet with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in Christ? God shined it in their hearts. He that made the light to shine out of the dark deep, Genes. 1. 2. by his spirit, he by the same spirit made the light of the knowledge of life shine in their dark hearts: and there it is also that the work of conviction is wrought by the same spirit. He that perfects the good work in the heart, the same is he that begins it there; and his beginning is by reproving and convincing of sin, and so turning the heart from it unto God, and unto the obedience of that righteousness which he makes manifest. And he that meeteth not with the spirit in the beginning of his work, or slinketh back and goeth not on with him, but smothereth his reproofes, not forbearing that, or parting with that, for which he is reproved, is never like to meet with him in the end. And then it will be too late for him to blame that Religion where∣in there was only a dead form, but not the living power of God. He that will come to life eternal, must be translated out of his dead understanding, and all his dead wayes and worships (which please that understanding) into a living principle and keep in that principle and then he shall know life indeed, and the true food of that life, and the true worship and service from that life, and the reward belonging to all. 8. That this light convincing of sin, shineth in every conscience. He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good, Micah. 6. 8. The life,
which was in Christ, was the light of men, Joh. 1. 4. Christ is the light of the World, Joh. 8. 12. God as he loved the World, so he manifested his love to the World, by sending his light into it to enlighten every man that cometh into the World, that with the light they might see his Son, and as many as re∣ceive him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God. As God would have all men to be saved, and come to the know∣ledge of the truth: So he hath given that light to all, which may bring to the knowledge of the truth which saveth. He is the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into the World, Joh. 1. 9. The grace of God, which bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all men, &c. As the enemy got possession of every mans heart, by filling it with darkness: so Christ pursueth, and seeketh to dispossess the enemy, by the light which he sen∣deth after him into every man. And this is the condemnation of man, not that he wants a light to witness against, and draw him from the enemy: but that he loves the enemy, and chuseth to be one with the enemy; but hates the light and turns from it, Joh. 3. 10. 20. He hearkens to the reasonings of his minde against the light, and so smothers and choaks it; but does not turn to the light, to have all the reasonings and strength of his minde subdued by it, and subjected to it. 9. The true way to life eternal, is by believing in the light of the spirit, which shineth in the conscience. Man is in darkness, which keeps him in death: and there is no way to come out of the death, but by coming out of the darkness: and there is no way to come out of the darkness, but by following that light which discovers it, and cals forth from it: And he that doth fol∣low that, cannot remain in the darkness, but must needs come out. There is an evil principle in man, calling for evil; and there is a good principle, calling from the evil to the good: Now he that follows the good, cannot follow the evil, but departs from it. I am the light of the World (saith Christ) he that followeth me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, Joh. 8. 12. But this is that which undoes man, he loves the dark∣ness, he loves the world, the course of the world the worships of the world; He loves his own understanding, and his own will, and so hates that light which crosseth these, & which teach would him (by the denial of them) to crucify that nature from
whence they spring, and to which they are sutable▪ And from hence it comes to pass (the love to sin within being strong; and Satan, the strong man, keeping the house) that the motions of Gods spirit are easily overborn, either by reasonings of the understanding, or by perversnes of the will: But if man durst trust himself to them he would quickly finde of what nature they were, by the strong opposition of the strong man against them. It is indeed a strait and narrow way, into which no flesh can enter and walk. And yet it is the only way: for there is no life in God, no peace with God while the enemy lives in the heart. But when the light is received and turned to, then the power begins to work which slayes the enemy in the heart; and that being done, there is no more war, but peace. Then the true peace, which passeth understanding, fills and refreshes the heart; where as the peace which was in the soul before, was but the peace of the enemy, and will abide no longer then the ene∣my is suffered to keep possession quietly. 10. That believing in the light of the Spirit, which shines in the conscience, unites the soul to God, and opens the springs of life to it. Belief in darkness (which is unbelief towards God) disunited the soul, and closed up the springs of life from it; be∣lief in the light, which is sent to lead from the darkness, u∣nites again, and opens the springs again. God is light he dwels in the light, and there enjoyes the fulness of life; and he gives a measure of his own light to draw from the darkness; and he who believes and follows this, is led by it unto God from whom it came: and being come out of the darkness unto him, he begins again to feel the springs of life (the fresh springs of life) which are in him. He that believeth, is come to the well of salvation, and draws living water out of it, and drinks of the living water continually, so that he can thirst no more; yea out of his belly flow rivers of living water. This is the fruit of the true faith, but this is not the fruit of the faith of the Apostacy, but there the soul remains stil disunited to God, and united to the darkness, and drinks not of the living streams, but drinks dead water: the fountain of pure life is not open to it, but the fountain of iniquity: and that blood which clenseth, and ta∣keth away the sin, is not known. There is onely a dream of these things in the dark night of apostacy, by which dream the
conscience is a little quieted for the present; but when the witnes awakes, and the light of the day shines, the soul (which is lean) wil find it self in the hands of the enemy, in the bonds of sin, and feel that it never new that power that could redeem it, but the subtil Serpent deceived it with a name in stead of the thing. This is the true way, the narrow way (I can, in the presence of the living God, set my seal to the truth of it) which it hath pleased God to discover and make manifest again, after the long dark night of Apostacy. And we come not to it, by hearing or receiving of any new notions or apprehensions of things, but by feeling that which puts an end to all creaturely notions and apprehensions: and we grow in it, by the increase of that thing in us. The seed to which the promise was made, the seed which was before Abraham was is felt, and his day is seen and re∣joyced in, and by the light thereof the darkness is discovered and the kingdom of darkness is assaulted. And as it dayly fals, in many particulars, so it shall at length fal in the general, and the Kingdoms of this world shal become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and ye shal reign upon the earth, where sin and Antichrist have long reigned and kept him down. And though there be a great rage and out-cry among the people and heathenish professors, yet the decree is gone forth, and Sions King shal reign upon the holy hill of Sion, and the hills and mountains shal melt before him, and the earth shal shake round about him. Therefore gather your selves together, muster up your strong forces, O ye several sorts of carnal professors. Let all your dif∣ferences one against another fal, and joyn together against him, who is against you all: improve the Serpents wisdom, and form arguments out of the Scripture thereby, with the utmost of the skil and understanding of flesh; get the Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates of the earth on your side too, handle all the wea∣pons of the flesh, skilfully; Dispute; reproach, revile, whip, stock, imprison, starve, nay put to death. See if you can up∣hold your kingdom: for there is a mighty one come forth a∣gainst you, who will take the vineyard, the king∣dom, the inheritance from you, and give it to another; and on you shall come that death and darkness, that misery and de∣struction
which ye have put far from you, and preached as the portion of others. Therefore consider your condition in the fear of the Lord: and if ye feel not your selves able to fight it out, make your peace betimes, and let your greatest crowns (your choisest wisdom and strength in the flesh) be laid down at the feet of Christ, at the lowest appearance of his light in the conscience. Let not the least check of his spirit be spighted there, but esteemed above the highest notions of light that ye have gathered in, or can gather with your fleshly understand∣ings. And indeed it is no less then its due: for this which runs fresh from the Spirit, is more living in it self, and more proper to that mans present estate to whom it comes, then whatever he himself by his understanding can gather from the letter. There hath been a precious seed of God long stirring in this Nation, but it hath been oppressed, and kept in bondage by the spirit of Pharoah and his wise Egyptians, who would subject it to their laws and worships, and not let Israel go out of Egypt at Gods cal, to worship him in spirit and truth, but would keep him in forms and waies of mans invention. The Lord hath poured out his plagues upon this spirit, and more and more wrought out the liberty of his people: but as the plagues cease, this spirit hardens it self, and assaies the reducing of Israel into bondage again. And as Pharoah renews the bondage of Israel, so God renews the plagues on Pharoah and his Egypti∣ans. Pharoah hath a stubborn wil, and a great wisdom and po∣wer, and is loth to let Israel go: but the Lord also is wise and strong, and hath a wil more righteous then Pharoahs, and by his wisdom and strength will he effect his will, and Pharoahs shal not stand. Who is such a stranger in Israel, that hath not observed, that as God began to raise up the seed in this Nation, and cal it in∣to liberty, so the spirit of the wise Egyptians rose up against it, exclaiming of error, heresy, blasphemy, new waies, new lights, &c? And doubtless many tares have sprung up, but the aime of the enemy was not so much to pluck up these tares, as to destroy the one good seed of wheat. Herod did not aime at killing all the Infants in Bethlehem, but he would rather kill them all, then have Christ live. What preaching on the one
hand? what running to the Magistrate on the other hand? and all to destroy this young babe. When any different way of worship did appear, as of Independency, Anabaptism, or of seeking and waiting for the truth; how did they make an head against them, and cry out against them, for fear the young child should be born and appear there? And now they see their own image brought forth there, they are at peace with them: and having discovered that, where no part of the image or mark can be received, but there is another nature in life and truth brought forth, and no form without life wil down? now they know where to shoot all their darts, now they know against whom to invent, and speak all manner of evil, and against whom to direct all their envy, rage and out-cryes, and to pre∣possess all sorts of persons every where, with all manner of prejudices, that the truth may not spread any where, but be opposed every, where And all persons minds there, are so filled before hand with the venome of the Serpent, that truth cannot come any where, but it finds the enmity already stirred up, and prepared to withstand it. This is a new way, a new light, saies one: we know a Reli∣gion before this came up, and we wil keep to that, let who wil run after these new sects and ways. A natural light, the old light of nature, saith another, or the corrupted light of Adam which hath run along through all his posterity. Another out∣cry is, that it makes the Scriptures void and useless. Others cry out that it teacheth things contrary to the Scriptures, that it sets up free-wil, that it leads to a covenant of works, that it breaks down Relations, Laws, Governments, takes away due respect from Magistracy and Superiours, and turns the world upside down. Thus the worldly spirit is every where up in arms, and a zeal kindled every where, to keep it out of every heart, and out of every place and country. Now these are not real things, but such kind of slanders and reproaches, as alwaies have attended truth. The Prophets of God, Christ, and his Apostles, though they have been spoken wel of afterwards, yet they have ever been hated, spoken il of, and persecuted by the generation of professors of their age. The Scribes and Pharisees could not with so great advantage have persecuted Christ and his Apostles, without a seeming zeal
for the Law and Prophets: and yet it was the same spirit that so vehemently cryed up the Law, the Prophets, the Ordinances of Moses, that persecuted the spirit and life in Christ and his A∣postles, from whence the Law, the Prophets, and Ordinances came. And thus it is at this day, though that Spirit is as blind now as it was then, and cannot see through its own cover, though it be as weak and narrow as theirs was. The guilty chargeth the innocent, that it might hide its own guilt, and keep its covering. The guilty Jewes, and the guilty Scribes and Pharisees, charged the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, that they might not be found guilty by them, and their formal co∣vering rent from them. And thus it is at this day, Truth is risen to make manifest mens false coverings, and the guilt and hy∣pocrisy that lies hid underneath: now to save themselves, they are prepared before hand to lay that charge against truth, which truth hath against them. Search thine heart, resist not the light, thou that haste charged the truth with any of these things, and thou wilt find it thine own condition, The truth is no new light, or new way; and they that hold it forth, do not hold forth any new way, or new light: but it is thou that hast left the good old light, the good old way which was before the apostacy, and hast fallen in with some new light, some new way invented and set up since the Apostacy. It is thou again that settest up the natural light, the fallen wisdom, the wisdom which is out of the life, and in en∣mity with the life; with this thou feedest that understanding which is to be brought to naught: and when thou hast done this thy selfe, then thou callest the spiritual light, wherewith God hath pursued it in all ages, a natural light. It is thou, that with this wisdom searching into the Scriptures, and gather∣ing the oldness of the letter into the old understanding, ma∣kest the Scriptures void and useless to thy soul, and canst not meet with that life and power which they speak of, but stil art alive in thy sins, and dead unto God: and then thou cryest out against that which comes to discover this to thee, and to bring thee out of this dead knowledg into the life of the Scriptures, thou cryest out against this, as if this made the Scriptures use∣less. And when thou hast set up an whole body of knowledge, religion, and worship quite contrary to the Scriptures, which
the truth comes to make manifest, then Cains nature riseth up in thee, and thou takest up Cains weapons, and fain wouldest thou kill thy brother, because his sacrifice in the faith testifies against thine, which is out of the faith, and contrary to the true testimony of the Scriptures. Again, for free-wil and a Cove∣nant of works, Thou hast set up a religion in the old will, and works, not according to the new Covenant of life, but accord∣ing to the old Covenant of death: and by this thou preachest that wil to be free, which is in bonds, and settest up the works of mans righteousness and conformity to the letter, for the works of the new Covenant. And for Governments and Laws, That which is according to God, which is a terror to the evil, and a praise to them that do wel, that which is liberty to the just, and a curb to the unjust; this thou art against, and cryest out daily for the turning of the Magistrates Sword against the in∣nocent, because they are a light to discover thy deeds of dark∣ness (which be out of the light) and disturb thy peace and thy settlement in that which is fleshly, and of man, and not of God. So for relations, and honour to Magistrates, The trans∣gressing nature hath brought up a wrong thing, a fleshly thing, an honour, a duty which is of the flesh, and pleaseth the flesh, and is not according to God. And this is not honour indeed, not an honour that wil stand, not an honour that will be justi∣fied in the sight of God, but is a shame to them that give it, and a shame to them that receive it, discovering that they are servants to the flesh, giving to and receiving from the fleshly part, that which the fleshly part (which crucifies the life) cals for, and is pleased with. All that the light doth to these things, is to discover and con∣demn them: and the end of its discovery is that they might be removed, and truth and righteousness brought in the stead of them. But mans evil heart, which is the cause of them, cries out against the light, as if the light brought them; whereas if man could but be quiet and stil, and suffer the work of the light up∣on him, he would find that the same light which discovereth them, would also purge them away, and leave neither root nor branch of iniquity either in mens hearts, or in relations, or fa∣milies, or towns, or cities, or laws, or governments; and there
would be no want of honour. Now though the Serpents wis∣dom is irreconcilable, & that understanding which stands there cannot be satisfied, but must be confounded and brought to nought, 1 Cor. 1. 19. yet because underneath all this, there is a simplicity in some which is betrayed; for the relief of that, somewhat further may be spoken in answer to these things. Object. 1. To the first Objection that this is a new way, or new light, I answer. Answ. It is new indeed to them who have lain long in the Apostacy, and set up another light, but it is not new in it self, but the same that was in the beginning, yea and before the be∣ginning also. Christ was the same yesterday, to day, and for ever▪ and the light that comes from him is like him, that also is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. It was the same un∣der the law, the same before the law, the same since the lavv. As the darkness all along hath been the same: so the light all along hath been the same also. It vvas the same in the Jews, and the same in the Gentiles. It vvas this God expected obe∣dience to from the Jews, and the Prophet (in the name of the Lord) disdains their sacrifices, and brings them to this, Micah 6. 8. He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Their eye vvas upon sacrifices and oyl; the prophet points them to that vvhich vvould bring them to the right sacrifice, and to the true oyl. And the Gen∣tiles, so far as they vvere obedient to this, vvere accepted, and excused in their ovvn consciences, the faithful vvitness vvhere∣of is of God, and vvil stand in the day of Christ, Ro. 2. 15. 16. That which was from the beginning, saith the Apostle John, de∣clare we unto you, 1 Joh. 1. 1. And this is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at al, ver. 5. And the end of preaching this message, is to dravv out of the darkness into the light: to bring men to the feeling of the light of God in them, and so to uni∣on vvith it; vvhich being turned to, dravvs out of the darkness. God vvho is light, is nigh to every man, vvho is darkness, though mans sense is very thick, and can hardly see or feel him: and a
light from him shines in mans darkness, but mans darkness comprehends it not. So that this light is not nevv in it self, but onely nevv to the old Spirit, vvhich hath long lain hid in the region of darkness and death, & hath not known the light of life. Object. 2. That this is a natural light, or the light of old Adams nature. Answ. It is in one sense a natural light, it is of the nature of him from whom it comes, of the nature of God and of his Christ, whom it appears for: but it is not of the nature of cor∣rupt Adam, whom it always reproved, and against whom it stil stands a witness, and condemns all corruption. Man is darkness, and when Christ comes to redeem him, he finds him darkness: and Christ finds no light in him to help him to dis∣cover sin to him, but all the disoveries of sin that are made in the heart, are by the light of Christ, and not by any light of mans nature. The Lord is the searcher of the heart, and he searcheth it with his own candle, and not with any left in mans nature. Man fel into darkness, & knew not wher he was, but the Lord cometh after him with his candle, & discovereth his state to him. It is the light from which man fel, and against which he sins, that is alone able to make his disobedience manifest to him. We know, saith the Apostle, that the law is spiritual, but I an carnal, Rom. 7. 14. The law is the lowest part of the light, and yet that is spiritual, and of Christs nature, and not of A∣dams nature; we know it, saith the Apostle. Such as know the nature of that which manifests sin, know it to be spiritual. It is the fallen man from the light, the man in the darkness, that cals the light darkness: but that which discovers the darkness, and reproves the darkness, and warrs against the darkness, is not darkness, but the light of life. And those who are spiritual, and feel the nature and power of it in their spirits, know it to be so. But man hath set up a light of his own, hath raised up a light by his study and invention, in the strength of the fallen wisdom: and now setting up this for light, he must needs call the true light darkness, as the Pharisees did Christ. Object. 3. That it makes the Scriptures void and useless. Answ. It came from the spirit that gave forth the Scrip∣tures, it is of the same nature with the light that shone in them that gave forth Scriptures, it speaks the same thing with
Scriptures, it leads to the same thing, and it opens witnesses to the words which the Scriptures speak; and so it brings the Scriptures, which have been long abused, into their true use. Indeed it puts an end to the corrupt use of Scriptures, to mans inventing and forming things out of them, but brings them in∣to their true use and service. It takes the Scriptures out of mans hand, who hath slain the life by them, and puts them in∣to the hands of the spirit, who makes the words again pure, and quick, and living, purging away mans defiled and dead conceivings and interpretations of them. A man must know the Spirit, come to the spirit, be joyned to and be in union with the Spirit, before he can have the true understanding of the Scriptures. The Scriptures of truth are the words of God, or various expressions of his mind, which he that searcheth into, afore he hath his spirit, cannot know: and so man in this state can onely guess and imagine at things, but cannot see the truth. And from hence it is, that so many sects and heaps are sprung up in the world, according to the variety of their imaginations. One sort of men cry this is the way, this is the truth, this is the Church, this is the worship: Another sort cry that is not it, that is superstition and error, but this is it: and so a third, and fourth &c. So about Scriptures, one saith this is the meaning; another saith it is not so, but this is the meaning. The Papists say the Church must judge of the mean∣ing of Scriptures; and the Protestants who take more scope, how do they doubt, and differ, and oppose one another about the interpretation of Scriptures? which plainly showes, that they do not plow with the right heifer, for then there would be unity and certainty. They let their own reasonings and imagi∣nations loose, and there is no foundation of certainty: but had they waited for the Spirit to begin with, and gone on no far∣ther then he opened to them, all these doubts and dissen∣tions would have been choked in the birth, or womb, or not have come so far as either birth or womb. Yet do I not alto∣gether deny the reading of Scriptures, even in this state, if men read with fear and trembling, not setting up his own un∣derstanding, or the understanding of any man else, but wait∣ing for the spirit, which can alone give him an understanding
to receive the true knowledg. But this I dare boldly affirm, that mens reading of the Scriptures in their own wisdom and self∣confidence (or confidence of what interpretation others have given) doth them no good at all, but much harm, tending to the building up of that which God will again destroy. But he that begins with the spirit of God, giving himself up to that light which comes from him, comes to true union with God, and to the feeling of his life, and so to a true growth, and know∣ledg of the spirit of God, whereby he comes to know and un∣derstand the Scriptures which came from the same spirit; and hereby also he comes to be able to measure the deceit of his own Spirit, which formerly led him aside, and also to see and measure the spirits of deceivers. But he that is in the deceit, in the imagination, out of the true knowledg; he cannot know the deceit of his own spirit, or the spirits of deceivers, but cals the truth deceit, and the deceit truth. Object. 4. That this light teaches things contrary to the Scriptures. Answ. That light, which comes from the same spirit which the Scriptures came from, cannot teach things contrary to the Scriptures. But man, who hath took the tools of his under∣standing, and formed images and likenesses out of the Scrip∣tures, (I mean invented meanings and senses) and judged these agreeable to the Scriptures: he must needs judge that which is contrary to these, as contrary to the Scriptures: whereas the truth is one in it self, and agreeth with whatsoever is true in this age, or in former ages; and differs onely from that which is not true. And we know that there is that true unity with that spirit from which the Scriptures came, and with the Scriptures, and with one another in that light which the wisdom of man cannot but despise, as hath not been in any age since the Apo∣stacy til now. Object. 5. That this sets up free-wil. When persons are ex∣horted to embrace the light, to let in the light, and told that condemnation comes for not believing or receiving the light: then they cry out, can man believe? can man receive the light? hath man free-wil? The wil of man is bound; but there is liberty, power, and
freedom in the light which visits man, and comes to unbind and save him. And man feels this power, tasts of this liberty, feels somewhat disengaging him from the evil, and drawing him from it: but he, being in love with the evil, draws back from the drawing, shutting his ears against the wisdom of the light, and opening his ears to the reasonings of the Serpent; and then the liberty and power, which was in the light, with∣draws with the light, and the bonds are strengthned upon him; And this is the condemnation, not that there was a want of power from God, but that he chose the power of the enemy, not loving the light, wherein the power of life lay. God knows the state of man in the fall, and knows the strength of the ene∣my; and the Saviour that he sends hath sufficient power against him, and the light that the Saviour sends is stronger then the darkness, and can overcome the darkness, and cannot be over∣come by the darkness; And if thou joyn with the darkness, and wilt not yeeld to the drawings of the father, but yeeld up thy self to the drawings and reasonings of the darkness; yet the strength of the light remains in it self: and though for the present, thou hast struck it down and slain it, yet it will rise up a strong and living witness against thee, and the darkness to which thou hast joyned. When a man goes from the light, he goes into the wil, voluntarily; then take and choose in the flesh. When a man follows the light, the will of the flesh dy∣eth in him, another wil riseth up and chooseth for him, there is the true liberty. But as for your speaking of free-wil, ye do not know what ye speak of: for the will, (with the freedom of it) either stands in the image and power of him that made it, or in a contrary image and power. While it is in the image and po∣wer of him that made it, it is free unto good, and not to evil: while it is in the image and power of him who corrupted it, it is free unto evil, and not to good. The wil is not of it self, but stands in another, and is servant to that in whom it stands, and there its freedom is bounded and comprehended. For there is no middle state between both, wherein the wil stands of it self, and is free to both equally; but it is a servant, and under the command of one of these powers. If it be under the com∣mand
of sin, of the power of darkness, it is free from righ∣teousness; and if it be under the command and power of righ∣teousness, it is free from sin: but such a free will, as men commonly speak of, is a meer imagination, and hath no founda∣tion in the true state of things. And this may answer another objection, which lies as a great block in the way of many, who feel a conviction, but are with∣held from obedience, under a pretence of wanting power: whereas the power lies in that light which convinceth, and is received in the obedience, and in the cross. As the power of the enemy crept in, in hearkning to him: So the power of truth is received in hearkning to, and receiving the reproofs of truth. That which checks the evil, that which stands against the minde, smiting it in its course of vanity and pleasure in the fallen state; in that is the power. That comes from the power, goes forth in the power, and the power is in it, and cannot be severed from it. So he that lets that in, lets in the power; and he that shuts that out, shuts out the power. And in this state, a man may complain all his dayes for want of power, and not meet with it: for how can he, when he refuses it in the way wherein the power seeks him, and waits for it in a way wherein it is not to be found? The appearance of the power at first is smal, and contemptible to the eye of the fleshly wisdom; and it is not received in any such great overpowring way (though that also is known afterward) as man is apt to expect; but all lies in one little seed, where the day of smal things is known: The light, the life, the power, the purity, the wisdom, &c. lies hid there: and in receiving that little thing, all is received: and in the groweth of that, all grows up. But by being tempted by the enemy to neglect this, and wait for some great power and appearance of God, the soul is held in the bonds of iniquity, and kept from the life as strongly, as by the grossest form. Object. 6. That this sets up a covenant of works: for a man is bid to do, bid to obey the light: and when he does, when he obeys, he has peace; and when he obeys not, he has not peace. Answ. This sets not up the works of the Law, but it leads through the works of the Law, to the righteousness of faith. When the commandement came, sin revived, and I dyed, Rom. 7.
The Apostle was alive in his worship and Jewish state, till the Law came: but when the Law came, it flew that life that he had there, and he became dead, both to that life by which he lived before, and to the Law that flew him, and then there arose up a life in him which answered the Law, and could fulfil it, and lead to a righteousness beyond it and then his life and his righteous∣ness were not any works of the Law, but of faith, and in the faith, Gal. 2. 19, 20. But yet there is no passing to this; but through the administration of the Law in the heart, in the hand of the Mediatour. And when the life is risen and received, yet even then there is no peace but in obedience to the life. The peace lies in that which brings the peace; and if there be a de∣parting from that, there is a departing from the peace. Any fleshly thought, any fleshly motion, as it is out of the life, so it is out of the peace; and the minde joyning to it, feels the death and trouble of it. Thus saith the Apostle, Gal. 6. 15, 16. Nei∣ther circumcision nor uncircumcision availeth, but a new creature: and as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them. The peace comes to the new creature, and to man walking accor∣ding to the rule of the new creature: and the condemnation is not to them, that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom. 8. 1. but if there be an hearkning to the flesh, and a fulfil∣ling the unrighteousness thereof in any thing, God is righte∣ous, and he cannot speak peace to the wicked, or to him that joyns with the wicked. Therefore where there is true peace, there must be a coming from the wicked nature, and a living out of the wicked nature in him who is the life, the righteous∣ness, the peace. I know there have been curious fabricks in mens minds about the covenant of grace, but they have not known the nature of it, and of the works that flow from it, and so are apt to call the works of the new life, springing from the covenant of life, the works of the old covenant. But wis∣dom is justified of her Children, and they know her birth; and in the true light the true nature of things is seen, and the true name and description given, which he that is out of the light cannot receive, but stumbles at: and the wiser he is, in his own devised way and knowledge of things, the more stumbling blocks he has, and the more he stumbles.
Object. 7. and last. That it breaks down relations, Laws, Government, takes away due respect from Magistracy and su∣periours, and turns the World upside down. Answ. Iniquity hath reigned, unrighteousness hath winded it self into, and twisted about every thing. And now the truth comes to discover and purg out the iniquity, the strong man, who hither to hath kept possession of the house, cries out as if the destruction of the thing were aimed at. Nay, it is onely the evil that is aimed at, but the thing it self is not to be destroyed, but to be set free from the evil, and preserved. Relations are good, Laws are good, Governments are good, of God; but the unrighteousness of flesh, the pleasing of the flesh by the pre∣tence of these, the giving liberty to the unjust, this is not good. And is it not in relations, in Governments, in the execution of Laws? If a man will be fleshly, and walk in them according to the flesh, the Law takes not hold of him, his relations are not offended at him: but if he come once to feel the power of God, and withdraw from the evil, and stand a witnesse for God against it; then relations, and powers of the earth, and Laws, all strike at him: and the reason is, because they are in union with the evil, and so cannot bear the rending of the evil from the thing. And from hence it is, that wherever the Gospel comes in power, it kindles a flame round about, setting father against son and son against father, husband against wife and wife against husband, &c. yea it goes closer then so, it sets one part in man against another: and the fight is very bitter and sharp, till one of these be subdued, and then there is peace: fleshly peace, if the wise fleshly part prevail, spiritual peace, if the weak foolish thing (to the World) in the heart, which is of God, prevaile. And for honour to Magistrates and Superiours, it is not de∣nied: but fleshly honour, corrupt honour, honour from the flesh∣ly part, and to the fleshly part, this cannot but be denied by them which are of God. That which is born of God is not of this World, nor can it give honour to that which is of this World: but it honours all men in the Lord. What ever is of God in Magistracy it honours, what ever is in superiority accor∣ding to God (as a father, an husband, a master is) it honours with true honour. Christ, the onely begotten of God, could not re∣ceive
honour of man, nor could he give honour to man: and he saith to the Jews how can ye believe which receive honour one another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God onely? The receiving of honour from man, cannot stand with the true faith (when ye know the faith, ye will know it.) He that repe∣cteth persons, committeth sin; and is a transgressor against the Law of faith, which leads to the life which stands in God, out of the Worlds honours, worships, customes, and whatever else which is not of faith, but of the World. Mordecai did not bow to Haman, nay he sate in the Kings gate, where Haman was to passe, and yet did not stand up, move, or bow to him: what an affront was this to that high, proud, lofty spirit? and yet it was of the Lord. This was a type (as the Jewish state in general was typical) of what God would do in the World, and is now doing. The Lord hath raised up Mordecais nature, and he hath discovered Hamans nature, and hath given the com∣mand to Mordecai, that he shall not bow to Haman. And if ye could search your hearts, ye would finde, that it is not that of God in you, which is offended for want of that which ye call honour, but the Hamanish spirit, the fleshly pride and lofti∣nes, which the Lord will lay low, and he alone will be exalted in this day of his mighty power, and man shall only be ho∣noured as he comes from him, and as he is found in him: but the honour which the fleshly part hath sought, and gained in the transgression, shall fall with the transgressor, whom the Lord hath furbished his sword to smite. And for turning the World upside down, it is acknowledged: the power of the Lord is come forth to do it. That which is high, that which is wise, that which is strong, that which is rich, that which is full; that which is fat; the Lord will lay low, make foolish, weak, poor, empty, Lean; for it lies in wickedness. He will feed the fat and strong cattle with that judgment, which shall make them lean and weak. And the humble, the foolish, the weak, the poor, the empty, the lean he will raise up, and make wise, and strong, and rich, and full, and fat with the true honour, the true wisdom, the true strength, the true riches, the sure and living mercies of David, who sets his feet on top of the high places of the earth, of whom Christ came according to the flesh.
Thus I have in plainnes of heart, and with plainnes of speech, set the truth and the error before you, and lent my hand toward the removing of some blocks which lay in your way, in love and pitty to your souls. Now if any, in the reading of this, feel a secret touch upon their hearts, startling them, and giving some testimony to the truth, though very smal, and through a thick dark covering: there is that to which I speak, there is my wit∣ness within the vail, and there is the testimony rising up which leads to life, if given heed to. Keep to this, and this will prick and wound, judge and condemn the contrary nature, though never so strong. And when it doth prick and wound, keep the wound fresh and open, as thou lovest thy life, till thou meet with the tue healer. For the false prophet will rise up in thee, and fill thee with reasonings, and perhaps multitudes of pro∣mises and comforts from Scripture, skinning over the wound, and crying peace, peace, when there is no peace. And when thou hast thus got over the trouble, then the false prophet, which brought thee this peace, will stir thee up against the wit∣ness, exalting the wisdom and reasonings of the flesh, and making merry with thee over the witness, which witnessed a∣gainst thee and him, and over the trouble which came thereby: and this wil bring thee to that hardness of heart, which is for destruction. And then, when thou hast slain the witness in thy self, and exalted thy fleshly reason and understanding over it, then the false prophet which seduced thee, will kindle a zeal in thee against the witness in others, and thou wilt prove a perse∣cutor of the life under the name of deceit, error, heresy and blasphemy, whereas thou thy self art fallen into the deceit, into the error from the life, and into the blasphemy against it, and art in Cains nature, and wouldst fain be handling of Cains weapons to destroy it. Therefore take heed of the fleshly wisdom, take heed of thine own understanding, take heed of thy reasoning or disput∣ing, for these are the weapons where with the witness is slain. That wisdom must be destroyed, and that understanding brought to nought, and thou become a child, and learn as a child, if ever thou know the things of God. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? did they ever
from the beginning of the World to this day, attain the know∣ledge of the things of God? where are the Councils? where are the great Convocations? where are the Synods? where are the assemblies of divines? what is become of them all? what have they done? have they been ever able to lead out of the Apostacy from the truth, into the truth again? Nay, that wis∣dom is cursed; it is of the earth, and fixeth in the earth, and is the grand enemy to the wisdom that is from above. And where that wisdom stands, there is no entrance for the other. This made it so hard for this sort of persons, in all ages, to own truth. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted the. This made the whorish spirit so able to use sorceries, and inchant∣ments from the life in all ages. And it is easier for publicans, harlots, drunkards, swearers, all sorts of sinners to own truth, and enter into life, then for these. For it is easier to empty them of their profanenes, then it is to empty these of their setled conceited Religion and devotion: and yet this with their Religion and devotion cannot enter, no more then the other with their profanenes. Ye have a knowledge, a righteousnesse, an hope, a faith, &c. founded by your pretence to Scriptures, who can shake down these, say you? and yet these must fall, be∣fore ye can build upon, and grow up in the life that the Scrip∣tures came from. For the Scriptures were not given for men to gather the meanings out of, and lay a foundation of faith there, by their own wils: but to discover and testifie of the foundation. And he that comes thither, & is built there, knows the truth, not because the Scriptures say so, but because he feels the thing, is founded upon the thing, grows up in the thing, and the thing in him whereof the Scripture speaks. And this know∣ledge shall abide, and this faith, and this righteousness, and this holiness, and this redemption; whereas the other is but a name, put upon that which is not the thing. These are precious & faithful words (though through a Vessel weakned, and weak beyond measure) and happy is he that hath an ear to hear them: but woe from the Lord to that eye that is closed, to that ear that is shut, to that heart that is hard∣ned, in the inventions and imaginations of mans fleshly mind, against the truth of God. Let the witness of God in thee stir
and speak, it shall answer me now: but if thou, through the strength of the flesh, and the vain imaginations which thou hug∣gest in thy heart, stifle the voice of it now, yet I know it shall answer me one day: but then it will be too late for thee to hear it. The Lord is now gentle and tender, pursuing thee with his love, and following thee up and dovvn with his light; and though thou run from him into sin and transgression, and hear∣ken to the wisdom of the flesh, yet his voice comes after thee to reclaim thee: and if thou wilt hear, and but yeeld thy self to him, he vvil not put thee to do any thing▪ but subdue all thy enemies for thee; yea he vvil slay the serpentine vvisdom in thee, vvith all its inventions, and dash all she children of Ba∣bylon against the stones, vvithout pitty to them, though vvith great pitty to thee. But if thou refuse, and choose the pleasure of the flesh, and the gross flesh-pots of Egypt, and turn thine ear from his voice, giving vvay to the reasonings of the flesh, and keeping dovvn the vvitness; that day of vvrath and severi∣ty, vvhich all the Scriptures have spoke of vvil come, and thou vvilt have thy portion vvith hypocrites, vvho in all ages have co∣vered themselves vvith a form of religion, pleasing to the flesh and the vvorld, but have vvith-held their hearts from the po∣vver of life, therefore prize the love of God to thee in giving thee this warning, and be not uncircumcised in heart and ears, as this generation of professors have alvvaies been: but let Christ reign in the heart, and let him trample all mans invented forms of knovvledg and vvorship under his feet; and give up thy self to be led by him, into the true knovvledg and vvorship, in the spirit and in the truth. And now you, who find your hearts touched and convinced of the truth, and find any desire kindled in you after the living God, and an hungring and thirsting after his righteousness: Take notice of these three things, which I have upon my heart to say to you, by way of advice. 1. Know and take up thy cross, the Cross of Christ, the daily Cross of Christ. The Cross of Christ is that which crosseth the natural, and this is the power of God to deliver from the na∣tural. How should the earthly understanding, the earthly wil,
the earthly affections, with the elementary nature (which have had their swinge in the earth) be crucified and slain, but by the cross of Christ? he therefore that wil have a Religion to please himself in any thing, must not come hither: and he who after he is come hither, admitteth of any thing pleasing to the earthly, and starteth from the cross, which would deny and turn from it; so far as it doth so, he goeth backward and not forward. It is no wonder that there is such an enmity in all sorts against the truth, for it striketh at their life, yea at the very root of their life. If there were any new way or form of Religion held forth, mens understandings and affections might by degrees be wrought of to it, and find pleasure in it: but this is direct death to that nature and spirit that hath lived in any form of Religion, and to the whole course of that nature and spirit: yet through this death the true life springs up, in those who receive the strokes of it. Therefore be willing and learn to die dayly, and bring every thing which is contrary to Christ, to the Cross. Deny self in every thing, take up the Cross in e∣very thing, follow Christ in every thing, This is the way which Christ himself prescribes to become his disciples by. If any man wil come after me, let him deny himself, take up his Cross daily, and follow me, seek not ease in the flesh, no not in the least, but take up the Cross every day, in every thing, till the earthly be slain, til the wisdom and strength of the flesh be wholly subdued, and then the wisdom and power of God will become natural. 2. Keep to the sence, keep to the feeling: beware of the understanding, beware of the imagining, conceiving mind: These cannot be for God, not bring forth any thing for God, until they be new cast and new moulded. The one seed of life lies in the invisible, in the hidden man of the heart, among multitudes of seeds of death, all which have their growth up in∣to, and strength in the corrupted natural. So that this seed cannot shoot up into any part of the natural, but the other seeds shoot up with it, and endeavour to choak it. Now the other seeds spring up two wayes? either in a way of opposition against the the true seed, or in a way of similitude. There can∣not a good thought, or desire, or beam of light enter into the
understanding or will, but multitudes of evil thoughts, evil de∣sire, or fleshly reasonings against it wil spring up with it, and strives to over bear it. And if the enemy be at length over∣come, by the power of God fighting with him and vanquish∣ing him, then he hath his garments of light, then he brings in thoughts, and desires, and motions like Gods, which easily pass for good, if the soul keep not close upon the watch. The forward understanding is apt presently to own them, and the forward will to embrace, and the forward affections to let themselves forth into them, until the soul come to feel a loss in life, and miss the power and presence of God, and find the e∣nemy strong again. Yea the enemy hath yet a more subtil way, namely, to raise motions like the motions of Gods spirit, and suddainly, before the light hath given the discerning of them to raise opposition and reasonings against them; that so by the op∣position, which is manifestly evil, the motion it self, which is also evil, (though good in appearance) might be the less suspected and swallowed. Now the onely way of safety is to keep out of the natural, whereof the enemy hath possession, and where his strength lies, and to keep in the sence and feeling of the invi∣sible seed? and onely to come forth with him into the natural, in that sence and feeling. And when he comes, he wil come with strength, above the strength that the enemy hath in the natural, and by degrees conquer him. But by no means rest or abide in the natural, but retire with the Lord (who will not dwel there, until it be clensed) into the resting place. These words may be hard to you at present, but hereafter (as you come into the exercise) you will feel them. And this is the reason, why the formal and outward part of Religion doth so commonly eat out the life, because things there are sutable to, and exercise that part wherein the strength of the enemy lies: and there can never be perfect freedom and safety, until that part be subdued, and all that belongs to that part removed. The Lord is risen to shake what may be shaken, that the king∣dom which cannot be shaken may appear: and happy are they, who are shaken by his hand in all that is outward, and established in the inward life, power, and rest, which remain∣eth for ever and cannot be shaken.
3. Wait patiently the Lords leasure. Be not hasty after life and salvation in the wil of the flesh, but leave the Lord to chuse his own season, for the showring down of his mercy and blessing. The Lord will not presently entertain that spirit, which hath adulterated from him (prostituting it self to stran∣gers, and defiling it self) into his bosom: but there must be a time of sorrow, a time of purifying and clensing. The soul must know and feel, that it hath been an evil thing and bitter, that it hath forsaken the Lord, the living fountain of living mercies, and hath sought life from vanities, and among dead Idols. And all the Idols must be thrown away, and the heart washed from that nature that ran after them, and become a pure virgin, to bear and bring forth the living seed; and by faithfulness to that seed, and waiting in that seed, in the Lords season it shall receive the mercy, and the blessing, and the in∣heritance which belongs to that seed. The Husbandman doth not presently reap, but waits long, even till the seed be grown up to maturity. Jacob, the type of the seed, said, O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. It is the election that obtains: it is to the seed, and for the seeds sake that the mercy is bestowed: and there must be a waiting, till the seed be gown up to age, and able to defend his portion from his elder Brother, who o∣therwise would be ready to seize on it, and waste it upon har∣lots again. Therefore lie stil, and bear the indignation of the Lord against that which hath transgressed, til he judg it, and de∣liver from it, and lead into the innocency and righteousness: and then he wil find a time to arise, and plead the cause of the innocent, and give the crown of immortal life to that which he hath prepared for it. Therefore think not the race long, nor the battel hard, nor be weary of the afflictions and chastise∣ments in the way: but follow the Captain, the guid, the lea∣der, whose light, strength, courage, and wisdom wil overcome all, and bring the soul, which abides in it, into his own throne. Now as you thus wait, taking up the Cross, and keeping in the feeling; so the corrupt natural, the mortal, wherein Satans throne and power hath been, wil wither, decay, and grow weak daily; and the tender plant of God, the immortal seed will
shoot up, and gather strength daily: and you will come to a will in God, and an understanding in God, and that which is of God wil manifest it self, and you wil come to know, and desire, and take delight in the things of God: Then the soul, which is immortal, wil come to hear, and receive, and feed on the immortal word, which is the bread of life, and which alone is able to preserve and nourish up to eternal life. Then ye wil know what it is to tremble at this word, and to have all the powers of nature melt and fail before it. Then ye will know the faith which gives the victory, and the knowledg which lets into life, and the fear which keeps the hearts clean, and the hope which anchors the soul immortal in the immortal God, and the patience which wins the Crown. And so ye wil come to witness the several conditions of the Saints in Scripture, at ye grow up into them, & wil not need men to give you mean∣ings of Scriptures, from their brain-studies and acquired arts and understandings, but wil know the meaning from the thing felt in your own hearts, and hear the words from the living voice of that spirit that first spake them, who alone is able to interpret his own mind, and open the words which he himself spake. And then ye wil know and love life, and need, no more exhortations to depart from all dead, corrupted, and corrup∣ting forms, which ever were, and ever wil be enemies to, and be traytors of the life. And to the peace of God, the rest of God, the true Sabbath of God, the everlasting light and life of God wil come to be your own, and enjoyed by you, past all gain-saying or dispute in you, while the natural understanding in others is reasoning, contending, and disputing about them, but can never know (while they are from the thing within?) for that mind is not the heir, nor must not inherit the kingdom of God.
A Postscript. TO those who have had a seriousness and depth in their Reli∣gion, who could not sit down in empty forms and shadows of things, but have been pressing after the living substance, and missing of that, through error of judgment, the true eye be∣ing not fixed in the head, have come to a loss; and so are re∣turned to, overgrown with, and hardned in the old nature, and have taken up a pittiful rest and centre in the earth, having let fal the pursuit of their spirits after the true center of rest in the life: a word to such from the love in the life. There was a spirit, soul, or image of God brought forth, and standing in his life before the fall. This soul was brought into death, under the burthen and bondage of corruption, out of its proper centre and resting place, by the fal. Now as there is in this state a true loss, so there is in this spirit a sensibleness, a groaning under the burthen, a feeling the bit∣terness of the captivity, and a panting after redemption and restoration to its former state. Now though the whorish part, which seduced from the life, make a great noise in the flesh about Saints words, and tempt to pleasures of the outward part, and pleasures in the mind, and draw into forms and religious worships, and frame deep centres of satisfaction in the understanding (perhaps from true openings of the life, quenching it) and so seek to quiet the soul, and stil the cry: yet the lost state remaining, the soul be∣ing not truely redeemed, but a false rest taken up by the way, in the false part; this wil fail, and the sense be again renewed in the day of tryal and sore trouble. For the soul by any ima∣gination, or notion, or feeling of a centre in the corrupt mind, cannot be healed or restored; but onely by having the true life raised up again in it, and it brought into its proper place and mansion in the fountain of life. There have been in the shakings of this Nation great stir∣rings,
the seed springing up, and great openings to the seed; the spirit of prophesy hath been enlarged in us, above what many of our fore-fathers felt: but the way into the spring of life hath not been known, where the preservation is: so the whorish part, the corrupt part, the understanding which was not purified & brought into subjection unto the truth, this har∣lot caught the openings and prophestes of the true spirit, concei∣ved with them, and brought forth children to the flesh; bring∣ing for a more inward apprehension of things, a more spiritual kind of knowledg, as of God to be all, all to be good, and in God, and all sin and evil done away there, &c. and so such a centre for the fleshly mind (as it were) in him, as was not known before. And now the redemption is forgotten, the pantings after life slain, and the flesh can lie down quiet in the un-redeemed estate, and say it is his wil, it is good, and it can rest satisfied there in that wil of his which is good. Thus the great abomination from the subtle flesh sprung up, which made many hearts desolate of very precious springings up, and bud∣dings forth of the true life and power of God. But after this great loss and betraying of the life in them, it hath pleased God to raise it up in others, and to discover the hammer, the sword, the fire, which can knock down, cut down, burn up this whorish part: and thither the whore is brought, when she comes to betray again; and the springings up of life shrink back, and lie safe in the centre, while the whore is bur∣ning. And as the whore is burnt, the heir comes up, and the Spirit (which is the portion of his inheritance) descends and rests upon him: and by this he is known: and that which is in union with him knows him. Therefore if you will live, come to that hammer, that sword, that fire which flesh dreads; and let the flesh be delivered up to it: and do not despise the day of smal things, waiting for some great appearance, but know it in its lowest knock; for its power of redemption is as truly there, as in its greatest appearance. He that hath an ear, let him hear, and his soul shal live. Let those therefore whom this concerns, consider their waies (as the grace that appeared to me, hath taught me to do) and try their foundation, upon what they stand: and that they do
not kill what is opened, and live in the slain openings and so in the end become dark, airy, dry, withered, wheeling about and turning into the earth, it becoming their rest and foundation again, and so loosing the joyes which formerly the opener did open. This, with me, many of you may witness: for whom my desire is, that they may also witness the return to that which then opened, and live in the opener, and be preserved by him from abusing his precious openings any more. For though I had a true taste of life and power from God, yet not knowing the foundation, there could be no true buil∣ding with it: and so the spirit was quenched, the life wasted, the portion spent upon harlots, the true bread lost, and chaff and husks fed upon, without the least satisfaction to the soul; the sense whereof, when the spirit of the Lord awakened me, did almost over-whelm me. Yea the bands of death were so strengthned upon me, and the spirit of the word had taken such hold of me, that I found my return very difficult: yea when living words of hope were mentioned to me; to draw me back to that principle of life from which I had gone out, I could re∣ceive nothing, but cry out impossible, impossible, impossible. I felt my self like a tree twice dead, plucked up by the roots, without the capacity of life, sence, or motion in the eternal be∣ing any more. But at length it pleased life to move in a low way, in the midst of the powers of darkness in my heart: and by sinking low out of the wisdom, out of the reason, out of all high imaginations, and trusting my self to it, though dreadful stroaks and oppositions were felt from the powers of darkness, yet at length there was some appearance of the deliverer, in such a poor, low, weak, despicable way, as could never have been welcomed, had not the soul been first brought to distress, and the loftiness of the imaginary part brought down. And then coming out of that into the feeling, in another part; there was a seed sprung up into a child: and as that child grows, and feeds on the milk of the immortal word, I live, & am strengthen¦ed in him, and daily weakned in that part which lived before. These are true words, from an honest heart, for the relief of those who may have been entangled in the same snare.
Here follows the Testimony Concerning the Estate of the True Church; what she hath been, and what she is; and it was given forth, as being the motion of the Spirit of the Father, and left with me; and is Judged sutable and servicable to be here inserted; and it may be for the edification of many. COncerning the True State of the Church, what she hath been, and what she is at this day; and concerning her increase and decrease thorough ages and generations past, and her present State is this; returning again out of the Wilderness, where she hath long been fed, having a place prepared of God. Now the Apostle saw her a woman clothed with the Sun, co∣vered with the light of Heaven, and with the glory of God, having the Moon under her feet, the light which was ordained to rule the night. Thus she was, and this was her state in the dayes of the Apostles, when many were converted out of dark∣nesse, and renewed to be members of this Church, for her glory shone through the World, and she flourished through Nations, and this was her Estate in the Apostles dayes; and she travelled to bring forth the man-child Christ Jesus, which is the child and husband of this woman, which was clothed with the brightness of the glory of God, the elected spouse of Christ, the Lambs wife, and his body, of his flesh and of his bones, ha∣ving power and dominion and treading under all contrary. And thus was it with her in generations past, whose seed spring forth as branches fruitful and glorious. But in process of time it came to pass, that this woman the spouse of Christ, his body, the wife and mother of thi man-child, she was bereaved of
her beauty, and her garments were taken away, her seed was made war against, and was smitten and overcome and she fled into the wilderness, and there hath sat desolate as a widow, lamenting the losse of her children, and being deprived of her husband, and the man child, which should have ruled the Na∣tions: for she hath been fled into the Wilderness, and her for∣mer beauty hath not appeared to be, and her former glory hath seemed to be gone, and she hath been driven away from her head, from her husband, and from her seed. Behold all people the Estate of such a woman, and read this parable who can, a woman most glorious and fair, having her husband ruler of the whole earth, and having an heir born to rule over heaven and earth, being covered with the light of heaven, and of the ever∣lasting day, and having the light of the night under her feet: yet hath this woman been deprived of her glory, and sate de∣solate in the Wilderness a mournfull place, seperated from her husband, and made childless and without seed: and what ey that sees this a right, but must mourn; and what heart that truly perceives it, but must lament: a woman so great and so glorious, and so fruitful as to bring forth the heir of heaven and earth yet hath she been left as a mourner, as without husband, and without issue for many generations; This hath been her estate and condition for ages, since the dayes of the Apostle, which John saw (in a vision) would shortly come to pass after him, and we see it hath been come to pass within this sixteen hun∣dred years; and this hath been the estate of the true Church for many ages, a woman childless, whose heir hath been taken from her, and whose seed hath been made war against and kil∣led for many generations. But her time was decreed, and she should but be thus for so many dayes: and now are the dayes expired, and she again shall receive her heir that hath been caught up from her, and her seed shall spring forth, and her slain shall live, and her beauty shall be given her, and her first glory shall be increased, and she shall feed no longer in the mourning. Wilderness, but she shall be fed upon the Mountain of Gods house, which is to be established upon the top of all mountains; and her seed shall spring forth numberless, and her heir shall rule with an iron rod, and her marriage day is
come, and the approach thereof nigh, and life shall be revea∣led. Thus she hath been and thus she shall be, the Lord hath said it. Now as for all those multitudes of sects, and peoples that have professed Religion, and as for all those Churches so called, that hath gone under that name, which hath professed Christ to be their head, and made a shew of him in appearance, the Papists Church, the Protestants Church, and all the sects that hath risen out of both of them, they have not been the true spouse, the lambs wife, but children of fornication, and not of the seed of that woman that was once clothed with the Sun, and they are come up; and their original begun, while this true woman, this spouse of Christ hath been childless: none of these are clothed with the sun, nor none of them have brought forth the heir of salvation. Come let's reason with you: who was your mother? who brought you forth? and in what womb was you bred? you that have appeared in the World, and for many ages, for the true spouse? The mother of the heir hath been childless, and as a widow banished from her husband, and her heirs seperated from her, and her seed killed and made war a∣gainst. She hath not born you nor brought you forth; then of what womb did you spring, all ye of the Papists and Prote∣stants Church, and all the sects that came out of you, answer me this? None of you hath been fled into the Wilderness, for you have appeared in the World. None of you have been as a widow mourning; for you have been practising ordinances, and rejoycing in the World. None of you have been without issue, nor your seed made war against: for you have been fruit∣ful in the World, and one sect brought forth another, and one Church brought forth another, therefore none of you hath been that woman which John saw: for never none of you, from the least to the greatest of you, was ever clothed with the sun, nor had the moon under your feet, nor ruled the Nations with the rod of iron: therefore none of you are the true spouse, the lambs wife; he is not husband to any of you, nor is he your, child, nor heir. And this is the word of the Lord God to you all; you Churches and sects, your beginning and springing forth was from another womb, while this woman lodged in the Wil∣derness,
and while she was childless and without seed; and the mother of harlots brought you forth, the great whore whose superscription is Mistery of Babylon, and her character is Mother of all abominations. For while this other woman hath been fled into the Wilderness, which John saw was fled thither, this woman the mother of harlots, which brought you fotth, hath been fruitful and flourishing, and hath had an husband and many children; for John speaks of two women, of a whore, and of a virgin: of one, the bloud of whose seed was drunk, and the other drunk the bloud: yea, one that was made war with and against, for the Saints were killed and their blood drunk, and that other killed the Saints, and was made drunk with their bloud: the one was fled into the Wilderness he saw, of which I have spoken, and the other making all Nations drunk with her fornication, and ruling over all the Nations of the earth as a Queen; and while the one of those, the virgin, the Lambs wife, hath been fled into the Wilderness, and left childless without seed; the other, the whore hath been fruitful, and brought forth many children, taken great pleasure in the World, and committed fornication with the Kings of the earth: and these things John saw was to come to pass, and we see (that have John's spirit) is come to pass already. And come all ye Sects upon the earth, and Churches so called, that have been in the World for many ages, which of those two women are you of? and the seed of whether of them are ye? who of these two was it that brought you forth? answer me, and make it appear. But I have said already the virgin brought you not forth, the Lambs wife did not bear you, nor you are not of her: for you were brought forth while she was banished, and de∣prived of her heir, and without her husband; and you are of the seed of that whore, the product of her fornications, ge∣nerated by the seed of adulterers: and though you have been warring, and fighting and striving one against another, yet you were bred in one womb, and are of one seed: And though some of you in one appearance of the whores beauty brought forth have made war against them, brought forth in another appearance of her, and burned her flesh; yet have ye given your power to the beast, and John saw that also, which we see is
fulfilled, some that should hate the whore, and make war a∣gainst her, yet should they also give their power to the beast. This have we seen fulfild amongst you sects and false Churches, and your beginning we know, and the first beginning of whor∣dom, and when the whore began with her fornications, since which time all Nations have drunk her cup, and her sent hass been upon Nations, and multitudes, and peoples. Her first whoredom John speaks of in his Epistle, and her beginning, they went out from the body, from the spouse, and from the virgin; they went out from the true Church being false mem∣bers, not as ever being of the body of Christ, nor of the true Church, but such as had been amongst the members of the true Church and were once convinced which had got the form, and put on sheeps cloathing upon the Wolvish nature, and here was the beginning of her whordom she went from the spouse, and went into the World, and the World heard her and recei∣ved her, and they drunk of her cup, and committed fornication with her, and she played the whore in the unbelieving World, after she departed from the Saints. She went out from them, and they denied her, and it was manifest she was not of them: and this was the beginning of whoredoms: and she was but young yet in her whordoms, and little in the World, and had not yet deceived many: but in process of time it came to pass, she increased so mightily, that she made all Nations drunk, and overcame them, Kings and Rulers, Bondmen and Freemen, they all drunk of her cup, and she became so great, that Nations, kin∣dreds, multitudes and peoples was her seat, her place of gover∣ment, where she sate Ruler and Queen having dominion over all, and all was bewitched by her, and made drunk with her cup: and of this woman came ye, all ye sects upon earth, and you are the multitudes, kindreds, and peoples upon, which her seat hath been, and over whom she hass had government. And this is she that hass drunk the bloud of the Saints, and over∣come them, and the heir and seed of the other woman, the vir∣gin, hath long been made war against, and killed and slain by this woman and her seed, and this hath been the state of the Church for many ages, since the dayes of the Apostles she hass been fled, and her seed made war against and killed, and
her heir caught up to God, and the Nations which should have been ruled by her heir, the whore hass set upon them, and the peoples, and the multitudes which he should have governed, hath been the seat of the Harlot, the mother of all abomi∣nations: and was it not like to be so, and how should it be otherwise, when the manchild, the womans heir, hass been caught up to God, and he hass been as prevailed against, and the remnant of the womans seed made war against and kil∣led, and this hath been since the dayes of the Apostles? and so all you Churches and sects, by what name soever you are known in the World, you are the seed of the great whore, and she hath brought you forth, while the other woman hass lodged in the Wilderness, and remains childless, if any man have an ear to hear, let him hear. Now it may be objected to me, and thus may it be said, by this accompt the Church, the Lambs wife, hass been prevailed against by the whore, because it is said she hath killed the Saints, the members of Jesus and of the Church; this seems to shew, as if the Church of Christ had been prevailed against, but Christ sayes the gates of hel shall not prevail against them, but she should remain for ever, and the gates of hel should not prevail against her, and how doth these two things agree? it seems doubtful to us, may some say. Answ. To all this I do answer, the true Church, the spouse of Christ in her self was never prevailed against, so as not to be in being, or that she was not, but in her self hass remained in being, and not prevailed against, so, as not to have a place or being, and Christs words are true, she hass had a place and being, to wit in the desert Wilderness, which place was pre∣pared her of God, there to be fed for, such a time. So she hass a place and has a being, though in the Wilderness, a place deso∣late and of mourning. So she hass not been prevailed against, as that she hass not had a being; but the Lambs wife, the mo∣ther of the heir, that which is perfectly so; which was and is to be joyned to Christ, which is of his flesh and bones taken out of him that cannot be prevailed against, never was, nor never shall be, for the divel nor Satan hath nothing in him, of whose flesh and bones she is; which is taken out of him, and it is as
possible for to prevail against him, as to prevail against her, for she is of him, as Eve was of Adam, if any have an ear to hear they may hear. But her off-spring hass been overcome her seed made war against, and her heir taken away, and caught up from her: so she not prevailed against nor overcome, though banished into the Wilderness, fled thither, and there hass she fed and had a place, and hass been left childless, as I have said. So the mother and the Lambs wife, hath had a being, and in her selfe never prevailed against nor overcome, and Christ's words are true: yet hath her seed been killed, and made war against, and overcome, as John said; and both these are true, and this is my answer, and if any have an ear to hear they may hear, though a parable to the world, yet plain to the seed, which now God hath raised and is raising: for the woman again is returning, and her seed again is springing, and she is becoming as fruitful as ever, and her glory shal be as great, the light of heaven shal cloath her, and the light of the night shal be under her feet as perfectly, when she is restored, as it was before the apostacy, though people cannot believe this in the apostacy. No reve∣velation, nor immediate teaching, nor miracles now to be ex∣pected, cry the professors, and these false sects and Churches: it was extraordinary times, and extraordinary manifestations were amongst the Apostles and Churches of old, say they, but the same now is not to be expected, nor never to be looked for, but thus they are in blindness and ignorance, and unbe∣lief. But we believe the glory of this woman, that hath been long fled into the wilderness, and hath been long without is∣sue while she hath been fled, shal have the same fruit and issue, and the same clothing that she had before she fled. When the whore and her seed is removed from the face of the earth, the glory of the Lambs wife shal be as great, her beauty as fair, her fruit as plenteous as before the whore was: and they that be∣lieve it not, believes not the Scriptures: for that testifies of the glory of the Church to be the greatest in the last dayes, as we are sure and certainly know it shal come to pass, when the waters are dried up, which hath been the seat of the great whore. Now though all those Churches and sects of people are said to be, and known to be the seed of the whore, and not of the
Virgin, as I have declared: and though Nations, and Peoples, and multitudes have been all running to sornication, and been deceived, and made drunk, yet this I have to say, in all sorts of people, and amongst all those sects, amongst Papists and Pro∣testants, and all sects risen out of them, in thousands of people, notwithstanding the darkness and all the Apostacy that has ru∣led in the general; yet in some of all sorts and sects there hath been a sincerity, and simplicity, and a desire and zeal for God, and of God in them and amongst them: yet the sincerity, sim∣plicity, and desire which hath stirred in some of all sects, it hath no soonet appeared, but it hath been smitten, and betrayed by the wicked without, and so by the error of judgement within: for even amongst the worst of sects, we know there is some in whom there is simplicity, and sincerity and zeal; and yet erre in judgment, for this is possible: and we know it is so with thousands, and ten thousands at this day, there may be a sim∣plicity, and zeal, and sincerity of heart, and yet err in judge∣ment, & the judgment not truly guided, by the Spirit of the Lord; but a false spirit, and a false thing, even the spirit of whoredom it self ruling the judgment, and be chief there: and this destroyes, & murders, and betrayes the zeal and simplicity; and this is, and hath been ever since the dayes of the Apostles, great error in judgment, and the judgement of all those sects have been mis-guided and misted, and a false thing, and not the spirit of the Lord has guided the judgment, and thereby the true sincerity, zeal and simplicity hath been enslaved and held under, by reason of the erring in judgment: and the state of such are truly to be lamented, where simplicity is devoured, and sincerity betrayed, and held captive by the whorish spirit that sits ruler in judgment. I do not speak of all people of all sects, that they have zeal and simplicity; but of some people in all sects, and through all these false Churches, and so the spirit which has guided the judgment, that has abased the zeal, and abused the sincerity, and betrayed it; so people have been a running, running after the form, and blind in judgement, and lost sincerity, and simplicity that has been betrayed in them, though sometime appearing and stirring, and so the wrong part in people has fed upon the form and appearance, and the
seed starved, and the sincerity eaten out, and so one sect hath made this the rule of their judgment, and another sect another thing, the rule of their judgment, one cries tradition, another Scriptures another cries the practice of Saints before us, & none of all have been guided in judgment by the spirit of the Lord; and where the spirit of the Lord is not the onely rule of judg∣ment, guiding the judgment in all things, that people and that man, are in error, and the sincerity in them hath not its free course, but bound under with a spirit which is bondage, and leads into bondage; and when people comes to be turned to the light of Christ in them, and receive a measure of the Spirit of the Lord to guide the judgment, then the sincerity and sim∣plicity and zeal wil grow, and thrive, and be increased: but til then the good is eaten out, that lies under and is oppressed, and ever and alwaies, the desire quenched the sincerity lost, the simplicity betrayed by the spirit of whoredom which rules the judgment; and these things are manifest in our age, therefore all people come out of your sects and false Churches, for the woman is returned, and returning out of the wilderness, and the seed shal spring forth as in the dayes of old. E. B.
A Testimony of great concernment to all that call themselves Christi∣ans, but have not known the true Church, of which alone the true Christian can be born. THere hath been a great War between the woman and her seed, and the harlot and her seed, from the beginning to this day; and they have each had their pre¦vailings in the war. The woman and her seed have been made strong in God, to conquer some of the territories of death, and to set up their life in the world. Thus in the Jew∣ish state, God prepared an heaven and an earth for the woman and her seed: and when that heaven and earth was shaken, he prepared a more glorious heaven and earth in the Christian state. Now no sooner was the Church and her seed seated in ei∣ther of these, but the Dragon made made war against her, and in the war had power given him, to recover her seat from her. Thus the Devil gat possession of the Jewish state, so that there was no room for the true Church there, but all was in idolatry and corruption; and the Lord was not served by their ceremo∣nies, by their sacrifices, by their Sabbaths, by their new moons, by their Temple-worship, &c. but the Devil. And the Devil also got possession of the heaven and earth in the Christian state, so that in their Ordinances, in their worships, in their duties, in that which they call their Churches, God hath not been wor∣shipped in truth, but the Devil for this many ages. For mark, who was it that got into the Temple of God? was it not An∣tichrist? was it not the Spirit of Satan? 2 Thes. 2. 4. And who was it that was worshipped in all the world, that had power given him over all kindreds, and tongues and nations? and whom all that dwel upon the earth, worship? was it not the
Dragon? Rev. 13. 7, 8. Did not all the world wonder after the beast, and worship the Dragon which gave power unto the beast, ver. 3. 4. of that Chap. The woman was assaulted here, her strong holds taken from her, so that she could not stay safe in that heaven and earth, which God had made for her: there∣fore there was another place prepared for her by God in the wilderness, and she had wings of an Eagle given her to fly thi∣ther, but the Dragon got into, and held possession of that hea∣ven where she was before, Rev. 12. So that none hath known the Church all this time, but he that hath been born of her in the wilderness, which was a place the world never dreamed of, but looked for her in the heaven and the earth which the Devil had got possession of. And here they cry up the Ordi∣dinances, the Ordinances, duties, the Church, the Ministry, &c. (as the Jews did the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord) not knowing in whose hands these were, and whom they worshipped hereby. Now consider this O ye Christians, I speak what I assuredly know, that God could not be truly worshipped in any of these, while they were in the Devils hands; but the whorish Spirit, and her seed worship here; and the worship of the Church and her seed: was a wilderness∣worship, or a worship which she learned of God in the wilder∣ness. Mark now and consider my testimony, O ye Christians. I deny all the worship, all the Ordinances which were taught the Christians of old, now practised by the whorish spirit: for the Devil had gained it, and corrupted it, and having corrupted it, God could not be any more worshipped in it; but the Antichri∣stian spirit sate there, giving forth those things as his Laws; He sate in the Temple of God, and there made use of the Vessels and Ordinances, which he had carried captive into his Babylon; and I deny it to be possible to have any true use of these, til the time of the recovery. And now the time of the recovery is come, and the restitution begun, people know it not; but cry up the old heaven and the old earth, which Satan had corrupt∣ed, setting it up in opposition against the new, which God hath new formed, and is bringing forth in true beauty and glory. Now in this war, though the Devil, though the harlot and her seed gat the womans seat from her, and banished her seed
as it were out of the earth; yet they were not able to touch the woman, nor to over-come the life of God in her seed, but onely to kil their bodies; but the life was stil conqueror over them, and not subjected to them. They could raise up Chur∣ches, and Ordinances, and Ministers and duties, and cause all that dwel on the earth to worship, in some part or other of this Babylon: but they could never make the seed bow to any of their images, nor could they hurt the woman hereby who was in the wilderness, out of the reach of all these: And there she did eat the bread of life with tears, mourning over her de∣solate estate, and her loss of children: And here alone was the true bread of life, which was not to be known or tasted of, in any of the Ordinances of the Apostacy: ye wil all one day acknowledge this to be a true testimony, held forth to you in true love: it were good for you that ye could see it now. J. P.
A brief account of what we are, and what our work is in the World. WE are a people whom God hath converted to himself, a people in whom God hath raised up the seed of his own life, and caused it to reign over the earthly part in our sel∣ves, a people whom God hath divorced from the spirit of whordom, and joyned to his own spirit. We, many of us, sought truly and only after God from our child hood (our consciences bear us witness in the sight of God) but the ho∣nesty of our hearts was stil betrayed, and we led aside by the whorish spirit, and knew not how to turn to that of God in us, which inclined us towards God. By this means we came to great distress and misery, beyond all men. Not but that all men were in as great a want of God (his life, power, and presence) as we; but the sence thereof was not so quickned in others, as in us. Now it pleased the Lord at length to pitty us, and to inform our minds towards himself, to shew us where life lay, and where death lay, and how to turn from the one, and to the other, and he gave us his helping hand to turn us. And by being turned to him, we have tasted of the truth, of the true wisdom, of the true power, of the true life, of the true righ∣teousness, of the true redemption: and by receiving of this from God, and tasting and handling of it, we come to know that that which the World hath set up in the stead of it, is not the thing it self. Now mark, we are not persons that have shot up out of the old root into another appearance, as one Sect hath done out of another till many are come up one after another, the ground stil remaining the same out of which they all grew: but that ground hath been shaken and shaking, de∣stroyed and destroying, removed and removing in us, and the old root of Jesse hath been made manifest in us, and we have been transplanted by the everlasting power of life, and a real change brought forth in us out of that spirit, wherein the World lives and worships, into another spirit, into which no∣thing
which is of the World can enter. And here we have met with the cal of God, the conversion to God, the regeneration in God, the justification, the sanctification, the wisdom, the re∣demption, the true life and power of God, which the World cannot so much as bear the name of. And what we are made of God in Christ, we know to be truth, and no lie: and when we testifie of this to the World, in the measure of the life of God in us, we speak truth and no lie; though the World, which knoweth not the truth, cannot hear our voice. Now our work in the World, is to hold forth the vertues of him that hath called us, to live like God; not to own any thing in the World which God doth not own: to forget our coun∣try, our kindred, our Fathers house; and to live like persons of another country, of another kindred, of another family: not to do any thing of our selves, and which is pleasing to the old nature, but all our words, all our conversation, yea every thought in us is to be come new. Whatever comes from us, is to come from the new principle of life in us, and to answer that in others, but we must not please the old nature at all in our selves, nor in any else. And walking faithfully thus with God, we have a reward at present, and a crown in the end, which doth and will countervaile all the reproches and hard∣ships, we do or can meet with in the World. We are also to be witnesses for God, and to propagate his life in the World; to be instruments in his hand, to bring others out of death and captivity unto true life and liberty: we are to fight against the powers of darkness every where, as the Lord calleth us forth. And this we are to do in his wis∣dom, according to his will, in his power, and in his love, sweet∣ness, and meekness. We are not to take wayes according to our own wisdom (but there must be a strict watch, set in the life, least that get up again:) nor must we speak such words, as mans wisdom would call wise: nor may we go in our own will to seek any, but the Lord must go before: nor may we make use of our own strength, but feel his arme in our weakness: nor may we go forth in that love, sweetness, or meekness vvhich is pleasing to the fleshly minde: but vve must be true to God, handling the svvord skilfully and faithfully, judging and cutting
down the transgressor in the power and authority of God, and when the meek, the lowly, the humble thing is reached and raised, then the true love, the sweetness the tendernesse, the meekness must go forth to that. The Lord God is tough with the transgressor, and all a long the Scripture heweth and judgeth him: and if we come forth in the same spirit, we shall finde the same leadings, where we meet with the same thing: for the Lord God will never be tender there; nor can that which comes from him, lives in him, is lead by him, be tender there where he is not. Now the very root of this severity is good, and of God, and hath love and sweetness at the bottom of it: yea in pittie, love, and bowels do we use the sword. It is in pitty to the poor cap∣tived creature, that that might be cut down, which keeps it in bonds and captivity. And though we seem enemies to all sorts of men, for the Lords sake: yet we are not enemies, nor could do the least hurt to them any way, but are true friends to their souls, and bodies also: and our only controversie is with that which captives and makes them miserable: for we fight not at all with flesh and bloud, but with the principality and power which led from God, and rules in it against God, to the poor creatures ruine and destruction. Yea if we had all the powers of the earth in our hands, we could not set up our own way, (if, after the manner of men, I may so call it) or so much as disturb others in their way thereby, but should waite in patience, till God gave us an entrance by his power. Now let not men run on in heats against us, but let them seriously consider, whether we be of God or no: and let them consider, not with the reason and understanding which is alie∣nated from God, but with the witness which lies hid in the heart. There is one great palpable argument that we are of God, which is this, all the World is against us, the Wordly part every where fights with us, the Wordly part in every sort and Sect of men opposeth us, the rage of man every where riseth up against us; But those that are so hot against us, if at any time they become but meek and calme, patiently considering our cause, and consulting there upon with the testimony that they finde in their own hearts concerning us, they soon become pa∣cisied,
and see that we are no mans enemies, against no righ∣teous Law, not against relations, not against Governments, not against any thing in the World that is good, but only against that which is evil and corrupt. And of a truth, the cor∣ruption of things God hath shewed unto us, and daily cals us forth after an immediate manner, to witness against. Therefore let men be sober, and take heed what they do, least they be found fighters against God: for the reproaches, the scoffs, with other presecutions, which seem to be cast at us, light on him. It is not as we are men, but as we are obedient to him, as we stand witnesses for him, that we meet vvith these things. Novv, as it is not vve our selves that do these things, but the life and povver of God in us; so it is not vve that are struck at, but that life and povver: If it vvere not for that, vve might be as acceptable as other men. It is because vve are not of the World, but God hath called us out of the World, that vve are so hated of the World. This is the true cause, though the World vvill no more novv acknovvledge it, than it vvould in former ages. Yet I do not speak this for my ovvn sake, to avoid my share in the cross: for the reproach of Christ is our riches, yea far grea∣ter treasure, then is to be found in the Palace of Egypt. Yea the presence of God, the svveet povver of life makes up all our losses, so that vve have no cause to complain. It is very svveet, pleasant, and profitable for us to be found sufferers for God; but vve knovv it vvill not be profitable for you to be found persecutors: and this is told you in true love and good vvill, by one vvho vvishes no evill to you, for all the evill that ye have exercised tovvard the dear and precious people of God for these many years. O that God vvould open your eyes, that ye might see vvhom yee have opposed, and against vvhom ye have hardened and strengthned your selves, that ye might bovv to him, and receive life from him, and not perish in your gain∣saying and opposition. I. P.
The cause of all error from the truth, and the Universall call out of it, into the low voice and beginnings, of the true Eternal light, which is the only leader to Eternall life and to followship in it. NOw is the calling in of the Jews, of the Papists, of the Christians of all Sects upon the earth, to the Lord, into the fould, into the covenant of God, into the end of the Pro∣phets, the end of Moses, the end of Abrahams words, the end of the Apostles preaching, into the substance Christ, who is come to gather together in one, and reconcile in one, things in heaven and things in earth into covenant with God: and this is the age; the call is gone out, the voice is gone out, and the trumpet sounding for all to come in, and the spirit bids come, and he that hears may come, and the bride and the Lamb saith come, who raigns, and the great war is begun, and the slaughter shall be till the tenth of the spoile shall be offered up; and the gathering of all Nations is come, and the war among all Nations shall be, and all shal be on heaps, before the light of the Son of God be risen in the hearts of all people, with which he must be seen, and receive his government upon his shoulders. Now is he come to raigh, who doth enlighten every man that comes into the World, Jews, Gentiles, Papists, Christians, In∣dependents, Baptists, Heathens, and all the Sects upon the earth whatsoever, and all in the light are to be gathered into one minde, and heart, and soule, and spirit concerning God and the Scriptures, concerning the Prophets, concerning Christ and the Apostles, and concerning the types and parables and the figures, with the light they shall see all, and have unity with all; who being out of the light, they see not one another, nor the Prophets, nor Christ, nor parables, nor types, nor figures, and so have not unity with their words, and so out of covenant with God and one another, in the earthly nature, in lusts, strife, and pride which causeth the wars, which must be all burnt up; and the cause of all peoples upon the earth setting up Images and Idols, is, because they are gone from the light which Christ hath enlightned them with all, and so bows down to them, but to the light should every one bow, to Christ, and to confesse him to the glory of God; the cause of all them that are called Chri∣stians in Christendom, setting up and making Images, crosses and Idols, likenesses and pictures, names and worshipping
Names,  hath en∣lightned them withall, and so they set up likenesses, Images and Idols, and fals down to them, to put them in minde of Christ, which coming to the light which Christ hath enlightned them withall, every knee shall bow to him who is Immanuel, and con∣fess him to the glory of God, and receive his minde, and they need not have any outward thing to put him in their minde, and the cause of all high notions of God, Christ and Scriptures, that are making Images and likenesses of things in heaven and setting up their imaginations of the Prophets, Christs and the Saints words and falling out about them is, because they be from the light which Christ hath enlightned them withall; and tis the cause why the Jews rest in the types in the outward let∣ter, preist, tythes, temples, shadows, is, because they be from the light which Christ hath enlightned them withall, in which all people should have unity one with another, with God, and with Scriptures, Jews and Gentiles to be gathered together in one with God, with one another, with Scriptures; in which light peo∣ple should have peace with God, and one with another, which is the covenant of God with man; in which covenant, people being in covenant one with another, shall shake all Nations saith the Lord, that that may appear that cannot be shaken, and such an earth-quake shall be upon the World; and the cause of all heresy, and Sects, and opinions, Judgments, and errors, and false Prophets, and deceiving men is going from the light which Christ hath inlightned them withall, and the devil going out of truth, which truth destroyes him and his works, and death (who being the power of it) who hath blinded the minds of all the transgressors upon the earth, who went out of the truth. So this is the true light, who hath inlightned every one that cometh into the World, that all through the light might believe: and he that believes, hath the witness in himself; and he that believes, sets to his seale that God is true, who hath sent his Son to in∣lighten him, him by whom the World was made, in whom was life, and his life was the light of men; and this is it which shines in darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend it; And there is the state of all confusion, and Sects, and opinions upon the earth, the darkness professing Christs, the Prophets, the Apost∣les, Davids, Abrahams, and the Saints words, and yet the dark∣ness cannot comprehend the light which Christ hath inlightned
them withall; so the darkness is not in unity with Abrahams, Davids, Christs and the Apostles words, but be all on heaps about them. Therefore as light shines out of darkness, shining in the heart, giving the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ the end of the Prophets, Abrahams; Mo∣ses, Davids, and the Apostles words, Christ Jesus is known, in whom is the unity and reconciliation, and no darkness at all, but unity with God, and with his Prophets words, and his Apo∣stles and servants before Abraham was; & in this unity all come into life and light, to the spirits of just men made perfect. And to you this is the word of the Lord God, and to your age and generation, the cause of all deceit and strife upon the earth, is, because men have been in transgression, Heathens, Jews, and Gentiles from Christ the light, under the devils power, out of truth; the cause of all Christians being on heaps one with ano∣ther, and their bad conversation, that the heathen cries shame of them, hath been because they have been out of the light which they have professed, in which they should have served God, and had unity with Scriptures, and one with another, and with God, and with that answer the principle of God in all upon the the earth, and not by serving Jdols, because of the vanities of their minds and unconverted state; so all upon the earth that sets up likenesses and Jmages, are under vanities, because of the corruption of their own minds, and the vanity of them: But the day of restauration is come into Christ the light and cove∣nant of God, and all upon the earth that sets up Jmages and Jdols, liknesses, and serves dead works, and hath a dead faith, and not the faith of Abraham, the faith of the elect, that gives every one to see Christ, and have accesse to God, and such need not to have any dead thing to put them in minde of him, so all that set up such things, whatsoever likenesses and Jmages, doth the light which Christ hath inlightned them withall, bring them off from into light and covenant with God (loving it) unto sal∣vation, and to see it and to covenant with God, there is every ones teacher, loving it; there is every ones condemnation, hat∣ing it; and they there with the light, that every one is inlightned withall, shall come to see the Prophet raised up, and there none shall be cut of that do hear this Prophet, and there every one shall have his reward according to his works, from the Son who hath inlightned them, who is come to judge the World in righ∣teousness,
who is now set down upon his Throne. So all Na∣tions are called, are commanded to come in and to hear the Son of God, and learn of the Son of God, hear the beloved Son of God, and cease from all them that are made of men, and by men, that they may come to hear the Son of God themselves, and receive the Son of God; and receiving him, they receive life by whom the World was made, coming into the light that he is enlightned withall, then every one may freely declare what he sees, and hears, and handels, and every one sees him by whom, the World was made, who is the light, and life, and resurrection; and wisdom, and sanctification, and justification from all things in which light the covenant of God, you have peace with God, that you may see him to the beginning. G. F. An addition concerning the doctrine of Justification. BEcause the doctrine of Justification is of great concernment, and the enemy of mankind hath exceedingly endeavoured to corrupt it, and in the Apostacy hath greatly prevailed, and the darkness which springs up in the fleshly wisdom, is exceeding thick at the day concerning this thing; therefore in true love to souls it is laid upon me, to search into the Scriptures, which chief∣ly speaks thereof, and from thence to clear it up to such, who are not yet come to the life that gave forth the Scriptures. The Apostle Paul doth largely and fully treat of it, in his Epi∣stle to the Romans, and lays down several things concerning it, which if wel heeded, may dash mens present apprehensions a∣bout it, and bring them to wait for the opening of those Scrip∣tures to them, in another light then you have yet known. 1. He affirms that Justification is not by the deeds of the Law, Ro. 3. 20. If a man could say with the young man, All these things have I done from my youth; or as Paul, that he was as touching the Law blameless, yet could he not be justified thereby: And the Apostle gives a mighty reason; for by the law is the knowledg of sin. Now Justification is not by the making of sinne known, but by that which saves and delivers from it. The know∣ledg of sin may put a man upon seeking out for justification, but it cannot justifie him, but rather condemn him; but that which de∣livers him from the sin, which the law makes known, that justi∣fies him.
2. He affirms that the righteousness of God (which is the justifi∣cation) is manifested without the law, v. 21. The Law makes sin known, and shews the sinner the need of justification, but the justification it self is not thereby, but is manifested with∣out it. The Law commands the nature to act that pertains to si∣militudes, figures, and types, and shadows, to the obedience of them, but the seed takes away the nature that pertains to simi∣litudes, and shadows, and the works of the law: so to the obedi∣ence of those things the law commands there is justification by the law, in the obedience to the works it commands: but the justifi∣cation, Christ, removes the nature, that pertains to those things the law commands: so that justification, the law, ends in Christ. 3. That this righteousness or justification is witnessed by the law and the Prophets, v. 21. The law, though it is not the justification, nor can the justification be by obedience to it, or by the deeds of it, yet it gives testimony to the justification: for the substance of what the law and all the Prophets witness, is, that nothing can justifie but the righteousness of God. 4. That this righteousness or justification is by the faith of Christ, v. 22. by believing or entring into that which justifies. As con∣demnation was by unbelier, by joyning unto and entring into the spirit of enmity: so justification, is by joyning unto & entring into the spirit of love, by true union with Christ in the spirit, which union is by the faith which comes from Christ. 5. That this justification or righteousness is upon all that believe, v. 22. He that receiveth the faith, believeth; and he that believeth hath the righteousness: and he that believeth not, cannot have the righteousness, but the condemnation & wrath abideth on him. 6. That this justification is freely by the grace, v. 24. There is no way to come to this righteousness but by the gift of grace, which gift is given freely. Therefore if ever man wil be justified, he must know the grace, and the gift which comes from the grace, and re∣ceive it: & receiving it, he cannot miss of justification, and not re∣ceiving it, (but either being ignorant of it, or resisting of it) he can∣not possibly be justified. 7. That this justification is by the redemption in Christ, v. 24. Christ is redeemer, the redemption (wherein is the justification) is in him, and there is no way of meeting with the justification, or re∣demption, but by receiving of him in whom it is; and he who hath
him, hath the justification, and is made partaker of the redempti∣on; and he who hath not him, hath it not. Mark then, the justification or redemption, is not by believing of a thing done without man (though that also is to be believed) but by receiving of him into the heart. For the virtue of all Christ did without, is within him: & I cannot be made partaker by belie∣ving that he did such a thing without, or that he did it for me, but by receiving the virtue of it into me, and feeling the virtue of it in me. This is that which saves me, and makes that which was done without, to be mine. 8. That Christ is the propitiation, v. 25. or that which pacifies and makes way for sinners to God, so that he that truly receiveth Christ, hath the atonement; but he that hath not received him, only dream∣eth of peace with God, but stil remaineth in the enmity, and is li∣able to the wrath, having the bond of iniquity over him, and is in the night. 9. That this Propitiation is by faith in the blood, v. 25. There is nothing pacifies God, but the blood of his Son; and thre is nothing feels the blood, but the faith, and that which is in the faith. A man may read Scriptures, and gather notions about justification, and think he believes, a right, and shal be justified; but he never comes to feel the blood, nor the life which is in the blood, till he receive the faith, and then he knoweth the true propitiation, and the true peace, which before he did but talk of. 10. That this faith is the righteousness; Faith is the gift of God, and this gift justifies; this gift is the justification, this is that which God imputeth for righteousness, ch. 4 v. 3. & 5. The faith is in the blood, and the blood is in the Son, and in the true receiving of the Son, both the faith and the blood are known, and felt. These are true words, though hard to the fleshly ear; do not stumble in the wisdom, but calmly wait for the revelation of the spirit, and then thou wilt say, the price of this knowledg is not to be valued; & if once thou come to tast truth here, all thy knowledg in the letter wil be but dross with thee. Ye are come to the blood of sprinkling▪ O do not rest in an outward way of believing an outward thing, but seek out the way of coming to the blood of sprinkling. 11. That the justification is of the ungodly, v. 5. He whom God maketh righteous, was ungodly before he made him righteous. There was nothing but unrighteousness could be imputed to him in transgression before he gave him his Son, and made him righte∣ous in his Son; for nothing is righteous with God but Christ, and
man only as he taken into his righteousnes; which is done, not by a believing from the bare leter, but by a receiving of faith in the life. 12. That the justification of the ungodly, is by believing in him that justifieth, v. 5. The gift of faith goes forth from him, is recei∣ved into the heart: now both by the gift it self, and by the ex∣ercise of it, is the justification: by receiving of the gift is the person justified, by the exercise of the gift are all his actions justi∣fied. Christ being let in to the heart, justifies the heart into which he is received; and Christ being in the heart, justifies every mo∣tion and action that comes from his life; and any other motion or action is not justified, for it is out of that which is justified, and is in and from that which is condemned. Abraham believed God, and it was counted anto him for righteous∣ness, v. . God promised him a seed, he believed God, God bid him sacrifice this type, he believed. This was it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now if he had not believed, if he had not received the gift, or not exercised the gift, could he have been righteous? so that Abraham was not justified by any work he did or could do, but by receiving and exercising the faith in the seed: by going out of his country kindred and fathers house, not of himself but by faith, and by living to God, and obeying his voice in that land to which he was led, not in his own wil or power, but in the faith. And by hearing the call of God, and receiving the faith, and living out of self out of a mans own understanding, wil and power, in the faith and living power and wisdom of God is the justification now: and they that do thus are the children of Abraham, born of the free woman, when as they that take up practises from the let∣ter, without being ingraffed into the life, are but children of the bond woman, but such children of Abraham as the Jews were, (if so much) and can not inherit that promise which belongs to the spiritual seed, while they live in that state. 13. That wher the faith which is imputed unto righteousness is found, there sin is not imputed, but covered, which is a blessed state, v. 6, 7, 8. Sin cuts off from God, who is life & blessedness; sin laies open to the wrath of the creator, which is too great for the crea∣tor to bear: woe and misery wil be his portion, to whom God imputes sin. But happy is he who has his sin covered: this is an happy condition, life and immortality will soon be opened to him. Now this blessedness cometh not by the works of the law, for they cannot remove the sin, but by the righteousness of
faith, which is able to cover the sin even from the pure ey of God. O Christians, christians, do not imagine your selves covered from sin, but know it, feel it; never rest till ye are so made parta∣kers of the true righteousness, that by its virtue in you, ye may be past all doubt that it is it. Believing from the letter without you, that ye are justified, may easily deceive you; but if once ye come truly to feel in your selves, the thing which justifies, and so find the power and life of it in you, above the power of all that which condemns, casting out the condemned thing, and the con∣demner with all his works out of your hearts, this cannot deceive. The virtue of life was lost in the Apostacy, and that which was living did not so much enjoy life, as mourn after it: and the po∣wer and safety of life did then appear most in mourning: but now the Apostacy draws towards an end, and the virtue begins to shoot up again: and he that wil be a Christian now, must be so, not by retaining his old notions, but by feeling this new virtue, and by growing up in this new-sprung life and power of the Lord, whose appearance is new to us, who have not been acquainted with it, but have been brought up in the darkness of the aposta∣cy, and lived in the waters, where great Leviathan ruled, and who was able to make war with him there? But he that seeketh, is joyned with, and keepeth to that power which drieth up the waters, and putteth an hook into the nostrils of the Leviathan, shall find the world with the whole course of it, ending in him∣self, and the beginning and growth of an endless life: and in whom that life lives, they shall live also; but wher death keeps the power of life down, such shal not live, or know the blessing, but abide under the curse of misery and death, and under the po∣wers of darkness. Therefore look about you, and make a wise choice; for his servants ye are whom ye obey, whether the Prince of darkness in his invented forms of godliness, or the Prince of light it the living power: and your reward shall be, according to your choice and work, either death in the death, if ye chuse and joyn to that, or life in the life, if ye joyn to that. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear. J. P.
A Table of the Contents. AN Apostacy from the truth fore-told of, Page 1 That this Apostacy began in the dayes of the Apostles, p. 4 The poyson of it infecting the Churches then, p. 5 The general overspreading of the Apostacy over the whole earth, p. 7 Witnesses raised up against the Apostates, but still persecuted and slain by the Apostates in all ages since the Apostacy, p. 8 Where the true Religion and Church hath been to be sought for all the time of the Apostacy, 9 The general corrupting of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the whole state of Christianity by the Apostacy, 10 The rule of Christianity lost in the Apostacy, 10 An objection concerning the rule answered, 13 The true rule (which was before the Apostacy) infallible, 16 A dishonor put upon the Scriptures under pretence of honour, 17 The Scriptures honor to be again recovered, 18 The true worship lost in the Apostacy, 18 The true faith lost in the Apostacy, 21 The true unfeigned love lost in the Apostacy, and a feigned love got up since among professors of all sorts, 22 The true hope lost in the Apostacy, 23 The true joy lost in the Apostacy, 24 The true peace lost in the Apostacy, 24 The true repentance lost in the Apostacy, 24 The true conversion lost in the Apostacy. 25 The true regeneration, lost in the apostacy 25 The true wisdom lost in the Apostacy, 25 The true righeousness or justification lost in the Apostacy, 26 The true sanctification lost in the Apostacy, 27 The true redemption lost in the Apostacy, 27 The difference between Christians before the apostacy, and Chri∣stians since, in the very substance of Christianity, 28 The true Church lost in the Apostacy, 29 The true Ministry lost in the Apostacy, 30
Witnesses raised up in all Nations to testifie against the Apostacy, and some sparks of truth (such as God saw fit for them to testi∣fie to the present age) revived in them, 32 As the whorish spirit changed her dresses to keep up her deceit, and to with-hold the honest hearted from the truth, so witnesses still raised up against her, to discover her, and witnesse against her in all her new forms and shapes, 33 Affliction and persecution good for the witnesses, to keep down the flesh, and keep the life pure, in its weak appearance in them, in the time of the Apostacy, 33 The tender kindness of God to the simple and honest hearted in the time of the Apostacy, 34 The ill use that the carnal mind now makes of it, 34 The Ministry of the apostacy wrong in its nature, and whole course, feeding the fleshly part, but not able to raise up and feed the soul, 34 Of a recovery from the Apostacy, the Lamb and the Saints again ruling, 35 The preaching of the Gospel again in the world 36 The fall of inventions, traditions, and false worship, with that whorish spirit which invented them, and bewitched all Nati∣ons with them, 36 Plagues to come upon them that abide in any part of Babylon, 37 Who are still in some part or other of the apostacy, and not recove∣red from it, 37 What the spirit that ruleth in the apostacy raiseth up in men, and what it suppresseth, 38 How this Spirit intangled the simple hearted, and held them in her snares, even when there were pure stirrings of life to get loose from her, 39 What the worship of men is in the apostacy, and whom they worship, 40 The onely way of recovery out of the apostacy, 43 The enmity of this Nation against that Spirit which would re∣cover it out of the apostacy, 44 The danger of this enmity to the Nation, 45 Salvation onely by the true knowledge of Christ, 46
By the new covenant, 46 The Laws whereof are to be written in the heart, 47 Which can be done by none but the Spirit, 48 Therefore the first thing to be known in Religion is the Spirit, 48 The Spirit is first known as a convincer of sin, 49 He convinceth by his light in the conscience, 50 The light of conviction shineth in every conscience 50 Believing in this light is the true way to life, 51 Believing in this light unites to God, and opens the springs of life, 52 How we came to the knowledg of the way to life, 53 The true Heirs comfidence in God against all the powers of flesh, 53 The springing up of the seed of God in this Nation, with the great opposition against it, 54 The spirit of error chargeth truth, with those things which be∣long to it self, 55 Truth would take away the error, with that from whence it springs, and wherein it lodges, but that it is opposed and with∣stood at the very first, even when it doth but begin to discover, 57 Object. That this is a new way, answered, 58 Obj. That this light is natural, answered, 59 Obj. That it makes the Scriptures void, answered, 59 Obj. That it teaches things contrary to the Scripture, answered. 61 Obj. That it sets up free-will, answered, 61 Obj. About wanting power, answered. 63 Obj. That this sets up a covenant of works, answered, 63 Obj. That it breaks down relations, laws, governments, takes a∣way due respect from Magistrates, &c. answered. 65 A false healing of a true wound, is the cause of error from the Spirit of life in ones self, and of persecuting it in others. 67 The wisdom, which hath been gathering knowledg from the Scrip∣tures in the apostacy, must fall, and all that knowledge come to naught, before the truth can be received, 68 Gods love in discovering the Apostacy, and calling from it, and
