p3283 12271147 58250
The Presentment of the Grand-Iury FOR THE COUNTY OF KENT, AT THE Assizes holden at Maidstone the 12th day of March, in the Five and Thirtieth year of the Reign of Our Soveraign Lord, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, &c. Anno{que} Dom. 1682. To the Right Honourable Sir Francis Pemberton, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesties Court of Common Pleas, and one of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Councill. WEE do humbly Present, That the best and most effectual way to maintain and preserve His Majesties Sacred Person, the Church and State by Law Established, together with the just Liberties, Privi∣ledges, and Properties of the Subject, is an Impartial and due Execution of the Laws. That Popery and Fanaticisme are equally dangerous to the Government: The Papists having almost ever since the Establishment of the Protestant Religion endeavoured the Subversion thereof, but by the Providence of God have been disappointed in all their attempts; but the Fanaticks having in our own memory, in the compass of a few years, actually maintained an open Rebellion, in the face of the Sun Murdered the best of Kings, Subverted the Government both in Church and State, and with an un-heard of Impudence justified All. That We have reason to believe the same Destructive and Anarchical Ends, are at this day driven by many Persons who under-hand court a Popular Fame, the same way and in the same Age to destroy the Monarchy again. That although His Majesties Incomparable Goodness and Clemency may perpetually meet such Persons with His Gracious Pardons, yet We hope and pray that according to His Majesties Royal Father's Advice of blessed Memory, His Majesty will be pleased never to trust them: Which is a wise and sure Principle, whereby neither His Majesty, nor His Loyal Subjects, can ever be ruined again by the same Instruments. That all such as pretend to Moderation in Execution of the Laws where the Government is apparently assaulted, are but Betrayers of their own Consciences, their King and Country. That the maintaining of the Succession of the Crown in the Right Line, is the undoubted means for the Preser∣vation and Support of this Monarchy, Church and State. We do also Present, That all Persons, whether Papists or Protestant Dissenters, and such as utter disaffected Reflections against the Government, are dangerous and of ill Example; and the Names of such ought to be represen∣ted to the Lord Lieutenant, or his Deputies, that they be forthwith Disarmed, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. We do also Present, That the separate manner of Divine Worship, used and permitted amongst the Walloons and Flemings of Canterbury, and other Places in this County, is of dangerous Example, and infections to His Majesties Liege Subjects, many of the Dissenting Persons from the Church of England daily flocking to their Assemblies; and therefore We humbly conceive some Regulation is fit to be made therein, according as to His Majesties Wisdom shall seem most fit. We do also Present as our humble Advice, That all Persons that keep Ale-houses, Victualling-houses, or other Publick Houses within this County, shall bring a Certificate under the hand of the Parson of the Parish, or other Incumbent there, at the same time that they come to renew their Licenses, that they have duly repaired to their Parish Churches, and received the Sacrament according to Law. That Coffee-houses, and the Selling of Brandy by several Shopkeepers in Towns Corporate, Villages and other places in this County, is a frequent occasion to gather Persons together disaffected to the Government, who there take a Liberty to intermeddle with affairs of State, to reflect upon their Superiours, and to debauch the Affections and Loyalty of His Majesties Liege People, by amusing them with causeless Fears and Jealousies. All which, We humbly submit to the Wisdom of this Honourable Court, and humbly Pray, That His Majesty may be acquainted with the Loyal Presentments and Dutiful Affections of His Majesties most Obedient and Loyal Subjects of the said County: Sir Edward Dering, Knight. Sir Nicholas Toke, Knight. William Rooke, Esq John Cason, Esq William Kingsly, Esq Edward Roberts, Esq Herbert Randolph, Esq Caleb Banckes, Esq Richard Manly, Esq John Mersham, Esq Charles Wheeler, Esq Roger Payne, Esq Walter Hooper, Esq Henry Lee, Esq Christopher Mists, Esq James Bicks, Esq John Linch, Esq John Simpson, Esq Henry Frere, Esq LONDON, Printed for Jos Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the Black-Bull in Cornhill, 1683.
