P664 R7606 12417548 61731
man courting a woman, surrounded by three cherubs Burnford sc.
THE PASTIME ROYAL; OR, THE GALLANTRIES OF THE FRENCH COƲRT. In Two Parts. By a Person of Quality LONDON, Printed by J Harefinch for Henry Rodes, next door to the Bear Tavern, near Bride-lane, in Fleet∣street, 1682.
THE PASTIME ROYAL, OR THE AMOURS OF THE Dutchess of Fontagne. PART I. THO' there is Glory to be acquired in a Military Employment, it must be confessed, that the Pe∣rils are very great, and that it is pardonable in a Hero to seek his Repose in Pleasures, after ha∣ving
exposed his Life in Dangers. Let us not then be surprized to see an Alexander make the same Sacrifice to Mars and to Love; and let us not blame a Hercules for that sharing himself equally between those two Divinities, He has found no sweeter Diver∣sion from his Labours, than in the Arms of the fair Sex. If that amorous Passion has been the Character of those Demy-Gods, it ought to be of those whom Nature has formed according to their Model; and, as there are none who represent to us a more perfect Copy of them then the French Monarch, we ought not to wonder to see him have their propensity and inclinations. Before I speak of the Person who is at present his Delight, it is fit I should tell how the Place She possesses became vacant, and
by what Accident the Royal Scepter has changed hands. You must know then that Madam de Montespan being one of the most beautiful and wittiest Women of the Sex, it is no wonder that she for so long a time was His Majestie's only Mistris; and in∣deed, we may say that she was more indebted to her Wit than her Beauty for that high degree of Preferment she arrived at; for her Humour is such as is re∣quisite in a Court, she knows how to feign and dissemble, and the great Correspondences she has ever kept, and which she still at present entertains with the greatest Wits of other Kingdoms, are so evident proofs thereof, that they are not to be contra∣dicted. It was by the means of this marvellous Genius that she be∣came
the King's Mistris, and that she has so well known how to manage His Passion, that she en∣joyed and kept him to her self, and gave the exclusive to the Lady who had his first In∣clinations; insomuch that she no sooner saw her self arrived at that high degree of Ho∣nour, than that she made use of all manner of Artifices to main∣tain her self therein; put in practice all her stratagems and Charms, and without doubt, she would have maintain'd her point, if that Discord, which almost concerns it self in all things, had not troubled, by an Adventure I will tell you, so perfect a cor∣respondence. Tho' Madam de Montispan did make it her study during her good Fortune, to procure all those to be her Friends, who
were in a capacity of doing her hurt, yet some words which he did not bear with as she might have done, raised her ve∣y considerable Enemies, and those too of the highest Quali∣ty: She know very well the ll consequence of some slan∣derous words which she had in∣ormed the King of, by way of demanding Justice; she was un∣willing to have been so sensibly concerned, but all too late, the mischief was not to be remedied, by reason the Punishment fol∣lowed so closely the pretended Crime, that it was impossible for her to moderate the Business. As the greatest mischief her Ene∣mies could do her was to set her at odds with the King, they did all that was possible to perswade him that there was an extream difference between the excessive
Love he had for that Creature, and the small returns she made appear upon all occasions. This was a very nice point to meddle with, but the Persons who man∣aged it had not only the King's Ear, but went likewise so cun∣ningly to work, that their De∣sign could not be discovered, nor their Cunning any way sus∣pected: And that they might the better bring their Enterprize to pass, they represented to the King the little deference that Madam de Montespan had had in such and such Occasions, and seemed to make their report with so much unconcern, that the King being of quick ap∣prehension, could hardly stem the To rent of Passion that en∣deavoured to hurry him away. Yet all these words having made but a slight Impression up∣on
his Mind, it was thought ne∣cessary for the convincing him, to shew him something real, that might undeceive him of the E∣steem he had conceived for Ma∣dam de Montespan. The Trea∣chery of a Woman furnished them with the means; this Maid being of their Cabal, put into their hands a Letter of Madam de Montespan's, but as they could not have made use of it accord∣ing to their Minds, if they had left it in its purity, they falsified it, and had such good success in their ill Design, that the additi∣on of some few words, caused an equivocation very disadvan∣tageous for her, who had never had any such thoughts. The Letter was given the King, as a thing found by chance; He read it, and could not perceive the difference of the hand, so
well was it counterfeited; the true meaning of the Equivoca∣tion came immediately into his mind, and the amazement it put him in, did not permit him to delay any longer the informing himself thereof. Wherefore he went immediately to Madam de Montespan's Apartment, and found her in her Closet, reading a New Romance. Ah! How Madam! said he to her, with something a scornful Air, Do you still spend your time in such Trifles? It is true, replied she, that in the bottom there is no∣thing solid in them; and I con∣fess that they are only the Dreams and Visions of others, which give us joy or cause sadness; however, I am still so weak as to let my self be seduced by them, and I was not able to see the infidelity of a Mistriss he
speaks of, without bewailing the Misfortune of her Lover. I am amazed, said the King, you should be so concern'd at so common a thing, seeing there is nothing more frequent than the nconstancy of your Sex. He continued the Discourse upon this Subject, and urg'd it so far, that Madam de Monstespan not knowing whither it tended, told him; Alas, Sire! 'Tis not for a Person of your circumstances to have any such fear, tho' you had even to do with the most inconstant of our Sex, and those men whose particular Merit is as illustrious as yours, are above all Suspicions. Hitherto, repli∣ed the King, I had flattered my self with being so, but we often deceive our selves, and such as judge only by appearances, are very subject to be mistaken.
These kind of Expressions which the King made use of, put Ma∣dam de Monstespan into an un∣speakable perplexity, she was only culpable in the stratagems of her Enemies, and not being able to reproach her self with any thing in particular, she on∣ly answered these words by te∣stimonies of an extraordinary Af∣fection; She put in practice all that the most passionate Love could inspire her with, and the Tears which attended all her Transports, moved the Heart of that irritated Lover. The King is as sensible and good natur'd as is possible for a man to be, to the grief of what he loves, wherefore he could not resolve to make that inquiry that he desir'd, what he saw perswaded him of the contrary, and he con∣tented himself with slipping the
Letter into Madam de Monste∣span's pocket, and then with∣drew. The King was hardly gone away, when that Madam de Monstespan drawing out her Handkerchief to wipe off the Tears that Love had made her shed, saw the fatal Letter fall at her feet, that was the cause of her trouble, unknown to her. She took it up, opened it, read it, and immediately perceived therein the Artifice of her Ene∣mies. As it was of the utmost importance for her to rid the King with the soonest of his first Impressions, she went immediate∣ly to him, let him know the ad∣dition of some words, and made him confess, that this was what had given occasion to his former Discourse. He comforted her, and promised her he would take
no notice of all the Reports that might be made him hereafter, and that they should never de∣stroy, by ridiculous and ill∣grounded fears, the Affection he had vowed to her, and that as to this she might entirely relye upon his word. Ah, Sire! said she to him weeping, if your Ma∣jesty suffers backbiting to come so near the Throne, it is to be fear'd, that it will not spare in the sequel your Person, though Sacred, and that it will violate what is most holy. Live you in repose, said the King, I will re∣medy that. Great pains were ta∣ken to discover the Author of the Tragedy; the Letter was put into the King's hands by a Person that was not at all to be suspected, and who indeed was not guilty. The Sentiments were entirely divided; some attribu∣ted
this contrivance to Valiere, aying, that in the midst of the Cloister she was amorously incli∣ed, and that as she ever had a passionate love for the King, jea∣ousie might have suggested her with that Design. Others more dvised, cast all the Intrigue up∣on one of the Queens Ladies, who, being her Majesties Confi∣dent, had thought without doubt to have render'd her a good Service, in procuring, by that Artifice, the removal of her Rival. Be it as it will, the King judged better thereof than all the others, saying that Lazrun had a hand in that Affair, not that he thought that was really the Par∣ty, that being morally impossible, seeing he was then a Prisoner, but he intimated thereby, that the Persons who have alwayes interessed themselves for him,
had contrived this Plot. Every Body did not comprehend the Consequence of these words, but those that knew that the Count's Disgrace proceeded only from speaking ill of Madam de Monste∣span, understood it immediate∣ly. It seemed that after the Pro∣testations which followed the Re∣conciliation of our Lovers, ne∣ver any change could be expect∣ed; but the sequel has let us know, that there is nothing cer∣tain in this World, and that at Court the highest Places are ever most slippery. Indifference has insensibly succeeded to Love, and that Passion which was so great in the King in regard of Madam de Monstespan, became languish∣ing by degrees, and at length expired. We may say, that ne∣ver any Mistriss knew so well
how to revive a dying Love as she did, she attended it to its Tomb, and, it may be said, that it was in her Arms that it gave the last gasp. As soon as she perceived that she was to quit her Post, she meditated her re∣treat, but a glorious Retreat, and such an one as may be ima∣gined of so sage and prudent a Person as she was. Those who only judge of things by them∣selves, without making a just Application, thought at first that she would go augment the num∣ber of the Nuns of Font-Evrault, it seemed as if the frequent Jour∣neys she had taken thither, had been only to choose her Place; But they were mistaken, and the Design she had was much more conformable to Reason and com∣mon sense. She no sooner saw the Game at an end, and the
Stakes lost, than that she with∣drew, but after such a manner, as that she lost nothing but what she could not keep; far from removing from Court, after the Example of the Mistriss who had preceded her, she remained there, saw all Companies, and has still a share in all the Intrigues of the Cabinet. All the Sages have found this farewel much more prudent than that of Valiere, and have reason to believe, that as this Maid was passionately in Love with the King, the Retreat she made was rather an effect of Despair, than any real motion of Devotion. Be it as it will, her Conduct was something precipi∣tated, and perhaps, that without the Pride that is taken in stick∣ing close to what we have un∣dertaken, she would have cor∣rected the fault she committed,
at the time that she confirmed it by her Engagement. Thus is the King without a Mistress; that is to say, in a state of Widdow-hood, which sutes but ill with his humor; but, do not expect he will remain so long, since that a Man of his make, tho he had neither Scep∣ter nor Crown, would not fail of making great Conquests. Love would have thought it a Crime, to have left such an Hero in Idleness, whose least Actions are illustrious, quickly pointed him to her whom he designed him: It was Mademoiselle de Fontange, a Maid as young, beautiful, and lovely, as was possible to be, and all whose Manners are so enga∣ging, that let her speak with ne∣ver so much Indifference, she seems to demand all a mans heart. The first News she learnt
of the beginning of her good Fortune, was brought her by Madam D. C. M. who is a Lady of an excellent Wit, and knows how honourable it is to be use∣ful in the Amours of our Sove∣reign. The suspition she had of the King's Affections, was found∣ed upon that in a Circle of Per∣sons of the highest Rank, where she made Figure. He enquired, with an extraordinary Curiosity, of the particular Merits of Made∣moiselle de Fontange. He took an extream delight in hearing her well spoken of; and the heart, which brings, sometimes, the most hidden Sentiments to the Lips, caused a word to slip from him, which made known to the Understanding, the Inclination he had for that young Lady. Certainly, said the King, so beautiful and witty a person, is
worthy of a considerable Heart; and I am not at all surprized, that she has so many Adorers. Ah! Sir, replyed Madam D. L. M. she has a defect, she is haughty and cruel in the highest degree; we may say, that all the Lovers have lost their time with her, and that it was more their Passion than her Cares, that engaged them to her Person. It is the duty, said the King, of so per∣fect a Maid as you describe her to be, to despise all common ad∣dresses. The Conversation end∣ed, and the King retired, with a design of seeing and speaking, as soon as possible, to her who began to possess his Inclinati∣ons. Never did News cause so many Transports of Joy, as that, which acquainted Mademoiselle de Fon∣tange, with the Sentiments the
King had for her person. She re∣mained almost a quarter of an hour without being able to give any Answer to Madam C. D. M. who brought her word thereof; insomuch, that this Lady being surprized at her Silence, and ta∣king it for a mark of Indifference or Insensibility, told her, Ah! How Mademoiselle, the King in Love with you, and you not sensible? Ah! replyed Made∣moiselle de Fontange, giving a Sigh from the bottom of her heart, I am, and more than you can imagine. And indeed, the Sequel did sufficiently make known the Truth hereof; for, the excess of her Joy being extra∣ordinary, she fell into a Swoon, wherein, losing the use of Speech, she only answered by languish∣ing Looks and Sighs, which the most tender Love drew from her
Heart. Assoon as she was recover∣ed from that Trance, she informed her self more particularly of what the King had said. Madam L. M. acquainted her with the least Circumstances, and told her what course she was to take, to manage that beginning of good Fortune. Know, continu∣ed she, that all depends on the first Paces you make, and that they only can assure you of an advantagious Success: Experience has given me some little know∣ledge in these kind of Affairs, wherefore, if you'l follow my Advice, when you're with the King, you should use all your Arts before you engage, accom∣pany all your words with a wise and modest Air, that has nothing of the liberty of Coquettes; a little Haughtiness mingled with Sweetness, if you manage it right,
cannot but produce a good Effect. For, you must know that there are those, who, yielding too easily, have lost their Fortune. Made∣moiselle du Sudre, pursued she, may serve you for an Example; Her Happiness was so short, that One day begun it, and the fol∣lowing ended it; Her something too hasty Complaisance spoyled all, and to be too quickly hap∣py, she became unhappy in a moment. It is however very difficult, said Mademoiselle de Fontagne, to have a fervent Love and not tell it, when the Object we cherish does earnestly require it of Us, and I have ever heard, that the King, in point of Love, is an Enemy of Delayes, that he is extreamly impatient, and that if from the first Overture He makes they let him not know the Affection they have for him, he
grows weary, is disquieted, and payes his Vows elsewhere, and how wretched are those Women who expose themselves to this Misfortune by their Conduct. You are in the right, replied M. D. L. M. and to secure the Success of an Affair, you must alwayes avoid the two Extremi∣ties; there is a certain medium in all things, from which we can∣not vary, without taking a wrong Byass; that is my Sentiment, and the Example I have proposed to you ought to serve you for a Rule. In the mean time, the King was not idle, his Thoughts were on∣ly on his fair One, the desire of enjoying her very suddenly made him seek with extraordinary care for an occasion to speak to her. He was two dayes without be∣ing able to find it favourable
enough to say to her any thing in particular; He almost daily saw her, sometimes at the Queens, and sometimes at Madam's, and the more he saw her, the more he was in love; He thought those two dayes lasted an Age, and the Impatience he was in made him consult the Duke de S. Aignan about the means of en∣tertaining the Person alone, for whom he had conceived so much Affection. The Duke was over∣joyed that the King made him his Confident in his new Inclina∣tions, as he had done in his for∣mer; He goes, seeks, and makes such Enquiry, that he learns that Mademoiselle de Fontange was to be the next day at the Thuil∣leries with Madam D. L. M. He acquainted the King therewith, who went thither, and found the Occasion as favourable as he
could desire. He had a long Con∣ference with that fair One, where∣in her Looks spake more than her Words, because, that accord∣ing to the Counsel that had been given her, she accompanied all her Discourses with so much Mo∣desty, that the King could not forbear reproaching her with her Insensibility: Her only Defence from this Reproach was, the E∣steem she had for His Majesty. Ah! Heavens, replied the King, Esteem is a thing which does not satisfie me when it comes all a∣lone, it is the Heart I aim at▪ and as long as you shall refuse me your Affection, I shall think my self unhappy. Ah! how, pursued he, are you displeased at my tel∣ling you, that your Merit forces me to live only for your sake, and, if you think fit, you may find in loving me, all the Sweets
that can be hoped for from the most sincere Correspondence? Ah, Sire! said Mademoiselle de Fontange, not being able to lose the remembrance of what you are, and of what I am, give me leave to tell you, that there is little probability that your Maje∣sty speaks seriously. What must I do then, reply'd the King, to justifie to you the sincerity of my Intentions? Is it that these words are not expressive enough, I love you? Ah! they are but too ex∣pressive, said our fair one, giving a great Sigh, they are but too sufficient to make a Heart suffer that is sensible to love. She said this with so perplexed an Air, that this Trouble quite charmed the King, and we may say, that her Bashfulness was at that time won∣derfully advantageous to her, by reason that her blushing giving a
new Vivacity to her Complexi∣on, she appear'd in the King's eyes to be the most beautiful and lovely Person he had ever seen. They parted, and the King told her at his taking leave, I perceive, Mademoiselle, that your Modesty has hindred your Love from say∣ing all it thought; I desire it may express it self with more li∣berty upon Paper, and I expect a Letter from you. At his going from the Thuilleries, Mr. de Louvois coming to his Majesty, to com∣municate to him some Affairs, the King told him, in speaking of Mademoiselle de Fontange, that he had never seen a more haughty Maid, and whose Virtue was more difficult to be shaken. Mr. de Louvois knowing whom the King meant, said to him, Ah! How Sire! Is there a Woman that can resist your Majesty? Yes, with∣out
doubt, replied he, but I am also in hopes, that when Love has once made himself Master of that Heart that has so long oppo∣sed him, and not being sure to return when he had a mind, he will not easily abandon the place. In the mean while, Mademoi∣selle de Fontagne gave a faithful Account of what passed, to Ma∣dam D. L. M. It is at present, said she to her, that you must pur∣sue your point; you are in dan∣ger of losing all by a delay, and it is time to unbosome your self, wherefore write to the King such a Letter as Love shall inspire you with; which she did immediate∣ly, and conceived it in these terms. SIRE, NOtwithstanding the small pro∣portion there is between such a Prince as you, and a Maid like
me, ought to oblige me to take your Majesties Discourse rather for a Gallantry than a sincere Declara∣tion, yet, if it is true, that real Lo∣vers know by seeing one another what passes most secret in their Hearts; it would be in vain for me to conceal from you any longer my Sentiments. Yes, Sire, I con∣fess, that the merit alone of your Person had already dispos'd of my Heart, before that your Majesty declared to me his Inclinations; Pardon me if I have strove against this Passion ever since it begun to bud, it was not out of any repug∣nance I had to cherish what appears to me so lovely, but rather out of the fear I had that my Eyes or my Action would, unknown to my Heart, acquaint you with the Ef∣fect your Charms have had upon it. Judge, Sire, of the Disposition I am in, by so ingenious a Confession of my weakness.
I shall not tell you who it was that carried this Letter, Be it as it will, the King received it, and it is difficult to find terms to ex∣press his Joy; He repeated seve∣ral times these last words, Judge of the disposition of my Heart, by so ingenious a confession of my weakness. In a word, he is charm∣ed, and would willingly have an opportunity of laying himself at his Mistresses feet, to thank her, as became him, for the tender marks of her Love. The King was in these transports of Joy when the Duke de S. Aignan came in; any other Person would have been troublesome at that mo∣ment: the King was very glad to see him; his whole Discourse to him was, only of the ingaging Qualities of Mademoiselle de Fon∣tange; the Duke, who knows how to make his Court better
than any man whatsoever, assured the King that he could not place his Affections better; that no∣thing could be more just than the choice he had made, and that in all his Court there was not a Woman of a more evident me∣rit. The King was overjoyed to see that his Choice was thus approved of, he enlarged in Commendation of his Mistress: No, said he to the Duke, never was there a finer shape, the love∣lyest Eyes that ever were seen; her Mouth is small, and of a Ver∣million Colour; but what charms me most, is a certain, sweet, and modest Air, that has nothing sa∣vage, nor too free. The Duke did not fail to amplifie still up∣on all that the King had said; and he carryed his Complaisance so far, that it would have been difficult to have added any thing
to so compleat a Picture. Where∣fore, no mystery was made of the Kings Passion: There was only Mademoiselle de Fontange, who desired that His Majesty would keep it as secret as might be; but this was a demand to no purpose: And in a particu∣lar Conversation he had with her the day after that he recei∣ved the Letter, he removed all her Fears, and made her resolve to depart on the Morrow with him, for Versailles. Never did he appear better satisfied, than when he had procured his God∣desses Consent for her departure. It was in this amorous Meeting that our Lovers interchanged Vows of an eternal. Affection; and Mademoiselle de Fontange's Entertainment was so sweet and charming to the King, that as long as it lasted, he was wholly
taken up with renewing to that lovely Person, all the Protesta∣tions of the most passionate Love. They parted; and that fair one bidding a tender Adiew with her Eyes to her Lover, left him the most amorous of all men. Before the King's Departure for Versailles, he sent Mademoi∣selle de Fontange, a Habit of im∣mense Riches, and the Lustre of the Garniture that attended it, could not be sufficiently admi∣red. She received it, and de∣parted presently after, with his Majesty, who gave all the usual Divertisements to the Ladies of the Court; yet reserving one in particular, for his lovely Mi∣stress. It was on a Thursday, in the Afternoon, that that place of Importance, after having been viewed, was attacked in the Formes; the Trench was open∣ed,
the Out-works taken in and at length, after much Sweat∣ing, Fatigues, and Blood-shed, the King entred therein victori∣ous. We may say, that never did Gonquest put him to so much trouble; for my part, though I believe him very valiant, this do's not at all surprize me, be∣cause, if it is permitted us to judge of the nature of a Place by the Out-works, the entrance therein must needs be very difficult. Be it as it will, that day was spent to the satisfaction of our two Lov∣ers; there were a great many Tears shed on one side, and ne∣ver did a dying Virginity give sweeter Sighs. This Feast was followed for a Week together, with all manner of Playes and Divertisements; Dancing was not forgotten, and Mademoiselle de Fontange did wonders therein,
and distinguished her self from all the rest; the Duke of S. Aig∣nan being at the King's Levy on the morrow after the Nuptials; As soon as the King perceived him, he smiled, and causing him to come to him, he acquainted him with the Success of his A∣mours. He told him, that he had never been more in love, and told him, that, according to the appear∣ances, he should never change his Inclinations. The Duke follow∣ed the King to his new Mistres∣ses Apartment; they found her considering attentively the Ta∣pistries with which her Room was hanged, and which repre∣sented his Majesties Victories. The King himself explained to her several Circumstances; and seeing that she took delight therein, he bid the Duke make an extempore Copy of Verses up∣on
that Subject. The Duke of S. Aignan shewed his ingenuity, and was admired for the Vivacity of his Wit, for, in a moment he wrote the following Verses in his Table-Book. The Hero's Hero is mention'd in this Story, But how, I see not here his last Victory? Of all the Feats of that brave Conquerour, In taking Towns, or bringing Hearts to's lure, The greatest, finest, hardest, and most nice, Was Coelia's Heart, that is above all price: Her Heart he won, that has a thousand times Brav'd Love, his Charms, his Laws, and all his Crimes. The King being impatient to see what the Duke had written, took his Table-book from him, before he had quite finished: He read the Verses, and found them very witty; he shewed them to his Mistris, who found them very ingenious, and very gallant: the Duke told him the thing was im∣perfect, but the King made answer,
that even in its imperfection he found it very agreeable. After this Complement, the Duke with∣drew, and left the King with Ma∣demoiselle de Fontange. He spent with her almost all that day, he did not eat in publick, and he found more Charms in that Soli∣tude, than he could have met with in the Grandeur of his Court. To tell you in what he employed all this time, would be to penetrate a little too far; how∣ever, we have reason to believe that Love was often taken in hand, and made the main Subject of their Conversation, by reason that the next day being designed for hunting, our Fair One was something wearied and fatigued, and desir'd the King to dispense her from attending him in so painful an Exercise. The King not being able to abandon her,
chose rather to defer that Diver∣tisement, than to give it to the other Ladies, and she not share therein. Whereupon that Re∣creation was put off for three dayes longer, and that interval of time was spent in Playes, Balls, and Feasts, wherein the King's Address and Magnificence was abundantly manifested. That day being come she had a Vest on of a considerable Va∣lue, and upon her head she had the finest plume of Feathers that could be found; it seemed so good an Air she had in that dress, that she could not have put on one that could have been more to her advantage. The fear her Lover was in that some Accident might happen in that Course to this new Huntress, obliged him to stay alwayes by her side; and, after having given her the plea∣sure
of causing the Stag they hunted to pass several times by her side, he strayed with her in∣to the most gloomy and thickest place of the Wood for to give her some refreshment. As it is well known that there are cer∣tain Moments wherein Solitude has more Charms than all the Pomps of the Court, the Compa∣ny left the King and his Mistris to enjoy peaceably the Repose they sought for in a Retreat; and they were much in the right, when they believed that he would prefer that Diversion before the Glory that he might have acqui∣red in hunting. Be it as it will, the Sequel has made appear, that our Lovers did not thus retire to have a Third, Mademoiselle de Fontange having since that day been very much incommoded with Qualmes, and Pains in her
Head, which, being the real Sym∣ptomes of Breeding, we may be∣lieve, without Divination, that the Course was vigorous, and that those Moments of Retreat were not all idly spent. Thus were the Hero's begotten in former times; the Gods found no place more proper for the ex∣ercise of their Amours, than the Groves; and we have reason to believe that the Fruit which will arise from this Pastime, will not be the more savage for having had its beginning in the Woods. The day after, this party of Divertisement was not equally happy for all the Court, since the King and his Mistris spent it in sadness; that Beauty being sensi∣ble of the fatigues of hunting, or, if you will, of the Moments of Retreat, was afflicted with great Qualmes, and a violent
Head-ach; and though her Lover knew that these Indispositions would be of no continuance, yet he seem'd as much concern'd as if they had been dangerous; He was alwayes with her, and con∣tinued to play the Gallant, but the most passionate Gallant in the World; He runs, goes, returns, and seems to dye of an ill that seems to touch him only in what he loves: His Mistriss's Sadness made him extremely dejected, but what almost forced Tears from his Eyes, was, that when Made∣moiselle de Fontagne was in the height of her pain, she fixing her Eyes upon him, said to him, af∣ter a tender and languishing man∣ner, Ah! my dear Prince: Must Pains follow so closely the pu∣rest Pleasures? Ah! It is no mat∣ter, pursued she, I cherish the Cause of them, and shall love
him eternally. At these words the King embraced her; She was up∣on her Bed, and grasping her the most amorously imaginable, he vow'd that he would never have any other Mistris than her, and that in his Life he had never con∣ceived so much love for a Per∣son as he was sensible of for her. In the Afternoon our indispo∣sed Lady was something better; she received several Visits; and never was the rest of a day so well employed as that was: the Discourse was generally of News of Gallantry, and of the freshest pieces of Wit; and as every one strove to contribute most to the divertisement of the fair One, M. D. A. who had been a hunt∣ing, drew a written Paper out of her Pocket, and read it quick∣ly over, so as that none of the Company could penetrate into
the sense of it. It was a Riddle, which she said was fallen by chance into her hands, that she was ignorant of its meaning, but that she did believe that it could not but be noble and lofty, see∣ing the King was mentioned therein; it was conceived in these termes; I am sometimes open, and sometimes I'm shut, According as our King does play at put, Pains I endure, Joyes I improve, and give, I'm lov'd by all, or almost all that live; When ought do's e're my Brother heat and rouze, Without respect, he does my Corail towse; Pierces my Bosome, until him I've drown'd, And quench those Flames with which he me do's wound. I am small of Body, but Life I do give, The more I am covered, the more Wet I receive, I have a tongue in my mouth, and yet cannot speak, My Name is too privy for to be known, A shade do's hinder me from being shown; To discover this Secret, alas! you're too weak. Before that the Riddle passed from hand to hand, the King
would needs read it; and tho▪ he has an infinite deal of Wit, yet he was not at that time quick enough to discover the meaning: His Mistress was more ingenious, and immediately un∣derstood the meaning of the per∣son who had composed it; but far from declaring it, she said, to disgust others from a more ex∣act scrutiny, that it did not de∣serve any farther Explication. This setting one of the Company a thinking, who, reading it over once more, understood the My∣stery of it. She had, at that time, more Wit than Judgment, for she could not forbear saying aloud, that they ought not to be surpri∣zed, if the true sense of the Enig∣ma was so difficult to find out, since the King only had the true Key of it. This word did not produce that Effect which the
Lady who had imprudently start∣ed it was in hopes of. The King, and all those who composed the Circle, easily guessed the Business; Enquiry was made of M. D. A. from whom she had had those Verses; all possible perquisitions were made to find out the Au∣thor of them▪ But M. D. A. being innocent of the Stratagem, did easily excuse her self, and said, that she had found it upon her Table at her rising, without knowing from whom nor how it came there. This did not satisfie the King, who would not suffer they should railly what he lov'd. The Company took leave of Mademoiselle de Fontange, that they might laugh at their ease, and divert themselves with the Riddle, whose pleasantry had so lively shocked that fair One. Some of Madam de Montespan's
Friends were suspected of having a hand in this Business, but she justified them all to the King, and made appear, that Hazard often concerns it self in several things which seemed to be executed with Design. But let us return to Mademoi∣selle de Fontange, whom we left with the King, extremely vexed that she had served for a Diver∣tisement to the Company. She declared, that this Adventure did the more nettle her, for that it attacked her where she was most sensible: the King testified no less displeasure at it, but it was only because it troubled his Mistris; for, as for him, we may say, that he is above all those kind of tri∣fles. He both comforted and pro∣mised her to make so exact a search, as that he would discover he or she who had the impudence
to divert themselves at her cost. This something appeased her, and after some Reflections, she desi∣red him to leave all in silence, without thinking of it any far∣ther. She did prudently, for it was the onely course to stifle the Raillery, and hinder the World from talking. Wherefore our Lo∣vers applied themselves only to pass their time pleasantly, in giv∣ing one another all the most ten∣der testimonies of their Love: We may say, that the King has never shwn more than he has done to Mademoiselle de Fontange, it is impossible he should be more fervent, and the returns that fair One makes him of her Affecti∣on, cannot be more passionate: which she made particularly ap∣pear, when that, being at Paris, she received news from S. Ger∣main, that the King, who often
makes Hunting one of his Recre∣ations, and who shews himself very vigorous therein, had run great danger in the pursuit of a Wild Boar, that his Horse had been wounded by that Beast, and that without the particular force and address of his Majesty, he would hardly have escaped the peril: this News was communi∣cated to her by a Gentleman of the Princess of Epinoy, who was present at that time. Mademoi∣selle de Fontange was almost as much concerned, as if the Mis∣chief had effectively happened, she fell into the greatest sadness imaginable, and sent that same day this Letter to the King. I Cannot (my dear Prince) ex∣press to you the Agony I am in. Can I learn from all parts the lit∣tle care you take of your Preserva∣tion,
without trembling? In the name of God, be more sparing of a Life that is more dear to me than my own, if you intend to find me alive at your return: Eh how! Is not your Courage sufficiently known, as well as your Address, that you must needs expose your Life thus to new Dangers? Can you find any Diversion from the Fatigues of War, in so painful and so perillous an Exercise? Ah! I tremble for fear: Pardon, my dear Prince, these reproaches, to the fervency of my Passion, and re∣turn if you love, and have a mind to disperse the Fears of her who cherishes you so tenderly. It is easie to perceive, that Stu∣dy has less share in this Letter than the Heart. We discover at first that it is that which speaks, and it would be difficult to make it
speak more tenderly. It was read by the King, with such transports of Joy as are difficult to be ex∣pressed; He kissed it a thousand times, and sent immediately an Express to his Mistress with this Answer. NO, my dear child, be not a∣fraid, the danger is over, and I will only preserve my self for thy sake. I confess, I am not ex∣cusable, for having sought for plea∣sure in Exercises wherein you had no share, but pardon those moments which I have given to the desire of glory, and I am coming to spend whole dayes in telling you that I love you. Ah! how sweet are only the thoughts of it, when we love so charming a Child, and that We are certain of being beloved. The King quickly followed this Letter, and departed from
Versailles the day after it was sent, for to go comfort his Mi∣ststris. Ah! how happy am I, my dear Prince, said she to him, ac∣costing him with an ingaging Air, to see thee thus returned? Ah! how difficult a thing it is to support the absence of what we love. I have found that to be true, my dear child, said the King, embracing her, and it is only the extreme love I have for you that has recalled me so soon, and that would not permit me to live a moment without you. This In∣terview was accompanied with as many testimonies of Joy, as if it had been the first. Our Lov∣ers thought they could never see one another sufficiently, and the Pleasures which followed these Transports, were enjoyed by them both in all their extent. Yes, we may say, that it was in
all their Extent, since, the Night after the King's arrival from Ver∣failles, was too short for Mars and for Venus, the day following shared part of their Raptures, and the disgust which so closely follow the purest Contentments, durst not trouble the sweet Pa∣stime of that Monarch. It was in those sweet moments, that Mademoiselle de Fontange obtain'd M. de—pardon of the King, tho' it had been to no pur∣pose, desir'd of him by several Princes; He granted her a con∣siderable Pension, in favour of a young Lady, a Friend of hers, and the Abbey of Chelles, which was bestowed upon her Sister, was likewise an effect of his Li∣berality: So true is it, that we have no longer any thing dear to us, after we have once given our heart. This new Abbess was
consecrated with an extraordina∣ay Pomp and Magnificence; it was sufficient that she was the King's Mistress's Sister. That no∣thing might be wanting to the Ceremony, she was likewise ho∣noured by a great number of Bi∣shops; almost all the Court as∣sisted thereat, and Mademoiselle de Fontange appeared there in such great Splendour, that she drew more Eyes upon her, than there was upon the Person who acted the principal part at that time. If all those Graces and Favours we have now mention'd, had been granted to Persons that had been only recommendable by their particular Merit, they might have been subject to changes; but all the Requests of Mademoiselle de Fontange are made with so much ehoice and discretion, that there
is nothing to be feared on that side. If la V. L. R. had used as much Circumspection in all she has exacted from the King, her Uncle would not have become a Miller of a Bishop; the Proverb is something common, but sutes well enough with the Subject, and, it is said, that upon his pure and simple dimission, that Mr. de B. V. V. so worthily fills his place. We may piously believe it, with∣out taking from one Virtue what belongs to another, and give to the Humility of L. B. L. B. what was a meer effect of his Obedi∣ence, may be, if he had had as much Happiness as Zeal to ap∣pease some light troubles of his Diocese, he would not have tum∣bled so suddenly from his Gran∣deur; but the little Success that followed his Endeavours, did not only occasion his Disgrace,
but likewise contributed to that of Mr. de Molue. The King let him know his Resentment by a Letter, which he was so silly as to show, wherein, amongst other terms, there was, I understand you make your Breviary your main Business. So true it is, that the Court judges only of the nature of an Enterprize by the good or ill Success; and that good In∣tentions do not alwayes produce good Effects. As the Countrey Air do's of∣ten give a relish to Pleasures, which we should find flat and in∣sipid in the greatest Cities; the King staid not long at Paris, without meditating his return to Versailles; the truth is, that it is a place filled with Enchantments, since care has been taken to adorn and embellish it. Whereupon all the Court departed for that place
of Pleasure; the King renewed there all the Feasts and Diver∣tisements that had been in some manner interrupted by his so pre∣cipitated departure: Hunting matches were appointed; the Ladies who usually accompany his Majesty in that Exercise, seem∣ed indefatigable, and shewed therein a great deal of Vigour. Mademoiselle de Fontang's Health was too dear to the King, to per∣mit her to engage, as several o∣ther Ladies did in the chace; she had the pleasure thereof without putting her self in danger, and saw from her Coach all that might satisfie her Curiosity. The Chace being at an end, the King got from his Horse, went and sate by her in her Coach, and conducted her to her Apartment. She was at that time in the gayest hu∣mour imaginable, and said a
thousand pleasant things to her Lover, upon the Divertisement one of the Company had given in falling from her Horse. The King laughed heartily, particu∣larly when she said, before seve∣ral Persons, that the fair Huntress ought to be the more concerned at her Fall, for that the Ladies had not provided themselves with Drawers, as was customary. This gave occasion to Mademoiselle de B. Madam's Maid of Honour, to say, that she should dye, if such an Accident had happened to her: I reserve my self, conti∣nued she, for more tranquil Di∣vertisements, and I cannot suffi∣ciently admire at those who can∣not enjoy Pleasures without run∣ning a risque of their Lives; She let slip this word, without taking notice that Madam, who was there present, is one of the most
passionate Lovers of that Exer∣cise; and indeed she was much displeased at what had been said. I perceive, said she, ad∣dressing her self to her, who would willingly have drawn back her word; that the Plea∣sures of the Alcove are more ac∣ceptable to you than those that require Agitation, lazy and se∣dentary Divertisements are requi∣site for those whose weakness does not permit them to take others. The Dauphiness caused the Discourse to change, by talk∣ing of a Ball that his Majesty was to give the next day. It was one of the sinest that had been seen; all therein was pompous and magnisicent; the King danced with his usual Address, but what was most surprizing, was, that he took out a young Lady twice, and whispered to her some very
obliging gallantries. He was the next day at his Mistresses Leavy, but found her extremely sad and dejected. He declared how much grieved he was to see her in that Condition, and asked her very affectionately, What was the oc∣casion of it. Ah! Sir, said she to him, viewing him with a ve∣ry languishing Air, If your Per∣son was less lovely, I should be less sad! He perceived that it was Jealousie that caused this Disorder, which he was not sor∣ry for; for, when he loves, he is willing to be beloved, and there is nothing which engages him more than those kind of Fears, when they are rightly nicked. He learn'd from his fair one, that what had passed at the Ball, had somewhat alavmed her, and that it was the only Cause of her being out of humor. He
let her see the little Reason she had to be afflicted, assuring her, that he would never love any but her, and that the Suspition she had, was altogether without ground. Eh how! continued he, is it possible that you are so ill acquainted with the Sentiments of my Heart? Should I abandon what I have most dear in the World? Ah! It wrongs my Pas∣sion, to have any such Thought; and you cannot think so, with∣out condemning my Judgment in the Choice I have made of your Person. No, I tell it you once more, you must not judge of the Love I have for you, by that I have shewn others hereto∣fore; you would know the dif∣ference, if you were acquainted with your own merits: And be assured, that finding in you alone all that is lovely in all others, I
shall never do any thing against my own Interest, my Word, and Inclination. Ah Sir! What plea∣sure do I not take in your Dis∣course? And how sweet it is to understand from the Mouth of so lovely a Prince, such tender and obliging words? But likewise, it is difficult to love such a Prince as you, without Fear and Dis∣quiet. No, I cannot possess such a Heart as yours, without ap∣prehending the loss of it: where∣fore, excuse my late Sadness, and take advantage of the Joy you have rendered me, by confirm∣ing me in the Possession of your Heart. She said these last words in casting her self about the Kings Neck, who could no lon∣ger resist her Caresses. He kissed her, embraced her, and after all this toying, they did something that is not fit to be told.
Tho' those things that are at∣tended with so violent a Ferven∣cy, do not seem that they can be of any long Continuance, we have, however, reason to believe, that as it is the Beauty, Wit, and Merit, of a person altogether charming, that have occasioned this great Intrigue, that it will subsist as long as she shall conserve the same Advantages. If we make a just parallel of our Heroine, with the Qualities of those who have precided her in her Employ, we shall find, that without the help of her Beauty, she surpasses them all. Those Courtiers who pretend to be most knowing in the point of Wits, say, that hers cannot be more accomplished, that it has both the Gayness and Lustre of that of Valiere, and the Stayed∣ness and Solidity of that of Ma∣dam
de Montespan. If they be not mistaken in the Judgment they make, it is credible, that collect∣ing thus in her self, all the Per∣fections that can render the King amorous, she will ever be belo∣ved, and that as long as she shall know how to manage her For∣tune, he will seek out for no other amusement. Mademoiselle de Fontange is good natured, ve∣ry witty, and as sensible as can be, to two very different Passi∣ons, Love and Hatred; inso∣much that if she loves with fer∣vency, what her Heart finds a∣greeable, she hates with no less Excess those she thinks she is de∣spised by. She loves Honour and Glory, and the Title of Mi∣stress do's not displease her; She has a great Air of Youth, which renders her altogether lovely; she talks agreeably; but to draw
her Picture, in two words, it is sufficient to say, That she is the delight of the nicest of all men, in point of Love; and that she has found the way to engage the greatest and haughtiest of all Hearts. The End of the First Part.
THE PASTIME ROYAL; OR, THE GALLANTRIES OF THE FRENCH COƲRT. The Second Part. By a Person of Quality. LONDN, Printed by J. H. for Hen. Rodes, next door to the Bear Ta∣vern, near Bride-lane, in Fleet∣street, 1682.
THE PASTIME ROYAL, OR THE AMOURS OF MADEMOISELLE. PART II. WIthout doubt, Dear a∣der, you have heard how that some Years ago, there was great talk of a Match between the Count de Saint Paul, and her Roy∣al Highness Mademoiselle, which gave occasion to several Persons
to buzze Reports abroad, as you know is done on such like Occasions, principally by Cour∣tiers, who, as more knowing in such kind of things, speak there∣of more boldly and pertinently. There was at that same time a very illustrious Company in a certain part of Paris, or else∣where, I know not certainly the place, but I know very well that the Persons who composed it were intimate Friends of the Count of Lauzun, as you will judge by their Discourses; who, after having long conversed to∣ger, fell at length upon the Marriage of Mademoiselle; and, after each had spoke his sense thereof, and how little her Roy∣al Highness cared for it, one of the Company addressed himself to the Count of Lauzun, and told him; And you, Mr. de Lauzun,
How comes it that so witty a Man as you forgets himself, in so fair and so noble an Occasi∣on? How, do you believe that this Business does not deserve your Thoughts? You may em∣ploy your time much worse. This so unexpected Harangue, did so extreamly surprize the Count of Lauzun, that a less Wit than his, would have found it something difficult to have made a Reply. And indeed, after ha∣ving retreated two or three Steps, How, My Lord, answer∣ed he the person who had spo∣ken to him, I? Do you say I have any Thoughts of Mademoi∣selle? Ha, My Lord, I know that Princess, and I know my self too well, to conceive a De∣sign, the Rumor whereof does terrifie me, and the Thought of which alone, would render me
criminal: I am far from daring only to form such a Design. Why not, replyed his Friend? You know that we often lose for want of seeking. What hurt would there be in trying your Fortune? That Princess is not inaccessible, and to you especi∣ally; for, we know how much you are in her Favour, and that she even loves your Company, and listens to you more willing∣ly than any other. Thus, what Hurt would there be in feeling her Pulse? Ha! answered the Count of Lauzun, I should not dare to have so much as any such Thoughts; the Answer that I am obliged to make to your ob∣liging Discourses, puts me upon the wrack, so great an Impossibi∣lity do I see in what you say. Be pleased however, to think of it, cryed then all the Company:
We are all your Friends, and we counsel you so to do, by rea∣son, that having so much Wit and Conduct as you have, and enjoying the Kings Ear and Fa∣vour as you do, nothing is im∣possible to you; think of it, if you will follow our Advice, it is for your own good, and we shall be all of us infinitely over∣joyed, if you be successful; and we are of Opinion, that this will be your wisest Course. The Count of Lauzun having answered them all as he had done the first, and having excused himself by the strongest and most apparent rea∣sons, that illustrious Company separated. Now, as we natu∣rally love what flatters us, tho' Discretion does not permit us to shew it; we often seem to have an Aversion for a thing, and absolutely refuse when we
most desire it; and the more a mans Wit is capable of knowing the value and merit of a thing that is proposed to him for his Advancement, the more he finds himself inflamed with a desire of Possession. The Count of Lauzun retiring to his House, after having part∣ed from his Friends, where he was no sooner arrived, than that all that Dialogue that had passed about Mademoiselle, returned in∣to his Mind, and what he had rejected as ill through the little Probability he found therein, seemed then to him something less harsh and more easie. And as he has an infinite deal of Wit above what's common, he began not to be altogether in despair; the Truth is, that he saw there∣in a great deal of Difficulty, but the more difficult the thing ap∣peared,
the more it invited his Courage, well knowing, that the greatest Glory does princi∣pally attend the greatest Obsta∣cles. On one side he saw one of the greatest Princesses of the Universe, who had despised a great Number of Kings and So∣vereigns, as if Nature had not wherewith to offer her a Heart worthy of her. He found in that Princess the haughtiest Humors and the greatest and most eleva∣ted Courage that can be imagi∣ned; However, he passed over all these Considerations; after having duely weighed them for a Month together, and after ha∣ving very often lost his Repose, for to apply himself entirely to the great Project he had already made. He acted as those famous Gourages of Antiquity did, who never undertook any thing, but
what seemed almost impossible, or at least, very difficult. In short, after having repassed a thousand times an Insinity of Thoughts, which came crowd∣ing into his Mind; and having made reflexion upon the inesti∣mable value of what his Labours already offered him, if he was so happy as to succeed therein; His great Heart made a powerful Effort, and took, from that mo∣ment a strong Resolution to put in Execution what he had pro∣jected, well seeing, that if he lost that occasion, he should ne∣ver recover it as long as he li∣ved; and that he should never find such glorious means of rai∣sing and establishing his Fortune. Thus then he renews and re∣doubles his Cares, in paying De∣voirs to Mademoiselle. He was not put to much pains, to find
Access to that Princess, his dex∣trous Wit had procured him that long before. He saw her daily, and never parted from her, but as late as was possible; yet he never entertained her but with Respects, Devoirs, News, and a thousand other Contrivances of Wit, capable of winning the hearts of all People. And, as a great Wit relishes sine things much better than one of an or∣dinary stamp, that can hardly di∣stinguish them, relishes those that are common; Mademoiselle took great delight to listen to the Count of Lauzun with a marvel∣lous application: insomuch that our Count, who played his Game underhand, and unknown to all the World, was never wanting new Matters and new Entertain∣ments, and his piercing Wit made him discover after what an obli∣ging
manner he was hearkned to by his Princess, still furnish∣ing him wherewith to satisfie the pleasure she seemed to take there∣in. In the mean time, the Count of Lauzun began to conceive some Rayes of hopes, though, in truth, they were very faint. It is true that he was kindly recei∣ved, but he was so before; if the Princess shewed him any fa∣vour, it was and could only be an effect of her Generosity; thus he had no ground in his hopes: Besides, the great disproportion he saw between that Princess and himself▪ put him into despair, and that indeed was his greatest obstacle. He pursued however his Design. Some time being spent in this manner, it came at length into his thoughts, that it was fit he should begin to play his Game more boldly: You are going to
see a handsome Lesson for those men who would win their Mi∣streesses heart; which, that they may do, they must above all make it their study to comply with her Humour, which is the only and true way by which we may safely insinuate our selves. The Count of Lauzun would at any rate dye, or insinuate him∣self into Mademoiselle's favour; in order to which, he had need of great help, but had made it a rule to borrow nothing but from him∣self; what does he? his Genius applies it self to consider atten∣tively that Princess; he applies himself seriously thereto, during some time: and, at length, having observed that this Princess was both a Lover of the Court and the Wits, and that she was natu∣rally curious, as is usual for her Sex, he resolved to take that course, as the most easie to arrive
at his end. He was one day at that Princess's Apartment, where, after a thousand fine Discourses, as his Custom was, which served as a Prelude to what he had medita∣ted; he fell marvellously to the purpose upon his Design; and speaking of the most common Af∣fairs of the Court: Well, Made∣moiselle, said he to her, will your Royal Highness alwayes be parti∣cular, and never have commerce with the Court? Is it possible that the most flourishing Court in the World has nothing that can please you, there are People in∣cessantly seen, who come from the four corners of the Earth to see the Majesty and Magnificence of the Louvre, and to admire there∣in our Incomparable Monarch, with all his Royal Family, which is, without doubt, the finest and most charming there is in the U∣niverse? Is it possible, once more,
Mademoiselle, that all this joyned to the Delicacy of the Wits, who are there without number, has not wherewith to invite your Royal Highness? It is true, Mademoiselle, that your R. H. alone has the ad∣vantage of being at Court, with∣out going from your Apartment. You may, in depriving the Court of the Louvre of it's finest Orna∣ment, I mean, in depriving it of the Presence of your Royal Per∣son, you alone can compose one entire, at Luxenburgh or else∣where, where your Royal High∣ness shall be. You have a mind to divert your self, Monsieur de Lauzun, answered Mademoiselle, and your Wit ever gallant, is willing at length, I should share in it's Gallantries. Ah! Made∣moiselle, replyed the Count of Lauzun, God forbid I should ever be wanting in the respect I owe your Royal Highness. I
know too well, how to speak to Persons of your Rank, for to fail ever in my Devoir; And what I take the Liberty to say to you, is only a faint Effect of the Zeal I have had all my Life time, and which I find does augment every moment for the Service of your Royal Highness. Yes, Mademoi∣selle, I have a desire, but a desire I cannot express, to see you Mi∣stress of all the Universe; and if I was so happy as to be able to contribute something thereto, my Life would be the least gift that I would I were able to make for that end; so true is it, Mademoi∣selle, that I will henceforward apply my self to the Interests of your Royal Highness. Ah! Mon∣sieur de Lauzun, answered Made∣moiselle, you are too generous, and you load me with Civilities: I could wish I were in a Conditi∣on of shewing you my Acknow∣ledgment,
but as my Sentiments are not what's common, and very rare in the Age we live in, it is requisite to be something more than I am, to be able to acknow∣ledge them worthily, but be mind∣ful, at least, that I shall preserve as long as I live the remembrance of your good and generous wishes. It is not, said Mr. de Lauzun, an interessed acknowledgment as to the benefits of Fortune, that makes me speak thus, Mademoiselle, your Royal Person is the only motive; and the Cause seems to me so just and glorious, that I shall alwayes be ready, let what will happen, to keep my word. But, Monsieur de Lauzun, said Mademoiselle, what would you have me to do for you, after so noble and generous a De∣claration? how! shall it be said, that a Gentleman, by his high Sen∣timents, shall have made it impos∣sible for a Princess of my Quality
to make returns? Ha! for Hea∣ven's sake, satisfie your self with what I have said to you, without pressing me any farther; and ex∣pect from Time and Fortune some∣thing better, and above all, be mindful of your word, and if you do not forget it, I shall remember it. No certainly, Mademoiselle, said the Count of Lauzun, I shall never forget it, and when your Highness shall do me the favour to demand proofs, you will see after what manner I know how to execute what I have once resolved. And for the better making appear to you my sincerity, I will from this time give you the means of trying me. You know, Mademoi∣selle, that I am so happy as to be much in my King's Favour, and that there passes few things at Court, but what I am one of the first that knows: insomuch, Ma∣demoiselle, that I pretend, if you
honour me with your Confidence, to inform you of all Occurrences: I do not speak of Secrets: your Royal Highness never wanted Prudence in the most pressing oc∣casions, thus I have reason to rely therein. In short, Mademoiselle, the King has a Love for you, and which would be augmented, if you shewed any Affection for him, you would be of his Table, and the first in all his Pleasures: the King would be overjoyed to possess you: and, as you are a Princess to be married, undoubt∣edly his Majesty would not fail of providing for you according to your Rank, if he cannot suta∣ble to your Merit. As for what concerns me, Mademoiselle, your Royal Highness may reckon as of a Person who is wholly devoted to your Service. And I protest to you, Mademoiselle, that I will ne∣ver let a moment pass wherein
your Interest shall be concerned, without doing all that shall be possible for me, whether with the King or elsewhere: and I likewise hope that your Royal Highness will quickly perceive my zeal for your Service. This happy Beginning could not but promise the Count of Lau∣zun a fine and glorious End; He talks to Mademoiselle of knowing Secrets of Confidence, of Plea∣sures, and at last he touches by the bye the string of Marriage. These things were a sure poyson to that Princess; He that said them, added so much Eloquence and agreeableness, that she could not resist so many Enemies that attacked her at a time; insomuch that having listen'd very atten∣tively to Monsieur de Lauzun, that Princess took such delight there∣in, that at length she yielded to so sweet a Discourse, and which
flattered her so agreeably. The first Testimony that the Count of Lauzun received thereof, was by word of Mouth from her, in this manner: Well, Count of Lauzun, what is then to be done, I am rea∣dy to do all you tell me, but tell me how? Mademoiselle, answered he immediately, You must first of all make some One your Confi∣dent, in whom you may relye. But where shall I find, replyed Mademoiselle, smiling, a Person I may trust in? Ha, Mademoiselle, answered Monsieur de Lauzun, How happy should I be, if your Royal Highness could think fit to confide in me; Ha, how faithful should I be! Yes, Mademoiselle, if I had that good Fortune, I would rather sacrifice my self, than be wanting in Fidelity. And moreover, after that your Royal Highness shall have began to put
Trust in me, she should be sure to know what is done or said even in the King's Closet, whether you were at Court or no. Well, Mon∣sieur de Lauzun, said Mademoiselle, continuing to smile, I am resolved, since you say that it is necessary for the better, and the more se∣cretly carrying on my Interests, to choose me a Confident to whom I will discover thoughts very in∣geniously, to oblige him to do the like. But he must likewise expect, that if I come to discover that he deceives me, he shall be punished sooner or later; and, on the con∣trary, if he acts like a gallant man, he shall be better recompenced, than he dares perhaps pretend to hope for. How, Mademoiselle, re∣plied Monsieur de Lauzun, after the charming word your Royal Highness has newly pronounced, can there be so base a Courage
found as to fail in his Devoir? Ha! it cannot be, Mademoiselle, and Heaven is too just to permit so black an Injustice. That if by some unlucky Chance this should happen, the Favour I demand of your Royal Highness, from this time, is, That you would permit me to hope, that I might serve as an Instrument for the punishing so horrible a Crime, or dye in so glorious an Enterprize. Well, you shall be fully satisfied, Mon∣sieur de Lauzun, said Mademoiselle, if that is capable of satifying you; and you alone shall punish that Criminal, at least, if he becomes so. But likewise, do not pretend to have any reason to revoke your Word; for, it is not to Persons of my Rank, that people ought to promise more than they intend to keep. Yes, Mademoi∣selle, I will keep my word with
you, answered Monsieur de Lau∣zun, and will keep it as long as I live. But, if in the choice I should make of a Confident, said Made∣moiselle, you should find a real Friend, a near Relation, or an Ally; in short, some one whom you loved more than your self, what would you do in such an Encounter? for it is convenient to explain to you all things, that you may not pretend a Surprize. Ha! Mademoiselle, your Royal Highness wrongs my Courage, if it is permitted me thus to speak to you, with all the respect that be∣comes me, and my Duty is more dear to me than Friends and Re∣lations, even my Life is nothing to me in comparison of my Ho∣nour. But, in short, Mademoiselle, continued our incomparable Count, may I not have leave to ask, who is that happy man whom your
Royal Highness has taken so much pleasure to animate me against, as if I were to engage a numerous Army? As the Enemy, said Ma∣demoiselle, you are to fight against, if I am betray'd, is powerful and strong indeed, tho' little in ap∣pearance; I was very willing to know, if you would not waver in hearing me speak. I waver, Made∣moiselle, replied Monsieur de Lau∣zun; You will ever see me fixed and unshakeable. I am however certain, said Mademoiselle, that his Name alone will make you think of it more than once; and per∣haps he will be so formidable, that you will repent all that you have offered upon this point. I repent, Mademoiselle, answered Monsieur de Lauzun, all the Earth, nor Death it self, is not capable of making me unsay it; and though all the Powers should arm them∣selves
for my ruine, I would ex∣pect them with an undaunted Courage, without diminishing any thing of my design. Whereupon, Mademoiselle spoke to him in this manner: Prepare your self then for two things, the one, either to punish your self for this so black a Crime that you would punish another for, if you are ever so wretched as to be culpable of it: it is in you alone that I will con∣fide my self; I know no Body more capable, nor that can ac∣quit themselves better: Consult your self well before you engage, and see if you are dispos'd to serve me faithfully. Yes, Mademoi∣selle, said the Count of Lauzun, I am disposed to all that is to be done for your Service. And since that your Royal Highness does me the Honour to prefer me be∣fore a thousand others, who me∣rit
it much better than I do, I pro∣test to her, I will never fail in my word. The Count of Lauzun had no sooner taken leave of Mademoi∣selle, than that he began to think on the happy Success of his Enter∣prize; In short, he might boast of having had pretty good Success for a meer Tentative: Nor did he fail to perform from point to point what he had promised that Prin∣cess; who likewise was very glad that she had made sure of a Per∣son who only could inform her with certain News of all that pas∣sed at Court. She saw that this Person was entirely devoted to her, that he took a particular care to inform himself of all the great∣est Secrets: In a word, the Joy of this Princess was so great, that she could hardly contain it.
Some time passed in this man∣ner, and Monsieur de Lauzun, who still pursued his point, and conti∣nued alwayes to redouble his cares with her, knew at length that he was so far in her favour, as to have hopes of a farther progress therein, if Fate was ever as favou∣rable to him as it had been, and it was the Success that still ani∣mated him. Coming one day earlier than was his Custome, whether by chance or a premeditated Design, or that he had indeed some No∣velty to acquaint Mademoiselle with; He was no sooner got up the Stairs, than that having tra∣versed immediately as far as that Princess's Chamber, he prepared himself to go in there, as was his custome to do, and for that end, having half opened the door, he perceived that Princess before her
Looking-glass, having her Neck uncovered, he retired immediate∣ly, and shut the Door after him, Respect not permitting him to ad∣vance farther. Mademoiselle, per∣ceiving some Body, and hearing the Door shut, called out pretty loud, and asked, with much con∣cern, who it was? and while they were going to see, she asked, Is it not Monsieur de Lauzun? the Person who went to see, made an∣swer that it was. Let him come in, cryed that Princess several times. At the same time Monsieur de Lauzun coming in, and having made a profound Reverence, Mademoiselle said to him, Pray you, my Lord, Why did you not come in without making so much Ceremony? How, pursued that Princess, smiling, Is it by flying from Ladies, that you make your Court to them? Mademoiselle, an∣swered he, I have known till this
time, what our Duty is to ordi∣nary Ladies, but I never could learn all that I owe to Royal Per∣sons, or if I knew it, I have late∣ly forgotten it. But what do you mean, said Mademoiselle to him? What I mean, Mademoiselle, an∣swered Monsieur de Lauzun, how would your Royal Highness be willing, that in losing the respect I owe you, I should likewise come and expose my self to a Conflict wherein I see my loss all entire. But again, What is it you mean, said she to him, smiling, I compre∣hend nothing of your Discourse, explain your self better, if you would have me to understand you. Ha! Mademoiselle, replyed Monsieur de Lauzun, I fear I shall explain my self but too well for my misfortune; however, if your Royal Highness pretends you do not understand me, I shall explain my self more openly, when you
give me leave. I should be very glad it might be at this present, replied Mademoiselle, continuing her smiling. Since your Royal Highness does command me, I must obey. At the opening of your Chamber door, began he, I had no sooner taken the first step, than that the first Object that pre∣sented it self to my Eyes, was your Royal Person, but in so daz∣ling a condition, that my Eyes were never so surprized, and that Surprize, or the fear of wanting Respect, or losing my self, did make me retire with the utmost Precipitation: I have Eyes and a Heart like another, I love beau∣tiful things as much as any One: Thus, Mademoiselle, at the entrance of your Chamber, I perceived, though at a distance, a Ray of the dazzling Lustre of your Roy∣al Person; I mean, Mademoiselle, your Royal Highness, whose Gra∣ces
and Beauties together made a composition of all that could flatter the sight; for tho' you are charming; however the white∣ness of Lillies which you conceal under Linnen or Silks, that admi∣rable Neck, that delicate Comple∣ion of the finest Bosom in the World, nor those Snowy Breasts which you could not deprive me the sight of; all this joyned together, with the unparallell'd Majesty of your shape, would have produced the same Effects in me, as in the greatest Princes in the World; I should never have been able to have seen so many Won∣ders together, without consider∣ing them attentively. I know that the consideration of beautiful things gives pleasure, that plea∣sure inflames desire; and, in short, that Desire only tends to Enjoy∣ment. In a word, I should never have been able to have avoided
this Charm, which by consequence would have made me unhappy. Alas! I easily perceive at present, that the being a King or a Sove∣reign, is a fine and advantageous Quality, since they alone may as∣pire, without being Criminal, to the possession of such Charms. Yes, I maintain, Mademoiselle, that he who can lawfully aspire to those Beauties of your Royal Highness, is, without doubt, the most happy man in the World, and with much more reason, the happiness of the Person who shall enjoy them, will still be much greater. I expected no less from you, Monsieur de Lauzun, said Mademoiselle, and I fancied that the trick you played at my door would at length terminate in the best invented and managed Gal∣lantry imaginable. Ha! Mademoi∣selle, replied Monsieur de Lauzun, how ill does your Royal High∣ness
judge of me, if you have such a thought, the Respect I ought to have for you, and the Vow I have made of spending my Life in your Service, will never make me dis∣guise my thoughts; and I will proclaim to all the Earth, when need shall be, what I have now declared. You think then, my Lord, answered Mademoiselle, that there are none but Kings and Sovereigns that can lawfully pre∣tend to the possession of fine things? How, Do you not know that it is Merit alone that ought to have that Pretension? and that neither Extraction nor Rank it self does augment the value of a Person, if they have not that in store? You know that there are an infinite number, who, without the aid of Birth or of Extract, have rendred themselves worthy of aspiring to all that is greatest, and that by their Merit alone.
And I may affirm, without Ficti∣on, that the Count of Lauzun, otherwise Monsieur de Peguillin, is one of the chiefest: and that his Virtue distinguishing him from common men, that same Virtue may, with Justice, raise him to something extraordinary. I will not say more upon this point to you, but I am very certain, that if you knew the Thoughts I have of you, you would not have rea∣son to envy any other rank than your own, if it is true that you make any account of my Esteem. Ha! Mademoiselle, answered Mon∣sieur de Lauzun, how much am I obliged to your Royal Highness, and how happy am I in having the Honour of having gratified you: But I am doubly happy in having some share in your Esteem. Yes, Mademoiselle, since your Roy∣al Highness has had the goodness to confer upon me so great a hap∣piness,
permit, for Heavens sake, that I suffer my self to be trans∣ported with those sweet Raptures that the joy hereof puts me in, and that my Soul may let you know by some Powerful effort the exstacy your last words have put it in. For if it is true, as I ought not to doubt, that your Soul is sincere, have not I reason to esteem my self the most Fortu∣nate of all Men? And what can I do to acknowledge so many Ob∣ligations, that I have to your Royal Highness, since that I am so unhappy as to be only able to give Wishes, but fruitless Wishes which can never acquit me of the least of your Favours. I de∣mand nothing of you, said Ma∣demoiselle to him, without it be the continuation of those same Wish∣es, and the Execution if an occasi∣on is offer'd. Yes, Mademoiselle, answered Monsieur de Lauzun,
I will Wish, Attempt, and Execute all things for the Service of your Royal Highness, even to the last Gasp. This was a fine advance for our new Lover, and, in my Opi∣nion, he never conducted so doubt∣ful and so bold an Enterprize, with so much Success: and indeed this last Conversation was a sweet Bait to him, having found therein all reason to hope. And it was this that emboldened him to push his Fortune on to the end. He spent some time in this Con∣dition, still paying his Respects with more Assiduity than usual to Mademoiselle. And if he ob∣served that that Princess took de∣light in his Company, he like∣wise failed not to do all that a fine Wit is capable of doing, for to maintain himself in her Favour. And for that end he had always an Opportunity in hand by a hun∣dred
fine things that his Genius furnish'd him with: And in all the Conversations he had with that Princess, he made appear so much respect in all his Actions, that at length all this joyned to the Vivacity of his Wit and the Strength of his Arguments; all this, I say, was too powerful for to resist it. And indeed, Made∣moiselle, who had a Wit more ca∣pable and knew better than any Body to judge of those things, found too many Charmes therein, not to think him delightful and Entertaining, and by Consequence unable to defend her self against him. She was even overjoyed when she saw him coming to her House, by reason she already looked upon him as a sure Con∣quest, and would have quitted all things to have had his Conversati∣on, not finding any thing wherein she had so agreeable a Divertise∣ment.
Thus things stood with them, when that the Count of Lauzun becoming from day to day more Bold and Familiar with Mademoi∣selle, and by the same Degrees, that he became more in Love, he bethought himself of an Inven∣tion to know if his Happiness was true or false; if it was a Shadow or a Substance. And it was some∣thing an extraordinary Trick as you will see, but which was mar∣vellously successful to him, since it assured him of his entire Hap∣piness. Being one day with that Prin∣cess, from whom he was as seldom absent as possible, and if he seemed very desirous to stay with her, Mademoiselle was no less▪ to detain him. He being then one day with her, after a pretty long Dis∣course, he testified to that Prin∣cess that he had something to tell her in particular. Mademoiselle
easily perceiving his Mind, took him aside, and having told him that she was ready to hear him if he had any thing to say to her. The truth is, answered Monsieur de Lauzun to Mademoiselle, that I have a favour to demand of your Royal Highness; but I dare not do it without your Permission. It is long since you have had it all intire, My Lord, said Mademoi∣selle, you need only speak and ask boldly all that depends on me, and assure your self at the same time of all. Tho your Royal Highness▪ has so much goodness to grant me my Request, pursued Monsieur de Lauzun, it is not just that I should make an ill use of it, and if any other Motive than that of your Interests set me to work, I should be without doubt less bold and more Circumspect. Whi∣ther it be your Interest or mine, said Mademoiselle, all is equal to
me, speak only with confidence of obtaining all that you demand. The Count of Lauzun made an∣swer to these so obligihg Discour∣ses, by a profound Reverence, and pursued afterwards in this manner; Some dayes since, Ma∣demoiselle, it came into my Head, that your Royal Highness would be suddenly marryed; and, this thought has made so strong an Impression in my mind, that I have represented it to my self as a certain Presage; or, to express my self better, as a thing conclu∣ded: And the Credit I give there∣to, and the Joy that it promises me, have forced me to take the Liberty of making you a most humble Request; that is, Made∣moiselle, that as it is a thing infalli∣ble, according to all Appearan∣ces, since the greatest men have aspired to this high Happiness. Your Renown has proclaimed
every where the Power of your Charms; insomuch, that amongst all those who have learn'd the Wonders of your Life, there are few, or to say better, there are none whose Mind have not been agreeably surprized, and who are become your Votaries. Thus, in that Crowd of Adorers, it must needs, except Heaven would ren∣der it self culpable of the greatest Injustice, make some One one day happy; and I know that it will be very suddenly. For, in short, I cannot get this thought out of my mind; and it has so prepossessed my Imagination, that on all moments, and even in the lit∣tle Repose that I take, I am not exempt from it. It is long since I have thought of any thing else; insomuch, Mademoiselle, that the Favour I demand of your Royal Highness, is, that as you have so often honoured me with your
Confidence, it may be permitted me to hope that you will continue to do so. Then Mademoiselle, ey∣ing him with a sweet and sincere Air, made answer in these words: It is very just, my Lord, that when we have once chosen any one for a Confident in any thing, it would be to belye our Choice, should we not confide in him all things with∣out reserve. For my part, I do not pretend to belye mine, I will make you the onely Depository of my most secret Thoughts, that if by chance I want Prudence in speaking, remember, that in the Quality of a man of Honour as you are, you are obliged by all manner of Reasons to be careful to keep the Secret, and that there is no less knowledge in knowing how to be silent, than there is in speaking well. But, pray you tell me then, what it is that you re∣quest of me? I do not speak of
your Gallantries, because I know that a gallant Wit, and a Courti∣er, as you are, cannot be without them. There is not a Gentleman but you that is capable of cajolling with so good a Grace, as to make a simple thought unshakeable and assured, even when it is but ima∣ginary. But, Mademoiselle, replied Monsieur de Lauzun, for Heaven's sake, what is it you say? Do you believe then that I have not so much as thought of what I have newly said to you? If your Roy∣al Highness could dive to the bot∣tom of my Heart, you would see the truth of the thing; and I am certain you would have no reason to suspect me as you do. And to let your Royal Highness know, that I am perswaded, of what I have now said, you will certainly see the effect thereof very sudden∣ly; and if my Vows are heard, the time will be short. And I de∣mand
of your Royal Highness, that as it will be a thing that all the World will know sooner or later, I may be the first that has the ho∣nour of learning it. He, pursued Monsieur de Lauzun, for whom, of all your Votaries, your Royal Highness shall have most inclina∣tion, of all those at Court, or out of the Kingdom; all the World will know him, and that with the extreamest Pleasure. And, as I am infinitely more yours, than the rest of Men, it is for this reason alone that I demand this Preference from your Royal Highness, to the end, that your fair Mouth having an∣nounced to me him, whom amongst all men you are willing to render most happy, I may be the first; likewise to give you joy, and te∣stifie the satisfaction I shall have, when I shall see the moment ap∣proach that is to give you the Per∣son you shall have honoured with
your Choice, and whom you shall have found worthy of your Affe∣ction. He ended these last words with a deep sigh, which Mademoi∣selle did not suffer to pass with∣out remarking; for she obser∣ved him too nearly to lose the least of his Actions. But, Monsieur de Lauzun, said Mademoiselle, from whence comes it that you sigh? You foretell me such fine things, and yet you end them by a great sigh. And where is then that Joy that you promise your self from thence? Methinks that it is not in sighing that we receive Joy and Pleasure. How would you have me then explain this, pursued that Princess, smiling? Ha! Mademoi∣selle, answered he, so intelligent a Wit as yours is, will not find it difficult to give a just application to that action, especially when you shall remember, that it is after those things that we ardently de∣sire,
that we sigh. That is true, answered Mademoiselle, but like∣wise you are not ignorant, that Sighs are no less the effects of fear, than of Joy and desire. Thus a Heart which vents Sighs, very much perplexes a Person to know the difference, and their real cause, for all that I have ever heard, have been after the same Fashion and Tone. I perceive, Mademoiselle, said Monsieur de Lauzun, That your Royal Highness is willing to divert your self; but in short, what Answer do you make to my Demand? You would be ve∣ry much deceived in your Expe∣ctation, if it was a Refusal. But since that I am engaged, I will keep my word with you, I assure you, that I will keep it punctu∣ally, and will truly tell you the Person I shall love most of all those whom I shall believe may aspire to me. But when shall this
be, Mademoiselle, answered the Count de Lauzun, with an incon∣ceivable Transport and Eagerness? The Princess, who without doubt, divined the Cause of it, though she did not seem to know it open∣ly, and who likewise made appear in her Looks, part of the Joy it occasioned in the Bottom of her Heart, told him, still smiling, that it should be within three Months. Ha! Mademoiselle, reply'd her Lo∣ver, how long shall I think this time? and how severe a Tryal will it be to my Patience? But it is no matter, continued he, I must wait, since your Royal Highness will have it so. This was the first Progress of this trick he had invented, to know if he had any ground for his hopes; you will see the end by the sequel, and the effect that succeeded it. Shortly after, the Journey to
Flanders was discoursed of, and the Count of Lauzun, whose whole thoughts were how to please his Mistress, and only applied himself to seek for all opportunities so to do, but all this with Honour, and without losing a moment of what he owed the King his Master; He was almost ever at that Princess's Apartment, or with her when she was at the Louvre: And especially he never failed of News, and told them with so good a Grace, that tho' he told them, and accompa∣nied them with serious things, wherein there was required a very great presence of mind, and a most particular Solidity of Judgment; however, the easie manner with which he related these News, and a thousand agreeable things, gave them a new Lustre, and made known to that Princess, that he was not altogether unworthy of her Attention. And indeed, we
from Mademoiselle; he went im∣mediately, without staying a mo∣ment, directly to that Princess's House; who seeing him come in∣to her Chamber, with a gay Coun∣tenance, and which shewed a con∣tented mind, said to him: In all likelihood, my Lord, you have re∣ceived from the King what you demanded of him? It is true, Ma∣demoiselle, answered Monsieur de Lauzun, after having made a low Bow, and come up something near∣er to her; and I come just from be∣ing created a Knight, and perform my promise I made this morning, and my first Order. We shall have it then, said Mademoiselle, laugh∣ing, who, without doubt, imagi∣ned the truth of the thing. Yes, Mademoiselle, answered he, and I am going to acquaint you with it in few words. Your Royal High∣ness, continued he, may, if you please, prepare your self to take
Arms, the King having a design to vanquish all the Flemmings, has bethought himself of attacking them with such Arms, as that they may not be able to resist; and it is in order to that, that his Maje∣sty will undertake this Voyage, whereof I had the honour to talk to you this morning. And, as in the last Campaigne he made into his Enemies Countrey▪ he was on∣ly able to extend his Conquests over some Provinces, he has re∣solved never to quit them, untill he has made himself absolute Ma∣ster thereof: and the Order that I have received from his Majesty is, that he desires you to dispose your self to accompany him; and expecting his principal Forces from your Royal Highness: He has commanded me to exhort you on his behalf, not to abandon him in so great and in so important a Design. Our amorous Count spoke
so agreeably all these things, that there was nothing more charming than to hear him pronounce them; and Mademoiselle taking an un∣speakable Pleasure therein, heark∣ned to him with a marvellous At∣tention. But being willing to know the end of this Gallantry, (for she foresaw that it was an In∣vention of the Count of Lauzun) that impatient Princess asked him, What do you mean, My Lord, when you speak to me of War, and that the King should have oc∣casion for me if he had such a de∣sign? You would be much fitter to do him Service than I am, since it is your Profession. You are highly necessary, Mademoiselle, answered Monsieur de Lauzun; it is not with Swords and Musquets that the King will attack that People, he will make use of more soft, but more dangerous Wea∣pons. It is by the great Lustre
and the Majesty of his Court, that the King will dazzle their minds that are naturally curious of ex∣traordinary things. And as your Royal Highness has more Charms than all the rest together, it is from you likewise that he expects the greatest Aid. Yes, Mademoi∣selle, I can affirm with Justice, that you alone have wherewith to conquer agreeably not only the grossest minds, but all the World together. In short, it is sufficient to say, when the greatest King in the World chooses you to be as the finest and principal Instru∣ment that is to secure to him his Conquests, and facilitate to him the means of making others much greater. And if your Roy∣al Highness might hope for any forreign Succors, and from others than your self, that high Esteem that our glorious and invincible Monarch makes daily appear for
your rare Merit, would give you a value above all that we can fi∣gure Great and Lovely. That is to say, said Mademoiselle, that Monsieur de Lauzun is alwayes the Man in the World who has the gift of Inventing every mo∣ment, the most agreeable Gallan∣tries, and, notwithstanding all my desires to him, to exempt me from them, his fine Wit cannot do it self that Violence. Is it possible that there is but one Lauzun in the World, who is ca∣pable of such rare Inventions, and that he alone can boast of telling all that is fine and rare, to form an Entertainment worthy of the greatest Wits of the Age? For my part, I do not comprehend, con∣tinued she, from whence you take all that you say. And I cannot for∣bear being surprized at the Novel∣ty of the things that proceed from you. Ha! How easie it is to speak
and say fine things, Mademoiselle, replied the Count of Lauzun, when a Person has the Advantage of seeing them shine in your Royal Highness, with the Lustre where∣with they appear there, and how easie and glorious it is to become a Doctor, when we have the ho∣nour of conversing with you! Let us be silent in this case, for I know that I shall gain nothing against you, said Mademoiselle, and let us know what the King has said to you. The King desires you, Mademoiselle, continued Monsieur de Lauzun, to dispose your self to take the Journey wirh the Queen, but he desires you very earnestly. I know, that if there only want∣ed an Order for that, you would not stay here, pursued he, smiling, and after a gay manner; for I should have thought it very se∣vere, and without doubt it would have been impossible for me to
have found Repose, without be∣ing alwayes near to you, to pay you my most humble respects. And I shall bless, all my Life time, this first moment, wherein I have been so happy as to contribute something towards your going with the Court. Yes, Mademoiselle, and I have acted herein with heat and eagerness, because that my place and the strict Obligations I have to my King, do oblige me to attend him every where; and your Royal Highness staying here, it would have forced me from my self, if I had gone from where she resides. I ask a thousand Par∣dons of you, Mademoiselle, if I speak to you so freely, and for having acted herein thus without your Permission; but I thought, that in serving my self I should not disoblige you, and that you would not be sorry to go with a King, who loves you tenderly, and who
has made me acquainted with his Affection for you, by the most passionate and sincere Discourses imaginable. No, I am not sorry, replyed that fair one; and far from that, I will thank you for it, as a thing that is very pleasing to me. And to speak to you free∣ly, that Indifference which I shew∣ed this morning for that Journey, was partly to see if you are as much concerned for me, as you say you are, and if you could quit me without Trouble; for, I know very well, that having so much Zeal as you have seemed to have this long time, for my Inte∣rests, and having so much Wit as you are possessed of, you would not fail to attempt something in order to that; and I promised my self, that you would endeavour it seriously, and that the free Access you have above all others to the King, would make you act with
Success: and I even know not, if you had done otherwise, if I should have pardoned you as long as I live. In a word, I thank you, and remember, that I shall never forget this Service: you will see Proofs thereof, perhaps, sooner than you hope for, and, which will sufficiently surprize you, to let you know, that you have not engaged your self to an ungrate∣ful Person, but to a Person, who perhaps, deserves the Cares you have, and do take for her. Thus you see when we are once favou∣red by Fortune, all that we do and undertake, succeeds to our advantage. The Count of Lauzun had the Wind so in the Poop, as we say, that he was not only successful in all things, to a wonder, but like∣wise, what he did for himself alone, made him merit Sentiments of Ac∣knowledgments altogether extra∣ordinary;
and you would have said, in hearing Mademoiselle's Dis∣course, as if it had been for her her self. Thus you see him then as well satisfied as a man can be, who has a great design, and is in a Condition to hope for all man∣ner of Success. He tryed all the means that his Genius suggested to him, and he found every thing favourable. In short, he had but one step more to take, and was in too fair a way to make a stop. It seems likewise, that not daring to discover it as he could have wished; that Princess, to partake, as we may say, of the Troubles of that severe Violence that she was obliged to make him suffer; that Princess I say, who saw in his Eyes, and in all his Actions, and who fancyed that she discovered and penetrated the favourable Motive that set him to work, put him often in a way to oblige him
to speak more boldly. But, as the Count of Lauzun did not yet think himself forward enough for that, he would manage all things, to the end, he might not build, as People often do, upon a moving Sand. He continued however his Cares with more assiduity than ever. And this is pretty rare, that having to do with a Princess of Mademoiselle's Rank, whose haugh∣ty Humour was altogether to be feared, he never lost any thing of the free Access he found at first to that Princess; on the contrary, he insinuated himself by little and lit∣tle, but alwayes from better to bet∣ter: insomuch that she suffered him, esteemed him, and treated him more obligingly than ever she had done any man, even more than she had the greatest Princes, who had been her Votaries. She does more, for he no sooner pre∣pares to take leave of her, when
he is at her Apartment, than that she makes earnest enquiry when she shall see him again. There was no unfitting hour for him, and he had leave to come to her Apart∣ment at all hours, and all moments; and I am likewise of Opinion, that if she had had a desire of forbid∣ding him any thing, it should have been not to have gone from her as seldom as possible. It was after this manner, that the Count of Lauzun passed agree∣ably a thousand sweet Moments every day, in giving and receiving innocent Testimonies of a conceal∣ed Love, and which it was not yet time to discover. In the mean time, the Term that Mademoiselle had told him that she would dis∣cover to him sincerely that man she should love most, was very much advanced; and the Count of Lauzun counted the days as so many years. At length, the day
being come, wherein the Term was expired, our Count failed not to go to Mademoiselle's house, and his Impatience made him go much earlier than he was used to do, which was what he told that Prin∣cess, after having made his Leg: At length, Mademoiselle, you see that this so much desired day is at length come, wherein I am to re∣ceive so much Joy. I do not think Mademoiselle, that your Royal Highness will unsay what you have promised, you did it too so∣lemnly to fail: He pronounced these words with that Agreeable∣ness that was usual in all his Dis∣courses. And Mademoiselle, who was not displeased at the Care he had taken to make her keep her Promise, was very glad to see the Earnestness with which Monsieur de Lauzun did it. And that Prin∣cess having asked him, tho' she knew it as well as he, if the three
Months were already at an end? Whereunto, our Lover made an∣swer in these words; It is true, Mademoiselle, that I have endea∣voured to count truly, but how exact soever I have been, I am sure, that I have deceived my self, and that instead of the three Months that your Royal Highness had taken, I have let three years pass. And if I would reckon ac∣crding to the Fervency of my Expectation, I am sure, I should go even to Infinity, without find∣ing the Account. But, said Made∣moiselle to him, What will you do with this Secret when I shall have imparted it to you? What I will do with it? Replyed the Count de Lauzun; I will rejoyce: and the Joy I expect it will give, will render me one of the most Contented men in the World; and so much the more, for that I shall be the first, to whom that glo∣rious
advantage shall be permitted Well, said Mademoiselle, I will tell it you this Evening. But after what manner? Answered he. I will write it upon a Pane of Glass in one of my Windows, said the Princess. Upon a Pane of Glass? Mademoiselle, replyed our Count, and the first of your Family who shall approach it, will know it even sooner than I; and it is on∣ly the honour of the Preferen that I have so often demanded of your Royal Highness. How will you then have me tell it you, said Mademoiselle? As your Royal Highness pleases, answered he, pro∣vided, I am the first that knows it. In short, Mademoiselle was very glad that she could not unsay her self in any manner; and that vio∣lence that the Count of Lauzun u∣sed to learn the Secret, diminish∣ed much of the trouble she had
to tell it him: insomuch that what our Lover asked to know, Ma∣demoiselle desired to tell him, tho' she made a shew to the contrary; and I find that she had more to overcome than she was willing to have had; and that she could not consider her self such as she was, without consulting what she was going to do. But it is no matter, she has something more powerful than the Blood that makes her act, and she was willing to finish what she had begun. And likewise that Princess took of a sudden her Re∣solutions, upon the answer she had to make the Count of Lauzun; and seeing that he pressed her but a∣greeably, and in a profound Re∣spect, to keep her word with him, since the time was expired; Yes, said she, I will keep it; but do not expect that I will tell it you, I will write it upon Paper, and
it you in the Evening, I pro∣mise you. He was forced to stay till this moment, notwithstanding his Impatience. At length, the Evening being come, Mademoiselle went to the Louvre: the Count of Lauzun, who had at that time a Flea in his Ear, did not fail, as soon as he saw that Princess come, to go to her, and make Supplica∣tions immediately for the Lette he so impatiently longed for. You see, Mademoiselle, said he to her, the Evening is come at last, Will your Royal Highness still put me off? No, said Mademoiselle, I will put you off no longer: and hav∣ing at the same time taken out of her Pocket a Letter, made up, and sealed with her own Seal, she gave it to the Count of Lauzun, and told him, as she gave it him, with terms, and an action altoge∣ther mooving: See here, My Lord,
the Letter wherein is what you so ardently desire; but do not open it till after it has struck twelve, because I have often remarked, that Fridayes, as to day is, are ve∣ry unlucky to me; thus do not disoblige me so far, and I shall see if you have a consideration for me, by your obliging me in this particular. O Mademoiselle, an∣swered our Count, how long will this time be to me? and how is it possible for a man to have his hap∣piness in his hands, without da∣ring to enjoy it? I shall see there∣by, said Mademoiselle, if you are faithful to me; and if you refuse it me, I will lay at your door the Events which shall follow, if they are fatal to me. Yes, Mademoiselle, I will obey you to the very end, answered the Count of Lauzun, and I will never fail to give proofs of my Fidelity, and my Devoir to
your Royal Highness. Presently after, it struck Eleven. Our Count, who kept his Watch in his hand, did not fail to shew it to Made∣moiselle, &, during all that time, ne∣ver did man shew more impatience than the Count of Lauzun did: and all those little Transports that he made this Princess take notice of, for the time she had set him, were as many powerful pricks that pierced her to the bottom of her heart. She was so overjoyed to see him, and it was what did quite enflame her, and which made all her Affections declare in favour of that happy Votary. In short, he comes again with the Watch in his hand, to tell Mademoiselle that it was past twelve. You see, said he, Mademoiselle, how faithful I am to your Orders, it has struck twelve, yet here is your Letter, with your Seal upon it, all entire, not hav∣ing
medled with it. But in short, Mademoiselle, continued he, more transported than ever, Is it not yet time that I should rejoyce in my happiness? Wait a Quarter of an hour longer, said she, and I will permit you to open it. This Quar∣ter of an hour being passed; Is it now time, said he, that I make use of the priviledge that your Roy∣al Highness has given me, since it is almost half an hour past Twelve? Yes, answered Mademoiselle, go and open it, and let me hear from you to morrow; Farewel, till then, when we shall see what this so much desired Letter has produced. The Count of Lauzun having ta∣ken leave of Mademoiselle, with∣drew to his House with an incon∣ceivable promptness: Curiosity is as a thing naturally joyned to the mind of Man; This is so true, that there is nothing in the World that Man does not make use of to learn
what is once come into his head to know. And this curiosity produ∣ces different effects, according to the different subjects which cause it. That of the Count of Lauzun was very laudable and good in its Nature; the means which he might make use of to have the end of it, were very uncertain, and the end very doubtful, and even dange∣rous. His curiosity was laudable and good, for he was willing to know, if he could procure being be∣loved by Mademoiselle. The means which he made use of for that end, were honest, even very noble. And tho' that hitherto he had only had great hopes of their good ef∣fects, however he had not yet any real certainty. There is only then that Letter which He holds in his hand, that can instruct him with all: and it will be by the End that it will be permitted us as well as him, to judge certainly of all things.
He was no sooner come to his House, whither He went with all imaginable haste, than that the first thing He did was to open that Letter; but he was not a little sur∣prized to see his own Name writ∣ten with Mademoiselle's hand. I leave you to judge of his astonish∣ment, and if that sight did not fill him full of thought; for in short, there was therein as much to be feared as to be hoped. It is true, that so far, all things, according to all appearances, had been successful to him. But as the Sex is usually very full of dissimulation, Made∣moiselle might have done all this only for her pleasure, and perhaps to laugh at him, and the great dis∣proportion there was between that Princess and the Count of Lauzun, filled him full of terrible fears. His Mind was agitated with a thou∣sand different thoughts all that Night long: sometimes he repassed
all in his memory, and found there∣in a thousand goodnesses, and so favourable and so extraordinary a Treatment for a Person of his Qua∣lity, that he figured to himself, that all these things could only pro∣ceed from the sincerity of that Princess: and the obliging manner with which she had used him, told him every moment that there was some secret motive that had urged her to all these things: But that it was easie to see, that she acted se∣riously therein, and that he might hope for a glorious end after such happy beginnings, and advantage∣ous progresses. There was only then the inequality of conditions that was an obstacle to him, and that made him still doubtful. He was so perplexed upon what he had to do, whether he should let go his hold, or pursue to the end, that He passed, as I have already said, the whole Night in horrible
disquiets: and his heart that had combated a long time between hope and despair, was still unre∣solved what he had to do when day appeared. In short, the one got the mastery of the other: and of all the divers motions, amongst which this poor heart floated, one alone conquered them all, I mean, hope; and indeed it is as the milk and nourishment which makes love subsist. The Count of Lauzun, whose Soul was on the wrack, being ani∣mated with sweet and agreeable hopes, took a strong resolution to see the end of his enterprize at what rate soever. For that end, after having prepared himself for all manner of events, He will, like an other Caesar, force Destiny; making even appear thereby, as that great Emperour did, that his great heart was no less disposed to resist boldly all the attacks of ill
fortune, than to receive agreeably the fruit of a happy success. He is resolved that this heart, that pro∣mised it self an Age of delights, if it was victorious, should expect with resolution all the rigours of his misfortune, if he was vanquish∣ed; He knows that it is in great Fights, and in the most bold and doubtful enterprizes, that true glo∣ry is to be found, and that it is not even necessary to vanquish al∣ways for the gaining of the victo∣ry: but that it is sufficient to make a glorious and vigorous resistance, and never to suffer that our Ene∣my should have the least hold up∣on our Courage, though he has the advantage over our Fate. This so much desired Morning being at length come, he went without delay to Mademoiselle's House. That Princess no sooner saw Him in her Chamber with a pale Countenance, and wherein
the Image of Death was entirely painted, than that she approach'd and said to Him: From whence does this so sudden Change pro∣ceed? Yesterday you was the gay∣est and joyfullest Man in the world, and at present you appear altoge∣ther sad and melancholy. How! Is this that joy you promised me from that Secret, for which you shewed yourself so earnest to know? You told me, that you should be the happiest of all Men, if I would discover to you this secret, and yet you seem quite the contrary since you know it. This is just the course of those who shew themselves so zealous. O, Mademoiselle, pursued then our Count, who had hither∣to listened very attentively to Ma∣demoiselle: I should never have believed that your Royal Highness would have laughed at me so o∣penly. How, Mademoiselle, for ha∣ving entirely devoted my self to
your Royal Highness, the Fideli∣ty with which I have acted here∣in, merits, methinks, something less than so clear a Mockery, and which will render me the Sport and Laughing-stock of all the Court; and you still ask me, from whence proceeds the Cause of my Sadness. You stab, if I may dare to say it, the Ponyard into my Bosom, and you inform▪ your self of the Cause of my Death. In short, you treat me as the basest of all men. And to render the Affront you do me the more sensible, you will still force me to the cruel Confusion of telling it you my self. Ha! Mademoiselle, how severe is this Usage for a Per∣son who has acted so sincerely with you. All my Actions that respected your Royal Highness, were such as became me. I know you as one of the greatest Princesses of all the Earth; and I know my self for a mere younger Brother, that owes
you all, by all manner of Reasons. But, tho' a younger Brother, and a mere Gentleman, Nature has gi∣ven me a heart high enough, and well enough placed, not to suffer nor do any unworthy thing. But what do you mean, replyed Ma∣demoiselle? It seems, by your Talk, that I have done you some great Injury, in granting you a thing which is of the utmost Importance to me, and whereof I have made a Secret to all the Earth. Hitherto you had appeared to me very gal∣lant, but at this time, I confess to you what you demand preferrably to any other. In the mean time, what would be a subject of Joy to many others, is to you, only an occasion of Complaints. The Truth is, I know not what must be done to give you Satisfaction. For Hea∣vens sake, Mademoiselle, answered the Count of Lauzun, Do not insult any more over a Wretch; your
Royal Highness may divert your self as long as you please with me, I consent to it with all my heart; but, I only demand, that she would have the goodness to revoke a Raillery, that would occasion all the World, as well as you, to ridi∣cule me, and treat me as a Fool. And once again, Mademoiselle, I have not received all those Marks of your Favour, with which your Royal Highness has honoured me, than as Effects of your Generosity and of a particular Goodness, and whereof, I have never merited the least part; and all the good Re∣ception nor the Esteem your Roy∣al Highness has declared you had for me, have never made me for∣get who you are, nor who I am. If this has made me take too great Liberties, it was without design, and I desire of you, Mademoiselle, to punish me for it, after any other manner, as your Royal Highness
shall think fit: I shall undergo your Judgment to the banishing my self from your sight for ever; I will even dye for to expiate the faults that I may have committed, tho' involuntarily, towards your Royal Person. I only demand of your Royal Highness, the honour of your Remembrance; and that you be persuaded, that you will never find any one more subdued to your Wills, or so inseparable from your Interests, as I am. Mademoiselle, who had thither to pretended not to understand what the Count of Lauzun meant, and who had even laughed at him in the beginning, seeing that he spoke seriously; and that considering the manner he had expressed his Grief, it was effectively sincere, and with∣out Fiction; that Princess was so lively moved, and that laughing humour giving place to her Com∣passion, was changed in a mome
into a real serious one. And, as what she had done at first was on∣ly to try him, and that besides, she desired nothing more, than to make sure of the Heart of the Count of Lauzun; she had no sooner thought her self sure of it, than that Tender∣ness that she had taken Care to conceal in the bottom of her heart, discovered it self at length in favour of him, And that languishing that Lauzun had in all his Face, having touch'd her to the Quick, Made∣moiselle viewing him with a more favourable Eye than she had yet done, after having kept silence a long time, that Princess said to him; Ha! My Lord, how great an Injury do you do the Sincerity of my Proceedings towards you, and how ill are you acquainted with the Sentiments my heart has con∣ceived for you? If you knew the Injury you do me in using me thus, you would punish your self
for the Affront you do me. How? You turn into Railery the greatest Affection in the World, wherein I have used all the Sincerity that was possible for me? I used Violence upon my self, before I did what I have done for you. But at length, Affection got the Mastery over my Haughtiness; I forgot my self, if I may so say, to give you the strong∣est Proof of my Affection, that I have ever given any body. I have seen Persons, and you know it, of a Rank, and no way inferiour to mine, who have done all they were able to merit my Esteem, and yet they have laboured in vain. And▪ I give you not only that E∣steem, but I give you my self. Af∣ter this, say that I laugh at you, and that I hazzard your Reputa∣tation; I much rather hazzard my self. However, I pass over all these Considerations that oppose it: And why that?
But only to raise you to a Rank, whereto according to all Appear∣ances, you ought not to pretend, tho' you merit more. The Count of Lauzun not daring yet believe what he heard, or at least, making show as if he did not, after having seen that Mademoiselle had done speak∣ing, made answer in these terms; O Mademoiselle! How ingenious are you in tormenting a Wretch? and it must be confessed, that Per∣sons of your Condition have the Advantage, in that they may di∣vert themselves agreeably, but cru∣elly for those who are the Subjects. Your Royal Highness will render me happy in Idea and in Imagina∣tion for a moment, to render me un∣fortunate in effect all the rest of my days. And, for Heavens sake, once again, Mademoiselle, put me rather to death at one blow, it would be much more sweet to me, than to see my self languish, and be the
laughing-stock of all the World. I have ever had the desire of sa∣crificing my self for your Royal Highness, but since I am thought unworthy of that Honour, at least be pleased to take notice of my good will. I say it again, Made∣moiselle, that I have never lost the remembrance of what you are, and of what I am; and thus I have never been so audacious to aspire to that happiness, whereof you take pleasure to flatter me, only to divert your self. He pronoun∣ced these words with an action that shewed effectively, that his Soul was in a great trouble, and that the Grief he suffered was most bitter; and Mademoiselle, who ob∣served him very strictly, easily perceived it, insomuch, that she suffer'd to see him suffer, which she let him know sufficiently by her words: How, said that Prin∣cess, with an action altogether pas∣sionate,
What must I then do, my Lord, for to perswade you? You take as much care to torment your self, as I take to procure you Re∣pose. I tell you once again, that I am a sincere Princess, and that what I have told you is but con∣formably to my intentions, and I will give such Proofs of it, that you shall have no reason to doubt thereof. Do you think I would have done for you so favourably as I have, if I had not had for you Sentiments of a real tenderness? No, pursued that Princess, shed∣ding some tears that she could not retain, because she saw the Count of Lauzun in the utmost affliction, and still obstinate in his Errour, that she laughed at him; No, I do not disguise my thought; and since that my words have not been able to perswade you of the real Sentiments of my heart, I must bor∣row the Succours of my Eyes, and
the Tears that you force me to shed may be Witnesses thereof, against which you can make no Objection. Do you believe me, my Lord, after having given you such strong Proofs of my Love? Will you still doubt of the sincerity of my procedure, after having heard it from my Mouth, and that my Eyes themselves have not spared their Cares and their Power, not to leave you in any doubt? An∣swer me then, if you please: this so ingenious Declaration, and, methinks, pretty extraordinary, Does it deserve you should add Faith to it? Do I acquit my self well of my Promise? You may remember, without doubt, that when you told me, that only Kings and Sovereigns could justly pretend to the possession of Great Princesses, I made you answer, that you were mistaken, that they were not the only Persons, and
there were others, who, by their own Merit, and without the help of Extraction, might pretend there∣to; and that amongst a great num∣ber that were found, I saw none that might with more reason than your self. I spoke to you so for to animate you, and I speak at pre∣sent for to make you happy, if the possession of a Person of my Cir∣cumstances can render you so: I will share the Trouble with you, and labour in concern to that end. Act boldly, and without fear, do all that you can on your side, and assure your self, on the Faith of a Princess, that I will never neglect any thing on mine; Are you sa∣tisfy'd, my Lord? And after what I have now said, can you still doubt of my Frankness? Ha! Mademoi∣selle, cryed Monsieur de Lauzun, casting himself at her feet, over∣joyed at so tender and so obliging a Discourse as Mademoiselle had
newly pronounced in favour of him; What can I do to acknow∣ledge the Excess of your Goodness? How, Mademoiselle, shall it be said, that he, of all men, whom your Royal Highness renders most hap∣py, should be the most ungrate∣ful, through the impossibility of not being able to do any thing to shew his acknowledgments? the greatest Princess in the World shall raise a Wretch to the high∣est degree of happiness, and he shall have nothing but Wishes for the acknowledgment of so extraordinary a Benefit? How happy do you make me, Made∣moiselle, by the Excess of so un∣parallel'd a Generosity! But how severe will this high point of Glo∣ry be to me, as long as I shall not be able to do any thing to acknow∣ledge the Declaration that your Royal Highness has now made in favour of me? It is too much to
my Advantage, and I find it too charming, to remain without an Answer; and Gratitude ought to oblige me to say at present, what a profound Respect and Duty it self have made me keep silent so long a time: And since that I can do nothing for your Royal High∣ness, that can show you my Gra∣titude, I ought to tell you, at least, and discover to you, the Sentiments of my Heart. The Truth is, Mademoiselle, that since I have had the honour of apply∣ing my self to your Royal High∣ness, I have remarked so many Charms, that what I did formerly out of duty, I have done since, out of a more sweet and more agreeable Motive. Yes, Made∣moiselle, pardon if you please my Transports, if I speak to you so freely. I saw you, considered you, and admired you, during a long time, your Royal Highness has too
many Charms to forbear doing so: the Beauties of your Mind which are joyned to those of your Body, an admirable Composition of all Beauties together. And thus, Mademoiselle, I have had Eyes for to see, Ears for to hear, a Mind for to admire, and a Heart for to love; I have used all my Efforts for to defend my self against this Passion, when it was in the Bud, not out of any man∣ner of Repugnance; for, I know too well, that besides that, you me∣rit the Adorations of all the Earth; I could never be set on Fire, by so worthy and glorious a Flame. I might add hereunto, tho' your Royal Highness may tax me of Presumption, that if Nature has put so much Inequality between your Condition and mine, it has given me a Heart sufficiently noble and elevated to aspire
only at great things, and could ne∣ver yet resolve to address it selfto any other than your Royal High∣ness. Yes, Mademoiselle, I confess it at your Feet, after the sincere declaration you have now made up∣on the subject of your Inclinations. I should never have dared to have spoke of them, if your Procedure had not given me the License, tho I should have seen no other re∣medy to my disease than languish∣ing, during the rest of my days. I loved rather to train out a dying Life in a mortal Silence, than to hazzard the displeasing you, and to draw upon my self for one sole Moment, your Displeasure, by the least word that might have ac∣quainted you with my passion. And, as I have hitherto done, I will carefully endeavour to compose my Eyes, and all my Actions, for fear, that unknown to my heart, they do tell you something of the
Sense it has of you. For what Ap∣pearance, Mademoiselle, That a mere younger Brother, whose only Portion is his Sword, should dare to aspire to the Possession of a Prin∣cess, who never knew how to look upon crowned Heads, but with Indifference, and who has refused the greatest Matches in Europe? What Appearance, say I▪ that after the Refusal of so many Sovereigns, amongst whom, there were those, who by the Rank they held, might without doubt, pretend with some Justice to the possession of your Royal Highness: However, all the Earth knows, that you have ever had a Heart firm against all their Pursuits, as if the Earth did not bear a man worthy of you. Thus, Mademoiselle, after so per∣fect a knowledge of all these things, would not all the World have bla∣med me, if it had known any thing of the Sentiments of my Soul to∣wards
your Royal Highness? And should not I have reason to fear all things from your Resentment, if I had been so rash as to disco∣ver it to you? Yes, Mademoiselle, I tell it you again, that with what horrible sequel of Torments soe∣ver I foresaw that my cruel Si∣lence would be undoubtably fol∣lowed, I prepared my Soul to a strong and respectful resistance: It was much more to my Advan∣tage to love you with a conceal∣ed Passion, and unknown to you, than to hazard a Declaration ca∣pable of displeasing you, and of interdicting my self the entirely free access that I had to your Roy∣al Highness. It is true, Mademoi∣selle, that in this perplexity I suffer'd inconceivable pains: and, to speak with an open heart, I now not if I could have resisted them long without dying; but the fear of a greater mischief modera∣ted,
in some manner, that I lay under. Mademoiselle, who had thitherto listned very attentively, without interrupting him, spoke then in this manner; The Choice I have made is not a Choice made in haste, I have had it long in hand, and have made more reflexion on it, than you may at first imagine. First of all, I observed you very strictly, and did not at length declare my self, till after much thought upon what I was going to do. I have not chosen alone; to the end, that you might add the more Credit upon the advice of several, than if it had been mine alone. And those whom I have consulted herein, have entirely confirmed me in my de∣sign. It is your Wit, your Actions, your Virtue, it is your self that I would have to give me Counsel; and I have found you so rational in all things, since I have observed you, that, far from repenting of what I have now said, on the contra∣ry, I fear that I cannot do enough to make you sensibly acquainted with my Afflictions. As to that Inequality of Conditions, which puts you to so much Trouble, do not think of it, I desire you, and be assured, that I will not leave
a thing imperfect, that I have endea∣voured with so much Pleasure, and which I will endeavour to the end, with Care, and as an Affair whereof I pre∣tend to make that Fortune, and the Subject of my Repose, relye only upon that. What the Lustre of Crowns, which you newly mentioned, was not able to effect upon my mind, your Me∣rits does excellently perform; and my Heart, which, till to day, has preser∣ved it self in it's entire Liberty, mau∣gre all the Addresses of Kings and So∣vereigns, has not, however, been able to avoid the becoming the Captive of a mere Younger Brother, as you say. If all Younger Brothers resembled you, My Lord, there are few men who would be the eldest. I do not pretend to make your Panegyrick; but, I am obliged to give you this first of all to Truth. Secondly, to your self, that you may not be ignorant, that I know you sufficiently to judge of you. Third∣ly, to the Choice I have made, to let all the Earth fee, that I did not make it till after a long Examination, and after having found it worthy of me, and to my own Satisfaction. For it is
very just, methinks, and I believe you so reasonable, as to permit me the same thing over you, as you have per∣mitted your self over me. You have said all that your Wit did imagine of me, my pretentions, and quality; and a hundred other, the finest and most obliging things imaginable, without it's lying in my power to hinder you from doing so: wherefore, you must give me leave to make Returns. Ha, said the Count of Lauzun! How inge∣nious is Your Royal Highness in gi∣ving your self Pleasure, and the Pre∣text of Returns is agreeably perform∣ed. It is true, if I durst say so, that since that you have by an effect of your Goodness, and of an unexampled Generosity, made a Choice so little worthy of you, it seems to be your Interest, to elevate it by excessive Praises, as high as your beautiful Mouth is able; to the end, that the particular Approbation your penetra∣ting Will shall make thereof, may procure that of all the Universe. And since that Your Royal Hand does de∣stine me to a place, whereof the Thought alone does make me trem∣ble,
out of Fear and Respect, it is re∣quisite, that that fair hand which pre∣pares me for so high a Happiness, may not be alone to act in so uncommon an Action; that is to say, Mademoiselle, that being so unhappy as not to merit that Your Royal Highness should so much as think of me, and that not∣withstanding all these Reasons, you have had the Goodness to destine me to the supremest Degree of Happiness, you ought, Mademoiselle, not for the Love of me, but for the Love of your self, esteem me; for, it is from your Esteem alone, that the Choice you have made of me will receive all it's Value: and it is thereby, that all the Earth will see me with less Pain and Torment mounted in so short a time to so high a point of Grandure. And this so sudden Elevation, and this so high Esteem will make me find a free Access into the minds even of such per∣sons who will be at first surprized thereat. This is the only Course, Ma∣demoiselle, to find wherewith to satisfie you, and to hinder you from having reason to repent.
If it is only requisite to esteem you, My Lord, not to repent my self, said Made∣moiselle, I may boast, I shall never repent; and to tell you all, it is sufficient to love you tenderly, to be as well satisfyed with my Choice, as I promise my self And for to oblige you to do the same, I am sure to live the rest of my days, the most hap∣py Princess in the World. Hitherto you have only had words, which have flatter∣ed  Ef∣fects.  you see the Sin∣cerity of my Heart, after a manner as will take from you all Scruple; and I pretend hereafter, that Effects shall be your only Assurances. Think of it only, if you have a mind to make your Fortune, and do not lose time, if you love me; the King loves you, order your Business so as to have his Consent, and be assured of mine, and I will do therein all that I am able. O Mademoiselle! cryed then the Count of Lauzun, casting himself a second time at her Feet; What can I do to acknowledge all the strict Obligations that I have to your Royal Highness, after having received such sensible Proofs thereof: How! The greatest
Princess on the Earth, in Quality, Estate, and Merit, shall debase her self to come and seek out a private man, for to ho∣nour him with her Favour! Ha, 'tis too much! But, she offers him not on∣ly her Favour, her Friendship, but like∣wise her heart privatively to all others, and her Affections: and for the utmost Testimony of so inestimable a Gene∣rosity, this same Princess is willing to give him her Royal hand, and gene∣rally all that is in her Power. Ha, Fortune! How prodigious art thou to me at present, and thou 'rt as cruel, since by giving me all thou leavest me, in the Impossibility of testifying my just Acknowledgment otherwise than by desires alone! The Present that thou makest me, is of an infinite Value, but it would be more conformable both to my Power and my little Merit, if it was less, by reason that I might con∣ceive some sorts of hopes of acquitting my self. The Truth is, Mademoiselle, that your Royal Highness sets me to day above Happiness it self; but, for Heavens sake, give me leave, Made∣moiselle, to complain of the excess of your Goodness, and to tell you, that
I should be much more happy, if I was less so, by reason that I should relish my Fortune with all it's Sweetness, if it was ordinary; whereas, I see my self over-whelmed with the weight of that which your Royal Highness offers me, so much is it above me and my hopes. And as I am not able to make any Re∣turns, be pleased to accept the Solemn Vow that I make to your Royal High∣ness, of all the Moments of my Life. The Gift I make you is small, in Com∣parison of what I have received; but, it is sincere: And the Exactness with which I shall perform my Promise, shall persuade your Royal Highness, and never leave you the least doubt upon this Subject. You see what an admirable Progress the Count of Lauzun had made in Ma∣demoiselle's Mind in so short a time: He had not only reason to hope, but had likewise nothing to fear, since that he had obliged that Princess to declare her self after a manner that much surpas∣sed all his Hopes. Insomuch, that see∣ing himself entirely assured on that side, and no longer doubting but that he was really beloved by Mademoiselle
after the tender and sincere Declarati∣on he had heard from that Princesses own Mouth, his thoughts were only how to procure the King's Consent, without which it was impossible to come to any conclusion. Shortly after, an opportunity was offered, or, to say bet∣ter, he procured one himself, seeing there was onely that wanting to his entire happiness. He was, as I have said, one day near the King, where, after having said a great many things of Mademoiselle, which gave sufficiently to understand, that there was something more than ordinary between that Princess and him. But the King, who has a Judg∣ment, and one of the most penetrating Wits, suspected something; and, as he has alwayes done Monsieur de Lauzun the honour of loving him, his Majesty told him, laughing, But Lauzun, Me∣hinks thou'rt in no i terms with my Cousin, for by what We hear thee speak of her, thou must necessarily have more Access to her than several others. Sir, nswered Monsieur de Lauzun, I am so appy as not to be out of her Favour; nd that Princess does me the honour
of Treating me after such a manner, that I believe, if your Majesty is favourable to me, I may pretend to a happiness that has not the like. How, replied the King, continuing to laugh, Can'st thou aspire to become my Cousin? Ha, Sir, answered the Count of Lauzun, God forbid, that I should have a thought above my condition, and which would render me criminal, should I dare to bring it to light my self, if it was true, that I had concei∣ved it. I know too well my Duty, to to my King and all the Royal Fami∣ly; and besides this Duty and Respect, I know likewise, that I am but a Beg∣garly Younger Brother, who has no∣thing but what he is indebted for to the Liberalities altogether royal of your Majesty; without whom, I know that I should be nothing. I had nothing when I devoted my self to your Ser∣vice, and at present, I may boast of having something; or, to speak more just, I may ffirm, that I am too rich, since I have the honour to be in your Favour. All the Benefits that I receive dayly from your Majesty, make me believe, that I have the happiness of
having some share in your good Opi∣nion. Thus, Sir, both my Duty and my just Acknowledgment, will not suffer me ever to pretend to any thing, without your Majesties Allowance. But, Sir, if it was permitted me to re∣peat once again, with all the respect that becomes me, if Your Majesty is not contrary to me, I may call my self the most happy of all men. Madam de Montespan being there, and having list∣ned without speaking to all this Dia∣logue, and who, as well as the King, was ravished with Astonishment, to see after what passionate and submissive manner, the Count of Lauzun had spo∣ken, was sensibly moved, and this made her say to the King; And why, Sir, should you oppose his Fortune? Let him pursue it; there is not a Per∣son who has more Merit than himself: What Hurt does this do you? Well, said the King, Go Lauzun; I assure thee, that instead of being against thee, I will be as favourable as I can. Ha! Sir, answered the Count of Lauzun, Kings and Sovereigns may promise all, without being obliged to perform, ex∣cept they have a mind, since they are
above Laws. Go, Count of Lauzun, said Madam de Montespan, the King gives his Consent, push on your Fortune. But Madam, replyed Lauzun, I can do nothing without my Masters Leave. The King seeing this Person full of so laudable and submissive an Ambition, and having ever honoured him with a cordial Kindness, he said to him; Well then Lauzun, push on thy For∣tune, I assure thee by my Faith, that I will aid thee all I can, and thou shalt see the Effects. In your Opinion, was there ever any Man more happy than our Lauzun? or who had had so lucky a progress in an Enterprize where all Appearances were directly contrary? And might not they promise themselves an entire hap∣piness there, where any other would have found his Ruine? Hereupon he went to carry her the good News of having got the King's Word. This Princess never testified more Joy than in this occasion. They remained some dayes in this coon, in giving mutually▪ all the innocent Testimonies of a real Love, managing all things after such a manner, as that they might compleat
and finish their Designs by a happy Marriage. Now, Madam happening to dye a∣bout that time, the Count of Lauzun went immediately to Mademoiselle, and spoke to her in this manner: I perceive, at length, Mademoiselle, that Destiny being jealous of my happiness, has at present declared it self against me; Ma∣dam's Death will entirely render abor∣tive all the glorious Designs that your Royal Highness has conceived for me. The Death of that Princess has left you a place more worthy of you, and more suitable to your Condition, than that you designed your self. You are willing to have a younger Brother, it is fit you should find a great Prince in this young∣er Brother: and your expectation can∣not be better satisfied, than by the Roy∣al person of Monsieur the Kings only Bro∣ther It is with that Great Prince that you▪ may enjoy a real Repose and a solid hap∣piness, and more proportionably to your Quality, if there be none who are so to your merit. My fall is uch the more sensible to me in that I fall from he highest degree of Glory whereunto your Royal highness had raised me, into
the greatest Confusion, by seeing my self so unfortunately frustrated of the fruits of my hopes: but in this strange Reverse of Fortune I find therein a kind of a Con∣solation, Mademoiselle, that having re∣ceived all from your Royal Highness, by the gift you had already made me of your Royal Person, I was infinitly ob∣liged and indebted to you, tho I had long before given my self to you through the inequality of the Present you had made, and of that you had received. But at present I pretend to acquit my self of all towards you, you have shown a unpa∣rallel'd generosity when you gave your self to me a yonger Brother. This wretch∣ed Gentleman having nothing to offer you in requital of your Liberalities, has at length resolved to restore you to your self, that he might contribute by this ge∣nerous restitution to the repose of your Royal Highness. I will not give you the trouble of disengaging your self from your promise, I do believe you to have too fine a so to have any such thought, but I will do my duty with disingage∣ing my self. Do not think, Mademoiselle, that I have any other motive than your interest, which makes me act in this
manner; I have a tender and sensible heart, more than your Royal Highness can imagine; though that in the loss I am now going to have, I foresee my ruine. Yes, Mademoselle, languishing will succeed all the joys that your Roy∣al Highness had caused by the favours, and this heart animated with such high and glorious hopes, is going to plunge it self, perish, and consume by linger∣ing Torments. Go then, great Princess, there is none that can fill it so worthily as you; it is your due by all manner of Reasons. And after this Loss of Mon∣sieurs, he can only be comforted by the Enjoyment of your Royal Highness. He alone merits your Affections, and you alone are worthy of his. Go, Mademoiselle, once again, live happy the rest of your days. May your Marriage with that Great Prince render you as well satisfied as you deserve, and I wish. The Count of Lauzun during all this discourse, made appear so much love, and so real a regret for his loss that he said, and thought without doub, that he was going to have; that at the same instant Mademoiselle made him answer, O Lau∣zun! I did not expect such a good mor∣ning
from you; I thought that my repose was dearer to you then to interrupt it in this manner. Methinks that you only seek to disquiet me more and more by allarms, that tho' they be very ground∣less incite me to trouble. I neither think nor live but for your sake, and to put you in a condition of envying no Bodies fate. It is neither Splendor nor Quality that I seek for, you know that I have often re∣fused them, that I am likely to do so still: Are you satisfied, my Lord? and is this declaration sufficiently ample to remove all your Suspitions? I will still do more, wch you shall suddenly see. At these words, the Count of Lauzun, casting himself at Mademoiselle's Feet, I ask your pardon, said he to her, for my light Conduct; im∣pute it only, I beseech you, to the excessive Love I have for your Royal Highness, If I loved less, I should be less in fear, and and should live more in Repose and without trouble; but the force of my passi∣on will not permit me in any manner to be witho llarms, till I am arrived to that happy moment, which is to assure me peaceably all the promises of your Royal Highness. I will go endeavour it with fervency, that I may leave you to
enjoy peaceably that Repose which I have so often interrupted. In some few days after, Mademoiselle, being willing to remove all appearance of fear from Mr. de Lauzun, begged of the King that he would desire Monsieur to desist from his pursuit, & not to think otherwise of her, than as having the ho∣nour of being her Relation; which the King did, whereat Monsieur seemed som∣thing displeased, without knowing from whence it proceeded; in the mean while, Mademoiselle failed not to tell Monsieur de Lauzun what she had desired of the King, which set him quite at rest, where∣with she was much pleafed. Now being willing at length to put an end to their Desires, they demanded of the King, the Performance of his word. His Majesty, seeing that Mademoiselle desired it ardently, willingly acquiesced; insomuch that there remained nothing but marrying, and the Count of Lauzun had a Dispensation in his pocket from the Arch-bishop; and the ing's word. What was assured on his part, was only delayed that the Ceremony might be made with the more Lustre and Pomp, insomuch, that it being publickly
known, the Princes and the Princesses of the Blood were so earnest with the King against it, that they made him change his mind; insomuch that His Majestie, having one Evening sent for Mademoi∣selle to the Louvre, He made her his Ex∣cuses: The first word that this Princess uttered after having heard this severe Sentence, was; And what will become of Monsieur de Lauzun? I'le take care, replied the King, that he shall have rea∣son to be satisfied. But, Cousin, Will you promiso nothing without me? I promise nothing, said that afflicted Princess, going out of the King's Cham∣ber in a pet. And as for Mr. de Lauzun, the King told him, for to comfort him, that he should not think of his Loss, and that he would put him into such a con∣dition that he should envy no Bodie's Fortune. Do not you admire this sudden Change of Fortune, which hitherto had smiled upon these Lovers, and suffered Ship-wrack just as they thought them∣selves in safety: And by a turn which ne∣ver had had the like, all the pleasures that these two hearts were just upon en∣joying together, were changed into bit∣terness,
that will never end as long as they live. If you have made reflection upon that first word of Mademoiselle, when the King announced to her that fatall Sen∣tence, she asked, what would be the fate of her Lover; and afterwards, what will become of me my self? as if the union of their Bodies together was to make their mutual happiness. This, me thinks, ought to be called sincere and real Love; and there is little met with of this Stamp, principally in that Sex; I could wish they would take this lesson for themselves in imitation of so great a Princess. Will not you confess, that all the trou∣bles and cares of Mademoiselle and the Count of Lauzun were but ill recompen∣ced? and that they had nothing to desire but an entire applause of all they had projected? but when they were upon the point of arriving at the Port, they were cast away. In a few days after, though that this Match was broken off, the rumour still run amongst the people, that it would still be effected; the truth is, that some spoke of it One way, and others another. The reason they had was, the kindness the King had for the Count of Lauzun▪
and that all these appearances, were only faigned, which they believed the King did to hinder people from talking of the inequality of Mademoiselle with Monsieur Lauzun. But to make appear that the King's proceeding was no fiction, but pure effect, He resolved to give proofs written with his own hand, not only to Persons of the Court, but to the Pub∣lick, by the Letter I here insert; wherein he explains himself very openly. The King's Letter. AS what has passed within these five or six days, by a Design that my Cousin of Montpensier had formed, of marrying the Count of Lauzun, One of the Cap∣tains of my Life-guard, will without doubt make a great noise every where, and being that my Conduct therein may be malignly interpreted, and blamed▪ by those who are not well informed thereof, I have thought my self obliged to inform all my Ministers of it who serve▪ me abroad. It is about ten or twelve days since that my Cousin, not having yet the boldness speak to me her self, of a thing she knew would infinitly sur∣trize me, wrote me a long Letter for to de∣clare
to me the resolution she said she had taken as to that marriage, beseeehing me, by all the reasons she could bethink her self, to give my Consent, conjuring me in the mean time, till that I should be plea∣sed to agree to it, that I would have the goodness not to speak to her of it, when I met with her at the Queens Apartment. My Answer, by a Letter I wrote to her, was, that I desired she would think better of it; and above all to be careful, not to be too rash in an Affair of that nature, which irrecoverably might be followed by long Re∣pentances. I contented my self with say∣ing no more to her, hoping I might do it better by word of Mouth, and with so ma∣ny considerations that I had to represent to her, reduce her by gentle means to change her Sentiments. She continued however, by new Letters, and all other ways that could come into her mind, to press me extreamly to give consent to what she desired, as the onely thing that could, said she, make the Happiness and Repose of her Life, as my Refusal to give it would render her the most unhappy Person upon the Earth. At length, seeing she went too fast, in my mind, in her pursuit, after ha∣ving found the means of interessing on her
side the principal Nobility of my Kingdom; she and the Count of Lauzun detached four Persons from amongst the Prime No∣bility, who were the Dukes of Crequi and Montauzier, the Marshal d' Albret, and the Marquess de Guitry, Grand Master of my Guard-robe, for to come and repre∣sent to me, that, after having consented to the marriage of my Cousin de Guise, not only without making any difficulty, but with pleasure, I resisted this, that her Sister so ardently desired; I should evidently make known to the World that I set a great difference between the younger Brothers of a Sovereign Family, and the Officers of my Crown, which Spain doth not do, on the contrary, preferred Grandees before all Foreign Princes, and that it was impossi∣ble but that this distinction must mortifie extremely all the Nobility of my Kingdom. They thereupon alledged to me, that they had in their favour several Examples, not onely of Princesses of the Blood Royal, who have done Gentlemen the honour of marrying them, but even of Queen Dow∣agers of France. For conclusion, the In∣stances of these four Persons were so pres∣sing in their Reasons, so perswasive upon the principle of not disobliging all the
French Nobility, that I yielded at length to give, at least, a Tacit Consent, to this Match, wondring at my Cousin's Passion, and saying onely, that she was at the Age of Forty five years, and might do what she pleased. From that moment the Affair wa held for concluded; they begun to make preparations for it; and all the Court were to pay their Respects to my Couzin, an made Complements to the Count of Lau∣zun. The day following, I was informed, that my Couzin had told several Persons▪ that she had only consented to this Marri∣age, because it was my Will to have it so I caused her to be called, and not think∣ing fit to speak to her but in the presenc of Witnesses, who were the Duke o Montausier, the Sieurs, le Tellier, Li∣onne, and Louvois, not having foun others in the way. She strongly denied ha¦ving said any such thing, and assured m on the contrary, that she had declared and would alwayes declare to the World that I had done all that was possible to per∣swade her from that Design, and oblig her to change her Resolution. But, being yesterday informed from divers parts, tha several People entertained an Opinion tha was very injurious to me, that all the re¦sistances
I had made in this Affair, were only a Feint and a Comedy, and that in effect I was very glad to procure so great a Fortune to the Count of Lauzun, whom all think I have a great Love and Esteem for, as it is true I have. I resolved imme∣diately, seeing my Honour interessed there∣in, to break off the Match, and to have no more consideration either for the satis∣faction of the Princess, or for the satisfa∣ction of the Count, whom I can and will otherwise reward. I sent to call my Cousin, I declared to her, that I would not suffer she should pass on to the making this Match; neither would I consent she should ever marry any Prince that is my Subject, but that she might choose in all the qualified Nobility of France, whom she would, except the Count of Lauzun, and that I would lead her my self to the Church. It is superflu∣ous to tell you with what Grief she re∣ceived the thing, how many Tears she shed, and Sobs she gave, and fell upon her knees, as if I had stabbed her a hundred times with a Ponyard,
she would have moved me, I resisted all; and after she was gone, I caused the Duke of Crequi, the Marquess of Guitry, the Duke of Montazier, to come in, the Marshal d' Albret not being to be found, I declar'd to them my Intention for to tell it to the Count of Lauzun, whom I my self after∣wards acquainted with it; and I may say, that he received it with all the Constancy and Submission that I could desire. This Letter left no Suspicion in the Publick, and it was quickly seen that there was nothing more to pretend, and that the Match was quite broke off. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. Whereas some few Errours have escaped in the foregoing sheets, the Reader is desired to impute them to the Author's Absence during the Im∣pression.
