q23 12636833 64894
THE Quakers Farewel to England, OR Their Voyage to New Jersey, scituate on the Continent of Virginia, and bordering upon New England. To the Tune of, The Independes Voyage to New England. COme Friends let's away, Since our Yea and Nay I England is now slighted, To the Indians wee'll goe, And our Lights to them show, That they be no longer benighted. We'll teach them to Quake, And wry Mouthes to make, And pretend Inspiration; That the Priests that are there Shall readily swear, We worship the Gods of their Nation. For each FRITAZIER Is inspired there When the Spirit into him does enter, And turnes up his Eyes, And trembles likewise: A Syk without peradventure. Yet the Worlds People That worships at the Steeple, Will confidently aver it, (Though it be a thing uncivil) That it is the Devil That both of us call the Spirit. Yet be it what it will So we get our fill Of Riches, and good possessions; When occasion shall be, We can change, you shall see, Both Habits and Our Professions. The Country is good, There's no want of Food; 'Tis fit for the Righteous to live in. Nor need Sisters fear, But this Country Cheere Will make them plump and thriving. For 'tis very meete That such should well eate, And farther Propagation, Or else ISRAEL'S Race Will decay apace, And lowe us a mock to the Nation. There shall we be free, And enjoy LIBERTIE, No power our Will controules; Then what greater Bliss Could any of us wish, desire from our y Soules? With the HOPE and the TVRK We before made no work; But if either now comes near us, We'll let them both know, That power we have now Shall make them to Quake and fear us. Neither IVES nor HICKS With all their Tricks Shall baffle our Inspiration: We'll make them to bend If they date here contend, And come to a Recantation. These BAPTISTS, Alas! Had a very bad Case To prove no Christianity In Quakers in found, Since we have good ground For what we pretend to be. Then why do we stay, And make such delay, When we to a Canaan are going? For who stayes behind May afterwards find, That it may cause their undoing. They have proved already Our Faith is not steady; Therefore we no Christians can be. Then next they will prove, (If we do not remove) Us guilty of Heresie. Then will they perplex, And the Outward Man vex; We shall have no peace in our Quarters: But if we get away, The INFORMERS may Go hang themselves in their own Garters. In this Land we can live, Get Money and thrive, And follow our own Inventions In spite of all those That seek to oppose Our Zeal, or its pretentions. To New JERSET WITH speed Come all Friends that need. Wealth, or large Possessions; The Indians we'll make To serve us and Quake, And be Slaves to our Professions. What they have is our own. As plainly shall be shown; For before us, Israels Race The Canaanites did spoyle, And make them turmoyle For them in their own place. With Allowance. London, Printed for J. G. 1675.
