R70A 18478136 107825
An Elegy, and Acrostick, and also an Anagram, On the Death of that Faithful and worthy Minister and Servant of GOD, MR. JOSEPH CARYL. REader, Expect no quaint heroick Verse Of Mine, should deck Renowned Caryl's Herse; Expect not from my Tender Years such Rymes, As from the Learned Sages of the Times: I having yet, not Thrice Five Winters told. But blame me not as being over-bold; What though the subject be Divine, and fit; Most stable, solid, and accurate Wits They all were Silent, therefore I step't forth To Weep o're, and Lament our loss in's Worth. SOrrow, and Affection's my Aonian band; His Worth, our Loss, my fork'd-Parnassus and My Helicon; and my Castalian-Springs, The Word of God, the supream King of Kings, Oh First, and Last, All's all, Tri-um-Jehove! Thou God of Goodness, Wisdom, Power, and Love, Assist my poor, my weak, and feeble Quill, And give me Strength, as thou hast gave me Will; That my Stentorian-Voice may Stellify Caryl on Earth, who's Glorify'd on High. CARYL's extinct! resplendent Phebus, How Is't, that thou dreadest not thy downfal now? Our Sun is set! in greatness, influence, And glory far beyond the reach of Sence: In all the Good that e're thou do'st, he did Excel, as thou the Stars in Day-time hid. His Influence, was Sp'ritual; and did tend T'Eternity: but thine with Time must end. Cease thy Diurnal course; Now, now there needs A swift retraction of thy fiery-steeds. Either extinguish, or eclipse thy Light, That we may Mourn in obscure shades of night. It is well known, his greatest Work hath been, To make Christ Lovely, and disparage Sin: He always labour'd, all men to convince O'th dang'rous stratagems of the Stygian-Prince. He did declare the Mind and Will of GOD, And shew'd the meaning of his Word and Rod: He was another Cato; he reprov'd All Vice, impartially, (as't him behov'd.) He was our Faithful Sentinel, he stood Upon his Watch-tow're, alwayes for our good. He Warn'd us of, he Labour'd too, Shew'd how We might Prevent, or else Prepare for now Come, or approaching Judgments: Now he's gone, God may command the rest to let's alone. He was a Pillar, he did support the Frame O'th glorious House, we nominate by God's Name: But now He's fal'n, we may suspect God will Go on t'remove our Chief Supporters still. His Doctrine was Substantial, alwayes founded, Clearly demonstrated, and firmly grounded Upon the Sacred Word of God, which doth Admit no Falsity, the Word of Truth; Which faithfully, and in veracity, He suited to each ones capacity. He wisely did distribute unto all. The share and portion to their lot did fall: Reproof, and Terror, to those to whom 'twas due; Advice, and Counsel, whom't belong'd unto; Comfort and Cons'lation he did divide To whom 'twas due; and unto none beside: e meted out to all their due; he was A Boanerges, and a Barnabas. He Liv'd according unto what he Teach'd, And put in Practice th'Doctrine that he Preach'd How Holy, and Exemplary was his Life! How Meek, how Humble, Patient, hating Strife! How Publick-spirited, Watchful, Laborious! How Wise, and not Erroneous, nor Censorious! At last, without fear, dread, despair, or horror, He fac't, and overcame the King of Terror. And as to Gifts, and Parts, God had bestow'd Them plenteously upon him, and endow'd Him with a studious, sharp, and ingenious Wit: Obscurest things were easie unto it. A vast-retaining Mem'ry, and a wise And prudent Heart, (with noble Faculties;) His Will conform'd to God's and his Affections Were Regular; so also were his Actions. And as to Learning, th'University Know'th well his progress and proficiency: He was a walking-Library, past Dimension Of Vulgar and of common Apprehension: Witness that learned Exposition fame Hath (to eternize his ne're-dying Name) Made famous th'row-out Europe; ev'n 'mongst those, Who are the Scriptures, and the Churches foes. By which Twelve Books on Job, he did obtain Such Honour, as but few (or none) do gain. And thus confus'dly, I've n brief run o're, Part of his Worth; but now I'le add no more: For some will not believe't, but will esteem him Of little worth, and greatly flatter'd deem him: And such I'le leave to these their thoughts of heart, And come a little to th' Elegiack part. According to his Worth, so is our Cross, And therefore great, yea, very great's our Loss. True; in our time, brave Worthy's do resort Unto the Happy, to the Heav'nly Court: But wherefore CARYL, did'st thou thus bereave us Of so great Good, thus suddenly to leave us? But stay, sad Genius! Call back that Expression: He's tak'n away, because of our Transgression. The Sins that he Reprov'd, have call'd away Him from his Work, in this most Needful day. Oh that all Heads were Waters, and all Eyes Fountains of Tears! That our Heart-rending Cryes, Commix't with Sighs, & Groans, & Tears might drownd This World of Sin, lest it this World Confound. Come Holy Mourners, you that have the Arts Of Weeping Eyes, and broken Bleeding-Hearts. Come, here's Occasion for your Lamentation; CARYL's expir'd! that son of Consolation And Thunder: Come, weep o're, weep o're the Crimes Of these Heart-breaking, these Rebellious times. Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, now more mild by far Than many Men, in this base Ir'n age are. But CARYL is not Dead; his Name shall live Throughout all Ages: Fate it shall survive. He having done his Work, is fal'n Asleep; (Ah! Can our Adamantine hearts not Weep!) For when th'Arch-Angels Trump shall sound from Heav'n, When Sun, Moon, Stars, are of their Light bereav'n; When all, this all, by Fire shall be destroy'd; And all be stripp'd of all they have enjoy'd: When Jesus Christ the Lamb, turn'd Lyon, shall Appear in Glorious Majesty to all: When many, with Dread and Despair shall fly To Rocks and Mountains, to Fall on them: Cry To them for shelter; think'ng to shun him there Who see's, and knows at all times, ev'ry where, All things, and persons;) say'ng, This is the Day Wherein his Indignation Hee'l Display. A bless'd Encomion! CARYL will then receive From him that sits on th'Throne; then, then! he'l have A glorious body; and re-entertain His Better-part, never to part again; I mean his Soul, which ev'n now doth possess Those endless Joyes, which never will be less.) The Righteous Perish, and are taken away; None lay't to Heart, nor yet Consider, they Are taken from approaching Ills and Dangers; But altogether to Gods Word are Strangers. And since 'tis so, what Judgment will, or shall, Sinful, unfruitful England, next befall. Oh Brutus heirs! this, and such losses tend To future Judgments, if ye don't Amend. God for our Sins may punish seven times more, With greater Judgments; oftner than before. And oh! what horrid Judgment must it be, That must be worse full Seven-times, than those three Tremendous-Judgments, Plague, and Fire, and Sword? And this God will Inflict, he saith in's Word. Sure God will vex us in his sore Displeasure; And make his Wrath wax hot; open his treasure Of Indignation; which he did prepare, For those who Live and Die without his Fear. I'le not determine, but I'le labour still To submit to, and acquiesce with, his Will. Come Reader, come; on Trust take Tears and Groans, That we like Niobe, may Weep to Stones. 'Tis Famous CARYL, who serv'd us in the stead Of Argus, and Briareus; now is Dead! An Acrostick. JS CARYL Dead! Or is't a fictious Fame? Or hath her lavish-trumpe mistook his Name? Say, Is it he, or not? Ah yes, 'tis Hee; E v'n that beloved, flourishing, fruitful Tree! Pray then? If God cause Green trees to expire, How shall we Dry ones 'scape the axe or fire? Can CARYL Die! who liv'd so much Respected; And can our flinty hearts not be Affected? Rend Hearts (not Graments;) never urge a Why, You may know th'cause: Sorrow doth seem t'reply, Loe, Famous CARYL's Dead! and you must short∣ly Die. JOSEPH CARYL, Anagram RIS' HOLY-PEAC' WE hear of War, which often Desolates And mighty Kingdoms oft Depopulates: Oh that in th'midst of War (if War don't Cease) There might RIS', and continue HOLY-PEAC. God hath been long contending with our Land, To make us Humble, under's mighty Hand: For when we're most Debas'd in our own Eyes, Then HOLY-PEAC' we may expect to RIS'. In th'latter times, 'tis said, that HOLY-PEAC' Shold RIS' up; and should more and more increase: Though HOLY-PEACeful CARYL's call'd away; This HOLY blessed PEAC' may RIS', and stay. BY S. R. Aged 14 years 3/4 Aug. 1673. London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds at the Sun and Bible in the Poultrey, 1673.71.
