s143 99831248 35711
The cry of the Oppressed BY REASON OF FALSE MEASURES: OR, A DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE Standard-Gallon OF ENGLAND; What it is, when, and by whom made, and where it ought to be found. By which, the Assizes of Wine, Ale, and Corn, are to be justly known, according to the proportions they bear to the Standard-Gallon. This Standard being not known to the Commissio∣ners and Farmers of the Excise of Beer, and Ale, in London, &c. As appeareth by their Non-observances of the Assizes of Beer and Ale, giveth a just accasion of the Brewers third Grievance complained of to the Parliament. Lineae recta est tam mensura sus quam obliquae. London, Printed in the year, 1659.
To the right Honourable the Committee of PARLIAMENT for Right Honourable! FAlse Weights and false Measures are an abomination unto the Lord: So Solomon that Oacle of Wisedom, and mirrour of Ju∣stice, Prov. 11. ver. 1. If so as in the Hebrew; a Stone and a Stone, an Ephah and an Ephah, a Hin and a Hin, or a Gallon and a Gal∣lon be an abomination unto the Lord; Surely then they must be abominated by your Honours who are the Lord's people. Unum pondus & una Mensura it per totum Regnum nostrum: So saith Old Magna Charta, and doth not the great Charter for heaven say the same, Deut. 25. ver. 13, 14, 15. Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small, thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a great and a smal, but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have. Worthy Sirs! That the Brewers of London should be gauged by the Gallon con∣teining 272 Cubicall-Inches, which is the Corn-Gallon, and yet be enforced to sell their Ale and Beer by another, viz. the Ale-Gallon containing 288¾ Cubicall-Inches, their loss being thereby in the Excise 7000 l per annum: Surely this must needs he juge'd by all mn a very Horrid oppression (except it be by the Commissioners and farmers of Excise, who have vowed to judge for their own profit, although it be to the ruine of all the good peo∣ple of the Nation) especially when as the Brewers by this pretended over-measure gain nothing, but lose the Principall. But as it must not be thought that our Supream Magi∣strate can do any wrong; or that  revenew is so mean, as to bee augmented by the farmers rapine▪ so it cannot be imagined but that the intention of  the Parliament was always so honourable, that they never meant that the Officers of the Excise should accompt with the Brewers by a measure so contrary to the established pra∣ctice; which were to bring a snare in a moment upon all the Subjects of this Nation  much less can we ever conceive, that ever a Parliament which is the Fountain of Ju∣stice, should so far Patronize injustice, as to confirm such an oppression by a Law, in full assurance therefore that your Honours will grant us relief in this particular, wee crave leave to subscribe our selves your Honours most humble and faithfull servants, . But the farmers Vassalls. S. S. J. W. J. B.
The true Assize of Beer and Ale; asserted, maintain∣ed, and proved by the Statutes, Old Assize-books, and generall practice of Artists. IT is the just Complaint of the Brewers, that the Gagers of the Commissioners and Farmers of Excise, do not observe the Assize of Beer and Ale according as they are commanded to do by the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, made September the 11. 1643. Article XXIII. Because they do not Gage the Brewers by the right Standard-Gal∣lon, as appeareth by these Statutes following. First, the Ordinance, for Measures made in Incertis temporibus, and Printed amongst the Statutes made the XVIII. Anno Edw 2. by the consent of the whole Realm of England the Measures of our Sovereign Lord the King are made, viz An English Penny, called a Sterling, round and without clipping, shall weigh 32 Wheat-corns, in the midst of the Ear, and XXd shall make an Ounce, and 12 Ounces one pound, and 81 shall make a Gallon of Wine, and 8 Gallons of Wine shall make a bushel London, which is the eighth part of a Quarter. Note that by the Old Law these are the weights and Measures of the Realm. By the Act made 12 Hen. 7. Cap. 5. these Weights and Measures in the Ordinance abovesaid are enacted to be Standards in haec verba; Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, by the assent of the Lords spiritu∣all and temporall, and the Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same Ordaineth, Establisheth, and Enacteth, That the Measure of the Bushel shall contain 8 Gallons of Wheat, and that every Gallon shall contein 8 pound of Wheat of Troy-weight, and every pound shall contein 12 Ounces of Troy-weight, and every Ounce shall contein 20 Ster∣lings,
and every Sterling shall be of the weight of 32 Corns of Wheat that grow in the midst of the ear, according to the Old Law of the Land:Which Old Law is the Ordinance above. The Standard of England. And that it pleased the King's Highness to make a Standard of a Bushell, and a Gallon after the said Assize, to remain in his Highness Treasury for ever. So that it appears plainly that the Wine-Gallon is the Standard-Gallon. First, for that the Wine-Gallon is expressed in the Ordinance for Measures abovesaid: of which this Act of 12 Hen. 7. Cap. 5. is but a confirmation. Secondly, for that it agreeth exactly with the 8 l of Wheat of Troy-weight, as will appear by an easie experiment; a pound of Wheat of Troy-weight filling exactly the Wine pinte. Thirdly, for that it is the least of Gallons, and therefore the very Exemplar by which all Measures are to be made, both of dry things as Corn,  &c. And Liquid things, as Ale and Beer according to the proportions they bear to it self: Fourthly, for that it measures all things measurable whatsoever. First, it measures all Liquids whatsoever; as Sope, Oile, Strong-Waters, Cider, Perry, Metheglin, Honey, Wines of all sorts, &c. Secondly, Ale and Beer, with a respect to the diversity of the Li∣quors. The which diversity will be made appear plainly by this dis∣course following: And the reason of the diversity. Thirdly, All sorts of drie things as Corn, &c. with a respect to the diversity of the said dry things, the dry things lying hollow in the Bushell, the which being shaken, will sink down to Wine measure, therefore its but reasonable that the Measures of dry things should be made with the proportion of 28 to 33. Their hollowness in the Mea∣sure making that diversity from the Wine Measure. And doth not Roger de Hugden in his Annalls, pars posterior, page 774 affirm as much saying. Assisa de Mensuris, sacta per Richardum Regem Axgliae Anno 1198. Corstitutum est, quod omnes Mensurae totius Angliae sint ejusdem quantitatis, tam de Bladiis, quam de leguminibus & rebus consimilibus; Mensura etiam vini & cervisiae & cunctorum liquo∣rum sit ejusdem quantitatis, secundum diversitatem liquorum; Pondera & librae, & ceta Pesiae sint ejusdem quantitatis, in toto Regno Secundum diversitatem. Mercaturarum: Is not the pound Troy, and the pound
Averdupois, one and the same weight in effect; onely the over weight of the Averdupois is allowed for the garble and filth that is in the Merchandise and other things that it weigheth, so that abstracting the garble and filth that is in the commodity, the thing it self is but the Troy weight. Is it not so between the Wine Measure and the Ale Measure; is not the Ale Gallon bigger by the one fifth part then the Wine, because of its foulness in working, yest, and frothing, so that in effect abstracting the yest of bottom and top, there remains no∣thing but Wine-Measure: About 40 years after, by the Statute of 23. Hen 8 cap. 4. it was Enacted, That every Barrel of Beer shall contein 36 Gallons, every Kilderkin 18 Gallons, every Firkin 9 Gallons of the Kings Standard Gallon. And that every Barrell for Ale shall contein 32 Gallons, every Kilder∣kin 16 Gallons, &c. of the King's Standard-Gallon: So that they shall be of good and just measure, or else above, and not under. And it is further Enacted by the said Authority, that every Barrell for Sope empty shall contein 31 Gallons & above, and to be in weight 26 pounds and not above,Note the Sope Far∣rel is made exactly by the Wine Gal∣lon. of ful and just mea∣sure and not above: and every half Barrel empty, &c. The same Act of the 23 Hen. 8. further provideth, and explaineth what is meant by those words, 36 Sandard Gallons or above (to∣wards the end of the 4 Cap. of that Act) It is Enacted, that every Coo∣per which shall hereafter make any the Vessells specified in the said Act, shal from the Feast of Pentecost next coming make every such Vessel according to the Assize specified in the Treatise called Compositio Mensurarum, viz. Every Barrell for Ale to contain 32 Gallons of the said Assize, or above; Of which 8 Gallons make the Common Bushell to be used in this Realm: Eve∣ry Kilderkin 16 Gallons, &c. So that this Proviso must either conclude the body of the Act, or explain the Act it self, so as to make it appear, by what Gallon the Brewers Barrells are to be made. True it is, there was made in Hen. the 7th time, a Standard-Bushel, and a Standard Gallon, according to the Assize for dry thigs, as Corn, &c. By which the Bushels and Gallons of Market Towns was to be sized and made. There was likewise made at the same time the common Bushell all which Measures are at this day in the Exche∣quer. This common Bushell is bigger then the Standard-Bushell or Corn by one 18th part, so that it holds 8 Gallons according to
288¾ and not according to 272 Cubicall-Inches, 8 Gallons of which make the Standard Bushel for Corn, &c. So that the Coopers Barrels are to be made according to the Gallon conteining 288¾ Cubicall Inches, of which 8 Gallons make the common Bushell to bee used in this Realm. So that by the Standard-Gallon in the body of the Act cannot be meant the Gallon containing 272 Cubicall-Inches: So as to that Gallon this Proviso doth not conclude the body of the Act. 2. This proviso explaineth what is meant by the Standard-Gallon in the Body of the Act. And necessarily concludeth the Wine-Gal∣lon, to be the Standard-Gallon there mentioned: for this Common-Bushell is the same with the Winchester-Bushell: The which Bushell Holdeth  Ale-quarts, or Winchester-quarts. And it is the same with that Bushell mentioned in the 11 Hen. 7. cap. 4. Which there is called the Water or Liquid Measure. The which Water-measure is to contain five pecks of the Standard, raised and stricken; that is five pecks Wine-measure; so that it appeareth by that Statute, that the Wine-Gallon is the Standard-Gallon. For that 10 Gallons Wine-measure, make 8 Gallons Water-measure, whch is the Common-Bushell, or Winchester-Bushell used in all places, throughout this Realm, on the Water, or Ship-board. So that it concludeth the Statute, and explaineth what is meant by the Standard-Gallon, in the body of the Act. viz. The Wine-Gallon by which the Coopers barrells are to be made. As appeareth. 23. Hen. 8. cap. 4. But yet with a respect to the assize, specified in the treatise called Compositio mensurarum. Which Treatise is now not to be found (Tempus edax rerum) hath swallowed it up. But the Assize is still kept up by tra∣dition of the Coopers in their Scantlings for their barrells, their Scantlings for Beer and Ale, being nothing but an Addition of a fifth to Wine-measure; which is called Ale-measure, and by some Winchester-measure. Now all the Artists in London do agree; That the Wine-Gallon conteins 231 Cubical In∣ches, or thereabouts, Mr. Newton grants the Wine-Gallon to contein 231 Cubi∣call Inches. to which if you add a fifth. viz. 57 ¾, it makes 288 ¾ Cubicall-Inches; which is the Content of the Ale Gallon. And these 288 ¾ Cubicall-Inches agreeth punctually with the Coopers scant∣lings. And this agreeth likewise with the Ale-quart, which is the quart part of the Ale-Gallon. The which Ale-quart is mentioned in 1o Jac. Cap. 9 Where it is enacted that the Inn-keeper, Ale house-keeper, or Victualler, shall
not sell lesse then one full Ale-quart of the best Beer or Ale for a pen∣ny. This Ale-quart likewise is mentioned in the Statute of the Pille∣ry. Made 51 Hen. 3. Where it is enacted, that when a quarter of Barley is sold for 2 shilling, then four quarts of Ale shall be sold for one penny. This Ale quart is at this day in the Exchequer; and it is one fourth bigger then the Wine-quart, this Ale-quart by the con∣sent of all Artists, doth contein 72 ¾, which is the fourth part of 288 ¾ which is the content of the Ale-Gallon by which the Victualler ought to receive his Ale and Beer, and by which he must sell the same. This, all the books of Assize call the Ale-measure, and sometimes Winchester-measure; and this Ale-quart, or Ale-measure was made one fifth bigger then Wine, because of it's foulnesse in working, yest and froathing, as Mr. Powell speaks in his book of Assize. The Gallon by which Mr. Lyon gageth the Brew∣ers Tuns is not the Wine-Gallon, M Lyon is the Gager generall to the Farmers. therefore not the Standard mentioned in the Act, therefore not the Standard of England, for it holds as he himselfe affirms, 272 Cubicall-Inches, which is bigger then the Standard-Gallon by 41 Cubicall-Inches and lesse then the Ale-Gallon by one eighteenth part. This Gallon was never used for the Ale-Gallon, untill Mr. Lyon but a Novice in the Art of Gaging, mistaking the Standard-Gallon, took that for the Ale Gallon, which was made for no other end but to be a measure by which the bushels to measure corn, should be made; for if that were the Standard-Gallon, as Mr. Lyon by a mistake so calleth it, and the Commissioners and Farmers in their answer do affirm and assert to be: then all Bushells and Gal∣lons of Towns Corporate, which do not agree with it, ought by the Act of the 12 of Hen. 7. cap. 9. to be broken. So that then likewise the Wine-Gallon it self must be broken, because it containeth 41 Cu∣bicall-Inches lesse then the Corn-gallon, which Mr. Lyon calleth the Standard-Gallon. The mistake of which Corn-Gallon for the Standard-Gallon occasioned learned M. Oughtred to affirm the Ale-Gallon to contein but 272 Cubicall-Inches, and that contrary to the opinion of M. Gunter, M. Goodwin, M. Reynolds, M. Bond, and all the ancient and late Artists and Mathematici∣ans of England. For as learned Mr. Graves Professor of the Mathe∣maticks in the University of Oxford, in his Treatise of Denarius ob∣serveth; That there are three Standards in this Nation the Stan∣dard of the Tower which agreeth with the Wine-Gallon, the Stan∣dard of Winchester which agreeth with the Ale-Gallon, the Standard of the Exchequer which agreeth with the Corn-Gallon. So Accu∣rate
Mr. Phillips in his late Treatise of Gaging of Vessells observeth that there are in use 3 sorts of Measures; The measure for Wine' being 231 Inches, the measure of drie things as Corn, &c. being a∣bout 272 Inches, and the measure for Beer and Ale being about 288 Inches ¾ the proportion between these three Gallons he observeth to be 28 33.35. And so concludes the proportion between the Wine and Ale. Gallon to be as 4 to 5. The which he proveth by the London Coopers Scantlings for a Beer barrell after this manner. The Diameter at the head — 19 Inches 9 parts The Diameter at the Bung — 23 Inches 0 parts The Length is — 27 Inches 4 parts Which being cast up yields— 36 Gallons and 140 parts over, according to 288 ¾ — So that the Ber-bar∣rell agreeth exactly with the Rule of Proportion aforesaid between the Wine-Gallon, and the Ale-Gallon, which is as 4 to 5. The said M. Phillips concluding that the Rule of Proportion of 4 to 5 agreeth very well with the Coopers and Brewers, who are most concerned herein, and woud not willingly lose so much over-measure as Mr. Oughtred and Mr. Lyons Rules intimate, but would rather if they had any truth in them, be ready to follow them for their own advantage for thereby the Cooper would save his Timber, and the Brewer his over-measure. These are to certifie that the Brewers Tunns ought to be gaged by the Coopers sealed beer barrels, being accounted but 36 Gallons & so the Gallon to contein 288 Inches three quarters: This we Artists and Gagers testifie under our hands. John Reynolds Henry Bond, Charles Salionstall, Richard Cudwoorth, John Hayes, Thomas Thoreslie, Sammuell Warr, John wale, Thomas Rise, John Leeke, Robert Hulbert, John Jennings, Baptist Hutton. If the Brewers must use no beer Barrell but such as are sealed at Coopers Hall; ought not then Brewers Tunns to be Gaged accor∣dingly. Besides the Beer being hot ready to cleanse will sink being cold at least 5 per cent. ought not this to be taken into consideration. Psalm 12. ver. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy: Now will I arise saith the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that would ensnare him.
A Supplement To the Treatise called the Cry of the Op∣pressed, by reason of False Measures: Or, an An∣swer to John Lyon's Remonstrance, delivered in, to the Honourable the Commissioners for bringing in the Areares due to the Common-wealth. May it please your Honours, IN the beginning of Mr. Lyons humble Remonstrance, there is a bold and impudent falshood offered unto your Honours, so that as the Proverb hath it, Ex ungue Leonem, that a Lyon is known by his Paw; So likewise, this discourse having a falshood in the Preface of it; may justly be judged to be composed of Sophisticall fal∣lacy, and impudent falsity; So that instead of commendation from your Honours, as he expects, and foolishly prays for, at the end of his Remonstrance, he ought to be severely punished for his mis-informing the Parliament, the Supream Authority of the Nation, by suggesting a notorious falshood unto your Honors, whose Authority you represent. In his Preface he saith in the Office at Broad-street in the year 1656. he found two different Gallons, The one made and placed there, and of use in that Office from the beginning of the Excise, having the Guild Hall mark and stamp on it; The other placed in that Office, with the name of John Reynolds thereon. That these two different Gallons were placed in that Office, is not to be denied: But that that Gallon with the Guild-Hall mark or stamp on it, was in use to Gauge the Brewers Tunne from the begin∣ning of that Office, or that the Brewers paid Excise by that Gallon is a notorious untruth: For that M. Winstanley who was the Gauger gene∣rall of that Office, and introduced that Gallon made by the Guild-Hall Standard, which is the same with the Exchequer Gallon, for which M. Lyon contends. Did never Gauge the Brewers Tnns by that Gallon, but by the Solid Cubical foot, he r ckoning six Cubical feet to the Beer barell, which agrees exactly with the Gallon made by M. John Rey∣nolds (an excellent Artist, and John Lyons master) which is the Gallon
the Brewers contend for. The which Gallon agreeth with the Coopers Scantling for the Beer barrell. This agreeth likewise with the Win∣chester or Ale quart Eight Gallons of this makes the common bushel, which is the Winchester Bushell used in this Land. As is made plainly to appear, by that Treatise called the Cry of the Oppressed, &c. So that the Exchequer Gallon was never made use of by M. Winstanley in that Of∣fice to Gauge the Brewers Tunns, or ever practised by any Artist for Gauging of Ale or Beer, untill M. Lyon came into that Office in 1656. All which M. John Hayes (an Artist nominated in his paper (can testifie. M. Lyon proceeds in the commendation of himselfe, and to the justi∣fication of his most wicked innovated oppression, And saith. These two different Gallons put him upon a further search into the Legali∣ty of the Gallons, then any of his praedecessors did. He saith, in his search he found by the Statute of 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 4. That the Barrells were to contein 36. Standard Gallons, &c. And further saith that he found by the Statute of the 12. of Hen. 7. Cap. 5. That there was a Standard Gallon to remain in his Highnesse's Trea∣sury, and therefore he, by the appointment of the Commissioners of Broad-street, did go to the Exchequer, and by that Standard Gallon did exactly make this Gallon, by which he Gaugeth the Brewers Tunns, and so concludes that therefore his Gallon, is the Standard Gallon mentioned in the Act 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 4. and by which the Brewers Barrels must be made, and consequently, by which their Tuns must be Gauged. This is the strength of his Argument, in which your Honours may observe an apparant Fallacie, as well as in his Preface a notorious Falsity, his Argument is but this. The Gallon in the Exchequer is the Kings Standard Gallon. The Coopers Barrels must be made by the Kings Standard Gallon. Ergo, The Coopers Barrells must be made by the Exchequer Gallon. This is a Sillogisme in the second figure, and all Affirmatives, and therefore a Paralogisme, as is a nother like it. Asinus habet Aures, Lion habes Aures, Ergo, Lion est Asinus. The Fallacie of which Argument we thus make appear unto your Honours.
First, by the Letter of the Act of the 12. of Hen. 7. Cap. 5. The Ex∣choquer Gallon is not the Standard Gallon; for that Act doth say expresly, That 8 pound of Wheat Troy weight, shall make that Gal∣lon according to the Old Law, which Old Law saith, totidem verbis, That 8. pound of Wheat of Troy weight shal make a Gallon of Wine, As by a ready experiment will easily be made appear, A pound of of Wheat of Troy weight, filling exactly the Wine pint; Whereas this Exchequer Galln holdeth above 9. pound of Wheat of Troy weight. So that according to th Letter of the Law, the Exchequer Gallon is not the Standard Gallon. Secondly, By the equity of that Act, this Gallon M. Lion contends for was made a Standard Gallon for drie things, as Corn, &c. And therefore according to that Assize it is made with its due proportion to the Wine Gallon, which all Artists observe to be the proportion of 28. to 33. The reason why it was there placed, was for preventing of mistake in sizing of Gallons and Bushells, which were to be sent down into Market Towns, nominated in a Schedule to that Act annexed, for if they should have gone to have made their Gallons and Bushells by the Wine measure, they would have been very apt to have mistaken in the true sizing of them according to the proportion of drie things to the Standard Gallon. Thirdly, By the equity of that Act, The Standard for Beer and Ale was likewise made, and is now at Coopers Hall, and it is called the Li∣quid or Water measure, which is provided for; by that Act of the 12. Hen 7. Cap. 5. and the 11. of Hen. 7. Cap. 4 which is, by the express words of that Act, the proportion of 5. to 4. so that Statute of 11. Hen. 7. Cap. 4. Provides that the water measure, shall hold 5. pecks of the Standard rased and stricken. And this Standard Gallon for Beer and Ale is mentioned in the Statute 31 Eliz. Cap. 8. and there called the Standard Gallon, appointed and allowed for Beer and Ale; All this will plainly appear to your Honours, if you dilligently read and com∣pare the Statutes made the 11. Hen. 7. Cap. 4. and 12. Hen. 7. Cap. 5. with 31. Elizab. Cap. 8. Object. 1. That the Statute 12. Hen Cap. 7. doth say that all Gal∣lons that do not agree with it shall be broken, aswell those that were in the Treasury, as in all places or Towns whatsoever. An. This must necessarily be understood of the measures fordry things,
wine Gallon, the very foundation of measures, and that which is principally in use, must be broken. And they that use it by that Act of the 12 of Hen. 7. Cap. 5. are to be fined, & severely punished, as by the act appears; so that it's evident, it's to be understood of dry things only which are to be measured in Markets and other places. Object. 2. The 23 Hen. 8. Cap. 4. Saith that every barrell for Beer, shall contain 36 Gallons of the Kings Standard Gallon or a∣bove, &c. but there is no other Standard Gallon in the Exchequer, Ergo. Answ. That Statute of 23 Hen. 8. cap. 4. doth not mention the Kings Standard Gallon of the Exchequer, but onely the Kings Stan∣dard Gallon, which properly is to be understood of the Wine-Gallon, as aforesaid, and as that statute doth import. For that Statute doth say, that every Barrell for Soape shall contein 32 Gallons &c. Which the Coopers, who are made the Judges of the Content of all Vessels made by vertue of that Act. And to whom, by that act, the sizing and gau∣ging of all Vessells, are committed, and for that end have sworn Gau∣gers and Sealers appointed. Do explain it in their Ordinance, that every Barrell for Sope shall contain 32 Gallons of the Kings Standard Gallon for Wine; and accordingly do make the Sope-vessels by that Gallon, But if it be granted, that by the Standard Gallon mentioned in the Act 23 Hen. 8. Cap. 4. Be meant the Exchequer-Gallon, for which Mr. Lyon doth so much contend, and for which if the Brewers were so selfish, as Mr. Lyon insinuates the Brewers are. Then they might likewise contend thereby they might save in this Nati∣on 100000 lper annum, for which over measure they have not one penny. But by that very Act, the Coopers are commanded to make their Barrells by the Coopers great Gallon, which agreeth with Mr. Reynold's Gallon now in Broad-street; and that by a Proviso at the End of that Act, whereby it is enacted that every Cooper, which here∣after shall make any vessells specified in the said Act; shall from the feast of Pentecost next coming, make every such vessel according to the Assize, specified in the Treatise, called Compositio Mensurarum (viz.) Every barrell for Ale to contain 32 Gallons of the said Assize or a∣bove; of which eight Gallons make the Common-bushell to be used in this Realm. Every Kilderkin 16 Gallons; which Common-bushell holds eight Gallons, according to Mr. Reynolds his Gallon in Broad-street, and the Coopers great Gallon, conteining 288 Cubicall Inches ¾ as is plainly made appear in the Treatise called, The Cry of the Op∣pressed.
But Mr Lyon doth urge his Argument further and saith that these measures of the Exchequer were confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, but names no statute: And by King Charles, at the beginning of this Par∣liament which confirmes the said Measures of the Exchequer, and or∣dains that any Law usage or Custome to the Contrary Notwithstanding, Wherein he doth very much Impose upon your Honours, and doth us a great injury by concealing the truth, for that very statute doth provide, that notwithstanding any thing in that Act, the Liquid measure shall remain the same throughout the Nation which agreeth with our great Gallon as is aforesaid. Thus We have cleared up (as we humbly conceive) the fallacy of Mr. Lyon's Argument. The second thing that he undertakes is to prove that we are not enforced to pay our excise by another, a thing so noto∣roius and so often proved by all the Artists of London, and by the Master and Wardens of the Company of Coopers. That we might very well save our labour in disproving of it, which is but actum agere. But lest M. Lyon should glory in his folly, fallacies, and falsities as we do understand hee doth. This impudent falsity wee thus dis∣prove. 1. Whereas he saith that he tryed several barrels in several mens houses in his paper nominated, & he found several new barrels sealed, which he tryed by his Gallon, wch hold but 36 Gallons & a half, & some less, what Barrells those were, he by his rod picked out we cannot tell, for the maintenance of his sowicked an Oppression. But sure wee are as he very well knows, that the most of the Barrells in those mens houses did contein 38 Exchequer-Gallons, and so ought to do by the Coo∣pers Scantlings; otherwise they are not to be sealed by the Sealers Oath, but to be broaken, and the Sealer that sealed them, and that Brewer that sells by them, are punishable by the Statute, 23 Hen. 8. Cap. 4. Secondly, he saith the Brewers in St. Giles, & Westminster, have cut their Gallons & made them equal to the Gallon in the Clark of the market hands in Westminster, which implies their Gallons were bigger before then the Exchequer Gallon. And what they have done for to preserve themselves from being ruined by his unjust Gage: we cannot tell, but in so doing, we say they have wronged the poor, and by those small measures do grind the faces of the poor, if they have done that which Mr. Lyon affirmes to be done by them. But Mr Lyon must know that
the Clarks of Markets, that seal Gallōs for Ale or Beer, as they seldom do, & as we humbly conceive, doth not belong to them: They ought to size them by the Ale, o Winchester Quart, four quarts of which makes the Ale-Gallon as is made appear in the Treatise called, The Cry of the Oppressed. The Ale-Gallon, & he, Winchester half-peck being all one. Thirdly, Whereas he doth confess that it is true which Samuel Starling saith, that the Ale Gallon must be made by four Winchester or Ale quarts. But saith that four Winchester or Ale quarts agrees exactly with the Exchequer Gallon; We aver the contrary and say, that four Winchester quarts doth over run the Exchequer Gallon one 18 part. So that we being come to this short issue, we do hope that this controversie will by a quick and easie experiment, be made appear un∣to your Honours, and put a period to this oppression, and clear up the matter for the future, and the difference of that measure, properly called the Winchester, or Liquid, or Ale measure, from that measure called the Exchequer, be fully understood. M Lyon concludes his Remonstrance with letters of commendation of himselfe, and his quondam Masters, and our more then Turkish or barbarous Patrons, saying. All which being considered by Impartiall ones, surely they wil censure the Brewers of selfishness at the least, and undoubtedly they will approve of the Commissioners of Excise there∣in, in walking and Acting by, and according to the said Standard; And it is hoped by the said John Lion that they wil be so far from con∣demning him, as that they will commend him for discharging his said Trust with faithfulness therein, who made (as he ought) the said Standard Gallon his Rule to walk by in the said Imployment. But we do hope and pray that (contrary to M. Lions Expectation) as your Honours have been instrumentall in removing these hard task∣masters; So likewise that you will not so far commend and approve of John Lion, the Introductor and Assertor of so great an oppression; contrary to the practise of all Artists; The Statutes of the Land; the Custome and usage of the Master and Wardens of the Company of Coopers, who by Law are made the Judges of the content of the Barrel; And that you will not onely give John Lion a Quietus est from his im∣ployment of Gauger generall to the Commissioners in Broad-street; who first of all, he by his false pretences, informations, and suggestions, did induce to take up this most unequall Gauge. But also that your Honours will be Instrumentall in bringing him principally to such
condigne and severe punishment as to Justice shall appertein according as this Honourable Parliament hath declared and promised by their Ordinance called Additionall Instructions concerning the Excise, made the 22 of February, 1646. Article the 4. And thereby your Ho∣nours shall fulfill the Command of God, Isa. 1.17. Learn to do wel, seek Judgement, Relieve or righten the Op∣pressed, Judge the Fatherless, Plead for the Widdow.
