s2228 13142619 98010
A Seasonable Discourse SHEWING The Necessity of UNION AMONGST PROTESTANTS In Opposition to POPERY, As the only Means (under God) to preserve the Reformed Religion ALSO, The Charge of Persecution, lately main∣tained against the Established Religion by W. P. H. C. and other Insignificant Scrib∣lers, detected; Proving it to be the Mi∣nisters of State, and not the Church, tha Prosecuted the Penal Laws on Protestan Dissenters. PRINTED in the Year, 1688.
THE known saying in the New-Testament, That a Kingdom divided can't stand, is very seasonable at this Juncture, by all Protestants to be seriously considered: And if ever Ʋnity (if not in Worship, yet in Love and Affections) will be necessary, it must certainly be Now; when the Common Enemy is seeking, by all means imagina∣ble, to correct such Divisions amongst Protestants, as if possible to tender them irreconcileable One to the Other. And though the Differences are not extraor∣nary; yet it has been the Polity of those that delight in the Division and De∣struction of Hereticks, (as they call them) to widen the Breaches, and, as much as possible, divide the Interest of Protestants. To effect this Design, how often have we heard of the many Disguises and Shapes they have appeared in, among all sorts of Protestants (none excepted); and it is lamentable to think, how great an effect they have had on Passionate Men, of all Perswasions. But now, considering the circumstances of Things, and how darkly they appear to Judicious and discerning Eyes, it's high time for all Parties to lay aside Pride, Passion, or Division; and, as far as possible, agree to Love and Serve each Other. The doing of which, is the only effectual Means to establish a lasting Ʋnion among Protestants, and to subvert the Designs of Plotting-Men, who would gladly over-turn our Religion and Laws. The Considerations above-mentioned, caused me to give the best Advice I could: I must confess, not only my ina∣bility, but also my engagement in Business, very much prevented my Design: But however, what I here offer, comes from a sincere Desire for allaying the Heats, and uniting the Interests and Affections of Protestants in general. I hope, I shall not offer any think contrary to Reason, and the Publick Good of Mankind. I shall begin with the Church of England. Worthy Sirs, The former Passion and Violence of some few Rash Men amongst you, together with their Zeal to serve an ungrateful sort of Men, rendred almost the whole Body obnoxious to the hard Opinion and Censure of many Worthy Men; insomuch, that those who were really Members of the Church, as by Law establish'd, were at a stand, and did not know what to think of the strange and unaccountable Speeches and Actions of many, both Clergy and Laiety: But, as this Fault can be imputed to but a small part of you, so I have that Charity to hope, they are, by this time, fully convinced of their Error, and will act more Prudently for the future. The heat of a few Rash Men ought not to bring so Venerable a Body of Men into contempt; for by that Rule, the most Innocent would be lyable to answer for the most Guilty; the Injustice of which, can't be sufficiently declared with Abhorrence.
My humble Advice is; As you have always manifested your Loyalty to the King; so continue Obedient Subjects, as far as the Laws of God and the Land, warrant your Obedience, and no farther are you actively obliged to Obey; (as to your Passive Obedience, ye are no Strangers to the meaning of it; there∣fore, I wave it:) Let your Obedience to the Divine and Human Laws, thereto agreeing, be without the least Hesitation or Reluctancy: But, if any thing be commanded by Man, you must always remember your prime Obedience is due to God; and no Commands, Threats, or Allurements, ought to Influence you so, as to violate the Laws of God, or the Land; always have an Eye to the Divine, which infinitely supercedes any Command or Human Law. For In∣stance, if at any time you are required to renounce your Sence and Reason, and believe Transubstantiation, or to Worship Images, Invocate Saints and Angels, or any other thing, contrary to Scripture; or to change your Holy, Pure, and Sound Religion, to embrace another, abounding with Novelties, full of Human Inventions and Absurdities; and that has little or no foundation on Scripture or Reason: You are not, on any pretence whatsoever, to forsake your certain Religion, for the embracing of One, not only dubious but dangerous: And let me assure all wavering Christians, (who, for Worldly Interests and Preferments, care not what Religion they are of) That they cannot Answer it to God, if they make Shipwrack of a good Conscience, by turning from a safe and rational Religion, to that which is not only unreasonable, but very ridiculous, in the judgment of all Good Christians. Since the Protestant Religion is founded on Reason and Truth, consonant to the Holy Scriptures, the practice of the A∣postles, and Primitive Christians, in all Ages; you, and all that desire to ap∣prove themselves sincere Protestants, ought to continue stedfast in that Divine Faith, you profess your selves Members of. If your Religion was built only on the Sandy Foundations of Tradition, Infallibility, &c. you might have some tollerable Plea for altering your Opinion; but as long as your Religion teaches you Obedience in all Things to God, and likewise to your Soveraign, in which you have sound Expositions of the Divine Truths, the Sacraments duly and truly administred in both kinds, according to Christ's Institution; the Scriptures no ways Lock'd up from Clergy or Laiety, (Because all these, and what-ever more is necessary for the ordering of a Christian's Conversation, is to be found in the Protestant Religion) I can't conceive, why any one should change his Profession. Worldly Interests, Troubles, or Temptations, ought to have no sway or force with us, when they come in competition with our pure Religion. I have enlarged the more on this Head, by reason now is a time of greater tryal than formerly: and that some, who not long since esteemed themselves Pillars of the Protestant Faith, have now, for sinister Ends, without Reason, departed from it. But let them seriously consider, there is a God above, who will not be Mocked. Such unstable Souls I shall leave to that God, who judg∣eth
all Men, and rewardoth All according to their Deeds, whether Good or Evil. In the next place, Let the Laws of the Land be your Rule; Be sure give no advantage to the Common Enemy, either by a partial Execution of them, or by doing less than the Laws allow: neither strain them too high, nor let them be as a Cypher, which will signifie nothing, without the Figure of Execution. As the publick Good and Welfare of Mankind, was the design of all Laws; so the Conformity to, and Execution of them, ought to have the same tendency. To strain any Law beyond the designed Good, or Intent of the Legislators, is a most severe and unjust Oppression; and to suspend, or let wholesome and beneficial Laws lye dormant, without all due Execution for the Publick Good, does not only shew the unfaithfulness of the Magistrate, to whom the Exe∣cutive Power appertains; but also, how little he minds his Sworn Duty, which is to see the Laws duly put in Execution; and Justice, according to them, e∣qually distributed without Partiality; and how any can Answer the nullifying them, without a Lawful Abrogation, by the same Power that Enacted them, I can't possibly conceive; for the common approved Maxim is, That Power only that made any Law, has sufficient Authority to suspend or repeal the same. The Laws of the Land, so long as they are founded on Reason, and found beneficial to the Publick Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom, ought to be kept Inviolable, and maintain'd by All; but more especially by those that have any share in the Execution of them. We should reckon him a Mad-man, that should un-tile his House, under pretence of keeping out the Rain. Likewise, if a Governour of a well Fortified City, who wanted for no Accommodations requisite for the defence of it, should, without any just cause of Fear of his Inconsiderable Enemies, either out of Cowardice or Perfidiousness, betray the City, and make himself and them, not only void of Power, but in effect Slaves to the Will and Pleasures of that part of Men, to whom he and they might have bid defiance. What can we say or think of such Esau's, that are ready to sell their Birth Rights for a Mess of Pottage, but that they shall not deserve any Compassion? and if they undergo the greatest Evils, they will have the just Reward they have deservedly Merited. I should not pity any Man, that, under pretence of keeping out Thieves and Robbers, should open the Door, and let them in; wholly trusting to their good Breeding, Kindness, and Honesty; not in the least believing they would be so unmannerly, as not only to secure him, by binding his Hands and Feet that he could not help him∣self, but also Rob him of all that was worth their carrying away; stopping his Mouth that he could not complain of his hard Ʋsage, or call for any help, to free him out of his miserable Condition. I wish, in the Land of Ʋtopia, there were not too many, that would shew the same kindness to those kind Hearted Christians, that should divest themselves of the Power and Security
the Law gives them, and meerly trust to their good Nature, for their Religion, and all their Liberties and Properties. Any Man, with whom the Administra∣tion of Justice is Intrusted, or that has the Honour to be Elected a Member of Parliament, for the Service of his King and Country; for such a Man to betray his Trust, either by parting with those wholsome Laws, that long ex∣perience tells us, are absolutely necessary, and most beneficial to the Com∣mon-Wealth; or by condescending to the unreasonable Desires and Endeavours of an inconsiderable sort of Men; or by not obstructing, but consenting to the Enacting of New Laws, destructive to the Common Good; He is most unworthy of the Trust reposed in him, and deserves the severest Punishment the Law will admit of: No Contempt, Disgrace, or Derision, can be bad enough for such a Man, that to serve his own particular private Interest, will Sacrifice the Publick. All Members of Parliament, when they design to make any Laws, ought throughly to consider, what Good or Benefit will accrue to the Subjects thereby; and if, upon mature Consideration, they see a necessity of Enacting such Laws, by no means ought they to be omitted, or laid aside. On the other side, if former Parliaments had, for weighty Reasons, made several Acts for the security of our Religion and Laws; before these Laws be made void by a Repeal, due respect ought to be had to the circumstances of Things and Times; and, after a strict and impartial Enquiry be made, if it shall appear that the Repealing those Acts will not only very much injure, but really en∣danger the Publick Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom; then, notwithstanding the Solicitations of a Party, whose Interests oblige them to desire it, they ought not to part with Laws which will prove as an impregnable Bulwark a∣gainst our Enemies. To make void an useful and necessary Law, under a pre∣tence of doing Good to the Publick thereby, is like the taking up of a Sluce to prevent an Inundation of Water. I may rather compare it to the throwing of Combustible Matter into an House on Fire, thinking thereby to Extinguish the Flames; which is so far from putting a period to them, that, on the contrary, it heightens the Flames, that they are not (if at all) easily Mastered. I have heard our necessary Laws compared to the most useful Damms and Banks in Holland, to prevent the raging Sea from over-whelming them. It's well known to Travellers, of what a vast Importance those Defences are: for, should there be a considerable Breach made in any of those Damms, that secure them from the violence of the Water; not only many Souls, Beasts, and many other valuable Things would be lost; but it would be an Immense Charge to repair them: But, though the damage to the Netherlands would be very great, should such a bad accident happen; yet it's the Opinion of Wise men, (and not without good grounds) that should English-Men and Protestants part with those Laws, that are like a strong and impregnable Defence to them, and their Religion, in one Respect it would be of a far worse consequence to
them; that is, the lose would be irrepairable; and Ten Thousand to One, if ever the like Security can be obtain'd. Country-men have an Old, but True saying; that is, If you love to be free from a Broken Head, keep fast the Staff in your own hand; so may you not only prevent your being beaten by your own Weapon, but, in case of an Assault, you may, by being in a posture of Defence, easily defend your self from violent Hands; whereas on the contrary, a Na∣ked Man may easily be Captivated; and, whether he will or no, he will be constrain'd to submit to the Mercy of his Insulting Enemy. It's farther ob∣served, That after the Rich Farmer has, with much difficulty, gotten a good Estate, he remembers how hardly he Laboured, Toiled, and Sweated, before he brought things to so good an Issue; and the calling to mind his former Indefa∣tigable Labour, has this effect on him, That since he obtain'd his Riches or Substance with no small Care and Industry, he is resolved, because he neither got it easily, nor can he dispence with the want of it, that he will not do like Prodigal Sons, who being Born to their Estates, and wholly Ignorant of their Parents Care and Trouble to provide for them, quickly squander away vast Fortunes: but though he may love his Children or Friends with all the real Affections imaginable; yet, says he, Charity begins at home; I must not make my self a Beggar, and stand to the Courtesie of Children or Friends, for what I shall want to sustain me, so that I may comfortably end those days that remain. For woful Experience too frequently informs us, That Children and Friends too soon forget their Duy, and the innumerable Kindnesses of their tender Parents. Since things are thus, let common Prudence dictate better things to us, than to part with what of right belongs unto us, or to let go that lawful Security we have, for all that is dear unto us; and by so doing, we may easily prevent our being made a Prey to our implacable Enemies, from whose tender Mer∣cies, Good Lord deliver us. I might much more enlarge on this particular but, should I proceed to enumerate all the manifest Dangers and Inconveni∣encies that I could easily insist on, I should cry out with the Poet, Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gente. In the third place, Let your Zeal for your Holy Religion continue, and let your Moderation be seen by your very Enemies; and let not the worst of them, have any just cause of laying any severe or unbecoming Actions to your charge. How will it please your Enemies, to see you differing and dividing your Interest and Affections with those? That a Worthy, and most Learned Member of your Church, in my hearing; lately Preach'd against excluding by Excommunication, from Communion with you, for indifferent Things, which may be left, undone, and yet Salvation obtained. The reasons he gave for lo∣ving them were, Because there were many good Christians among them; and because they protested against the same Errors, believed the same Articles of Faith, and hoped for the same common Salvation by Christ, that you do. You
can't but be deeply sensible, how many Eyes are fixed on you, and what de∣sires your Enemies have of seeing you exposed to Publick Shame and Contempt: Have Charity towards all Men, especially to all those of the Protestant Religion, that in any tollerable Measure conform to the Rules of it. As for your Dis∣senting Neighbours, (like the Reverend Doctors, Till. and Ten.) let your Love and Moderation be so great towards them, as if possible, though you cannot make them satisfied with your Reasons for Conformity; yet let your Christian Charity and Affection to them as Protestants and Members of the same Body you profess to be, have such an Influence over them, as to expel any Malice or prejudice they might have entertain'd against your Persons; and who knows, but such Methods as these, may have a great Influence towards a far∣ther Conformity. It's my Opinion, (and not without Reason) That the bitter Invectives not long since, in and out of the Pulpit, created greater and fiercer Enemies against the Church of England, than otherwise she would have had; but as this has sometime since ceased, so Charity ought to be exercised, in forgeting what was amiss; in hopes the like may never be heard again. My Advice to you Dissenting Protestants, is, for the most part, the same I gave to the Church of England: I need not enlarge any farther on the abso∣lute necessity of Ʋnity and Charity among Protestants at this Season, when it is very manifest, that nothing is more delightful or acceptable to those that have the Protestant Interest, than to see one Protestant rending, tearing, and back-biting another: It being too apparent, that these Fishers of Men delight in troubled Waters, knowing it to be the fittest time and opportunity to over∣come their Heretical Enemies, (for so they call Protestants) when their Dissen∣tions among themselves are greatest. Therefore, I earnestly perswade and entreat you, as you tender the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom; and the establishing your sound Religion, to put on a Spirit of Meekness, Charity, and Complyance, as far as possible, with the Church of England; and if you can't receive satisfaction enough from her Learned Members, throughly to Conform; yet let not your Charity be so narrow, as to have a bad Opinion of those Worthy Men, that are abundantly satisfied with the reasonableness of their Conformity. As you desire no harsh Censures be past on you for Nonconfor∣mity; so be sure you avoid reflecting on those Pious Men, that hold it lawful to assent and consent to all the Articles of the Church of England. If possible, have Peace with all Men, especially with those of the same Houshold of Faith you profess. Strongly endeavour to prevent bitter Invective Speeches against that Church; which, in all probability, is like to be the only Invincible Bul∣wark against Popery: And I am the more inclin'd to be an earnest Advocate for the Church of England, nor only because I have hopes she has laid aside those bitter Things, formerly, with some Truth, laid to her charge; but chiefly because a vast number of her Worthy, and eminently Learned Members,
have, with great Learning and Solidity defended our Holy Religion, from the Heresie, Schism and Novelty falsly charged on it by the Church of Rome. All Persons that Study any thing to the purpose, of the Controversie betwixt us and them, must certainly perceive, how admirably they have confuted the unreasonable and unaccountable Doctrines of that pretended Infallible Church; clearly proving the Truth and Excellency of the Protestant Religion; and that we are not (as they pretend) beholding to them for it: But evi∣dently making it appear, that the Protestant Faith is most ancient, and that its Doctrine is consonant or agreeable to the Word of God, and the practice of the purest Christians, in the Primitive Times. This very consideration alone, is sufficient to clear the Body of that Church from being Popishly affected. A second Reason to Love and Esteem them for, is, their firm adhering to the known Laws of the Land; for what-ever a few unfound Members of her Communion have done to the contrary, yet she is not accountable for them; the greatest and most considerable part, having been found very faithful on that account. A third Thing, for which you ought to value the Members of the Church of England, viz. Their stedfast adhering to the Rights of the People, and espe∣cially of the Clergy. Their Consciences have been so just, that notwithstand∣ing the Angry Frowns of Majesty have taken hold of hm, and that they have, and are likely to suffer very much by it; they rather choose to trust God with their Temporal Felicity and Comfort, than sinfully violate those Sacred Oaths they have so Solemnly taken, by betraying (in the least) the Trust reposed in them; notwithstanding the Frowns or Allurements of the greatest Men. This only single Instance of their signal Fidelity to God and Man, ought to have no small sway or Influence with all considering Persons. He that orders his Con∣versation according to the Divine Rule, and faithfully Studies to preserve the just Rights and Lawful Liberties of Mankind, deservedly Merits the greatest Love and Affection imaginable. But he that makes no Conscience of his Duty to God, and designedly makes Ship-wrack of the Lawful Rights and Priviledges of any Party or Society, and that will Sell his Birth-Right for an inconsiderable Value, deserves not the Name of a Man, or to be admitted into the Society of Mankind. I desire you would imitate the Church of Eng∣land, in all those things for which I justly commend her. In the first place, Follow her Loyalty as far as you can, and not break the Laws of God nor Men, thereto corresponding. In the second place, Be servent and constant in the Sacred Religion you profess your selves Members of. You know, with∣out doubt, the greatest part of you, the Transcendent Excellency of your Religion; and therefore, if any of you should, for Interest or Preferment, turn from Truth to Falshood, from Light to Darkness from a Sound to a Corrupt Religion; How great and unpardonable would so wilful a Sin be? And, to
speak the Truth, I must do you the Justice to commend you for your firmness in your Holy Profession, in that I have heard few or none, that have either gone over, or been perverted to the Communion of the Church of Rome, not∣withstanding the alluring Favours of that Church towards you, and practice of her Clergy and Laiety to gain Proselytes among you. What I shall say on this Head, is, Go on, and Prosper; and, without doubt, the Spirit of Truth will guide and direct you for the best. In the third place, Imitate their Fidelity to the Laws of the Land: You can't, but with admiration, perceive how stedfastly they labour to preserve them, and all the reasonable Rights and Priviledges of the People. As you are Rational Men, professing the Protestant Religion, and render the Publick Good, let not any uncertain Transitory Interest prevail with you so far, as basely to give up your Religion, and the known useful Laws of the Land, be sure, you neither consent to the suspending, or taking away any, that (to all Intelligent Men) are like to prove your only Security. When the Country-man designs to preserve his Grain, from those Creatures that would Eat it up, or otherwise spoil it, he is far from rooting up the Fence that secures it: So ought you carefully to preserve the Laws, for your own and the Publick Safety. Things at present look, to you perhaps, with a good Aspect; I wish, they may long continue in that condition: But, if the course of things should mightily alter, and these Halcion Days (of which you have no assurance) should not long continue, how greatly would your hopeful expectations be frustrated? Therefore, be sure you do not impru∣dently purchase your present Liberty, and seeming Favours, at too dear a rate; for such Acts may wholly deprive you of the Favours, that you may o∣therwise expect from the next Successor, &c. But strenuously endeavour to manifest to the World, that your former great out cries against the least In∣vasions of your Religion, Liberties, Properties, and the Laws of the Land, were really in earnest and, that as then you truly hated those that were in any mea∣sure guilty of them; so now, it something lyes in your Power, you will not by the greatest Perswasions and Promises of Kindnesses, be wrought on, to part with the Laws of the Land because you can't well be Ignorant of the fatal consequence of so doing. If you either give us the Laws, or cease to execute those that are most necessary, you not only highly serve and gratifie your known Enemies; but by betraying your Trust you will render your selves extraordinary Odiou in the Opinion of most Men; in that you are unfaith∣ful to what you formerly so much cryed up, viz. That the Laws might flou∣rish, and Justice might duly and impartially be distributed, and all Men, qui∣etly possess what of right belongs to them. No Honest Man, or good Chri∣stian, will disswade you from Serving or Obeying your Soveraign, as fr as i Lawful: But, in all Obedience, strict recourse must be had to the Divine and Human Laws, that the Limits of neither be Transgressed; and then the
Issue of such Obedience, will be of no ill consequence to you or the Publick; Such Obedience will redound to your Immortal Honour. Fourthly, Consider, if the the Papists in England were not of a rigid, violent, and ambitious Nature, they would not make all this stir about the Test, which debars them from a share in the Government. In Holland we know, that though the Papists are very Peaceable, and have given many Years Testimo∣nies of their good Behaviour, under a Protestant Power; yet the States, for their own and the Publick Safety, will admit none of them into any Offices. I am of Opinion, and not without Reason, Roman Catholicks here, can't give so good an account of their Peaceable and Christian Behaviour, as those in Holland can: Therefore, greater Arguments may be produced, why no Power ought to be granted to them in England: It being notoriously known, that though their Prince be a Just Man, valluing his Word, yet a restless Zeal moves the Papists (manibus pedibusque) to advance what they call Catholick Interest; which, without any Restraint, will not keep within the bounds of Moderation. But if the Laws are taken off, I know not of any Obstruction they can meet with; then we must expect to be Govern'd wholly by Papists, and the conse∣quence of such a Government must be terrible to Protestants; for what can they expect less than Popish Lords and Commons; and from such a Parliament, what less than a perfect establishing of Popery by a Law; and, without doubt, when such Laws are Enacted in favour of that Religion, as severe will be made against the growing of Protestant Heresie in England, from such Laws, and such Times, God in Mercy deliver England. Pray, therefore, consider, if you once give the Papists so much Power, whether, so soon as they have it, they will not make severer Tests against Protestants, than ever were made a∣gainst the Church of Rome? The late Famous Actions of the French King, and the Marian Kindness of old, to Hereticks, are convincing Evidences of the Lenity and Moderation of a Government, wholly in the hands of Papists. As for the Happiness, and flourishing of Kingdoms or Republicks, under the Papists, See the contrary in Dr. Burnet's Travels. The Romanist's great Ambition, and eager desire to be in Eminent Places of Trust, is enough to convince any Rational Man, that for no mean or inconsi∣derable Enterprises, do they contend for them: They think if once they can get into the Saddle, with greater ease they may Ride the poor Hereticks. I would advise you to Ponder, with great deliberation, the Natures, Disposi∣tions, and especially the Interests of those Men, that with might and main la∣bour to take off the Test. And if it shall appear, (as doubtless it will) 'tis a grievance to those only, that espouse a Forreign Interest, directly contrary to yours; and that the Test is a strong defence to preserve you. I hope you will manifest your real Love and Kindness to this Nation, by undergoing, for a time, as great Severities as ever, rather than in any degree be Instrumental
in ruining of this now happy Kingdom (I mean in her Laws). I would gladly know of any ambitious Papist, Whether it would not be more unreasonably bold for him to desire a share in that Government, from which he is Legally excluded, than for a Hugonet in France, where, as I never heard, were any Laws to exclude him, to desire to be prefer'd to no small Offices: I am ve∣rily perswaded the Body of the Papists there, would be very unwilling to be Govern'd by him; I think the case is not parrellel, and that the Protestants ought to insist much more on the same Priviledge in England. In the Fifth place, Seriously think of the professed Kindness of your new Friends of the Church of Rome, you may and ought to consider, Cui bono, For what good or design, is so great Friendship pretended, and so many Favours now on a suddain confer'd and accumulated on you; who, not long since, were esteemed unwohy of Life: You may well enquire, what occasioned so great a Calm, after so violent and Tempestuous a Storm. It must, certainly, be matter of the highest admitation to you, to see the wonderful Moderati∣on and Clemency of the Roman Catholicks at this time to you obstinate He∣reticks; especially since the Members of that Church are now in so great Power: I say, to see a Church, whose Principles are directly opposite to the Protestant Interest, so caress the strictest sort of them; when as, not long since, the greatest Violence and Cruelty imaginable, to extirpate them, was thought not only lawful, but necessary; it's well if you find these Kindnesses real, and not to make you, what you hate to be, Tools for a Design both dangerous and dishonourable: To see Men, one while, breath out nothing but Invectives a∣gainst the Reformed; at another time, if it more serves their purposes, fawn∣ing and courting Hereticks, is enough to put considering Men on their Guard. Such unexpected Kindnesses may put you on enquiry. First, Whether you come nearer in Belief or Practice to that Church now? or, whether you be as guilty of Heresie (as she calls it) as ever? Secondly, Whether the usual Spirit of Persecution, and Antipathy to Prote∣stants (though at present in England restrain'd) be not as predominant in France, and other places, as ever? It's well if Roman Catholicks can Act con∣trary to their known and beloved Principles, in puting on a Moderation and Temper suitable to the Gospel. If it be clearly evinced, that Protestant Dis∣senters have not in the least obliged the Papists, by their receeding or depart∣ing from their own Principles; or by their favourable construction of the Articles and Opinions of the Church of Rome; then it is visible their designs are (since the Church of England will not serve their turn) if possible, to make the Dissenters their Tools, they being the last Refuge they can fly to, in order to their Assistance. The late Actions of the Papists, towards you, bespeak your favourable Opinion: But the too well known Maxim amongst the Ro∣manists, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks, doth justly cause Prote∣stants
to expect no real or greater Kindnesses from them, than consists with their Interests or Designs to manifest. If the Papists shew you outwardly great Respect; and, for Sinister Ends, treat you as Friends for a while, till you have served their turn, by taking off the Test and Penal Laws, that they might be on as equal Terms as you: It's not only Mine, but the Opinion of Ten Thousand more; that not only you, but the Nation will dearly pay for the Kindnesses you have received from them: And, let me tell you, if things are so ordered, you may Whistle for any place of Trust in the Government: And when all the Administration of Justice is wholly in the Romanists (as doubtless then it will be) you Hereticks must be content with such as can be got: For I know not where you can expect any Redress, or to whom you can appeal. These Considerations, I hope, will make you perceive as great a necessity of continuing those Laws, as ever there were of Enacting them: especially the Test. Pray God direct you, that you may act Prudently, for your own Credit, and the Nations Good. I have great cause to hope well of you, because, for the most part, you are Men of Consideration and Un∣derstanding, that scorn to be Accessaries, much less the chief Actors, in sub∣verting the happy Constitution of our Government. I make no question but your wse Carriage, at this time, by being faithful to your King, your Religion, and the Laws, will so far reconcile you to the favour of the Church of England, that when ever a seasonable Opportunity shall offer for the easing of you in a Legal way, her Members, will readily consent to it; for they will not be so void of all Gratitude, as wholly to for∣get your sumness to your Religion, and the necessary Laws of the Land; but if you Act contrary to the Interest of Protestants, and of the Nation, you can expect only the short Favours of the Church of Rome; and not easily to be admitted into the favourable Opinion of the Church of England, nor re∣ceive those Kindnesses from her, which otherwise you might expect. And I must profess, you will deserve none of her Favours, if you study more to serve the Roman, than the Protestant Interest: But I hope better things of you. I shall not enlarge, having (I hope) writ enough to have convinc'd you already. I shall Answer one grand Objection, relating to the Penal Laws; The Test (as I can understand) being not much Insisted on; unless by some Mercenary Men, whose Writings are all they have to depend on. The po∣pular Argument, for a present Repeal, with some timerous and passionate Dissenters, is this, That the Members of the Church of England, are of a Per∣secuting Spirit; and as one, the other end of the City, said, That while these Rods (meaning the Penal Laws) are in their hands, they will be continually lashing Protestants: Therefore, it is (as he said) the highest piece of Pru∣dence to take them off, while it is in their Power. I always heard a great account of the Gentleman, that his Memory was very good, his Parts very
eminent: If so, I can't but admire he forgets, or at least understands not, from whence those severe Orders, for ruining Dissenters, came: Nay, farther, for what Ends and Designs things were so violently carried on. Perhaps it may farther be Objected, That many of the Divines of the Church of Eng∣land, often Zealously pressed this Persecution. I'll grant the Accusation in part; but I can the better excuse those hot Men, when I consider what Mo∣tives, Incentives, and Promotions came from that end of the City, that now so much condemns the Church of England for her Zeal to Serve the King in that particular: Since things were so carried, that no Clergy-Men were esteemed or preferred unless he would comply with Courtly Orders, in Thundring against Dissenters. As there are, amongst Men of all Perswasions, Ambitious, Indi∣gent Men; so, I confess, there were some few such as Mr. Thompson of Bristol, among the Church of England Divines: But for the Richer and more Learned part of that vast Body, I am fully convinc'd, few, if any, were of that Per∣secuting Spirit. Farther, The Worthy Members of the Church of England are grateful Understanding Men; and I have that Charity for them, as not to imagine, That if the Dissenters be, to their Power, Friendly and Service∣able to the Church of England now; if it should ever lye in her Members Power hereafter, but that a trebble return of Kindness and Gratitude would by them be made. Lastly, To conclude, I must profess, that I hate a Persecuting Spirit in Men, pretending to Christianity; and I do freely declare, I should heartily rejoyce, if this time were a fit opportunity to relieve the Dissenters; but, were I in their condition, as I had already undergone much, so, by the Assi∣stance of God, I would Suffer much more, rather than, like Sampson, who, when he had lost part of his Strength, for Revenge, with what he had left, pull'd down the House, not only on the Philistines, but on his own Head. Such a Foolish Revenge would be but a poor satisfaction to a Rational Man: How aptly the comparison is made, I leave to understanding Dissen∣ters to consider.
POSTSCRIPT. I Had almost forgot Two weighty Considerations; The first is, You ought to consider, and seriously reflect on Courtly Favours and Pro∣mises; and how the Court opposed the Kindnesses design'd for you by the Westminster Parliament: I must acquaint you, That Three Parts in Four, of that Parliament, were strict Church of England-Men; and that they had such a respect for you, that they unanimously passed a Bill for easing of Protestant Dissenters; And I can't conceive, why it was by the Court obstructed, unless because it did not extend to the Papists, as well as Dis∣senters: However, for Reasons best known to themselves, instead of Pre∣senting the Bill to King Charles the Second, to have his Royal Stamp, it was lost (a thing never heard of before): This Act will sufficiently clear the major part of the Church of England, from that Odious Accusation of being Promoters of that Persecution, then so vigorously carried on: And since it clears them, it must fall heavy somewhere: I do not affirm, the Pa∣pists had any hand in losing that Bill; but I know not what to think of it. No Man can doubt, but that great Kindness to Protestant Dissenters, was really by that Parliament designed: But there was a considerable Party then in being, with whose Interests, Designs, and Glory, such Lenity could not then consist, what ever it may do now. Secondly, Some great Advocates for Repealing the Test, pretend to an Expedient for it; and declare, they will part with it, provided such Secu∣rity as can be proposed, may be gotten: As an Expedients, in another Case, was thought Odious and Ridiculous; so now, a Nominal, and not a Virtual Obligatory Law, ought to have the same Fate. It's my Opi∣nion, If the pretended Expedient be as Valid and Secure to Prote∣stants as the Test, it would be equally indifferent for the Papists to let you keep what you have: And some think, if you must have a Test, it will not be grateful to the Roman Catholicks. Wherein lyeth the Kindness
of the King, if he parts with any Law, and at the same time grants ano∣ther as severe, to Exclude his Subjects, (whom He thinks Worthy) from all publick Places of Trust. I must freely tell you my Mind, If you are concern'd for preserving your Religion, and what is dear to you, and us All, Remember, and abide by that common Proverb, One Bird in Hand, is worth Two in the Bush. You would reckon a Purchaser (though he were sure of a Penniworth) very imprudent, if he should Pay the full Value for his Land, before he were sure to receive a satis∣factory Title from the Vender. As to the Promoters and Patriots of an Expedient, in lieu of the Test, In the first place, are they sure such a thing will be granted? I put the Quaery, because, if I am not mis-in∣formed, the Draconical Author had no Thanks for proposing it, in his An∣swer to the Letter to a Dissenter. To Conclude, I shall give you my Sentiments in a plain Intelligible In∣stance: I can as soon be wrought upon to believe an Ignorant Pretender, that shall pretend to take out my Sound Teeth, and put in a better Sett in the room of them, as to Credit the Promoters of an Expedient: As I should admire at the Confidence of the former, so I should be amazed at the Ignorance of the latter. I believe the impossibility of my getting new sub∣stantial Teeth, and their getting as firm Security for the Protestant Re∣ligion, in place of the Test, will be alike equal: Therefore, be Prudent, and consider the danger of altering a well-Establish'd Government: For, it's manifest, when things are in Confusion, it's a hard matter to set them right again. FINIS.
