S2632 R19634 12172596 55464
A SERMON Preach'd at the Chappel Royal in the TOWER, Upon the DEATH Of her Sacred Majesty, Our Late Gracious Queen MARY. By a true Lover of the Church, the King, and his Country. London, Printed by J. D. for R. Mount, and sold by John Whitlock near Stationers-Hall. 1695.
TO THE READER. THE following Sermon was preach'd soon after the fatal Death which occasion'd it; and at the Importu∣nity of some (whom the Author could not in Gratitude disoblige) it was also printed: but not thinking it worthy of a more publick View, there were no more Books run off than what were presented to those who were desirous to see it, except a very few to some particular Friends; by which he has drawn this Inconvenience upon himself, that a greater number of his Friends remain dis∣gusted than he hath had the opportunity of
obliging by it: For which Reason, as also because he is (by no incompetent Judges) inform'd that it may be of use at this Juncture; but especially to do himself and it Right, (there having happen'd several Mistakes and Oversights in the first Im∣pression) he is prevail'd with to suffer it to go abroad, but under the same Defects of Stile and Method as before; hoping it may not (by those it is designed for) be lik'd the worse because of the Plainness of its Dress.
ISAIAH XL. 6, 7, 8. The Voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field. The Grass withereth, the Flower fadeth, because the Spi∣rit of the Lord hath blown upon it: surely the People is Grass. The Grass withereth, the Flower fadeth: but the Word of our God shall stand for ever. I Question not, but upon the reading of the Text, you easily observ'd it to suite but too well with the sad and bewailed occasion of this Solemnity; which hath given us (beyond any thing to us known) a doleful Instance of its Truth: and all I can say will come infi∣nitely short of the sad but clear Comment, which the Breath of our Nostrils, She of whom we said,Lam. 4.20. Nations shall rest under her Shadow, hath given us upon it; who be∣ing dead yet speaks, yea cries in a louder than the Pro∣phet's Voice, All Flesh is Grass, &c. All Flesh. It pleased the great Creator of all things to make at first three sorts of living Creatures: Angels he made pure Spirits without Flesh, and therefore only for Heaven, not to dwell on Earth. Brutes he made Flesh, without Immortal Souls, and therefore only for Earth, not to pretend to Heaven. Man is of a middle Nature, par∣taking both of Flesh and Spirit, and therefore made both for Heaven and Earth. But as his Flesh is but to minister
and serve his Spirit, so he was made for Earth, but as his passage and way to Heaven, not that this should be his Home or Happiness. But how wofully have we perverted this Order, whose incessant Cares for the Things of this Life sufficiently declare, that we believe our selves here at home? One Man eagerly pursuing Sensual Pleasures, as if he had nothing to mind or hope for but what the Beasts enjoy. Another Riches, and that with so much Earnestness, as if he were to enjoy the same for ever; tho the Fool knows not but this very Night he must part from them. A third hunt∣ing after Honour and Dominion, so as to stick at nothing that may compass it, and yet little knows how soon his Honour may be laid in the Dust. A fourth after Popular Applause, which is nothing but a Blast, nothing more vain and uncertain than it is. Whereas, if we did but rightly understand our State and Condition here, and seriously consider that all Flesh is Grass, we would little value these things, and at best, use the World as if we used it not: Use it no otherwise than a Traveller doth his Inn, and how is that? when he comes there, tho he finds every thing ready, a Room well furnished, and all things there∣in not only convenient, but delightful too; yet he is not so silly as to set his Heart upon them, because he knows on the Morrow he is to leave them and be gone: And there's no Man that travels homeward, that would multiply Bu∣sinesses on himself unnecessarily in the Way. When he is at Home in his House, he may find sundry Imployments to busy himself about, but in the Inn he cares for nothing but Rest and Refreshment. So Men that are thoughtful or wise,1 Pet. 2.11. know themselves to be but Strangers and Pilgrims here, and therefore look for a Country and City to come, and so think it no Wisdom to intermeddle too much in the Affairs of that Country through which only they are to pass; but, as Citizens of Heaven, send up their Hearts
Desire where they profess their Treasure is. This Lesson our Saviour teacheth when he tells us,Mat. 6.32, 33. After all these things below do the Gentiles seek, but seek ye the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness of it. And St. Paul assures us,1 Cor. 7.31. the Fashion of this World passeth away, and wisheth us not to fashion our selves to it. Could a Traveller justly seize all the valuable things that occur in his way, and convey them to his Home, so as to be of advantage to him there, his endeavouring it might be the more excusable. And so in our Case, could a Man carry the World to Hell to bribe the Flames, or corrupt his Tormentors, there were something to be said for our Fondness of it; but the Psalmist has already assur'd us of the contrary, His Glory shall not descend after him.Psal. 49.17. Or could he (tho at the Expence of all his Worldly Enjoy∣ments) buy out his Pardon, or procure his Peace, before he come there; this might well excuse our grasping at it, but that's not to be done neither;Ver. 8. for the Redemption of the Soul is precious, and ceaseth for ever: And what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?Mat. 16.26. For what material thing can equalize a Spirit? Many things may be had more precious and fine than the Body, but all of them have no proportion to a Spiritual Being. St. Paul, we know, counts all things but Dung;Phil. 3.8. and can we think that God will take Dung in Exchange for a Soul? O! how dreadful will it be at last to think, that for a little of the World, for the Satisfaction of a Lust, for a few drossy Pleasures, and sensual Delights, which have been here (not without the mixture of much Sorrow and Allay) enjoyed, you have lost your Souls, and forfeited your Interest in those Mansions that are above, where there are Pleasures for evermore: And all this (in a great mea∣sure) because we believe not, at least mind not this Voice in the Text, All Flesh is Grass. Man has many Excellences and Advantages which give
him a due Preference above all other living Creatures; but as to his Flesh there is nothing extraordinary in it. It's of the same Substance and Form, says one, with the Creatures we feed upon, altogether inclined to corruption, and nothing but Frailty and Vanity it self. And we need go no further than the Expression in the Text to evince it, All Flesh is Grass. All that we see, all that we admire, all the most tempt∣ing Objects we gaze and dote upon, yea, the whole World, and all that is therein, is all but Flesh, and all Flesh is Grass. But is this a Truth so Universal, that it admits of no Exception? tho it may hold good, as to the generality of Men; yet are not the Princes and Monarchs, and Heroes of the World exempted? Have not they something in them, that may privilege them against the Insults, at least, of the King of Terrors? something that they may (upon oc∣casion) plead against the common Fate? The Prophet seems to agree to all this, and in the very Text makes some difference between a mean and a great Person, between a Subject and a Prince; but what is it? No other, than is between green Grass and a Flower; which tho more beau∣tiful to the Eye, more sweet and pleasing to the Sense, is yet every whit as fading, as perishing, and as subject to be trod under Foot, or to be scorch'd and wither'd by the Sun, as the Grass is. As they grow together in the same Field, so they are equally liable to be cut down by the edg of the same Sythe: and therefore it is that the Prophet after the Voice had cried, All Flesh is Grass, adds, and all the Goodliness of it is as the Flower of the Field. By the Goodliness of the Flesh, he means its Youth, its Health, its Strength, its Beauty, its Vigour, or whatever in it is most Valuable and Pleasing. By it we may under∣stand the state and condition of a Man that wants nothing, nay, that abounds in all things the World can afford: As Riches, Honour and Pleasure. Flesh, saith the Prophet,
in all the Glory of it, in the free and full injoyment of all things on the highest Pinnacle of Honour, seated on a Throne, crowned with Diadems, and incircled with all the Badges of Royalty and Grandeur; yet in the midst of all this Pomp and Splendor, it's still but Flesh, and liable to such damping thoughts as these. May not God this very Night, take me away like the Fool in the Gospel, from all these things, or these from me? May I not, nay, must I not within these few Years, it may be within these few Weeks, or Days, instead of my Honour be laid in the Dust? instead of my Purple and Scarlet be clothed with Rottenness? instead of my Lux∣uries and Delicacies, become my self the Food of Worms? Is not the poor Soul in my Bosom, an Immortal Soul? Must it not have a Being, so long as there's a God who is able to support it? And will not all I toil and moil for here, all I covet and doat upon, all my beloved Bags and superfluous Titles, my sweetest Pleasures, and my highest Preferments, my very Learning and my natural Endowments, and every thing save my Sins (which I must then reckon for) forsake me when I enter into that Immortality? I say, when a Man shall take him∣self thus to task, and his Conscience summons him to such serious thoughts as these; How will he be startl'd and amaz'd under the Sense of his own Frailty, and his little hopes of a better State? And how dreadful will it be for his Immortal Soul, to have nothing between it and Eter∣nal Misery, but that which will crumble and moulder into Dust, and leave the poor Soul that trusted to it to sink into bottomless Calamities? Nor do our earthly Injoyments always continue with us even to the last; but often leave us before we our selves go off. Riches make themselves Wings, Honour is fading,Prov. 23.5. Wit, Beauty, and Strength fail, all created Delights will quickly have an End; and the Casualties that attend
their very Enjoyment, doth sufficiently discover their Va∣nity and the little Stress that's to be laid upon them. One Rich to day, and Poor to morrow; in Health, Sound and Strong to day, to morrow Languishing and Expiring on a sick Bed; now advanc'd to the highest Pinnacle of Honour, anon deprest and expos'd to Infamy and Dis∣grace; attended by trains of Parasites and Flatterers to day, to morrow deserted, slighted and forsaken by all. And as it is with Men, so it is with Things. Cities, Towns and Villages Flourishing and Beautiful, Rich and Opulent to day, to morrow laid in Ashes, and levell'd with the Ground. So that there's no Flower more fading, no Bubble more vanishing, no Dream more deluding, nothing more Vain, nothing more uncertain than the World is. It's all but Grass, or at best but as the Flower of the Field; the Grass withereth, the Flower fadeth. But in the midst of all this Misery, Vanity and Un∣certainty, the Prophet adds, what may stay and sup∣port us, But the Word of our God shall stand for ever. All that's in the World, all the Happiness that that Flesh which is but Grass, can pretend to in its Passage here, is full of Vanity, Uncertainty and Disappointments, and then usually fail a Man most, when he most of all relies on them; which must needs be one of the greatest De∣feats that can be. For those things wherein Men fear Miscarriage, or expect Disappointment, they prepare such a disposition of Mind as may be fit to bear it; but when a Man is surpriz'd with Evil, when that happens which he least expected, the Novelty increaseth the Trouble: And the Scripture expresseth the greatness of a Judgment, by the unexpectedness of it;Isa. 6.3, 4. When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for. Their not looking for it, rendred the Judgment so much the more Terrible. A Breach in an instant, a momentary, a sudden Destruction, a swift Dam∣nation, a flying Roll, a winged Woman, are all Expressions
to denote a severe Judgment. Now Men are too too apt to promise themselves much Contentment and Satisfacti∣on in the Fruition of worldly Things; and to be herein disappointed (as they usually are) must needs be a great Surprize, and occasion no small Vexation. But the Word of God is an abiding Word, as founded on the Immutability of God's own Truth: he that makes it his Refuge, relies on the Omnipotency of God himself; and has all the Strength of the Almighty, ingag'd to help him. Asa was safe while he depended upon God in his Promises,2 Chron. 16.7, 8, 9. against the huge Hosts of the Ethiopians and Lubims; but when he turned aside to other Aids, and trusted too much in the Arm of Flesh, he purchased to himself nothing but perpetual Wars. And this was that which established the Throne of Jehoshaphat, and caused the Fear of the Lord to fall on all the Kingdoms of the Land that were round about him;2 Chron. 17.9, 11. because he honour'd the Word of God, and caused it to be taught to his People. When Israel and Judah did at any time forget to lean up∣on God's Word, and betook themselves to correspondence with Idolatrous People, or other the like Helps, they found themselves always bereft of Succour; and all their Hopes deceived and blasted. Which should teach us not to rest upon our own Wisdom, nor lean upon our own Strength, nor build our Hopes and Assurances upon Hu∣man Foundations; but in all conditions lay hold upon God's Word, which shall stand for ever, and support us in any Extremity,Psal. 23.4. and carry us through the Valley of the Shadow of Death it self. And thus I have done with what I design'd to offer from the Text: but to apply it to the Occasion, I know neither how to begin, nor where to end. The Voice cries so loud, and the Blow (tho for our Sins justly inflicted) is every way so amazing, that the very Thoughts of it were enough to make a Man lose all
Method, though he had studied it never so carefully. And therefore that I may neither confound you, nor lose my self, I shall only glance at some few things that may satisfy us, what great Advantages we might have reapt from her Life, had it pleased the wise Disposer of all things to have continued it. And this will naturally tend: First, To give us a due Sense of our Loss. Secondly, To quicken us to such Duties, whereby (since 'tis impossible to improve it to our Temporal Advantage) we may yet make the best of it, that our Misfortune as well as our other Circumstances will admit. The Loss of a good (tho private) Person, is at all Times, especially in bad Times, a just ground of deep Sorrow; What then must be the loss of a good Queen, who is a common Stock, in which Millions have a Share? A burning Lamp, which shin'd and imparted its Light to three great Kingdoms? No wonder if the exhausting of such a Store, the quenching of such a Lamp, should be Matter of doleful Complaint. And here I could willingly indulge both yours and my own Passion, that we might sit down a while in Silence, and only by the Language of our Tears speak our Sense of this heavy, this irreparable Loss: But all Passions, e∣specially that of Grief, need rather a Bridle than a Spur; and we have something else to do, upon such an extraor∣dinary Occasion, than to bewail our Loss after the com∣mon rate, tho that's allowed us too. A bright Star is removed; nay, our Sun is set: Well may Darkness over-spread our Horizon;Zech. 11.2. A Cedar is fal∣len, well may the Fir-trees howl. A Cedar, which, had God so pleased, might have stood and flourished much longer: But we often see the loftiest Cedar cut down be∣fore the useless Shrub; And they frequently fall, (says one) who while they stood, not only graced the Forest,
but gave Shade and Shelter to others too. And oh! that we had not now the Occasion to bewail the Fall of the most flourishing Plant that grac'd our own or any other Soil; verifying that of St. Paul,1 Cor. 7.31. The Fashion of this World passeth away, and we together with it. The Throne leaves some, and others leave it:Heb. 12.28. and as there is but one King∣dom which cannot be shaken, Eternal in the Heavens; so there is but one King, who is the Immortal King of A∣ges, God over all, blessed for ever. All the rest are but Flesh, and all Flesh is Grass. After such a Voice, what can warrant any of you that you shall be alive while to Morrow? Who can be Securi∣ty for his own Life one Moment beyond the present? You'll say, my Youth, my Strength, my Temperance, and my Vigour, these will secure me: But was there ever any more healthy, more lively, more temperate, or more vigorous than the Queen? How sprightly, how fair, how hail, how charming was she but this Day three Weeks, and almost a Week after? And yet the King of Terrors stole upon her, before her Self, or at least her Friends suspected, being even (after some Days illness) look'd upon as Safe, and past all Danger, on Tuesday; and yet, beyond all Expectation, given over, and the Sen∣tence of Death pronounc'd by her Physicians before Noon on Wednesday: So vain a Thing is Man. But this can be no surprize to those, whole usual Exer∣cise it is to die daily; and as St. Ambrose conceived of Valentinian the Emperor, so may we of her Majesty; The Evidences past in her Health, are fair Proofs of that Disposition her Soul was in in her Sickness. But more of this anon: for tho all her earthly Advantages are now be∣come the Spoils of Mortality, yet She's not to be laid in the Dust like common Mold, nor deposited in the Shades with silence. It's true, in the blessed State to which she is now ar∣riv'd,
crowned with an incorruptible Diadem, in the Company of Angels and Saints, and all her Triumphant Ancestors; She needs no Praises of ours, but yet that which every good Man may claim, is much more justly her Due; Commendation after Death, being a just Tri∣bute to a Religious Life. Consult the Scriptures, and you shall scarce find one Godly Man laid in his Grave without an Epitaph of Ho∣nour; view the Fathers, and you shall observe it their Practice, to honour the Death of the Good, especially if Princes: and if this had never been done before, it might be now allowed to Her, who was as well the Best, as the greatest among Women. As to the latter, 'twere easy to shew it, in the Instances of her Illustrious Birth, (being descended from a Royal Race of Kings, as well the great∣est, as of the longest and most uninterrupted Succession now in the Christian World) in her sutable Education, in her natural and acquired Accomplishments; which rendred Her the Darling of the Age, as well as the Glory of her Sex. But we must leave these, and many other Advan∣tages, with all Her great Actions, to fill up Chronicles; and they will better become the History and Annals of the Time, than the Nook of a Sermon. The sweetness of her Temper, her Beauty, Wit, and Charms of Conversation, which made Her, like Vespasi∣an, Deliciae humani generis, and rendred her Amiable and Dear to all that had the Honour to know Her, (tho they were Gifts from Above) yet must they now be past over in silence, as being Praeda Mortis, a Spoil unto Death and the Grave. Which Consideration should cure the undue Esteem which too many Christians seem to put upon them; be∣ing more ambitious to outvy others in every thing, rather than real Holiness; which (after all's done) is the only Ornament that Death cannot spoil us of.
Nor were the Endowments of her Mind any whit in∣feriour to those of her great Birth, and other Personal Advantages; her Apprehension more quick and lively, her Judgment more penetrating and solid, her Elocution more fluent, graceful, and every way more perswading than is usually found in her Sex. And what good use She made of these Talents, I need not tell you; and it may justly upbraid many other Ladies, even of the first Rank, who (I know not upon what pretences) omit improving them the same way. I am sure she had more Business to divert her, more Plenty and Abundance to entertain her, as much Beauty to tempt her, and more Favour and Honour to entangle her, than any of them all, and live in the same Atheistical degenerate Age that they live in: An Age wherein a sincere and serious, a religious and devout Temper is ex∣pos'd to Ridicule, and esteem'd the most unmodish, un∣fashionable, and useless thing that can be. And yet all these Disadvantages, all these Temptations to raise her Pride, and make her haughty, to render her careless, secure and indevout, serv'd only to raise her Am∣bition to behave her self more agreeable to her great Qua∣lity, by a Carriage truly Exemplary, and every way Great; a Carriage that was in all respects Religious, Ho∣nourable and Vertuous. The great God of Heaven, the Creator and Disposer of all things, was chiefly regarded in all her Behaviour, and the first and main Principle of all her Actions. Hence sprung that awful Regard and Reverence of his Divine Majesty, which was visible in all her Carriage; and I have heard that she used frequently to express a great sense of the Folly, the Ignorance and Impudence of those (tho esteem'd Wits) who pretend to deny the Be∣ing of a Deity, when they had such clear Convictions of Him, his Attributes, and Providence, in every particular
of the Creation, even such as were obvious and discove∣rable to their very Senses. And as no Pulpit-Discourses pleased her better, than such as were dexterously levell'd against this unreasonable, this hellish Error; so for pre∣vention of its growth in an Age so fruitful in Evil, they were always commanded to the Press. It was upon this Belief, upon this Knowledg (as the best Foundation) that she rear'd that noble Structure of Piety and Devotion, Uprightness and Sincerity, Purity and Charity, and all other the Duties of Christianity, that shined so brightly through the whole Course of her Life. Dr. Wak's Sermon at Greys-Inn on the same occa∣sion.But by a Discourse just come to my Hands, I find my self prevented, and every way out-done, as to what I offered upon these Heads; therefore I chose rather to re∣fer the Reader to it, and the rather, because that Reve∣vend Author speaks all, or most, from his own Knowledg, which may render it more authentick, and more satis∣factory too; and (as he himself observes) the Reader need not fear his imposing on him, for he may defy him to flatter if he would. There you may behold this great Queen delineated at large; you may see how great, how good, how every way exemplary she was in her Life, and she is no less so in her Death; being an Object not lightly to be laid to all our Hearts not only as Subjects, not only as Christians, but as Men, as Mortals too; warning all that have seen or shall hear of the sudden blasting of this Flower, that all Flesh is Grass; and louder than any other Voice cries, All the Goodliness thereof is but as the Flower of the Field. There you may see how great a Friend she was to the Church, how careful of the Welfare of the State, and how much she did contribute to the Happiness of both: how religious, how pious in Publick, how exact, how punctual in Private; how constant in the Chappel, how
frequent in the Closet, and how sincere and devout in both. I had once the Honour to be near her when she receiv'd the blessed Sacrament, and I shall never forget with what Reverence, what Humility, what Zeal and Intention she did participate of that Divine Mystery; which plain∣ly shewed she was as sincerely as seemingly devout. Her Affections seem'd to be raised above their common pitch, and her Carriage during the whole Action, was so Heavenly and so Divine, as if her Soul had actually ascended to that God, to whom her Prayers were directed; and brought to my Thoughts that Saying of St. Luke's concerning St. Stephen, when he saw the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at God's Right-hand; His Face, says the Text, was as the Face of an Angel. And now she, that by such remarkable Instances of Piety and Devotion, manifested the profound Reverence and Veneration she had for God, could not be wanting in any regard to the rest of his Commandments; She that was so exact in the Duties of the first, could not be de∣fective in those of the second Table. Her Righteousness was no less illustrious in that respect, than her Piety was in the other. Her Word was as sacred as any Oath, and no Incon∣venience would make her flinch from what she had once promised. She so much abhorred a dishonourable Recess, that she had no great value for those, who by little Arts and Shifts would free themselves from their Ingagements, and thereby disappoint the Expectations they had raised in others. But I need not stay upon this: Her Vertues in this kind were so eminent, and so conspicuous, that (consi∣dering the Orb she shone in) it was impossible they could be concealed; and this it was that made her so justly ad∣mired, and so entirely beloved of all.
She was of that Sweetness of Temper, of that Kind∣ness, Affability, and (considering her great Quality) of that Condescension and Courtesy in all her Demeanour, as rendered her very dear, and her Conversation grateful and desirable to all that had the Honour to be near her. She was usually very pleasant and chearful, but her Mirth was always managed with Descretion, and bounded with Religion; her Prudence kept her within the Limits of Reason, and her Piety restrained her from being vain; in both which she was very Excellent, and very Ex∣emplary. She was in her Conversation (notwithstanding the Respect due to her Quality) far from ingrossing all the Discourse to her self: And when she did speak, she still (according to the wise Man's Character of the good Woman) opened her Mouth with Wisdom,Prov. 31.26. and in her Tongue was the Law of Kindness. And she did so far excel all o∣thers this way, that if a Stranger who had never seen her, had come in and found her at work among her Maids of Honour, (as he often might) or in the Company of other Ladies, without any Badges of Royalty and Distinction; he had been very undiscerning, if (after a little Observa∣tion either of her graceful Meen, or winning way of Address) he had not presently concluded, That's the Queen. In a word, she was so great a Proficient in all the Arts of Obliging, that she reigned over the Hearts, as well as the Persons of all those who were happy in the Honour of her Converse. And now, she who was thus exact, thus perfect in all the Duties both of the first and second Table, must needs excel in that which is the great Badg and Character of them all, Charity; of which she was so compleat a Pattern, that if she out-did her self in any one thing, it was in this, which she extended both to the Persons and Necessities of all.
Being all Goodness her self, she was apt to believe most People good too, or at least, better than perhaps they were; Charity thinking no evil.1 Cor. 13.6. And she used this good Opinion of others, as an Instrument to make them what she was so willing to signify she thought them: And so would make People good by believing them to be so, and by this Engagement make them ashamed to deceive or disappoint her Expectation and Thoughts of them. And then, as to the Necessities of others, she was willing to her Power, yea and beyond her Power,2 Cor. 8.3. to relieve them. God,1 Sam. 2.30. who always honours them that honour him, had given her Riches and Honour in abundance,2 Chron. 17.5. as is said of King Jehoshaphat; yet her Heart was not puffed up by them,Ver. 6. but lifted up under them in the Ways of the Lord. And the great Satisfaction she took in them, was the Opportunity they afforded her of doing Good; and when at any time they would not answer the great Designs of her willing Soul,Pag. 36. the fore-mentioned Discourse tells us what her Concern and Regret was. She had a deep sense of the Wants of all Persons, and would catch at the least hint of any proper Object of Cha∣rity when at any time mentioned, and never declin'd re∣lieving any Indigent, either Families or private Persons, when recommended to her. Nor was her Charity confined only to such here, but extended to Ireland too; and not only to those there, who had suffered for their Religion, or for espousing her In∣terest, but even to the Irish Orphans, that is, the Chil∣dren of such Parents who died in actual Rebellion and fighting against her, and that after they had robb'd, and stripp'd, and kill'd, and murdered many of her loyal Sub∣jects; yet to their Children was her great Charity de∣sign'd. And she was (to my knowledg) very solicitous to have some Fund settled for their Support, that they might be brought up in the Protestant Religion, and
maintained while fit to be put to Trades, or otherwise disposed of. This was Charity indeed, the doing Good for God's sake, without any other than a Christian and truly Pious Inducement,1 Tim. 6.19. Luk. 16.5. to lay up in store a good Foundation against the time to come; and to make to her self Friends of the Mammon of Ʋnrighteousness. She had a great Compassion for such Foreigners as fled for their Religion, as being forward to do good to all, so especially to those of the Houshold of Faith. But she had a particular Concern for such indigent Persons, whose Circumstances had been any ways consi∣derable in the World; there being some Objects of real Charity, which are not so to vulgar Eyes or Purses, on whom she would confer, and whom she would surprize with great and sutable Assistances; and to such she was generally kind in the very manner as well as measure of her Charity, being as tender of their Modesty, as she was compassionate of their Necessity; and by her sweet ob∣liging way, made her Gift seem more a Present than a Charity. But I should never have done should I insist on Particulars, or say all that might be said of her in a private Capacity, as a Christian. And how much more might be said of her in relation to others? As she was the best of Queens, so she was the best of Mistresses, to those who had the Honour to serve her; never (as I am informed) urging her Commands upon them so much by her Power and Authority, as obli∣ging them by her Kindness and Condescension, treating them more like Friends than Servants. And as their Quality did intitle many of them (as much as any of their fellow-Subjects) to her Friendship, so she lost no∣thing by affording it, but did secure their most ready Obe∣dience upon stronger Principles than that of bare Autho∣rity, even those of Love and Gratitude; which as they
are most acceptable and pleasant on all sides, so are they most faithful and most lasting. In a word, I have been told, that her Carriage among them was so obliging and prudent, that she was never known to say or do any thing unworthy of her great Self, or unbecoming that great Wisdom and Discretion that appeared in all her Actions. I shall now consider her as a Queen, and that but briefly, fearing to outstrip my time. And first, As a Queen Consort, as a Wife; and here we may say as the Scripture says,Prov. 31.11, 12. The Heart of her Husband did safely trust in her, and she did him Good and not Evil, all the days of her Life.Prov. 12.4. Never was Woman more a Crown and Or∣nament to Man. She liv'd doubtless with a great Sense of the Covenant of God that was between them, upon her Heart, and might say, as her Royal Grand-father in his Message to his Queen, that she never transgress'd the Obligation of Fidelity or Affection to Him, no not in Thought. She was all Love, and all Obedience. A great part of her Care, was to observe every thing that was most pleasing to him, and she was in all respects what she ought to be, A Help-Meet.Gen. 2.20. And the inexpressi∣ble Sorrow his Majesty groans under for her Loss, is a too sufficient Manifestation of all this. And upon this Head it might not be improper to add a word or two, as a just and farther Vindication of her Majesty in the only thing her most malicious Enemies could charge her with. She, who was so generally and so justly beloved and admired by all, had yet the hard Thoughts of some few biast and unreasonable Men, who pretended forsooth to be dissatisfied with her way of coming to the Crown, and were therefore so impudent as to censure her for it. But had there not been other great and weighty Reasons, yea an absolute Necessity for it, as great as the saving three
tottering Kingdoms from sinking, and our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and after them our Estates and Lives from expiring: Had there been, I say, none of these or any other Inducements, yet the Obligations she lay un∣der as a Wife (which by one of the first Sanctions in Holy Writ,Gen. 2.24. are far greater than any due from a Child to a Pa∣rent) might very well have excused her, and removed their Dislike upon that score, and so rendred her as ami∣able and dear to them, as she was to all others. And now we might consider her as a Queen Regent. And here again, as a farther Demonstration of his Ma∣jesty's great Affection, when the aspiring Designs and Attempts of a potent and haughty Enemy, forc'd him from her and us, and necessarily required his Presence else∣where, he entrusted the whole Management of the State to her Care and Conduct; to which, tho she was (in his Absence) qualified and entitled by Law, yet it was a high Testimony of his Confidence in her Prudence, to leave and intrust it to her sole Care. Which Trust she discharged with such Dexterity, such Exactness, and such admirable Wisdom, that she never gave or left occasion for any Complaint, but rendered all more than silent, satisfied; and not only satisfied, but ap∣plauding and admiring her prudent and honourable Con∣duct. And tho she loved, and even hugg'd her Retirements as her greatest Satisfaction; yet when the Exigences of Affairs required it, she would deny her self, and her particular Inclination, to comply with a Duty of a more publick Concern; and chearfully sustained the hurry of Business, which was inevitable, and always acquitted her self (with Honour and Applause) of the great Trust imposed in her. But never did any Man, after a long and uneasy Con∣finement, meet his Liberty with more Joy and Satis∣faction,
than she did solace her self, when she had escaped the Noise and Crowd of Affairs, which must needs have ruffled and disturb'd her Quiet, and (so far) lessen'd, or (at least) suspended the full enjoiment of her Self. And now by such a Regular, such a Pious and such a Righteous Life, we cannot easily suspect She could be un∣prepar'd even for the most sudden Death; and tho the Warning was indeed but short, yet we have no reason to fear it was much surprizing to one that always lived in expectation of it. She was always (as I was inform'd) in the midst of her Health and Strength, apprehensive enough of the Dis∣ease whereof she died; yet being seiz'd with it, she seem'd not at all discourag'd, and profess'd her self entirely wil∣ling to acquiesce in the Will of God; and all the while of her Illness continued in the same Frame; and not∣withstanding a Complication of Distempers, notwith∣standing the troublesome Prescriptions of Physicians, and the no less troublesome Applications of others; notwith∣standing her own Pain and Disorder, of which (her Con∣stitution, and other Circumstances consider'd) She could not but be very sensible, yet with an admirable Patience and Resignation to the Will of God, with a great Con∣tempt of the Vanities of the World, and with a holy In∣difference even to Life it self, she was ready to answer when it pleased God to call; being impatient in nothing, nor importunate in any thing, save an earnest desire that she might know her Danger: and when it was at last de∣clared to Her, O God, how like an Angel, rather than a Soul clogg'd with Flesh, did She receive it! with such an humble unconcernedness, such submission, and such evenness of Temper, as nothing could have given but an innocent and meek Spirit, and a Conscience void of Offence, towards God and towards Man: And resigned up Her great Soul in Death, with the same Courage, and the same
Quietness, that She had possest it in Patience all her Life. And thus lived, and thus died (who can speak it with∣out Tears?) this Great Queen, this Glorious Saint; tho not full of Years, yet full of mature Fruits and Graces; when all Men judged Her worthy of a longer, but God, the only unerring Judg, found her full ripen'd for a bet∣ter Life. And after he had prevented Her with the Bles∣sings of Goodness, and set a Crown of pure Gold upon her Head; after he had given Her the universal Esteem, Love and Admiration of all that knew Her; the blessing of a good Name, and more than unspotted, a bright and re∣splendent Reputation: After he had granted Her the Re∣quest of her Lips, and shut not out her Prayer: After he had made Her glad with the Light of his Countenance, and gi∣ven Her a Heaven upon Earth, the Blessing of a calm, purified, and well-assured Conscience. In a word, after he had taken out the Sting of Death, and made it an ea∣sy Passage to Everlasting Life, he then took Her from her Corruptible and Earthly, to an Incorruptible and Heavenly Crown. And She is now safely arriv'd at that happy Place, where (as the Father sweetly warbles) there's Vita Ae∣terna, Beatitudo Perfecta, & Summa Voluptas; Fulness of Joy, Eternity of Life, and Perfection of Bliss. Where her Faith is turned into Sight, her Hope into Fruition and Love, everlastingly satisfied with the Presence of God, the Face of Jesus Christ, the Fulness of the Spirit, with the Communion and Society of all Saints, and the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect; where all the Cares and Troubles annext to an Earthly Crown are now done away; and where she is, and shall be for ever ravished in joining with Angels and Saints, and all the Choir of Heaven, to carol forth Praises, and sing Hal∣lelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, to the Lamb, and
to God for ever. The most glorious Imployment, the most happy State that the greatest Monarch, the greatest An∣gel ever arrived to: And tho it be every way her Advan∣tage and her Gain, yet it's still our Loss; and Her many Excellencies before-mentioned, may satisfy us what great Advantages we might have expected from her Life, had it pleased the Almighty to have continued it. And now let us suspend our Sorrow a while, and con∣sider what may be justly expected from our selves on this sad Occasion. And here I could lay before you a Pattern worthy of your Imitation; such a Pattern, as in all re∣spects this Age perhaps has not produced; a Pattern that may for ever silence, what either the greatest or the meanest Person can offer against the Reasonableness or the Necessity of a Holy Life; and may sufficiently con∣vince us, that there are no insuperable Difficulties in Reli∣gion: for tho She was a Queen, yet she was a Woman, of the feebler Sex, a great and a rich Woman;Mat. 19.23. and how hard∣ly can such be saved? A Woman of like Passions with your selves, inwardly clogged with the same corrupt and sinful Nature, outwardly beset with the like or greater Temptations; and yet she cast off the Weight that hung upon Her, broke through the Difficulties that did incompass Her, and ran the Race which was set before Her; and thrô Faith and Patience has obtained, and now in∣herits the Promises, and that sure Reward, that Crown of Glory, that endless Kingdom, which God hath provided, and Christ hath purchased and promised to Her, and all them that love and fear him, and wait for his appearing. I could likewise here shew you, how idle and frothy are the Projects and Purposes, the Designs and Resoluti∣ons which worldly Men are too too apt to promise to themselves on the Hopes, and to build upon the Assurances of long Life; than which there is nothing more vain, nothing more uncertain.
If ever any meer Mortal could, by any Privilege what∣soever, pretend or hope for Exemption from the Arrests of an early Death; this Good, this Great, this Young, this healthy Queen might: and yet all the Advantage She has now over common Dust is, that to Her may David's La∣mentation over Saul be more fitly applied; O, how is the Mighty fallen!2 Sam. 1.19. how lovely and pleasant was She in her Life! and yet she is fallen, as if she had not been anoin∣ted with Oil. And indeed nothing in the whole World could have more convincingly assured us of this Truth, that all Flesh is Grass, than her Fall hath done. But I hasten to what yet remains. There are two Duties that seem specially and necessa∣rily to be incumbent upon us at this time. First, What we are to do to sanctify, or at least how we are to demean our selves, that God may sanctify this great Loss to us. Secondly, What we are to do to lessen it, so as it may not prove fatal to us. First, How we are to improve this, so as to have it sanctified to us. This is certain, by such Dispensations as these, the Death of his Servants, God doth forewarn us of future Judg∣ments; especially if they be such as are great and eminent, whether in Church or State: We have now lost the Greatest in both; and this is a fearful Sign that some hea∣vy Judgment attends the Remnant of the People. This is that whereof our Prophet speaks, Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts,Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. doth take away from Jerusalem, the mighty Man, and the Man of War, the Judg, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Antient, the Captain of Fifty, and the honourable Man, and the Counsellor; and all this threatned as the Fore-runner of heavy Judgments; such as the having Children for their Princes,Ver. 4, 5. their oppressing one another,Ver. 8. and no less than the Ruin of Jerusalem, and
the Fall of Judah. And the same Prophet elsewhere tells us, That the Righteous perisheth,Isa. 57.1. and no Man layeth it to Heart; and merciful Men are taken away, none considering that they are taken from the Evil to come. Thus was that good King Josiah dealt with; not long after whose Death, followed the Captivity of Babel. In the Grave wherein he was interr'd, the Liberty, Glory, and Peace of Jewry, lay also buried. I would not willingly be the Prophet of our Wo; but whatever we may think, or however we may flatter our selves, God never withdraws such great Lights out of the World, but at the approach of some black and dreadful Tempest; which, if we humble not our selves under his mighty Hand, and prepare to meet him in the Way of his Judgments, will certainly overtake us. And therefore while it is called to Day, let us not harden our Hearts, but look to the Things that concern our Peace. Let us search and try our Ways, and turn again unto the Lord. We cannot think he hath made this great Breach, only to open a Pas∣sage to our Sorrow, much less to furnish us with new Mat∣ter of Discourse: No, he designs that we should glorify him in our Hearts and Lives, more than formerly we have done; and therefore let it be our Wisdom and our Care, to hear the Rod, and who hath appointed it, to turn every Man from the Evil of his Way, before the Lord's Wrath be further kindled, and to repent and relent for all our Transgressions, that so Iniquity may not be our Ruin. Secondly, Let us see how we may lessen this great Loss, at least so far as to prevent its being fatal to us. And I conceive, the best Course we can take in order to this, is to place a double Value upon Him, whom God in his Mer∣cy yet spares to us, our Gracious King. Let this heavy Stroke render his Life more dear to us: Let us pray more constantly, and more fervently, for his Health, his Safety, his Happiness, and his Success.
We may be induced strongly to this, upon these Grounds. First, We are to do this for her Sake that is gone. Secondly, For his own Sake. Thirdly, And especially upon the Account of our selves. First, For her Sake that's gone. While She lived, She loved, honoured and admired Him: She knew his Worth beyond what we do; and besides His many other Accom∣plishments, which His very Enemies admire in Him, She knew, that in His greatest Undertaking, His chiefest Aim was the Interest and Good of Europe; and especially that part of it which needed most his Help, and to which He was in all Respects most obliged to give it, Great Britain and Ireland. In a word, She best knew Him, and therefore justly valued Him: And surely if the Saints departed have any knowledg of what passes here below, we cannot perform a more grateful Service to her Memory, than to value Him, to love, honour and admire Him too. Secondly, For his own sake. Remember he is a Prince that has yet got nothing by us but Trouble, and Care, and Travel, and Toil, and Danger: A Prince, who when we were in the extreamest Danger, upon the Brink of being ruined and undone, staked his Life, his Fortune, his All, to save us; in which Attempt, (considering the Season, and the powerful Army there was to oppose Him, with the other Difficulties he had to struggle with) the Discouragements were so many, that none but a Cou∣rage, great like His, could have encountred them: And indeed the Undertaking was so great, and the Means to carry it on in Proportion so little, that we need not think it an Hyperbole in Him, who concludes, there was a Power more than Humane in bringing it to pass, and the Issue seems to confirm it: Insomuch that France her self, that
laugh'd at the Attempt, was yet amaz'd at the Success; and well she might, it being the likeliest step that was ever made towards her Ruin. But to return. Remember, He is a Prince, who after many Years Ef∣feminacy, Luxury, Ease and Softness, (wherein the English Valour so samed heretofore, lay withering and fading, unactive and rusting) hath renewed to us the Memory of those great Kings who headed English Ar∣mies abroad; and hath done more in his own Person, than all the Crowned Heads of this, or (for ought I know) any other Age. What Prince ever so oft exposed to the Dangers of the Sea, as well as to the Plots of Assassines, and the Arms of the Enemy by Land as He has been? A Prince, that as always, so lately, and especially in the Reduction of Ireland, hath made good the Cha∣racter of his Illustrious Family, in being the Deliverer of oppressed Nations. In a word, a Prince who hath every way performed his Part, how much soever his Affairs hath been clogged at Home, by the unnatural Treachery of some, who like the true Seed of Nero, can rake with delight in the Bowels of their Mother, and betray the native Interests of their Country, to its most inveterate Enemies; not only holding a Correspon∣dence with them, but offering up Vows and Prayers for their Success, and discovering a cursed kind of Laughter and Satisfaction, at the Losses and Misfortunes of their own Nation; an Indignity which no Government in the World deserves less than this, and none upon Earth would perhaps bear but this: But Mercy is a God-like Temper, and it would ill become this Place to offer any thing against it; and I doubt not but Heaven it self will take care to avenge such monstrous Ingratitude. I could further shew you, with what Wisdom He u∣nites and keeps together the Confederates, against the Disturber of the Peace of Christendom, for which we
are (next after our Deliverance it self) as much behold∣en to Him, as for any one thing whatsoever. For by this means the War is kept at a distance, and we live free from all Disturbance; without which, what could Eng∣land hope for, but to be a Field of Blood? It had long since been so, had not his Majesty interpo∣sed; we were ready to sheath our Swords in one ano∣ther's Bowels, while a third Party (under the Pretence of Assisting one) was gaping for an Opportunity to devour both. Nay it had been so, notwithstanding this Inter∣position, were not the Enemy kept at a Distance by con∣tinuing Flanders the Seat of the War: and (after all our Noise) all that's done to support our Allies, is no less than necessary to support our Selves; it's to find the E∣nemy work on that side, that we may live in quiet at Home; No common Blessing, if we consider what our Neighbours, both in Flanders and Germany, and else∣where, suffer by the Scourge of War. And notwith∣standing the malicious and unreasonable Suggestions of some who cry out, (tho with no other Design, than to foment our Animosities and Divisions) that we are at the vast Expence of a needless War, to maintain the Domi∣nions of a Foreign Prince: Yet all Men of Sense know, that the Preservation of Flanders is as much, nay more, for the Interest of England than of Spain: If that should once fall a Victim to France, we need not sure be told, at this time of Day, what would soon follow. And therefore, since we have no other Choice than to fight for Flanders, or for England in Flanders, or in Eng∣land, there's none but Men besides themselves, or other∣wise notoriously biast, that would chuse the latter. But I need insist no longer upon this. It's but too plain, we ought to value and admire Him for his own Sake: Let us now see what Obligations lie upon us, to do it for our Own.
And what can in this case be less expected from a grateful and a brave People, to so generous, so deserving a Prince? But that we contribute our Endeavours, that we may neither be wanting to our selves, nor in Duty and Affection to him, but that we share in his Dangers, and promote his Designs, and do all that in every one of us lies, to keep him in a Capacity of meeting his Enemies with equal Numbers, whom they dare never attack but with unreasonable odds. This indeed is but what we owe to our selves, to our Country, our Families, our Posterity, and beyond all, to our Religion; for all these are at stake, and they are (let some pretend what they will) the very things we con∣tend for in the present War with France, which is en∣deavouring to get not only our Houses, but the Houses of God into their Possession: and how they will use both them and us, they have given us more than a Specimen by what they have done at home in their own Country; where within a few Years, there were more than a thou∣sand places of God's Publick Worship, where some hun∣dred thousands of Protestants served God religiously and truly; and yet the French, at least the Popish Fury, hath turn'd all those Churches into ruinous Heaps, and treated the poor Owners of them (tho their Country∣men, their Neighbours, their Friends and Relations) with more Scorn and Contempt, more Barbarity and Cruelty, than has been heard among Turks and Infidels: So that it's every Man's Interest to engage in this Quarrel; and were it not only so, yet a due sense of Honour might excite all Persons of Character and Reputation, to fol∣low the Example of their KING, who hath so often exposed himself for us, and who is still ready to sacrifice his Life for our Safety. I am sure there's no Man can tell me, what it was (for almost this Age past) we desired more than such a
King; what it was we long'd for more than a Prince with∣out any private Designs, and beyond all suspicion, firm in the Nation's Interest and Quarrel against France: This very Qualification had aton'd for all other Failings, and the want of it (for ought I know) hath been, in a great measure, the Source of all our Miscarriages; and not on∣ly mischievous to us, but fatal to all Europe. And now that that God, who brings Good out of Evil, hath as it were mercifully comply'd with our Desires, and blest us with a Prince, who (besides his other Endowments) is of all other the best qualified this way; a Prince whom that Monarch always fear'd, and has now more reason to fear than ever: Shall we not lay hold of the Opportunity, and push on the present War with the ut∣most Vigor? Believe it, to talk or think of restoring the late King without a French Army, (as some of our disaffected Scriblers would seem to impose upon us) or to think that such an Army, if they could restore him, would then only take their leave and e gone, (as others of them would perswade us) is a anity,  Madness that may require our Pity, but seems to be past our Cure. And therefore to Cabal or Plot, Censure or Murmur, or if we arrive not to this height of Undutifulness and Folly, but only remain unconcern'd, or stand only ga∣zing and looking on, as if it were no great matter how the War succeeded, must needs be because we will not exercise so much Fore-thought, as to consider the dread∣ful Consequences of miscarrying in it. All wise Men will tell you, we had better be subdued by any Nation under Heaven than the French; for be∣sides that no other, considering our Situation (as one hath lately observ'd) hath Naval Forces enough to se∣cure such a Conquest; so no other would insult and in∣slave us at the rate they would. If the Turk should
subdue us, he would (saith the same Author) miserably Tyrannize, but yet for a small Yearly Tribute, he would allow us the Exercise of our Religion. If other Na∣tions, either their Distance would slacken our Bonds, or their Weakness would press us more lightly: But France is our next Neighbour, very powerful by Sea and Land, able to load us with heavy Chains, and to rivet them upon us: Besides, she hath found us capable of being a Rival to her Glory, and we know who it is at this mi∣nute that stops her Conquests, who gives Check to all her aspiring Designs: nay, she has felt the Power of our Arms in her Bowels, and has beenThis Conquest was undertaken upon just Grounds, Edward II. King of England, having married Isabella Daughter to Philip the Fair of France, whose three Sons dying without Issue, the Crown descend∣ed to the Heirs of Isabella; and then it was when Edward III. in right of his Mother claimed the Kingdom of France, that they made their Salick Law, which could how∣ever bar only for the future, and not for the time past; and there∣fore the King invaded France, and was very successful in all the Battels he sought; but by reason of seve∣ral Diversions at home, this Suc∣cess was not pursued by his im∣mediate Successors; yet Henry V. (a Prince of a Warlike Temper) coming to the Crown, and consi∣dering that not only Normandy, Guien, Aquitain, and Aju, were the rightful Inheritances of the Kings of England, but also his just Title to the whole Kingdom of France, derived from Isabella aforesaid; after he had first by Ambassadors set forth and demanded his Right, he with an English Army invades France, and having won several Battels, was at last married to Katherine, Daughter of Charles VI. and thereupon declared and crowned King of France in Reversion: Charles and Isabella his Queen to reign during their Lives, and Isabella surviving Charles, at her Death made a Will, declaring her Son-in-Law Henry V. Heir to all her Goods, and to the Crown; which gives the Kings of England a farther Right to the King∣dom of France. And I am perswaded, if the French King had half so much Right to England, as the King of England hath to France, we should be pestered with his Manifesto's and Scribles, alledging his just Pretensions, as he calls all that he makes. conquered by us, and has had such fatal Proofs of the English Valour, that she would be sure to take care never more to stand in fear of her Antient Enemies: And upon these Grounds we are to expect no Mercy at her Hands, but the worst of an Hostile Fury; and nothing less perhaps than our total Sub∣version would serve their turn. Nay, when we consider how barbarously they use the People whom they subdue, tho of their own Religion, without regard to Churches or Religious Houses, or the very Sepulchres of the Dead, tho of Princes themselves; we may believe our English Papists (hower they may
flatter themselves) would meet with no better Quarter than others. But for those Protestants, who, tho at ease in their Fortunes, and enjoying all the Privileges of their Fellow-Subjects, are yet restless and dissatisfied, and weary of a Government, that's the only Security of their Religion and Estates; surely, as they will be the easiest, so they will be the most despised Prey of their Enemies, who, if they have any Manhood, or any thing that's great in them, will shew more Favour to the brave De∣fenders of their Country, than to those who have so base∣ly and treacherously deserted and betrayed it. But I know if I should discourse at this rate out of this place, or where I might expect an Answer, I should presently be told, that I had used a great many words to little purpose, and had run on all along upon a false Ground; for that the great King of France hath nothing of Self in all this, nor is he further concerned, than out of a Principle of Honour and Generosity, to espouse an Oppressed, and to restore an Exil'd Prince. That he was neither opprest nor banished is plain enough; and on whose side the Oppression lay we all know; and yet we will allow them, that that Monarch may seemingly with much Gallantry, espouse his Cause till he see a fair op∣portunity of setting up his Own, but to be sure no longer. Or, suppose he should not do this, can we however think that he would not demand so great a Charge, as the whole Wealth of the Nation would be too little to answer? And were it not better Policy in us (tho we had no other In∣ducement) to supply him, even to a Moiety of what we have, who will preserve the rest by keeping such Ene∣mies out, and by cherishing and protecting us in our Religion, and other Rights? To be sparing in a case of such Necessity, is to be wanting, and indeed cruel to our selves, and our Poste∣rity; like the fatal Parsimony of the People of Constan∣tinople,
who refused to supply their own Emperor (tho by way of Loan) with a thirtieth part of that Money, which the Turkish Emperor depriv'd them of, together with the Lives of the Wealthiest of them. Whereas by that seasonable Supply they might, in all likelihood, have preserved their City and their Lives too. 'Twere easy to shew, what a poor thing Money is, in respect of our Religion, our Lives, our Laws, and our Liberties; and it's not yet seven Years, since all conside∣rate Men and good Protestants amongst us, would have given more than this War will cost us, to have been under the Circumstances we now are. But (God be thanked) there's no need to insist upon this. Those wor∣thy Patriots who so freely and chearfully find out Ways and Means to support the War, are highly sensible of it. And all I have to offer upon their Accounts, is, to pray as David, when the People, even beyond what he expected, offer'd so willingly towards a Publick Good; O Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers,2 Chron. 29.18. keep this for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart of thy People. But to return, that I may leave nothing un∣said, to open the Eyes of those who are not wilfully blind, I will for their satisfaction suppose, that this ex∣travagantly ambitious King (upon whom they so much depend) had no private Design, but would only clear the Way to the Throne, and then fairly draw off, without any other Consideration than the Satisfaction of his own haughty and ambitious Humour: Let us, I say, suppose this, (tho indeed it's next to impossible) yet even in this Case, might not the Prince whom he left repossest, (I only presume to ask the Question) justly write himself James the Conqueror? And tho I am not to determine how mercifully he might use us if left to his own Conduct, (tho we must believe him more than a Saint, to forget what is past) yet, considering how he has been influenced, and
(considering his Princicles) how he still must be, if ever Divine Judgment, as a Punishment for our Sins, should suffer this to come to pass: The very Thoughts of what we might expect, are so full of Horror, that I chuse ra∣ther to draw a Vail over it, and pass it in silence, than go about to display it; and if any Man be so weak, or so short-sighted, as to wish or desire it, I am perswaded, that a short Change with a Subject of France, would very effectually cure him of his Malady and Folly too. And yet our Case might be much more desperate than some of theirs, and no better to be sure than that of the Protestant Subjects under that Crown; and how it should be worse is not easy to imagine. And now, Since those very Men amongst us, who seem most fond of the late King's Return, do yet pretend they would by no means have him come with a French Power, as being aware of the dreadful Consequences thereof: Since it is not pos∣sible he should come by any other, or any other Way; the abused Affections of his Quondam Subjects (except a few not worth the naming) being now settled upon a Prince, who has gained them with the Hazard of his Life; a Prince, that is not only Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone, and so our natural Leige Lord, but of our Religion also, and therefore the dearer to us, as we are every way, and especially in that the safer: This being so, it is not possible they should think of recalling a Prince, under whose Administration they suffered so much, and whose incen∣sed Wrath would not be easily appeased; and whose Thirst for unlimited Power, he would be sure to quench at our Cost; and therefore must come by a French Power, or not at all. Since such a Power, if they could set him on English Ground, (which I much question) would either, in his Name, and under his Umbrage, do all for themselves; or at their going off, demand such vast Sums as we could
never pay; and yet for not paying, would be exposed to all the Miseries that Scorn or Cruelty could invent. Since after they had done this, (or suppose they should not do it) they would at best leave us in the Hands of a Conqueror, all incensed, full of Wrath and Revenge, who used us not over-well when he had no Pretence to that Title; but would now, be sure, (without usurping a Dispensing Power) make his Will our Law, and im∣pose whatever his own Resentments and Bigotry, his Wrath, or Jesuitical Zeal, and the Cruelty of those about him, could inflict. Since our Religion (with which nothing should come in competition) is by the late happy Revolution, secured to us and our Posterity, being wrap'd up and safe, not on∣ly in his Majesty, (whom God long preserve) but in those Illustrious Heirs of the Crown, her Royal Highness, and her Royal Son, in whom we may one Day be happy. Since our Laws are once more Sacred, our Privileges allowed, our Rights and Liberties cherished: And since we are blessed with a King, by whose Prowess and Conduct, by whose Justice and Goodness, we may (if not wanting to our selves) be as Great, as Happy, and as Dreadful as ever. Since this, I say, is so, it is not possible, unless we be in love with Chains, and fond to see our Religion truckle to Popery, our Liberty to Slavery, our Rights and Privi∣leges to Courtesy; unless we desire to see our Lives expo∣sed, and our Estates offered as an Oblation to a supersti∣tious greedy Church; or as a Reward to the Souldier that shall destroy us: Unless, I say, we are fond of these things, it is not possible we should desire, or ever long for such an Administration as will certainly produce them. And therefore if we have any natural Love for our Country, or any supernatural Affection for our Religion, or any natural Instinct of Self-preservation, or any Sense
of Honour in acting sutably to such Principles; If a Roy∣al Example can incite us, or our own Welfare and Safety encourage us; let us, in the Name of God, as we value any, or all of these dear Things, in all due Thankfulness to the Author, and in all Loyal Duty and Affection to the Instrument of our Deliverance, turn from our Sins, and unite and strengthen our selves against the Common Ene∣my of our Religion and Civil Rights, as the only way to have our Peace and Happiness restored and settled upon sure and lasting Foundations. And this I conceive is the best Course we can take to lessen this great Loss, so as it may not prove fatal to us; To stand by our King with our Lives and Fortunes; to pray constantly, and to pray fervently, that God would pro∣tect Him from the private Machinations and open Vio∣lences of his Enemies; that he would preserve him to perfect that Great, that Glorious Work he hath so gene∣rally and so successfully begun, that so we may enjoy Him in Peace,2 Sam. 21. and esteem Him as the Israelites did David, the Light of our Israel; and as they did Josiah, the Breath of our Nostrils.Lam. 4.20. The serious Acknowledgment whereof, will not suffer us to be wanting in all Duty and Affection to Him, whom God continue long over us; and let all that love the Peace and Happiness, the Welfare and Glory of Great-Britain and Ireland, say, Amen, Amen. Now to God only Wise, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all Glory, Honour, Power, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now and for ever, Amen. FINIS. Errata, Page 13. line 14. for live, read lived. P. 14. l. 15. dele rather.
