S4108 99830631 35084
A Short Introduction TO THE ART OF PAINTING AND Varnishing, LONDON, Printed for George Dawes, over against Lincolns-Inn-Gate, in Chancery-Lane, 1685.
THE NAMES OF COLOURS FOR PAINTING, WHite Lead, Flake, Ceru's, White. Kirmine, Vermillion, Red lead, Spanish Brown, Indian Red, Red Ocker. Red. Ultramarine, Bice, Smalt, Verditer, Indigo, Blew. Distill'd Verdigrass, Green. Three sorts of Masti∣cote, Yellow ocker, light pinck, Ortmeut two sorts, Yellow. Ivory Black, Black. Brown pinck, Brown ocker, Umber, Brown. Venice Lake, a sort of Red or Blome.
To Mix your Colours. WHite Umber and Black, Hair Colour White and a little Black, Grey Hair. White, little Black, lit∣tle Yellow ocker and very little Lake, Dead Body or Face. Black and little Umber Dark part of the Eye. Lake and Vermillion, Scarlet. White, Black a little Smalt, Armour. Yellow ocker and little Vermillion, Gold. Lake and little White, Pale Purple. Lake White and little Indigo, Deep Purple Light Masticote, Lemmon. Verdigrass, and very little White, Willow Green. Verdigrass brown pink and very little white, Grass green
Verdigrass & light pink Bright green. Verdigrass and light Masticote another, Green. Smalt and light Masti∣cote, Moss green. And for Variety you may put together any of the Blewes to any of the Yel∣lowes. Smalt and White, Skie or Pearl. Vermillion and Umber Brick. Indigo, White & Lake, Violet. Light Masticote and Vermillion, Flaming Fire. Lake and Bice, Blome. Indigo and White, Lead. White, Black, and lit∣tle Yellow Ocker, Stone. Deep Masticote Buff. Deep Masticote and lit∣tle Vermillion, Orange. Lake and little Black Sables. White and little Verdi∣grass, Grass Win∣dow. Verdigrass and White, Sea.
White, Black, and Ʋmber for ground∣ing. When you have laid on your Cut and Rub'd it, you are to do it over with Oyl of Turpentine, with a soft Brush, & in an hour after, to do it again with Nutt Oyl, and then to close it well to the Glass with your fingers, to disperse those little hollownesses that then will appear, and if after there shall appear any little glissinings or bright places, you are to repeat the last oyl upon the places, & close it well as before, & they will disappear or if they happen after Painting, then lay your Nutt oyl upon the back of the Colours against the place and it will in a little time pierce through and cure it, but at the first in laying on of your Oyls, use of neither sort more then what will just wet your Cutt through. You are to grinde all your Colours in Nutt Oyl, and that extremely Fine.
To make the Varnish. Take half a pound of Gum Sandrock four ounces of Gum Animy, two oun∣ces of Gum Copal, one ounce of Ma∣stick and half an ounce of Tackama∣hacka, steep your Gumlack twenty four hours in water in a course bag, then put to it a Lump of hard Soap, the bigness of an Egg and chafe it well about half an hour to beget a lather to take as much of the Red Tincture from it as you can, then clean the Soap from it with water, then make it very dry either in the Sun or before the Fire, then bruise all your other Gums, that is, your Gum Animy, very small, and the other but as gross Pepper, then di∣vide all your Gums into two equal quantities, and put them severally in∣to 2 glass bottles that hold 3 quarts a piece, then into each bottle put two quarts of Spirit of Wine, stop them close & keep them in a moderate heat
before the fire for six or seven days, shaking 'em once an hour to prevent the Gums for setling to the botom, then take it from the fire and let it rest twen∣ty four hours, then through a cloth into a clean Bottle, pour as much off as will run perfectly clear and let the remain∣der settle again, and as it becomes clear pour it off as before. To do black Work. TO some of your Varnish put a little Ivory black in a little pot of a thin consistance, and do your work over nine times, letting it dry two hours betwixt each time before a fire, then let it dry a day, then smooth it a little with polishing Rushes either wet in water or dry. If you wet your Rushes, then when you have done, wash your work clean, and dry it with a cloth by the fire, then do it over ten times with clear Varnish, without Colour, allowing the same space for drying as before, then let it dry three
days, then pollish it with Tripola made fine upon a wet cloth until you have brought it to an exact eveness, then wash it as before, and dry it, then take a little oyl upon a clean soft rag, and just touch it over to take off the dulness given it by washing, but use not so much oyl as to leave your work grea∣sie. Tortoise-shell upon Red Ground. FIrst do your Work over four or five times with Vermillion mixt with Varnish of a like thin consistance until you see your Wood be perfectly covered, then do it twice with clear Varnish, then cloud it with Dragons Blood and Ivory black mixt together, then let it dry a day, then varnish it ten times with clear Varnish, then let it dry three days, and pollish and finish as in your black work.
Tortoise upon Yellow Ground. INstead of Vermillion mentioned in the last, use white Lead and very little yellow ocker and Cover your wood as in the Red Tortoise, then pro∣ceed and finish as in that, only in this you must observe, that your clou∣dings must be more Ruddy then on the Red Ground. Tortoise upon Gold Ground. WHen you have silvered your work let it dry a day, then with a Camels hair brush do it twice or thrice over with the mixture next mentioned then let it dry another day, then cloud it with the clouding directed in your Yellow Tortoise and go on and finish as in the other.
To turn Silvered work to a Gold Colour. TO half a pint of varnish put as much gam bouge as will lie upon a large shilling, and as much Dragons blood as will lye upon a groat, both beaten small and let it dissolve two or three days, sometimes shaking it, then run it through a fine rag into a clean bottle, and this laid twice or thrice upon silvered work, 'twill bring it to an Exact gold Colour. To Gild. TAke Parchment shreds and boyl them in water that when the Liquor is cold, it may be as stiff as jelly, then to some of that put some Spanish White to make it somewhat thicker than Cream and keep it warm upon a few Coales, and do your work four or five times, that your wood be throughly Covered, then smooth it
with Rushes, and then do it twice over with the Size alone, then smooth it again a little more, then lay on your Gold Size thin and even and let it dry until it be of such a temper that when you touch it with your finger, you may perceive it stick and yet none of the Size to come off upon your fin∣ger, then lay on your mettle and press it down with a Hares seutt. To do the Red work that ap∣pears to have Black to be sprinckled on in little specles. FIrst Ground your work with Ver∣million, as in the Red Tortoise, then with the clouding directed for that taking very little in your brush, and holding it upright in your hand, strike it down pretty quick and hard, and take no greater compass at a time than you can well attend (before the Varnish dries) to disperse the little black eyes and froth occasioned by the
quick motion of your brush, and then begin again at the edges where you left off, after that proceed as in your Tortoise. To make Gold Size. TO a quart of Linseed Oyle put White Copperis, Honey, razen and Littridge of Gold, each one ounce, and boyl it four or five hours upon a gentle fire, sometimes stirring it, that it burn not to the bottom, and let it cool, & pour off all the thin part into a pot or bottle, and as you have occasi∣on to use it, grind a small quantity of it at a time upon your stone, with a little white Lead, yellow Ocker, and a little boul Almanick, to be of a thin∣ner consistance than you make your Colours for Painting, but you must be careful to grinde it extremely Fine, otherwise your mettle will not lye even.
White Varnish. TAke four ounces of the Largest Lumps of Gum Sandrock four ounces of Gum Animy, one ounce of Mastick, and one ounce of Cam∣phier, scrape off the outsides of your Gums that they be very clean, and bruise them all as in your other Var∣nish, and slice the Camphier thin, and put them altogether into a quart of Spirit of Wine, and manage it at the fire after the same method, and for the same time as you do the other Varnish and when it has stood twenty four hours, let it through a cloth into ano∣ther bottle, and it will at once all run off clear. This is to be used with Blew and White Colours after the same Manner as you use your other Varnish, with other Colours (it likewise being twice laid on) pre∣serves anything silvered from ever tar∣nishing and is most used for this.
To Enammel. DIssolve some Gum Arabick in fair water and mix with it some of your Shell Gold or Shell Silver, and with a small Pencil, draw upon your work either before your work be fit to pollish or after it be done, but I conceive it best before you Varnish it the last ten times, so that Varnishing and pollishing upon it will both secure it from tarnishing and rubbing off. You must observe, that all the wood you intend to Varnish, that is of an open grain, as Oak, Firr or such like, you must first white and smooth it just as you do for Gilding, otherwise the Varnish will not fill it up though you repeat it ne∣ver so often.
To lay on your Mettle Speckles. FIrst wet your work with Varnish, with a soft brush, then while 'tis wet dust your speckles upon it thro' a piece of Tiffany, and then Varnish it twice, to keep 'em from rubbing off 'tis enough. You are to grinde all your Colours dry and very small▪ FINIS.
