S4745 12279060 58596
TWELVE SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions. By ROBERT SOUTH, D. D. Six of them never before Printed. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1692.
To the Right Honourable EDWARD, Earl of CLARENDON, Lord High Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon, and one of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. My Lord, THough to prefix so great a Name to so mean a Piece, seems like enlarg∣ing the Entrance of an House, that affords no Reception: yet, since there is nothing can warrant the Publication of it, but what can al∣so command it; the Work must think of no other Patronage, than the same that adorns, and protects its Author. Some indeed vouch great Names, because they think
they deserve, but I, because I need such: and had I not more occasion than many others, to see and con∣verse with your Lordship's Candor and Proneness to pardon, there is none had greater cause to dread your Iudgment; and thereby in some part I venture to commend my own. For all know, who know your Lordship, that in a Nobler respect, than either that of Government, or Patronage; you represent and head the best of Universities: and have travelled over too many Nations, and Authors, to encourage any one that understands himself, to appear an Author in your Hands: who seldom read any Books to inform your self, but only to countenance and credit them. But, my Lord,
what is here published, pretends no Instruction, but only Homage; while it teaches many of the World, it only describes your Lordship, who have made the ways of Labour and Vertue, of doing, and doing Good, your Business and your Recreation, your Meat and your Drink, and, I may add also, your Sleep. My Lord, the Subject here treated of, is of that Nature, that it would seem but a Chimera, and a bold Pa∣radox, did it not in the very Front carry an Instance to exemplifie it; and so by the Dedication convince the World, that the Discourse it self was not impracticable. For such ever was, and is, and will be the Temper of the generality of man∣kind, that, while I send men for
Pleasure, to Religion, I cannot but expect, that they will look upon me, as only having a mind to be plea∣sant with them my self: nor are Men to be Worded into new Tempers, or Constitutions: and he that thinks; that any one can persuade, but He that made the World, will find that he does not well understand it. My Lord, I have obeyed your Command, for such must I account your Desire; and thereby Design, not so much the Publication of my Sermon, as of my Obedience: for, next to the Supreme Pleasure de∣scribed in the ensuing Discourse, I enjoy none greater, than in having any opportunity to declare my self, Your Lordship's very humble Servant, and obliged Chaplain, ROBERT SOUTH.
The Contents of the Sermons. SERMON I. PRoverbs III.17. Her ways are ways of Pleasantness. Page 1 SERMON II. Gen. I.27. So God created man in his own I∣mage, in the Image of God created he him. p. 53 SERMON III. Matth. X.33. But whosoever shall deny me be∣fore men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven. p. 101 SERMON IV. I Kings XIII.33, 34. After this thing Jerobo∣am returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people Priests of the High places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of the High places. And this thing became sin unto the house of Jero∣boam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the Earth. p. 155 SERMON V. Titus. II. ult. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. Let no man despise thee. p. 223 SERMON VI. John VII.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. p. 269
SERMON VII. Psalm LXXXVII.2. God hath loved the Gates of Sion more than all the Dwellings of Iacob. p. 323 SERMON VIII. Prov. XVI.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing of it is of the Lord. p. 373 SERMON IX. 1 Cor. III.19. For the Wisdom of this World, is Foolishness with God. p. 425 SERMON X. 2 Cor. VIII.12. For if there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted according to that a Man hath, and not according to that he hath not. p. 477 SERMON XI. Judges VIII.34, 35. And the Children of Is∣rael remembred not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their Enemies, on every side. Neither shewed they kindness to the House of Ie∣rubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel. p. 535 SERMON XII. Prov. XII.22. Lying Lips are abomination to the Lord. p. 587
A SERMON Preached at COURT, &c. PROV. 3.17. Her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness. THE Text relating to something going before, must carry our Eye back to the 13th. verse, where we shall find, that the thing, of which these words are affirmed, is Wis∣dome: A Name by which the Spirit of God was here pleased to express to us Religion, and thereby to tell the world,
what before it was not aware of, and per∣haps will not yet believe, that those two great things that so engross the desires and designs of both the Nobler and Ignobler sort of mankind, are to be found in Re∣ligion; namely Wisdom and Pleasure; and that the former is the direct way to the latter, as Religion is to both. That Pleasure is Man's chiefest good, (because indeed it is the perception of Good that is properly pleasure) is an assertion most certainly true, though un∣der the common acceptance of it, not only false, but odious: for according to this, pleasure and sensuality pass for terms equivalent; and therefore, he that takes it in this sence, alters the Subject of the discourse. Sensuality is indeed a part, or rather one kind of pleasure, such an one as it is. For Pleasure in general, is the consequent apprehension of a sutable Object, sutably applied to a rightly dis∣posed faculty; and so must be conversant, both about the faculties of the Body,
and of the Soul respectively; as being the result of the fruitions belonging to both. Now amongst those many Arguments, used to press upon men the exercise of Religion, I know none that are like to be so succesful, as those that answer, and re∣move the prejudices that generally pos∣sess, and barr up the Hearts of men a∣gainst it: amongst which, there is none so prevalent in Truth, though so little owned in Pretence, as that it is an Ene∣my to mens pleasures, that it bereaves them of all the sweets of Converse, dooms them to an absurd and perpetual Melancholy, designing to make the world nothing else but a great Monastery. With which notion of Religion, Na∣ture and Reason seems to have great cause to be dissatisfied. For since God never Created any faculty, either in Soul or Body, but withal prepared for it a sutable object, and that in order to its gratification; can we think that Religion
was designed only for a Contradiction to Nature? and with the greatest and most irrational Tyranny in the World to tantalize, and tie men up from enjoy∣ment, in the midst of all the opportuni∣ties of enjoyment? to place men with the furious affections of hunger, and thirst in the very bosome of Plenty; and then to tell them that the envy of Provi∣dence has sealed up every thing that is sutable under the Character of unlawful? For certainly, first to frame appetites fit to receive pleasure, and then to interdict them with a Touch not, tast not, can be nothing else, than only to give them occasion to devour, and prey upon them∣selves; and so to keep men under the per∣petual Torment of an unsatisfied Desire: a thing hugely contrary to the natural felicity of the Creature, and consequent∣ly to the wisdom, and goodness of the great Creator. He therefore that would persuade men to Religion, both with Art and effica∣cy,
must found the persuasion of it up∣on this, that it interferes not with any rational pleasure, that it bids no body quit the enjoyment of any one thing that his Reason can prove to him, ought to be enjoyed. 'Tis confessed, when through the cross circumstances of a man's temper or condition, the Enjoyment of a pleasure would certainly expose him to a greater inconvenience, then Religion bids him quit it; that is, it bids him prefer the en∣durance of a lesser evil before a greater, and Nature it self does no less. Religi∣on therefore entrenches upon none of our Priviledges, invades none of our Plea∣sures; it may indeed sometimes com∣mand us to change, but never totally to abjure them. But it is easily foreseen, that this Dis∣course will in the very beginning of it be encountred by an Argument from Ex∣perience, and therefore not more ob∣vious than strong; namely, that it cannot but be the greatest trouble in the world
for a man thus (as it were) even to shake off himself, and to defie his Nature, by a perpetual thwarting of his innate Appe∣tites and Desires; which yet is absolutely necessary to a severe and impartial pro∣secution of a course of Piety: nay, and we have this asserted also, by the Verdict of Christ himself, who still makes the Disciplines of self-denial and the Cross, those terrible blows to Flesh and Blood, the indispensable requisits to the Being of his Disciples. All which being so, would not he that should be so hardy as to attempt to persuade men to Piety from the pleasures of it, be liable to that invective taunt from all Mankind, that the Israelites gave to Moses; Wilt thou put out the Eyes of this People? Wilt thou persuade us out of our first Notions? Wilt thou demonstrate, that there is any delight in a Cross, any Comfort in vi∣olent abridgements, and which is the greatest Paradox of all, that the highest Pleasure is to abstain from it?
For answer to which, it must be con∣fest, that all Arguments whatsoever against Experience are fallacious; and therefore in order to the Clearing of the Assertion lay'd down, I shall premise these two Considerations. 1. That Pleasure is in the Nature of it a Relative thing, and so imports a peculi∣ar Relation and Correspondence to the state and condition of the Person to whom it is a Pleasure. For as those who Discourse of Atoms affirm that there are Atoms of all forms, some round, some triangular, some square, and the like; all which are continually in motion, and never settle till they fall into a fit circum∣scription or place of the same figure: So there are the like great diversities of Minds and Objects; whence it is, that this Ob∣ject striking upon a mind thus or thus disposed, flies off, and rebounds without making any impression; but the same luckily hapning upon another of a Dis∣position as it were framed for it, is pre∣sently
catcht at, and greedily clasped into the nearest Unions and Embraces. 2. The other thing to be considered, is this; That the Estate of all men by Na∣ture is more or less different from that estate, into which, the same persons do, or may pass, by the exercise of that which the Philosophers called Virtue, and into which men are much more effectually and sublimely translated by that which we call Grace; that is by the supernatu∣ral overpowring operation of God's Spi∣rit. The difference of which two estates consists in this; that in the former the sensitive appetites rule and domineer; in the latter the Supream faculty of the Soul, called Reason, sways the Scepter, and acts the whole man above the irregular de∣mands of Appetite and Affection. That the distinction between these two is not a meer figment, framed only to serve an Hypothesis in Divinity; and that there is no man but is really under one, before he is under the other, I shall
prove, by shewing a Reason why it is so, or rather indeed why it cannot but be so. And it is this: Because every man in the beginning of his life, for several years is capable only of exercising his sensitive faculties and desires, the use of Reason not shewing it self till about the Seventh Year of his Age; and then at length but (as it were) dawning in very imperfect Essays and Discoveries. Now it being most undeniably evident that every Fa∣culty and Power grows stronger and stronger by exercise; is it any wonder at all, when a man for the space of his first six years, and those the years of ductility and impression, has been wholly ruled by the propensions of sense, at that age very eager and impetuous; that then after all, his Reason beginning to exert and put forth it self, finds the man prepossess'd and under another power: so that it has much adoe by many little steps, and gra∣dual conquests, to recover its preroga∣tive from the usurpations of appetite, and
so to subject the whole man to its Dic∣tates: the difficulty of which is not con∣quered by some men all their Days. And this is one true ground of the Difference between a state of Nature, and a state of Grace, which some are pleased to scoff at in Divinity, who think that they con∣fute all that they laugh at, not knowing that it may be solidly evinced by meer Reason and Philosophy. These two considerations being pre∣mised, namely, That Pleasure implies a proportion and agreement to the respec∣tive States and Conditions of men; and that the state of men by Nature is vastly different from the estate into which Grace or Vertue transplants them; all that Ob∣jection levelled against the foregoing As∣sertion is very easily resolvable. For there is no doubt, but a man, while he resigns himself up to the Bru∣tish guidance of sense and appetite, has no relish at all for the Spiritual, refined delights of a Soul clarified by Grace and
Vertue. The pleasures of an Angel can never be the pleasures of a Hog. But this is the thing that we contend for; that a man having once advanced him∣self to a state of Superiority over the Con∣trol of his inferior Appetites, finds an infi∣nitely more solid and sublime pleasure in the Delights proper to his Reason, than the same person had ever conveyed to him by the bare ministry of his Senses. His taste is absolutely changed, and there∣fore that which pleased him formerly, becomes flat and insipid, to his Appetite now grown more masculine and severe. For as age and maturity passes a real and a marvellous Change upon the Dyet and Recreations of the same person; so that no man at the Years and Vigour of Thirty, is either fond of Sugar-plums or Rattles: In like manner, when Reason, by the assistance of Grace, has prevailed over, and outgrown the encroachments of Sense, the delights of Sensuality are to such an one but as an Hobby-horse
would be to a Councellour of State; or as tastless, as a bundle of Hay to an hun∣gry Lyon. Every alteration of a man's Condition infallibly inferrs an alteration of his Pleasures. The Athenians laught the Physiogno∣mist to Scorn, who pretending to read men's minds in their foreheads, descri∣bed Socrates for a crabbed, lustful, proud, ill-natured Person; they knowing how di∣rectly contrary he was to that Dirty Cha∣racter. But Socrates bid them forbear laughing at the man, for that he had given them a most exact account of his Nature; but what they saw in him so contrary at the present, was from the con∣quest that he had got over his Natural disposition by Philosophy. And now let any one consider, whether that Anger, that Revenge, that Wantonness and Ambi∣tion, that were the proper pleasures of So∣crates, under his Natural temper of crab∣bed, lustful, and proud, could have at all affected or enamour'd the mind of the
same Socrates, made gentle, chast and humble by Philosophy. Aristotle says, that were it possible to put a Young man's eye into an Old man's head, he would see as plainly and clearly as the other; so could we infuse the incli∣nations and principles of a Vertuous per∣son into him that prosecutes his debau∣ches with the greatest Keeness of desire, and sence of Delight, he would loath and reject them as heartily, as he now pursues them. Diogenes, being asked at a Feast, why he did not continue eating as the rest did, answered him that asked him with another question, Pray why do you eat? Why says he for my pleasure; why so, says Diogenes, do I abstain for my Pleasure; and therefore the Vain, the Vi∣cious and Luxurious person argues at an high rate of inconsequence, when he makes his particular desires, the general measure of other men's delights. But the case is so plain, that I shall not upbraid any man's understanding by endeavour∣ing
to give it any farther Illustration. But still, after all, I must not deny that the change and passage from a state of Nature, to a state of Vertue, is laborious, and consequently irksome and unplea∣sant: and to this it is, that all the fore∣mentioned expressions of our Saviour do allude. But surely the baseness of one condition, and the generous excellency of the other is a sufficient. Argument to induce any one to a change. For as no man would think it a desirable thing, to preserve the Itch upon himself, only for the Pleasure of Scratching, that attends that loathsome distemper: so neither can any man, that would be faithful to his Reason, yield his Ear to be bored through by his domineering appetites, and so chuse to serve them for ever, only for those poor, thin gratifications of sen∣suality that they are able to reward him with. The ascent up the hill is hard and tedious, but the serenity and fair prospect at the Top, is sufficent to incite the La∣bour
of undertaking it, and to reward it being undertook. But the difference of these two conditions of men, as the foun∣dation of their different pleasures, being thus made out, to press men with argu∣ments to pass from one to the other, is not directly in the way, or design of this Discourse. Yet before I come to declare positively the pleasures that are to be found in the ways of Religion; one of the grand du∣ties of which is stated upon Repentance; a thing expressed to us by the grim names of Mortification, Crucifixion, and the like: and that I may not proceed only up∣on absolute. Negations, without some Concessions; we will see, whether this so harsh, dismal, and affrighting duty of Repentance is so entirely Gall, as to ad∣mit of no mixture, no allay of sweetness, to reconcile it to the Apprehensions of Reason and Nature.
Now Repentance consists properly of two things: 1. Sorrow for Sin. 2. Change of Life. A word briefly of them both. 1. And first for Sorrow for Sin: Usual∣ly, the sting of Sorrow is this, that it neither removes nor alters the thing we sorrow for; and so is but a kind of reproach to our Reason, which will be sure to accost us with this Dilemma. Either the thing, we sorrow for, is to be remedied, or it is not: If it is, why then do we spend the time in mourning, which should be spent in an active applying of Remedies? but if it is not; then is our Sorrow Vain and Superfluous, as tending to no real Effect. For no man can weep his Father or his Friend out of the Grave, or mourn himself out of a Bankrupt condition. But this Spiritual Sorrow is effectual to one of the greatest and highest Purposes, that mankind can be Concerned in. It is a means to avert an impendent wrath, to
disarm an offended Omnipotence; and even to fetch a Soul out of the very jaws of Hell. So that the End and Consequence of this sorrow, sweetens the sorrow it self: and as Solomon says, In the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful; so in the midst of sorrow here, the heart may re∣joyce: for while it mourns, it reads, That those that mourn shall be comforted; and so while the penitent weeps with one Eye he views his Deliverance with the other. But then for the External ex∣pressions, and vent of Sorrow; we know that there is a certain pleasure in weep∣ing; it is the Discharge of a big and a swelling grief, of a full and a strangling discontent: and therefore he that never had such a burden upon his heart, as to give him opportunity thus to ease it, has one pleasure in this World, yet to come. 2. As for the other part of Repen∣tance, which is change of life; this indeed may be troublesome in the Entrance; but it is but the first bold onset, the first reso∣lute
Violence and invasion upon a vici∣ous habit, that is so sharp and afflicting. Every impression of the Lancet Cuts, but it is the first only that Smarts. Be∣sides, it is an argument hugely unrea∣sonable, to plead the Pain of passing from a Vicious Estate, unless it were proved, that there was none in the continuance under it: But surely, when we read of the Service, the Bondage, and the Captivity of Sinners, we are not entertain'd only with the Air of Words and Metaphors; and instead of Truth, put off with Simi∣litudes. Let him that says it is a trou∣ble to refrain from a Debauch, convince us, that it is not a greater to undergoe one: and that the Confessor did not im∣pose a shrewd Penance upon the Drunken man, by bidding him go and be drunk again: and that lisping, raging, redness of Eyes, and what is not fit to be named in such an Audience, is not more toilsome, than to be clean, and quiet, and discreet, and respected for being so. All the trou∣ble
that is in it, is the trouble of being sound, being cured, and being recover∣ed. But if there be great arguments for Health, then certainly, there are the same for the obtaining of it: and so keeping a due proportion between Spirituals and Temporals, we neither have, nor pretend to greater Arguments for Repentance. Having thus now, cleared off all, that by way of Objection can lie against the Truth asserted, by showing the proper Qualification of the Subject, to whom only the ways of Wisdom, can be ways of Pleasantness; for the further prosecution of the matter in hand, I shall show what are those properties that so peculiarly set off, and enhance the Excellency of this Pleasure. 1. The first is That it is the proper pleasure of that part of man, which is the largest and most comprehensive of Plea∣sure, and that is his mind: a substance of a boundless comprehension. The mind of man is an Image, not only of God's
Spirituality, but of his Infinity. It is not like any of the Sences, limited to this or that kind of object: as the sight inter∣medles not with that which affects the smell: but with an universal superinten∣dence, it arbitrates upon and takes them in all. It is (as I may so say) an Ocean, into which all the little Rivulets of Sen∣sation, both External and Internal, dis∣charge themselves. It is framed by God to receive all and more than Nature can afford it; and so to be its own motive to seek for something above Nature. Now this is that part of man, to which the Pleasures of Religion properly be∣long: and that in a double respect. 1. In reference to Speculation, as it su∣stains the name of Understanding. 2. In reference to Practice, as it su∣stains the name of Conscience. 1. And first for Speculation: the plea∣sures of which have been sometimes so great, so intense, so ingrossing of all the Powers of the Soul, that there has been
no room left for any other Pleasure. It has so called together all the Spirits to that one Work, that there has been no supply to carry on the Inferior operations of Nature. Contemplation feels no Hunger, nor is sensible of any Thirst, but of that after knowledge. How frequent and exalted a Pleasure did David find from his Medi∣tation in the Divine Law? all the day long it was the Theam of his Thoughts. The affairs of State, the government of his Kingdom, might indeed employ, but it was this only that refresh'd his mind. How short of this are the delights of the Epicure? how vastly disproportionate are the Pleasures of the Eating, and of the Thinking man? indeed as different as the silence of an Archimedes in the study of a Problem, and the stilness of a Sow at her wash. Nothing is comparable to the pleasure of an Active, and a prevailing thought: a thought prevailing over the difficulty and obscurity of the Object, and refreshing the Soul with new discoveries,
and images of things; and thereby extend∣ing the Bounds of Apprehension, and (as it were) enlarging the Territories of Reason. Now this pleasure of the Speculation of Divine things, is advanced upon a double Account. 1. The Greatness. 2. The newness of the Object. 1. And first for the greatnss of it. It is no less than the great God himself, and that both in his Nature, and his Works. For the Eye of Reason, like that of the Ea∣gle, directs it self chiefly to the Sun, to a glory that neither admits of a Superior, nor an Equal. Religion carries the Soul to the study of every Divine Attribute. It poses it with the amazing thoughts of Omnipotence; of a Power able to fetch up such a Glorious Fabrick, as this of the world, out of the Abyss of Vanity and Nothing, and able to throw it back into the same Original Nothing again. It drowns us in the speculation of the Divine Omniscience; that can maintain
a steady infallible comprehension of all Events in themselves Contingent and Accidental; and certainly know that, which does not certainly exist. It con∣founds the greatest subtilties of Specula∣tion, with the Riddles of God's Omnipre∣sence; that can spread a single Individu∣al substance through all spaces; and yet without any commensuration of parts to any, or circumscription within any, though totally in every one. And then for his Eternity; which non-plusses the Strongest and Clearest Conception, to comprehend how one single Act of Du∣ration, should measure all Periods and Portions of time without any of the di∣stinguishing parts of Succession. Like∣wise for his Justice; which shall prey upon the sinner for ever, satisfying it self by a perpetual Miracle, rendring the Creature immortal in the midst of the flames; always consuming, but never consumed. With the like wonders we may entertain our Speculations from his
Mercy; his Beloved, his Triumphant Attribute; an Atribute, if it were possi∣ble, something more than Infinite; for even his Justice is so, and his Mercy tran∣scends that. Lastly we may contem∣plate upon his supernatural, astonishing works; particularly in the Resurrection, and reparation of the same numerical Body, by a reunion of all the scattered Parts, to be at length disposed of into an estate of Eternal Woe or Bliss; as also the greatness and strangeness of the Beatifick Vision; how a created Eye should be so fortified, as to bear all those Glories that stream from the fountain of uncreated Light, the meanest expression of which Light, is, that it is unexpressible. Now what great and high Objects are these for a Rational Contemplation to busy it self upon? Heights that scorn the reach of our Prospect; and Depths in which the tal∣lest Reason will never touch the Bottom: yet surely the pleasure arising from thence is Great and Noble; for as much as they
afford perpetual matter and imployment to the inquisitiveness of Humane Rea∣son; and so are large enough for it to take its full scope and range in: Which when it has suck'd and dreined the utmost of an Object, naturally lays it aside, and neg∣lects it as a dry and an Empty thing. 2. As the things belonging to Reli∣gion entertain our Speculation with great Objects, so they entertain it also with new. And novelty we know is the great parent of pleasure; upon which account it is that men are so much pleased with Variety, and Variety is nothing else but a continued Novelty. The Athe∣nians, who were the profess'd and most diligent Improvers of their Reason, made it their whole business to hear or to tell some new thing: for the truth is, Newness e∣specially in great matters, was a worthy entertainment for a searching mind; it was (as I may so say) an High Tast, fit for the relish of an Athenian Rea∣son. And thereupon the meer unheard of
strangeness of Iesus and the Resurrection, made them desirous to hear it discoursed of to them again, Acts 17.23. But how would it have imployed their searching Faculties, had the Mystery of the Trini∣ty, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the whole Oeconomy of man's Redemption been explained to them? For how could it ever enter into the thoughts of Reason, that a satisfaction could be paid to an Infinite Justice? Or, that two Natures so unconceivably different, as the Humane and Divine, could unite into one Person? The know∣ledge of these things could derive from nothing else but pure Revelation, and consequently must be purely New to the highest discourses of meer Nature. Now that the Newness of an Object so exceedingly pleases and strikes the mind, appears from this one consideration; that every thing pleases more in expectation than fruition: and expectation supposes a thing as yet new, the hoped for disco∣very
of which is the Pleasure that enter∣tains the expecting, and enquiring mind: Whereas Actual discovery (as it were) rifles and deflowers the Newness and Freshness of the Object, and so for the most part makes it Cheap, Familiar and Contemptible. It is clear therefore, that, if there be any pleasure to the mind from speculation; and if this pleasure of speculation be ad∣vanced by the greatness and newness of the things contemplated upon; all this is to be found in the ways of Religion. 2. In the next place, Religion is a plea∣sure to the mind, as it respects Practice; and so sustains the Name of Conscience. And Conscience undoubtedly is the great Repository and Magazine of all those pleasures that can afford any solid refreshment to the Soul. For when this is calm, and serene, and absolving, then properly a man enjoys all things, and what is more, Himself, for that he must do, before he can enjoy any thing else.
But it is only a Pious life, lead exactly by the rules of a severe Religion, that can authorize a man's Conscience to speak comfortably to him: It is this that must word the sentence, before the Conscience can pronounce it; and then it will do it with Majesty and Authority; it will not whisper, but proclaim a Jubilee to the mind. It will not drop, but pour in Oil upon the wounded Heart. And is there any pleasure comparable to that which springs from hence? The Pleasure of Conscience is not only greater than all other Pleasures, but may also serve instead of them: for they only please and affect the mind in Transitu, in the piti∣ful narrow compass of actual fruition; whereas that of Conscience entertains and feeds it a long time after with du∣rable, lasting reflections. And thus much for the first ennobling property of the Pleasure belonging to Religion; namely, That it is the pleasure of the mind, and that both as it relates to
Speculation, and is call'd the Understand∣ing; and as it relates to Practice, and is called the Conscience. 2. The second ennobling property of it is, That it is such a pleasure as never sa∣tiates, or wearies: for it properly affects the Spirit, and a Spirit feels no weariness, as being priviledged from the causes of it. But can the Epicure say so of any of the pleasures that he so much dotes up∣on? Do they not expire, while they sa∣tisfie? and after a few minutes refresh∣ment, determine in loathing and unqui∣etness? How short is the Interval be∣tween a pleasure and a Burden? How undiscernable the Transition from one to the other? Pleasure dwells no longer upon the Appetite, then the necessities of Nature, which are quickly, and easily provided for; and then all that follows, is a load and an oppression. Every mor∣sel to a satisfied Hunger, is only a new Labour to a tired Digestion. Every draught to him that has quencht his
Thirst, is but a further quenching of Na∣ture; a provision for Rheum and Dis∣eases; a drowning of the quickness, and activity of the Spirits. He that prolongs his meals, and sacri∣fices his Time, as well as his other Con∣veniences, to his Luxury, how quickly does he out-sit his pleasure? and then how is all the following time bestowed upon Ceremony and Surfeit? till at length after a long fatigue of Eating, and Drink∣ing, and Babling, he concludes the great work of Dining Gentilely, and so makes a shift to rise from Table, that he may lie down upon his Bed: Where, after he has slept himself into some use of Himself, by much adoe he staggers to his Table a∣gain, and there acts over the same Brutish Scene: so that he passes his whole life in a dozed Condition between sleeping, and waking, with a kind of drowsiness, and confusion upon his Senses; which, what pleasure it can be, is hard to conceive; all that is of it, dwells upon the tipp of his
Tongue, and within the compass of his Palace, a worthy prize for a man to pur∣chase with the loss of his Time, his Rea∣son, and Himself. Nor is that man less deceived, that thinks to maintain a constant tenure of Pleasure, by a continual pursuit of Sports and Re∣creations: For it is most certainly True of all these things, that as they refresh a man when he is weary, so they weary him when he is refresh'd; Which is an evident Demonstration that God never designed the use of them to be continual; by put∣ting such an emptiness in them, as should so quickly fail and lurch the expectation. The most Voluptuous, and loose Per∣son breathing, were he but tyed to fol∣low his Hawks, and his Hounds, his Dice, and his Courtships every day, would find it the greatest Torment, and Calamity that could befall him; he would flie to the Mines and the Galleys for his Recreation, and to the Spade and the Mattock for a Diversion from the misery
of a Continual un-intermitted Pleasure. But on the contrary, the Providence of God has so ordered the Course of things, that there is no Action, the use∣fulness of which has made it the matter of Duty and of a Profession, but a man may bear the continual pursuit of it, without loathing or Satiety. The same Shop and Trade, that employs a man in his Youth, employs him also in his Age. Every morning he rises fresh to his Hammer and his Anvil; he passes the day singing: Custom has naturalized his Labour to him: His Shop is his Element, and he cannot with any enjoyment of himself live out of it. Whereas no Custom can make the painfulness of a Debauch easie, or pleasing to a man; since nothing can be pleasant that is Unnatural. But now, if God has interwoven such a pleasure with the works of our ordinary Calling; how much superior and more refined must that be, that arises from the survey of a Pious and well-governed Life? Sure∣ly,
as much as Christianity is nobler than a Trade. And then, for the Constant freshness of it; it is such a pleasure as can never cloy or overwork the mind: for, surely no man was ever weary of thinking, much less of thinking that he had done well or vertuously, that he had conquered such and such a Temptation, or offered Vio∣lence to any of his Exorbitant Desires. This is a delight that grows and improves under thought and reflection: and while it exercises, does also endear it self to the mind; at the same time imploying and inflaming the Meditations. All pleasures that affect the Body, must needs weary, because they transport, and all Transpor∣tation is a Violence; and no Violence can be lasting, but determines upon the falling of the Spirits, which are not able to keep up that height of motion that the Pleasure of the Senses raises them to. And therefore how inevitably does an immo∣derate laughter end in a sigh? which is
only Nature's recovering it self after a force done to it. But the Religious Plea∣sures of a well disposed mind, moves gent∣ly, and therefore constantly. It does not affect by Rapture and Ecstasie; but is like the pleasure of Health, which is Still and Sober, yet Greater and Stronger than those that call up the Senses with grosser and more affecting impressions. God has gi∣ven no man a Body as strong as his Ap∣petites; but has corrected the Boundles∣ness of his Voluptuous desires, by stint∣ing his strengths, and contracting his Ca∣pacities. But to look upon those pleasures also, that have an higher object than the Bo∣dy; as those that spring from honour and grandeur of Condition; yet we shall find, that even these are not so fresh and con∣stant, but the Mind can nauseate them, and quickly feel the thinness of a popu∣lar Breath. Those that are so fond of Applause while they pursue it, how little do they taste it when they have it? Like
lightning, it only flashes upon the face and is gone, and it is well if it does not hurt the Man. But for greatness of Place, though it is fit and necessary, that some persons in the world should be in love with a splendid servitude, yet certainly they must be much beholding to their own fancy, that they can be pleased at it. For he that rises up early, and goes to bed late, only to receive Addresses, to read and answer Petitions, is really as much tied and abridged in his freedom, as he that waits all that time to present one. And what pleasure can it be to be en∣cumbred with Dependances, throng'd and surrounded with Petitioners? and those perhaps sometimes all Suitors for the same thing: whereupon all but one will be sure to depart grumbling, because they miss of what they think their due: and even that one scarce thankful, because he thinks he has no more than his due. In a word, if it is a pleasure to be envied and shot at, to be maligned standing, and
to be despised falling, to endeavour that which is impossible, which is to please all, and to suffer for not doing it; then is it a pleasure to be great, and to be able to dispose of mens fortunes and prefer∣ments. But further, to proceed from hence to yet an higher degree of Pleasure, indeed the highest on this side that of Religion; which is the pleasure of Friendship and Conversation. Friendship must confes∣sedly be allowed, the Top, the Flower, and Crown of all Temporal enjoyments. Yet has not this also its flaws and its dark side? For is not my Friend a man, and is not Friendship subject to the same Mor∣tality and Change that men are? And in case a man loves, and is not loved again, does he not think that he has cause to hate as heartily, and ten times more eagerly than ever he loved? and then to be an Enemy, and once to have been a Friend, does it not imbitter the Rupture, and ag∣gravate the Calamity? But admitting
that my Friend continues so to the end; yet in the mean time, is he all Perfection, all Vertue, and Discretion? Has he not humours to be endured, as well as kindnes∣ses to be enjoyed? And am I sure to smell the Rose, without sometimes feel∣ing the Thorn? And then lastly for Company; though it may Reprieve a man from his Melan∣choly, yet it cannot secure him from his Conscience, nor from sometimes being alone. And what is all that a man en∣joys, from a week's, a month's, or a year's converse, comparable to what he feels for one hour, when his Conscience shall take him aside and rate him by himself? In short, run over the whole Circle of all Earthly Pleasures, and I dare affirm, that had not God secured a man a solid pleasure from his own Actions, after he had rolled from one to another, and en∣joyed them all, he would be forced to complain, that either they were not in∣deed Pleasures, or that Pleasure was not Satisfaction.
3. The third ennobling property of the Pleasure that accrues to a man from Re∣ligion, is, that it is such an one as is in no Body's power, but only in his that has it; so that he that has the Property, may be also sure of the perpetuity. And tell me so of any outward enjoyment, that Mortality is capable of. We are gene∣rally at the mercy of mens Rapine, Ava∣rice, and Violence, whether we shall be happy or no. For if I build my felicity upon my Estate or Reputation, I am happy as long as the Tyrant, or the Rai∣ler will give me leave to be so. But when my concernment takes up no more room or compass than my self; then so long as I know where to breath, and to exist, I know also where to be happy: for I know I may be so in my own Breast, in the Court of my own Conscience; where if I can but prevail with my self to be In∣nocent, I need bribe neither Judge nor Officer to be pronounced so. The plea∣sure of the Religious man, is an easie
and a portable pleasure, such an one as he carries about in his bosome, without alar∣ming either the Eye or Envy of the world. A man putting all his pleasures into this one, is like a Traveller's putting all his Goods into one Jewel: the Value is the same, and the Convenience greater. There is nothing that can raise a man to that generous absoluteness of condition, as neither to cringe, to fawn, or to de∣pend meanly; but that which gives him that happiness within himself, for which men depend upon others. For surely I need salute no great man's Threshold, sneak to none of his Friends or Servants, to speak a good word for me to my Con∣science. It is a noble, and a sure Defi∣ance of a great Malice, back'd with a great Interest; which, yet can have no advantage of a man, but from his own Expectations of something that is with∣out himself. But if I can make my Du∣ty my delight; if I can feast, and please, and caress my mind with the pleasures of
worthy Speculations, or vertuous practi∣ces, let Greatness and Malice vex and a∣bridge me if they can: my Pleasures are as free as my Will; no more to be con∣trolled than my Choice, or the unlimited range of my Thoughs and my Desires. Nor is this kind of Pleasure only out of the reach of any outward Violence; but even those things also, that make a much closer impression upon us, which are the irresistible Decays of Nature, have yet no influence at all upon this. For when Age it self, which of all things in the world, will not be baffled or de∣fyed, shall begin to arrest, seize, and re∣mind us of our Mortality, by Pains, A∣ches, Deadness of Limbs, and Dulness of Senses; yet then the pleasure of the mind, shall be in its full Youth, Vigour, and Freshness. A Palsie may as well shake an Oak, or a Fever dry up a Fountain, as either of them shake, dry up, or im∣pair the delight of Conscience. For it lies within, it centers in the heart, it
grows into the very substance of the Soul; so that it accompanies a man to his Grave; he never out-lives it, and that for this cause only, because he cannot out-live himself. And thus I have endeavour'd to de∣scribe the Excellency of that Pleasure that is to be found in the ways of a Religious Wisdom, by those excellent properties that do attend it; which whether they reach the Description that has been given them, or no, every man may convince himself, by the best of Demonstrations, which is his own tryal. Now, from all this Discourse, this I am sure is a most natural and direct conse∣quence, That if the ways of Religion, are ways of Pleasantness, then such as are not ways of Pleasantness, are not truly and properly ways of Religion. Upon which ground it is easie to see what judg∣ment is to be passed upon all those affect∣ed, uncommanded, absurd Austerities, so much prized, and exercised by some of the
Romish Profession. Pilgrimages, going barefoot, Hair-Shirts, and Whips, with other such Gospel-Artillery, are their only helps to Devotion: Things never en∣joyned, either by the Prophets under the Jewish, or by the Apostles under the Christian Oeconomy; who yet surely un∣derstood the proper, and the most effica∣cious Instruments of Piety, as well as any Confessor, or Friar of all the Order of St. Francis, or any Casuist whatsoever. It seems, that with them, a man some∣times cannot be a Penitent, unless he also turns Vagabond, and foots it to Ierusa∣lem; or wanders over this or that part of the world to visit the Shrine of such or such a pretended Saint; though perhaps in his Life, ten times more ridiculous than themselves: Thus, that which was Cain's Curse, is become their Religion. He that thinks to expiate a Sin by going barefoot, does the Penance of a Goose; and only makes one Folly, the Atone∣ment of another. Paul indeed was Scour∣ged
and Beaten by the Jews, but we ne∣ver read that he Beat or Scourged him∣self: and if they think that his keeping un∣der of his Body imports so much; they must first prove, that the Body cannot be kept under by a Vertuous mind, and that the mind cannot be made Vertuous but by a Scourge; and consequently that Thongs and Whipcord are means of Grace, and things necessary to Salvation. The Truth is, if mens Religion lies no deeper than their Skin, it is possible that they may Scourge themselves into very great Improvements. But they will find that Bodily exercise touches not the Soul; and that neither Pride, nor Lust, nor Covetousness, nor any other Vice was ever Mortified by Corporal Disciplines: 'tis not the Back, but the Heart that must Bleed for Sin: and consequently, that in this whole course they are like men out of their way; let them Lash on never so fast, they are not at all the nearer to their Jour∣neys
end: and howsoever they deceive themselves and others, they may as well expect to bring a Cart, as a Soul to Hea∣ven by such means. What arguments they have to beguile poor Simple, unsta∣ble Souls with, I know not; but surely the Practical Casuistical, that is, the Prin∣cipal, Vital part of their Religion savours very little of Spirituality. And now upon the result of all, I sup∣pose that to exhort men to be Religious, is only in other words to exhort them to take their Pleasure. A pleasure High, Rational, and Angelical; a pleasure, em∣based with no appendant sting, no con∣sequent Loathing, no Remorses, or bitter farewells: But such an one, as being Ho∣ney in the Mouth never turns to Gall or Gravel in the Belly. A pleasure made for the Soul and the Soul for that; suita∣ble to its Spirituality, and equal to all its Capacities. Such an one as grows fresher upon Enjoyment and though continual∣ly Fed upon, yet is never Devoured. A
pleasure that a Man may call as properly his own, as his Soul and his Conscience; neither lyable to Accident, nor exposed to Injury. It is the fore-taste of Heaven, and the Earnest of Eternity. In a word, it is such an one, as being begun in Grace, passes into Glory, Blessedness and Immor∣tality, and those pleasures that neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entred into the Heart of Man to Conceive. To which God of his Mercy vouch∣safe to bring us all: to whom be ren∣dred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Domini∣on, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of S. PAUL, Novemb. 9th. 1662.
To the Right Honourable, The Lord Mayor and Aldermen Of the City of LONDON. Right Honourable, WHen I consider how impossible it is for a person of my condition to produce, and consequently how imprudent to attempt, any thing in proportion either to the Ampleness of the Body you repre∣sent, or of the Places you bear, I should be kept from venturing so poor a piece, designed to live but an hour, in so lasting a Publication; did not what your Civility calls a Request, your Greatness render a Command. The truth is, in things not unlawful great Persons cannot be properly said to request, because, all things con∣sidered, they must not be denyed. To me it was Honour enough to have your Audience; enjoy∣ment enough to behold your happy Change, and to see the same City, the Metropolis of Loyalty and of the Kingdom; to behold the Glory of En∣glish Churches reformed, that is, delivered from the Reformers; and to find at least the service
of the Church repaired, though not the build∣ings; to see St. Paul's delivered from Beasts here, as well as St. Paul at Ephesus: and to view the Church thronged onely with Troops of Auditors, not of Horse. This I could fully have acquiesced in, and received a large personal reward in my Particular share of the publick Ioy; but since you are further plea∣sed, I will not say by your Iudgment to approve, but by your Acceptance to encourage the raw Endeavours of a young Divine, I shall take it for an Opportunity, not as others in their sage Prudence use to do, to quote three or four Texts of Scripture, and to tell you how you are to Rule the City out of a Concordance; no, I bring not Instructions, but what much better befits both you and my self, your Commendations. For I look upon your City as the great and mag∣nificent stage of Business, and by consequence the best place of Improvement; for from the School we go to the University, but from the U∣niversities to London. And therefore as in your City-Meetings you must be esteemed the most considerable Body of the Nation; so met
in the Church, I look upon you as an Auditory fit to be waited on, as you are, by both Universities. And when I remember how instrumental you have been to recover this universal settlement, and to retrieve the old Spirit of Loyalty to Kings (as an ancient testimony of which you bear not the Sword in vain) I seem in a man∣ner deputed from Oxford, not so much a Prea∣cher to supply a course, as Oratour to present her thanks. As for the ensuing Discourse, which, (lest I chance to be traduced for a Plagi∣ary by him who has play'd the thief) I think fit to tell the world by the way, was one of those that by a worthy hand were stoln from me in the Kings Chappel and are still detained; and to which now accidentally published by your Ho∣nours Order, your Patronage must give both va∣lue, and protection. You will find me in it not to have pitcht upon any subject, that men's guilt, and the consequent of guilt, their concern∣ment might render liable to exception; nor to have rubbed up the memory of what some here∣tofore in the City did, which more and better now detest, and therefore expiate: but my sub∣ject is inoffensive; harmless, and innocent as
the state of innocence it self, and (I hope) sui∣table to the present design and Genius of this Nation; which is or should be, to return to that Innocence, which it lost long since the fall. Briefly, my business is, by describing what Man was in his first estate, to upbraid him with what he is in his present: between whom Innocent, and Fallen (that in a word I may suit the sub∣ject to the place of my discourse) there is as great an unlikeness, as between S. Paul's a Ca∣thedral, and S. Paul's a Stable. But I must not forestall my self, nor transcribe the work in∣to the Dedication. I shall now only desire you to accept the issue of your own requests; the gratification of which I have here consulted so much before my own reputation: while like the poor Widow I endeavour to shew my offici∣ousness by an offering, though I betray my po∣verty by the measure; not so much caring though I appear neither Preacher nor Scholar, (which terms we have been taught upon good reason to distinguish) so I may in this but shew my self Your Honours very humble Servant, Robert South. Worcester-house, Nov. 24. 1662.
GENESIS 1.27. So God created man in his own Image, in the image of God created he him. HOW hard it is for Natural Reason to discover a Creation before re∣vealed, or being revealed to believe it, the strange opinions of the old Philo∣sophers, and the Infidelity of modern A∣theists, is too sad a Demonstration. To run the world back to its first original and Infancy; and (as it were) to view Nature in its cradle, to trace the out∣goings of the Ancient of days in the first Instance and Specimen of his Creative Power, is a research too great for any mortal Enquiry: and we might conti∣nue our Scrutiny to the end of the World, before Natural Reason would be able to find out when it begun.
Epicurus his Discourse concerning the Original of the World is so fabulous and ridiculously merry, that we may well judge the Design of his Philosophy to have been Pleasure, and not Instruction. Aristotle held, That it streamed by con∣natural Result and Emanation from God, the Infinite and Eternal Mind, as the Light issues from the Sun; so that there was no Instant of Duration as∣signable of God's eternal existence, in which the World did not also co-exist. Others held a Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms. But all seem joyntly to explode a Creation; still beating upon this ground, that to produce Something out of Nothing is Impossible and Incomprehen∣sible. Imcomprehensible indeed I grant, but not therefore Impossible. There is not the least transaction of sense and mo∣tion in the whole man, but Philosophers are at a loss to comprehend, I am sure they are to explain, it. Wherefore it is not always rational to measure the truth
of an assertion by the standard of our Ap∣prehension. But to bring things even to the bare perceptions of Reason, I appeal to any one, who shall impartially reflect upon the Idea's and Conceptions of his own mind, whether he doth not find it as ea∣sie and suitable to his Natural Notions, to conceive that an Infinite Almighty Power might produce a thing out of nothing, and make that to exist De Novo, which did not exist before; as to conceive the World to have had no Beginning, but to have existed from Eternity: Which, were it so proper for this place and exer∣cise, I could easily demonstrate to be at∣tended with no small train of absurdities. But then, besides that the acknowledging of a Creation is safe, and the denial of it dangerous and irreligious, and yet not more (perhaps much less) demonstrable than the affirmative; so over and above it gives me this advantage, That, let it seem never so strange, uncouth, and impossi∣ble,
the Nonplus of my Reason will yield a fairer opportunity to my Faith. In this Chapter we have God survey∣ing the works of the Creation, and lea∣ving this general Impress or Character upon them, That they were exceeding good. What an Omnipotence wrought, we have an Omniscience to approve. But as it is reasonable to imagine that there is more of design, and consequently more of perfection, in the last work, we have God here giving his last stroke, and sum∣ming up all into Man, the Whole into a Part, the Universe into an Individual: so that whereas in other Creatures we have but the Trace of his Footsteps, in Man we have the Draught of his hand. In him were united all the scattered per∣fections of the Creature; all the Graces and Ornaments, all the Airs and Fea∣tures of Being, were abridged into this small, yet full System of Nature and Di∣vinity. As we might well imagine that the great Artificer would be more than
ordinarily exact in Drawing his own Picture. The Work that I shall undertake from these words, shall be to shew what this Image of God in Man is, and wherein it doth consist. Which I shall do these two ways: 1. Negatively, by shewing where∣in it does not consist. 2. Positively, by shewing wherein it does. For the first of these we are to remove the erroneous opinion of the Socinians. They deny that the Image of God con∣sisted in any Habitual Perfections that adorned the Soul of Adam: But as to his Understanding bring him in Void of all Notion, a rude unwritten Blank; ma∣king him to be created as much an In∣fant as others are born; sent into the world only to read and spell out a God in the Works of Creation, to learn by degrees, till at length his Understanding grew up to the stature of his Body. Also without any inherent habits of Vertue in his Will; thus divesting him of all, and
stripping him to his bare Essence. So that all the perfection they allowed his Under∣standing was Aptness and Docility, and all that they attributed to his Will was a possibility to be Vertuous. But wherein then according to their opinion did this Image of God consist? Why, in that Power and Dominion that God gave Adam over the Creatures: In that he was vouched his immediate De∣puty upon Earth, the Viceroy of the Cre∣ation, and Lord Lieutenant of the World. But that this Power and Dominion is not adequately and formally the Image of God, but only a part of it, is clear from hence; because then he that had most of this, would have most of God's Image: And consequently Nimrod had more of it than Noah, Saul than Samuel, the Persecutors than the Martyrs, and Caesar than Christ himself, which to assert is a Blasphemous Paradox. And if the Image of God is only Grandeur, Power and Sovereignty, certainly we have been hitherto much
mistaken in our Duty: and hereafter are by all means to beware of making our selves unlike God, by too much Self-denial and Humility. I am not ignorant that some may distinguish between  and , between a Lawfull Authority and an Actual Power; and affirm, that God's Image consists only in the former: which wicked Princes, such as Saul and Nimrod, have not, though they possess the latter. But to this I answer, 1. That the Scripture neither makes nor owns such a distinction, nor any where asserts, that when princes begin to be wicked, they cease of right to be Go∣vernours. Add to this, that when God renewed this Charter of Man's Sovereign∣ty over the Creatures to Noah and his fa∣mily, we find no exception at all, but that Cham stood as fully invested with this Right as any of his Brethren. 2. But secondly, This savours of some∣thing ranker than Socinianism, even the Tenents of the Fifth Monarchy, and of
Sovereignty founded only upon Saint∣ship; and therefore fitter to be answer∣ed by the Judge, than by the Divine; and to receive its confutation at the Bar of Justice, than from the Pulpit. Having now made our way through this false Opinion, we are in the next place to lay down positively what this Image of God in Man is. It is in short, That Universal Rectitude of all the faculties of the Soul, by which they stand apt and disposed to their respective Offices and Opera∣tions. Which will be more fully set forth, by taking a distinct survey of it, in the se∣veral faculties belonging to the soul. 1. In the Understanding. 2. In the Will. 3. In the Passions or Affections. 1. And first for its noblest faculty, the Understanding: It was then sublime, clear, and aspiring, and, as it were, the soul's upper region, lofty and serene, free from the vapours and disturbances of the inferiour affections. It was the leading,
controlling faculty; all the Passions wore the colours of Reason; it did not so much perswade, as command; it was not Con∣sul but Dictator. Discourse was then al∣most as quick as Intuition; it was nim∣ble in proposing, firm in concluding; it could sooner determine than now it can dispute. Like the Sun, it had both light and agility; it knew no rest but in moti∣on; no quiet, but in activity. It did not so properly apprehend, as irradiate the Object; not so much find, as make things intelligible. It did arbitrate upon the several Reports of sense, and all the varieties of Imagination; not like a drou∣sie judge, only hearing, but also direct∣ing their Verdict. In sum, it was vegete, quick, and lively; open as the Day, un∣tainted as the Morning, full of the inno∣cence and spriteliness of Youth; it gave the Soul a bright and a full view into all things, and was not only a Window, but it self the Prospect. Briefly, there is as much difference between the clear Re∣presentations
of the understanding then, and the obscure discoveries that it makes now, as there is between the Prospect of a Casement, and of a Key-hole. Now as there are two great functions of the Soul, Contemplation, and Practice, according to that general division of Ob∣jects, some of which only entertain our Speculation, others also imploy our Acti∣ons; so the Understanding with relation to these, not because of any distinction in the faculty it self, is accordingly divi∣ded into Speculative and Practick; in both of which the Image of God was then apparent. 1. For the Understanding Speculative. There are some general Maxims and No∣tions in the mind of Man, which are the rules of Discourse, and the basis of all Phi∣losophy. As that the same thing cannot at the same time be, and not be. That the Whole is bigger than a Part. That two Proportions equal to a third, must also be equal to one an∣other. Aristotle indeed affirms the Mind to
be at first a meer Rasa tabula; and that these Notions are not ingenite, and im∣printed by the finger of Nature, but by the latter and more languid impressions of sense; being only the Reports of observa∣tion, and the Result of so many repeated Experiments. But to this I answer two things. 1. That these Notions are universal, and what is universal must needs proceed from some Universal, constant Principle, the same in all particulars; which here can be nothing else but humane Nature. 2. These cannot be infused by obser∣vation, because they are the rules by which men take their first apprehensions and ob∣servations of things, and therefore in or∣der of Nature must needs precede them: As the being of the Rule must be before its application to the thing directed by it. From whence it follows, that these were Notions not descending from us, but born with us; not our Off-spring, but our Brethren; and (as I may so say) such as
we were taught without the help of a Teacher. Now it was Adam's happiness in the state of innocence to have these clear and unsullied. He came into the World a Phi∣losopher, which sufficiently appeared by his writing the Nature of things upon their Names: he could view Essences in themselves, and read Forms without the comment of their respective Properties: he could see Consequents yet dormant in their principles, and effects yet unborn and in the Womb of their Causes: his un∣derstanding could almost pierce into fu∣ture contingents; his conjectures impro∣ving even to Prophecy, or the certainties of Prediction; till his fall it was ignorant of nothing but of Sin; or at least it rested in the notion without the smart of the Experiment. Could any difficulty have been proposed, the resolution would have been as early as the proposal; it could not have had time to settle into Doubt. Like a better Archimedes, the issue of all his En∣quiries
was an , an , the off∣spring of his Brain without the sweat of his Brow. Study was not then a Duty, night∣watchings were needless; the light of Reason wanted not the assistance of a Can∣dle. This is the doom of fallen man to labour in the fire, to seek truth in profundo, to exhaust his time and impair his health, and perhaps to spin out his days, and himself into one pitifull, controverted Conclusion. There was then no poring, no struggling with memory, no straining for Invention. His faculties were quick and expedite; they answered without knock∣ing, they were ready upon the first sum∣mons, there was freedom, and firmness in all their Operations. I confess 'tis difficult for us who date our ignorance from our first Being, and were still bred up with the same infirmities about us, with which we were born, to raise our thoughts, and imagination to those intellectual perfecti∣ons that attended our Nature in the time of Innocence; as it is for a Peasant bred
up in the obscurities of a Cottage, to fan∣sie in his mind the unseen splendours of a Court. But by rating Positives by their Privatives, and other Arts of Reason, by which discourse supplies the want of the Reports of sense, we may collect the Ex∣cellency of the Understanding then, by the glorious remainders of it now, and guess at the stateliness of the building, by the magnificence of its ruins. All those arts, rarities, and inventions, which vul∣gar minds gaze at, the ingenious pursue, and all admire, are but the reliques of an Intellect defaced with Sin and Time. We admire it now, only as Antiquaries do a piece of old Coin, for the Stamp it once bore, and not for those vanishing li∣neaments, and disappearing draughts, that remain upon it at present. And cer∣tainly, that must needs have been very glorious, the decayes of which are so ad∣mirable. He that is comely, when old and decrepit, surely was very beautifull, when he was young. An Aristotle was but the
rubbish of an Adam, and Athens but the ru∣diments of Paradise. 2. The Image of God was no less re∣splendent in that, which we call man's Practical Understanding; namely, that store-house of the Soul, in which are treasured up the rules of Action, and the seeds of Morality. Where, we must ob∣serve, that many, who deny all Connate Notions in the Speculative Intellect, do yet admit them in this. Now of this sort are these Maxims, That God is to be wor∣shipped. That Parents are to be honoured. That a man's word is to be kept, and the like; which, being of universal influence, as to the regulation of the behaviour, and converse of mankind, are the ground of all vertue, and civility, and the founda∣tion of Religion. It was the Privilege of Adam Inno∣cent, to have these Notions also firm and untainted, to carry his Monitor in his bo∣som, his Law in his heart, and to have such a Conscience, as might be its own
Casuist: And certainly those Actions must needs be regular, where there is an Identity between the rule and the faculty. His own mind taught him a due depen∣dance upon God, and chalked out to him the just proportions, and measures of be∣haviour to his fellow-creatures. He had no Catechism but the Creation, needed no Study but Reflection, read no Book but the volume of the world, and that too not for Rules to work by, but for Objects to work upon. Reason was his Tutor, and First principles his magna moralia. The Decalogue of Moses was but a Tran∣script, not an Original. All the Laws of Nations and wise Decrees of State, the Statutes of Solon, and the twelve Tables, were but a paraphrase upon this standing rectitude of Nature, this fruitfull principle of Justice, that was ready to run out, and enlarge it self into suitable determinations, upon all emergent objects, and occasions. Justice then was neither blind to discern, nor lame to execute. It was not subject to
be imposed upon by a deluded fancy, nor yet to be bribed by a glozing appe∣tite, for an Utile or Iucundum to turn the balance to a false or dishonest sentence. In all its directions of the inferiour facul∣ties, it conveyed its suggestions with clear∣ness, and enjoyned them with power; it had the Passions in perfect subjection; and though its command over them was but suasive, and political, yet it had the force of coaction, and despotical. It was not then, as it is now, where the Conscience has only power to disapprove, and to pro∣test against the exorbitances of the Passi∣ons; and rather to wish, than make them otherwise. The voice of Conscience now is low, and weak, chastising the Passions, as old Eli did his lustfull, domineering Sons; Not so, my Sons, not so: but the voice of Conscience then was not, This should, or this ought to be done; but this must, this shall be done. It spoke like a Legislator: the thing spoke was a Law: and the manner of speaking it a new
Obligation. In short, there was as great a disparity between the Practical dictates of the understanding then, and now, as there is between empire and advice, coun∣sel and command, between a companion and a governour. And thus much for the Image of God as it shone in man's understanding. 2. Let us in the next place take a view of it, as it was stamped upon the Will. It is much disputed by Divines concern∣ing the power of man's will to Good and Evil in the state of Innocence; and upon very nice, and dangerous precipices stand their determinations on either side. Some hold that God invested him with a power to stand, so that in the strength of that power received, he might without the auxiliaries of any further influence have de∣termined his will to a full choice of good. Others hold, that notwithstanding this power, yet it was impossible for him, to exert it in any good action, without a su∣peradded assistance of grace, actually de∣termining
that power to the certain pro∣duction of such an act. So that, whereas some distinguish between sufficient and effectual grace; they order the matter so, as to acknowledge none sufficient, but what is indeed effectual, and actually pro∣ductive of a good action. I shall not presume to interpose dogmatically in a controversie, which I look never to see de∣cided. But concerning the latter of these Opinions, I shall only give these two re∣marks. 1. That it seems contrary to the com∣mon and natural conceptions of all mankind, who acknowledge themselves able, and sufficient to do many things, which actu∣ally they never do. 2. That to assert, that God looked upon Adam's fall as a sin, and punished it as such, when, without any antecedent sin of his, he withdrew that actual grace from him, upon the withdrawing of which, it was impossible for him not to fall, seems a thing that highly reproaches
the essential equity and goodness of the divine Nature. Wherefore doubtless the will of man in the state of Innocence, had an entire freedom, a perfect equipendency and in∣difference to either part of the contradic∣tion, to stand, or not to stand; to accept, or not accept the temptation. I will grant the Will of man now to be as much a slave as any one will have it, and be only free to Sin; that is, instead of a liberty, to have only a licentiousness; yet certain∣ly this is not Nature, but Chance. We were not born crooked, we learnt these windings and turnings of the Serpent: and therefore it cannot but be a blasphemous piece of ingratitude to ascribe them to God; and to make the plague of our Nature the Condition of our Creation. The Will was then ductile, and pliant to all the motions of right Reason, it met the dictates of a clarified understanding half way. And the Active informations of the Intellect, filling the Passive reception
of the Will, like Form closing with Matter, grew actuate into a third, and distinct perfection of Practice: The Understand∣ing and Will never disagreed, for the pro∣posals of the one never thwarted the in∣clinations of the other. Yet neither did the Will servilely attend upon the Under∣standing, but as a favourite does upon his Prince, where the Service is Privilege, and Preferment; or as Solomon's servants waited upon him, it admired its wis∣dom, and heard its prudent dictates, and counsels, both the direction, and the re∣ward of its obedience. It is indeed the nature of this faculty to follow a Superi∣our guide, to be drawn by the Intellect; but then it was drawn, as a Triumphant Chariot, which at the same time both follows and triumphs; while it obeyed this, it commanded the other faculties. It was subordinate, not enslaved to the Un∣derstanding: Not as a Servant to a Ma∣ster, but as a Queen to her King; who both acknowledges a Subjection, and yet re∣tains a Majesty.
Pass we now downward from man's Intellect and Will, 3. To the Passions; which have their residence and situation chiefly in the Sen∣sitive Appetite. For we must know, that inasmuch as man is a compound and mixture of Flesh as well as Spirit, the soul during its abode in the body, does all things by the mediation of these Passions, and inferiour affections. And here the Opinion of the Stoicks was famous and singular, who look'd upon all these, as sinfull defects and irregularities, as so ma∣ny deviations from right Reason, making Passion to be only another word for Per∣turbation. Sorrow in their esteem was a sin scarce to be expiated by another; to pitty was a fault, to rejoyce an extravagance, and the Apostle's advice, to be angry and sin not, was a contradiction in their Phi∣losophy. But in this, they were constantly out-voted by other Sects of Philosophers, neither for fame, nor number less than themselves: So that all arguments brought
against them from Divinity would come in by way of overplus to their confutation. To us let this be sufficient, that our Sa∣viour Christ, who took upon him all our natural infirmities, but none of our sinfull, has been seen to Weep, to be Sorrowfull, to Pitty, and to be Angry. Which shews that there might be gall in a Dove, passion without Sin, fire without smoke, and mo∣tion without disturbance. For it is not bare agitation, but the sediment at the bottom, that troubles and defiles the Wa∣ter. And when we see it windy and du∣sty, the wind does not (as we use to say) make, but only raise a dust. Now, though the Schools reduce all the Passions to these two heads, the concu∣piscible, and the irascible Appetite: yet, I shall not tie my self to an exact prosecu∣tion of them under this Division; but at this time leaving both their terms and their method to themselves, consider on∣ly the principal and most noted Passions, from whence we may take an estimate of the rest.
And first, for the grand leading affec∣tion of all, which is Love. This is the great Instrument and Engine of Nature, the bond and cement of Society, the spring and spirit of the Universe. Love is such an affection, as cannot so properly be said to be in the Soul, as the Soul to be in that. It is the whole man wrapt up into one desire, all the powers, vigour and faculties of the Soul abridged into one in∣clination. And it is of that active, rest∣less nature, that it must of necessity exert it self; and like the fire, to which it is so often compared, it is not a free Agent, to choose whether it will heat or no, but it streams forth by natural results, and una∣voidable emanations. So that it will fa∣sten upon an inferiour, unsuitable Object, rather than none at all. The Soul may sooner leave off to subsist, than to love; and like the Vine, it withers and dies, if it has nothing to embrace. Now this affec∣tion in the state of Innocence was happily pitched upon its right Object; it flamed
up in direct fervours of devotion to God, and in collateral emissions of charity to its Neighbour. It was not then only ano∣ther and more cleanly name for Lust. It had none of those impure heats, that both represent and deserve Hell. It was a Ve∣stal and a Virgin-fire, and differed as much from that which usually passes by this name now-a-days, as the vital heat from the burning of a Fever. Then for the contrary Passion of Ha∣tred. This we know is the Passion of de∣fiance, and there is a kind of aversation and hostility included in its very essence and being. But then (if there could have been hatred in the world, when there was scarce any thing odious) it would have acted within the compass of its proper object. Like Aloes, bitter indeed, but wholsome. There would have been no rancour, no hatred of our Brother: An innocent na∣ture could hate nothing that was innocent. In a word, so great is the commutation, that the Soul then hated only that, which now only it loves, i. e. Sin.
And if we may bring Anger under this head, as being according to some, a tran∣sient hatred, or at least very like it: This also, as unruly as now it is, yet then it vented it self by the measures of reason. There was no such thing as the transports of malice, or the violences of revenge: no rendring evil for evil, when evil was truly a non-entity, and no where to be found. Anger then was like the sword of Justice, keen, but innocent and righteous. It did not act like fury, and then call it self zeal. It always espoused God's honour: and never kindled upon any thing but in order to a Sacrifice. It sparkled like the coal upon the Altar, with the fervours of piety, the heats of devotion, the sallies and vibrations of an harmless activity. In the next place, for the lightsome Passion of Ioy. It was not that, which now often usurps this name; that trivial, vanishing, superficial thing, that only gilds the appre∣hension, and plays upon the surface of the Soul. It was not the meer crackling of
thorns, a sudden blaze of the Spirits, the exultation of a tickled fancy, or a pleased appetite. Joy was then a masculine and a severe thing: the recreation of the Judg∣ment, the Jubilee of Reason. It was the result of a real good sutably applied. It commenced upon the solidities of Truth, and the substance of Fruition. It did not run out in voice, or undecent erupti∣ons, but filled the Soul, as God does the Universe, silently and without noise. It was refreshing, but composed; like the pleasantness of youth tempered with the gravity of age; or the mirth of a festi∣val mannaged with the silence of contem∣plation. And, on the other side, for Sorrow. Had any loss or disaster made but room for grief, it would have moved according to the severe allowances of Prudence, and the proportions of the provocation. It would not have sallied out into com∣plaint, or loudness, nor spread it self up∣on the face, and writ sad stories upon the
forehead. No wringing of the hands, knocking the breast, or wishing ones self unborn; all which are but the ceremo∣nies of sorrow, the pomp and ostentati∣on of an effeminate grief: which speak not so much the greatness of the misery, as the smallness of the mind. Tears may spoil the eyes, but not wash away the af∣fliction. Sighs may exhaust the man, but not eject the burthen. Sorrow then would have been as silent as Thoughts, as severe as Philosophy. It would have rested in inward senses, tacit dislikes: and the whole scene of it been transacted in sad and silent reflections. Then again for Hope. Though in∣deed the fullness and affluence of man's enjoyments in the state of Innocence, might seem to leave no place for hope, in respect of any further addition, but only of the prorogation, and future continu∣ance of what already he possessed: Yet doubtless, God who made no faculty but also provided it with a proper object,
upon which it might exercise, and lay out it self, even in its greatest innocence, did then exercise man's hopes with the expe∣ctations of a better Paradise, or a more intimate admission to himself. For it is not imaginable, that Adam could fix up∣on such poor, thin enjoyments, as riches, pleasure, and the gayeties of an animal life. Hope indeed was always the An∣chor of the Soul, yet certainly it was not to catch or fasten upon such mud. And if, as the Apostle says, no man hopes for that which he sees, much less could Adam then hope for such things as he saw through. And lastly, for the affection of Fear. It was then the instrument of caution, not of anxiety; a guard and not a torment to the breast that had it. It is now indeed an unhappiness, the disease of the Soul: it flies from a shadow, and makes more dangers than it avoids: it weakens the Judg∣ment, and betrays the succours of rea∣son. So hard is it to tremble, and not to erre, and to hit the mark with a shaking
hand. Then it fixed upon him who is only to be feared, God: and yet with a filial fear, which at the same time both fears, and loves. It was awe without a∣mazement, dread without distraction. There was then a beauty even in this very paleness. It was the colour of de∣votion, giving a lustre to reverence, and a gloss to humility. Thus did the Passions then act with∣out any of their present jarrs, combats, or repugnances; all moving with the beauty of uniformity, and the stilness of composure. Like a well-governed Ar∣my, not for fighting, but for rank and or∣der. I confess the Scripture does not ex∣presly attribute these several endowments to Adam in his first estate. But all that I have said, and much more, may be drawn out of that short Aphorism, God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. And since the opposite Weaknesses now infest the nature of Man faln, if we will be true to the rule of contraries, we must con∣clude,
That those perfections were the lot of man innocent. Now from this so exact and regular composure of the faculties, all moving in their due place, each striking in its proper time, there arose, by natural consequence, the crowning perfection of all, A good con∣science. For, as in the Body, when the principal parts, as the Heart and Liver, do their offices, and all the inferiour, smaller vessels act orderly, and duly, there arises a sweet enjoyment upon the whole, which we call Health. So in the Soul, when the supreme faculties of the Will and Understanding move regularly, the inferiour Passions and Affections follow∣ing, there arises a serenity and complacen∣cy upon the whole Soul, infinitely beyond the greatest bodily pleasures, the highest quintessence and Elixir of worldly de∣lights. There is in this case a kind of fra∣grancy, and spiritual perfume upon the Conscience; much like what Isaac spoke of his son's garments, That the scent of them
was like the smell of a field which the Lord had blessed. Such a freshness and flavour is there upon the Soul, when daily watered with the actions of a vertuous life. What∣soever is pure, is also pleasant. Having thus surveyed the Image of God in the Soul of Man, we are not to omit now those characters of Majesty that God imprinted upon the Body. He drew some traces of his Image upon this also; as much as a spiritual Substance could be pictured upon a corporeal. As for the Sect of the Anthropomorphites, who from hence ascribe to God the figure of a Man, eyes, hands, feet, and the like, they are too ridiculous to deserve a confutation. They would seem to draw this impiety from the letter of the Scripture sometimes speaking of God in this manner. Ab∣surdly; as if the mercy of Scripture-expres∣sions ought to warrant the blasphemy of our Opinions. And not rather shew us, that God condescends to us, only to draw us to himself; and cloathes himself in our
likeness, only to win us to his own. The practice of the Papists is much of the same nature, in their absurd and impious pictu∣ring of God Almighty: but the wonder in them is the less, since the Image of a Deity may be a proper object for that, which is but the Image of a Religion. But to the purpose: Adam was then no less glorious in his Externals; he had a beautifull Body, as well as an immortal Soul. The whole compound was like a well built Temple, stately without, and sa∣cred within. The Elements were at perfect union and agreement in his Body; and their contrary qualities served not for the dissolution of the compound, but the va∣riety of the composure. Galen, who had no more Divinity, than what his Physick taught him, barely upon the consideration of this so exact frame of the Body, chal∣lenges any one upon an hundred years study, to find, how any the least fibre, or most minute particle might be more com∣modiously placed, either for the advan∣tage
of use, or comeliness. His stature e∣rect, and tending upwards to his Centre; his Countenance Majestick and Comely, with the lustre of a native Beauty, that scorned the poor Assistance of Art, or the Attempts of Imitation; his Body of so much quickness and agility, that it did not only contain, but also represent the Soul: for we might well suppose, that where God did deposit so rich a Jewel, he would suta∣bly adorn the Case. It was a fit Work-house for spritely, vivid faculties to exer∣cise and exert themselves in. A fit Taber∣nacle for an immortal Soul, not only to dwell in, but to contemplate upon: where it might see the World without travel; it being a lesser Scheme of the Creation, nature contracted, a little Cosmography or Map of the Universe. Neither was the Body then subject to distempers, to die by piece-meal, and languish under Coughs, Catarrhs, or Consumptions. Adam knew no disease, so long as temperance from the forbidden fruit secured him. Nature
was his Physician: and Innocence, and Abstinence would have kept him health∣full to immortality. Now the Use of this point might be va∣rious, but at present it shall be only this; To remind us of the irreparable loss that we sustained in our first Parents, to shew us of how fair a portion Adam disinherit∣ed his whole posterity by one single pre∣varication. Take the picture of a man in the greenness and vivacity of his youth, and in the latter date and declensions of his drooping years, and you will scarce know it to belong to the same person: there would be more art to discern, than at first to draw it. The same and grea∣ter is the difference between Man inno∣cent and faln. He is as it were a new kind or species; the plague of sin has e∣ven altered his nature, and eaten into his very essentials. The Image of God is wiped out, the creatures have shook off his yoke, renounced his Soverignty, and re∣volted from his dominion. Distempers
and Diseases have shattered the excellent frame of his body; and by a new dispen∣sation, Immortality is swallowed up of Mor∣tality. The same disaster, and decay al∣so has invaded his spirituals: the passions rebel, every faculty would usurp and rule; and there are so many governours, that there can be no government. The light within us is become darkness; and the Understanding, that should be eyes to the blind faculty of the Will, is blind it self, and so brings all the inconveniences, that attend a blind follower under the conduct of a blind guide. He that would have a clear, ocular demonstration of this, let him reflect upon that numerous litter of strange, sensless, absurd Opinions, that crawl about the world, to the disgrace of Reason, and the unanswerable reproach of a broken Intellect. The two great perfections, that both adorn, and exercise man's understanding are Philosophy, and Religion: For the first of these; take it even amongst the Profes∣sors
of it, where it most flourished, and we shall find the very first notions of com∣mon sense debauched by them. For there have been such, as have asserted, That there is no such thing in the world as Motion: That Contradictions may be true. There has not been wanting one, that has denied Snow to be white. Such a stupidity or wantonness had seized upon the most raised wits, that it might be doubted, whether the Philo∣sophers, or the Owls, of Athens were the quicker sighted. But then for Religion; What prodigious, monstrous, mishapen births has the Reason of faln man produ∣ced! It is now almost six thousand years, that far the greatest part of the World has had no other Religion but Idolatry. And Idolatry certainly is the first-born of Fol∣ly, the great and leading paradox; nay, the very abridgment and sum total of all absurdities. For is it not strange, that a rational man should worship an Oxe, nay the Image of an Oxe? that he should fawn upon his Dog? bow himself before
a Cat? adore Leeks and Garlick, and shed penitential tears at the smell of a deified Onion? Yet so did the AEgyptians, once the famed masters of all arts and learning. And to go a little further; we have yet a stranger instance in Isa. 44.14. A man hews him down a tree in the wood, and part of it he burns, in the 16. ver. and in the 17. ver. with the residue thereof he ma∣keth a God. With one part he furnishes his Chimney, with the other his Chappel. A strange thing, that the fire must first con∣sume this part, and then burn Incense to that. As if there was more Divinity in one end of the stick, than in the other; or, as if it could be graved and painted om∣nipotent, or the nails and the hammer could give it an Apotheosis. Briefly, so great is the Change, so deplorable the de∣gradation of our nature, that, whereas be∣fore, we bore the Image of God, we now retain onely the Image of Men. In the last place, we learn from hence the excellency of Christian Religion, in
that it is the great and onely means, that God has sanctified and designed to repair the breaches of Humanity, to set faln man upon his legs again, to clarifie his Reason, to rectifie his Will, and to compose and regulate his affections. The whole busi∣ness of our Redemption is, in short, only to rub over the defaced copy of the Crea∣tion, to re-print God's Image upon the Soul, and (as it were) to set forth Nature in a second, and a fairer edition. The recovery of which lost Image, as it is God's pleasure to command, and our duty to endeavour, so it is in his power only to effect. To whom be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all praise, might, majesty and dominion, both now and for ever∣more. Amen.
INTEREST DEPOSED, AND TRUTH RESTORED: OR, A Word in Season, delivered in Two SERMONS: The first at St. MARY'S in OXFORD, on the 24th of Iuly, 1659. being the time of the Assizes: as also of the Fears and Groans of the Nation in the threatned and expected Ruine of the Laws, Ministery, and Vniversities. The other Preached before the Honourable Society of LINCOLN'S-INN.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL EDWARD ATKINS, Serjeant at Law, and formerly one of the Justices of the COMMON-PLEAS. Honoured Sir, THough at first it was free, and in my choice, whether or no I should publish these Discourses, yet the Publication being once Resolved, the Dedi∣cation was not so indifferent; the Nature of the Subject, no less than the Obligations of the Author, styling them in a peculiar manner, Yours: For since their drift is to carry the most Endangered, and Endangering Truth, a∣bove the Safest, when sinfull, Interest; as a Practice upon grounds of Reason the most Generous, and of Christianity the most Religi∣ous; to whom rather should this Assertion re∣pair as to a Patron, than to Him whom it has for an instance? Who in a case of emi∣nent competition, chose Duty before Interest;
and when the Iudge grew inconsistent with the Iustice, preferred rather to be Constant to sure Principles, than to an Un-con∣stant Government: And to retreat to an Innocent and Honorable privacy, than to sit and Act iniquity by a Law; and make your Age and Conscience, (the one Venerable, the other Sacred) Drudges to the tyranny of Fa∣natick, Perjured Usurpers. The next attempt of this Discourse is a Defence of the Mini∣stery, and that, at such a time when none owned them upon the Bench, (for then you had quit∣ted it) but when on the contrary we lived to hear one in the very face of the University, (as it were in defiance of us and our Profes∣sion) openly in his Charge, defend the Quakers and Fanaticks, persons not fit to be nam'd in such Courts, but in an Indictment. But, Sir, in the Instructions I here presumed to give to others, concerning what they should do, you may take a narrative of what you have done: what respected their Actions as a Rule or Admonition, applyed to yours is only a Rehearsal, whose Zeal in asserting the Mi∣nisterial
Cause is so generally known, so grate∣fully acknowledged, that I dare affirm, that, in what I deliver, you read the words indeed of One, but the Thanks of All. Which af∣fectionate Concernment of yours for them, seems to argue a Spiritual sense, and experimen∣tal Tast of their Works, and that you have reaped as much from their Labours, as others have done from their Lands: For to me it seemed always strange, and next to impossible, that a man, converted by the word Preached, should ever hate and persecute a Preacher. And since you have several times in discourse declared your self for that Government in the Church, which is founded upon Scripture, Reason, Apostolical Practice and Antiquity, and (we are sure) the onely one that can consist with the Present Government of State, I thought the latter Discourse also might fitly address it self to you, in the which you may read your Iudgment, as in the other your Pra∣ctice. And now, since it has pleased Provi∣dence, at length to turn our Captivity, and answer persecuted Patience with the unex∣pected
returns of Settlement; to remove our Rulers, and restore our Ruler; and not one∣ly to make our Exactors Righteousness, but, what is better, to give us Righteousness in∣stead of Exaction, and hopes of Religion to a Church worried with reformation; I believe, upon a due and impartial Reflexion on what is past, you now find no cause to Repent, that you never dipt your hands in the Bloody High Courts of Justice, properly so called only by Antiphrasis; nor ever prostituted the Scarlet Robe to those Employments, in which you must have worn the Colour of your Sin in the Badge of your Office: but, not∣withstanding all the Enticements of a Prospe∣rous Villainy, abhorred the purchase, when the price was Blood. So that now being privileged by an happy Unconcernment in those legal murders, you may take a sweeter relish of your own Innocence, by beholding the misery of others Guilt, who being Guilty be∣fore God, and infamous before men, Obnoxi∣ous to both, begin to find the first-fruits of their sin in the Universal scorn of all,
their apparent Danger, and unlikely Remedy: which beginnings being at length consum∣mated by the hand of Iustice, the cry of Blood and Sacrilege will cease, men's doubts will be Satisfied, and Providence Absolved. And thus, Sir, having presumed to ho∣nour my first Essayes in Divinity, by pre∣fixing to them a Name, to which Divines are so much obliged; I should here in the close of this Address, contribute a Wish at least to your Happiness: But since we de∣sire it not yet in another World, and your Enjoyments in this (according to the Stan∣dard of a Christian desire) are so compleat, that they require no Addition; I shall turn my Wishes into Gratulations, and congra∣tulating their fullness only wish their con∣tinuance: Praying that you may still Pos∣sess what you Possess; and Doe what you Doe; that is, reflect upon a clear, unblot∣ted, acquitting Conscience, and feed upon the ineffable Comforts of the Memorial of a Conquered temptation; without the dan∣ger
of returning to the Tryal. And this (Sir) I account the greatest felicity that you can enjoy, and therefore the greatest that he can desire, who is Yours in all Observance, RO. SOUTH. Chr. Ch. 25 of May, 1660.
MATTHEW X.33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven. AS the great comprehensive Gospel duty is the denial of Self, so the grand Gospel sin that confronts it, is the denial of Christ. These two are both the commanding and the dividing Prin∣ciples of all our actions: For whosoever acts in opposition to one, does it alwaies in behalf of the other. None ever op∣posed Christ, but it was to gratifie Self; None ever renounced the Interest of Self, but from a prevailing love to the Inte∣rest of Christ. The subject I have here pitched upon, may seem improper in these times, and in this place, where the number of Professors, and of men, is the
same; where the Cause and Interest of Christ has been so cryed up; and Christ's Personal Reign and Kingdom so called for, and expected. But since it has been still Preached up, but Acted down; and dealt with, as the Eagle in the Fable did with the Oister, carrying it up on high, that by letting it fall he might dash it in peices. I say, since Christ must Reign, but his Truths be made to serve; I suppose it is but Reason, to di∣stinguish between Profession & Pretence; and to conclude, that men's present cry∣ing, Hail King and bending the knee to Christ, are only in order to his future Crucifixion. For the discovery of the sence of the words, I shall inquire into their occasi∣on. From the very beginning of the Chapter we have Christ consulting the propagation of the Gospel; and in or∣der to it (being the onely way that he knew to effect it) sending forth a Mini∣stery; and giving them a Commission,
together with instructions for the Execu∣tion of it. He would have them fully acquainted with the Nature and Extent of their Office; and so he joins Com∣mission with Instruction; by one he con∣veys Power, by the other Knowledge. Supposing (I conceive) that upon such an Undertaking, the more learned his Mi∣nisters were, they would prove never the less In the Parliament 1653, it being put to the Vote whether they should support and en∣courage A godly and learned Ministery, the latter word was reject∣ed and the vote passed for a Godly and Faith∣ful Ministery.faithful. And thus having fitted them, and stript them of all manner of defence, v. 9. He sends them forth amongst wolves: A hard Expedition, you will say, to go amongst wolves; but yet much harder to convert them into Sheep; and no less hard even to discern some of them, possibly being under Sheeps cloathing; and so by the advan∣tage of that dress, sooner felt, than dis∣covered: probably also such, as had both the properties of wolves, that is, they could whine and howl, as well as bite and de∣vour.
But that they might not go al∣together naked among their Enemies, the onely Armour that Christ allows them, is Prudence and Innocence; Be ye wise as Serpents, but harmless as Doves, v. 16. Weapons not at all offensive, yet most sutable to their Warfare, whose greatest encounters were to be Exhortations, and whose only Conquest, Escape. Inno∣cence is the best caution, and we may unite the expression, to be wise as a Serpent, is to be harmless as a Dove. Innocence is like polish'd Armour; it adorns, and it defends. In summ, he tells them, that the opposition, they should meet with, was the greatest imaginable, from the 16. to the 26. v. but in the ensuing verses he promises them an equal proportion of assistance; and, as if it were not an Ar∣gument of force enough to out-weigh the fore-mentioned discouragements, he casts into the Balance, the promise of a Re∣ward to such as should Execute, and of Punishment to such as should Neglect
their Commission: The Reward in the former verse, Whosoever shall confess me be∣fore men, &c. the punishment in this, But whosoever shall deny, &c. As if by way of preoccupation he should have said, Well: here you see your Commission, this is your Duty, these are your Discourage∣ments: never seek for shifts and evasi∣ons from worldly afflictions; this is your reward, if you perform it, this is your Doom if you decline it. As for the Explication of the words, they are clear and easie; and their Ori∣ginals in the Greek are of single significa∣tion, without any ambiguity; and there∣fore I shall not trouble you, by proposing how they run in this, or that Edition: or straining for an interpretation where there is no difficulty, or distinction where there is no difference. The onely Ex∣position, that I shall give of them, will be to compare them to other Parallel Scriptures, and peculiarly to that in the 8. Mark 38. Whosoever therefore shall be asha∣med
of me and my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glo∣ry of the Father, with the holy Angels. These words are a Comment upon my Text. 1. What is here in the Text called a denying of Christ, is there termed a being ashamed of him, that is, in those words the Cause is expressed, and here the Effect: for therefore we deny a thing, because we are ashamed of it. First Peter is asha∣med of Christ, then he denies him. 2. What is here termed a denying of Christ, is there called a being ashamed of Christ and his words: Christ's truths are his second Self. And he that offers a con∣tempt to a King's letters or edicts, virtu∣ally affronts the King; it strikes his words, but it rebounds upon his Person. 3. What is here said, before men, is there phrased, in this adulterous and sinful genera∣tion. These words import the hindrance of the duty enjoyned; which therefore is here purposely enforced with a non obstante
to all opposition. The Term Adulterous I conceive may chiefly relate to the Jews, who being nationally espoused to God by Covenant, every sin of theirs was in a pe∣culiar manner spiritual Adultery. 4. What is here said, I will deny him before my Father, is there expressed: I will be ashamed of him before my Father and his holy Angels, that is, when he shall come to Judgment, when revenging Justice shall come in pomp, attended with the glori∣ous retinue of all the Host of Heaven. In short, the sentence pronounced declares the Judgment, the solemnity of it the Terrour. From the words, we may deduce these Observations. 1. We shall find strong motives and tem∣ptations from men, to draw us to a denial of Christ. 2. No Terrors, or Solicitations from men, though never so great, can Warrant or Ex∣cuse such a denial. 3. To deny Christ's words, is to deny Christ.
But since these Observations are rather implyed, than expressed in the words, I shall wave them, and in stead of dedu∣cing a doctrine distinct from the words, prosecute the words themselves under this Doctrinal Paraphrase. Whosoever shall deny, disown, or be asha∣med of either the Person, or truths of Iesus Christ, for any fear or favour of man; shall with shame be disowned, and Eternally rejected by him at the dread∣ful judgment of the great day. The discussion of this shall lie in these things. 1. To shew, how many ways Christ and his truths may be denyed, and what is the denial here chiefly intended. 2. To shew, what are the causes that induce men to a denial of Christ and his truths. 3. To shew, how farr a man may consult his safety in time of persecution, without denying Christ.
4. To shew, what is imported in Christ's denying us before his Father in Heaven. 5. To apply all to the present Occasion. But before I enter upon these, I must briefly premise this, that, though the Text and the Doctrine run peremptory and absolute, Whosoever denies Christ, shall assuredly be denied by him: yet still there is a tacit condition in the words suppos∣ed, unless repentance intervene. For this and many other Scriptures, though as to their formal terms they are Absolute, yet as to their sence they are Conditional. God in mercy has so framed, and tem∣per'd his word, that we have for the most part, a Reserve of mercy wrapp'd up in a Curse. And the very first judgment that was pronounced upon fallen man, was with the allay of a promise. Whereso∣ever we find a Curse to the Guilty expres∣sed, in the same words Mercy to the Pe∣nitent is still understood. This premi∣sed, I come now to discuss the first thing,
viz. How many ways Christ and his truths may be denied, &c. Here, first in general I assert, that we may deny him in all those acts that are capable of being morally good or evil: those are the proper Scene in which we act our confes∣sions or denials of him. Accordingly therefore all ways of denying Christ I shall comprise under these three. 1. We may deny him and his truths by an Erroneous, Heretical judgment. I know it is doubted whether a bare er∣ror in judgment can condemn: but since truths absolutely necessary to salvation, are so clearly revealed, that we cannot erre in them, unless we be notoriously wanting to our selves; herein the fault of the judgment is resolved into a precedent default in the will: and so the case is put out of doubt. But here it may be replied, Are not truths of absolute and fundamental necessity, very disputable; as the Deity of Christ, the Trinity of Per∣sons? if they are not in themselves dispu∣table,
why are they so much disputed? Indeed, I believe, if we trace these disputes to their original cause, we shall find, that they never sprung from a reluctancy in Reason to embrace them. For this Rea∣son it self dictates, as most rational, to assent to any thing, though seemingly con∣trary to Reason, if it is revealed by God, and we are certain of the Revelation. These two supposed, these disputes must needs arise only from curiosity and singu∣larity: and these are faults of a diseased Will. But some will further demand in behalf of these men, whether such as as∣sent to every word in Scripture, (for so will those that deny the natural Deity of Christ and the Spirit) can be yet said in Doctrinals to deny Christ? to this I an∣swer, since words abstracted from their proper sence and signification, lose the nature of words, and are only equivo∣cally so called: inasmuch as the persons we speak of, take them thus, and derive the letter from Christ, but the significa∣tion
from themselves, they cannot be said properly to assent so much as to the words of the Scripture. And so their case also is clear. But yet more fully to state the matter, how far a denial of Christ in belief and judgment is damna∣ble: We will propose the question, Whe∣ther those who hold the Fundamentals of Faith, may deny Christ damnably, in respect of those superstructures and conse∣quences that arise from them? I answer in brief, by fundamental truths are under∣stood, 1. Either such, without the belief of which we cannot be saved; or, 2. such, the belief of which is sufficient to save: If the question be proposed of fundamentals in this latter sence, it contains its own an∣swer; for where a man believes those truths, the belief of which is sufficient to save, there the disbelief or denial of their con∣sequences cannot damn. But what and how many these fundamentals are, it will then be agreed upon, when all Sects, Opi∣nions and Perswasions do unite and con∣sent.
2ly. If we speak of fundamentals in the former sence, as they are only truths, without which we cannot be sa∣ved: it is manifest that we may believe them, and yet be damned for denying their consequences: for that which is on¦ly a Condition without which we cannot be saved, is not therefore a Cause suffici∣ent to save: much more is required to the latter, than to the former. I con∣clude therefore, that to deny Christ in our judgment, will condemn, and this con∣cerns the learned: Christ demands the homage of your understanding: he will have your reason bend to him, you must put your Heads under his Feet. And we know, that heretofore, he who had the Leprosy in this part, was to be pronoun∣ced utterly unclean. A poysoned reason, an infected judgment is Christ's greatest Enemy. And an Error in the judgment, is like an impostem in the Head, which is always noysom, and frequently mortal. 2. We may deny Christ verbally, and
by oral expressions. Now our words are the interpreters of our hearts, the tran∣scripts of the judgment, with some further addition of good or evil. He that inter∣prets usually enlarges. What our judg∣ment whispers in secret, these proclaim up∣on the house top. To deny Christ in the former, imports enmity; but in these, open Defiance. Christ's passion is renewed in both: he that mis-judges of him, con∣demns him; but he that blasphemes him, spits in his face. Thus the Jews and the Pharisees denyed Christ. We know that this man is a sinner, John 9.24. and a de∣ceiver, Mat. 27.63. and he casts out devils by the prince of the devils, Mat. 2.24. And thus Christ is daily denyed, in many blas∣phemies printed and divulged, and ma∣ny horrid Opinions vented against the truth. The Schools dispute whether in morals the external Action superadds any thing of good or evil to the internal eli∣cit Act of the will: but certainly the en∣mity of our judgments is wrought up to
an high pitch before it rages in an open denial. And it is a sign that it is grown too big for the Heart, when it seeks for vent in our words. Blasphemy uttered is Error heightned with Impudence. It is sin scorning a concealment, not onely committed, but defended. He, that de∣nies Christ in his judgment, sins, but he that speaks his denial, vouches and owns his sin: and so, by publishing it, does what in him lies, to make it Universal, and by writing it to establish it Eternal. There is another way of denying Christ with our Mouths, which is Negative: that is, when we do not acknowledge and confess him: but of this I shall have oc∣casion to treat under the discussion of the third general Head. 3. We may deny Christ in our Acti∣ons and Practice; and these speak much louder, than our tongues. To have an Orthodox belief, and a true Profession, concurring with a bad life, is only to deny Christ with a greater solemnity. Belief
and Profession will speak thee a Christi∣an but very faintly, when thy conver∣sation proclaims thee an infidel. Many, while they have Preached Christ in their Sermons, have read a lecture of Atheism in their practice. We have many here, who speak of Godliness, Mortification and Self-denial; but if these are so, what means the Bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, the noise of their ordinary sins, and the cry of their great ones? If Godly, why do they wallow and steep in all the carnalities of the world, under pre∣tence of Christian liberty? Why do they make Religion ridiculous by pretending to Prophecy, and when their Prophe∣cies prove delusions, why do they A noted Independant Divine, when Ol. Crom∣wel was sick, of which sickness he dyed, declared that God had Revealed to him that he should recover and live 30 years longer, for that God had raised him up for a work which could not be done in less time. But Oliver's Death being published two days after, the said Divine publickly in Prayer expo∣stulated with God the De∣feat of his Prophecy in these words. Lord thou hast lyed unto us; yea, thou hast lyed unto us. Blas∣pheme? If such are self∣denyers, what means the griping, the preju∣dice, the covetousness, & the pluralities preach∣ed against, and retain∣ed,
and the Arbitrary Government of many? When such men Preach of self-denial and hu∣mility, I cannot but think of Seneca, who praised Poverty, and that very safely, in the midst of his great Riches and Gardens; and even exhorted the world to throw away their Gold, per∣haps (as one well conjectures) that he might gather it up: So these desire men to be humble, that they may domineer without opposition. But it is an easie matter to commend patience, when there is no danger of any trial, to extol hu∣mility in the midst of honours, to begin a Fast after Very credibly reported to have been done in an In∣dependant Congregation at Oxon. Dinner. But O how Christ will deal with such persons when he shall draw forth all their Actions bare and stript from this deceiving veil of their heavenly speeches! He will then say, it was not your sad Countenance nor your hypocritical groaning, by which you did ei∣ther
confess or honour me: but your world∣liness, your luxury, your sinister partial dea∣ling; these have denyed me, these have wounded me, these have gone to my heart: these have caused the weak to stumble, and the profane to blaspheme: these have offended the one, and hardned the other. You have indeed spoke me fair, you have saluted me with your lips, but even then your betray'd me. Depart from me there∣fore you professors of holiness, but you workers of iniquity. And thus having shewn the three ways by which Christ may be denyed, it may now be demanded, which is the denial here intended in the words. Answer 1. I conceive, if the words are taken as they were particularly and per∣sonally directed to the Apostles upon the occasion of their mission to preach the Gospel, so the denial of him, was the not acknowledgment of the Deity or God∣head of Christ; and the reason to prove, that this was then Principally intended,
is this; Because this was the truth in those days chiefly opposed, and most dis∣believed; as appears, because Christ and the Apostles did most earnestly inculcate the belief of this, and accepted men upon the bare acknowledgment of this, and Baptism was administred to such as did but profess this, Act. 8.37, 38. And in∣deed as this one Aphorism, Iesus Christ is the Son of God, is vertually and emi∣nently the whole Gospel; so, to confess or deny it, is vertually to embrace or re∣ject the whole round and series of Go∣spel-truths. For he that acknowledges Christ to be the Son of God, by the same does consequentially acknowledge that he is to be believed and obeyed, in what∣soever he does enjoyn and deliver to the Sons of men: and therefore that we are to repent and believe and rest upon him for salvation, and to deny our selves: and within the compass of this is inclu∣ded whatsoever is called Gospel. As for the manner of our denying the
Deity of Christ here prohibited, I con∣ceive, it was by words and oral expressi∣ons verbally to deny, and dis-acknow∣ledge it: This I ground upon these reasons: 1. Because it was such a denial as was before men, and therefore consisted in o∣pen Profession; for a denial in judgment and practice, as such, is not always be∣fore men. 2. Because it was such a denial or confession of him as would appear in Preaching: but this is mannaged in words and verbal profession. But now 2ly. If we take the words, as they are a general precept equally relat∣ing to all times, and to all persons, though delivered only upon a particular occasi∣on to the Apostles (as I suppose they are to be understood) so I think they com∣prehend all the three ways mentioned of confessing or denying Christ: but prin∣cipally in respect of practice; and that 1. Because by this he is most honoured or dishonoured. 2. Because without this
the other two cannot save. 3. Because those who are ready enough to confess him both in judgment and profession, are for the most part very prone to deny him shamefully in their doings. Pass we now to a Second thing, viz. to shew What are the Causes inducing men to deny Christ in his truths. I shall pro∣pose Three. 1. The seeming, supposed absurdity of many truths: upon this foundation Heresie always builds. The Heathens derided the Christians, that still they re∣quired and pressed belief, and well they might (say they) since the Articles of their Religion are so absurd, that upon Prin∣ciples of Science they can never win as∣sent. It is easie to draw it forth and de∣monstrate, how upon this score the chief Heresies, that now are said to trouble the Church, do oppose and deny the most im∣portant truths in Divinity. As first, hear the denyer of the Deity, and satisfaction of Christ. What, (saies he) can the same
person be God and man? the Creature and the Creator? can we ascribe such attri∣butes to the same thing, whereof one im∣plies a Negation and a contradiction of the other? can he be also Finite and In∣finite, when to be finite is not to be in∣finite, and to be infinite not to be finite? And when we distinguish between the Per∣son, and the Nature, was not that distin∣ction an invention of the Schools, savour∣ing rather of Metaphysicks, than Divini∣ty? If we say that he must have been God, because he was to mediate between us and God, by the same reason they will reply, we should need a Mediator between us and Christ, who is equally God, equally offended. Then for his satisfaction, they will demand to whom this satisfaction is paid? If to God, then God pays a Price to himself: and what is it else to require and need no satisfaction, than for one to satisfie himself? Next comes in the Denyer of the Decrees and Free-grace of God. What, (says he) shall we ex∣hort,
admonish, and intreat the Saints to beware of falling away finally, and at the same time assert that it is impossible for them so to fall? what, shall we erect two contradictory Wills in God, or place two contradictories in the same Will? and make the Will of his Purpose and Intention run counter to the Will of his Approbation? Hear another concerning the Scripture and Justification. What, (says the Romanist) relie in matters of faith upon a private Spirit? How do you know this is the sence of such a Scripture? Why, by the Spirit. But how will you try that Spirit to be of God? Why, by the Scripture: this he explodes as a circle, and so derides it. Then for justification. How are you Justified, by an imputed Righteousness? Is it yours before it is im∣puted, or not? if not, (as we must say) is this to be Justified to have that accoun∣ted yours, that is not yours? But again, did you ever hear of any man made rich or wise by imputation? why then Righ∣teous
or Just? Now these seeming Para∣doxes, attending Gospel truths, cause men of weak, prejudiced intellectuals to deny them, and in them, Christ, being ashamed to own faith so much (as they think) to the disparagement of their Reason. 2. The Second thing causing men to deny the truths of Christ, is their Unpro∣fitableness. And no wonder, if here men forsake the truth, and assert interest. To be pious is the way to be poor. Truth still gives its followers its own Badge and Li∣very, a despised nakedness. It is hard to maintain the truth, but much harder to be maintained by it: could it ever yet feed, cloath, or defend its assertors? Did ever any man quench his thirst, or satis∣fie his hunger with a Notion? Did ever any one live upon Propositions? The te∣stimony of Brutus concerning Vertue, is the apprehension of most concerning Truth: that it is a Name, but lives and estates are things, and therefore not to be thrown away upon Words. That we are
neither to worship or cringe to any thing under the Deity is a truth too strict for a Naaman: he can be content to worship the true God, but then it must be in the house of Rimmon: the reason was implied in his condition, he was Captain of the Host, and therefore he thought it reason good to bow to Rimmon, rather than in∣danger his place: better Bow than Break. Indeed sometimes Providence casts things so, that truth and interest lie the same way: and, when it is wrapt up in this co∣vering, men can be content to follow it, to press hard after it, but it is, as we pur∣sue some beasts, only for their skins: take off the covering, and though men obtain the truth, they would lament the loss of that: As Iacob wept and mourned over the torn Coat, when Ioseph was alive. It is incredible to consider how interest out∣weighs truth. If a thing in it self be doubt∣full, let it make for interest and it shall be raised at least into a Probable; and if a truth be certain, and thwart interest, it
will quickly fetch it down to but a Pro∣bability; nay, if it does not carry with it an impregnable Evidence, it will go near to debase it to a downright falsity. How much interest casts the Balance in cases dubious, I could give sundry instances: let one suffice. And that concerning the unlawfulness of Usury. Most of the Learned men in the World successively, both Heathen and Christian, do assert the taking of Use to be utterly unlawfull; yet the Divines of the Reformed Church beyond the Seas, though most severe and rigid in other things, do generally affirm it to be lawfull. That the case is doubt∣full and may be disputed with plausible arguments on either side, we may well grant: But what then is the reason that makes these Divines so unanimously con∣curr in this opinion? Indeed I shall not affirm this to be the reason, but it may seem so to many: that they receive their Salaries by way of pension, in present rea∣dy money, and so have no other way to
improve them; so that it may be suspe∣cted, that the change of their Salary, would be the strongest argument to change their opinion. The truth is, In∣terest is the grand wheel and spring that moves the whole Universe. Let Christ and Truth say what they will, if Interest will have it, Gain must be Godliness: if Enthusiasm is in request, learning must be inconsistent with Grace. If pay grows short, the University Maintenance must be too great. Rather than Pilate will be counted Caesar's enemy, he will pronounce Christ innocent one hour, and condemn him the next. How Christ is made to truckle under the world, and how his truths are denied and shuffled with for profit and pelf, the clearest proof would be by Induction and Example. But as it is the most clear, so here it would be the most unpleasing: Wherefore I shall pass this over, since the world is now so pec∣cant upon this account, that I am afraid Instances would be mistaken for Invectives.
3. The third Cause inducing Men to deny Christ in his truths, is their apparent danger. To confess Christ, is the ready way to be cast out of the Synagogue. The Church is a place of Graves, as well as of Worship and Profession. To be re∣solute in a good cause, is to bring upon our selves the punishments due to a Bad. Truth indeed is a Possession of the high∣est value, and therefore it must needs ex∣pose the owner to much danger. Christ is sometimes pleased to make the professi∣on of himself costly, and a man cannot buy the truth, but he must pay down his life and his dearest blood for it. Christia∣nity marks a man out for destruction: and Christ sometimes chalks out such a way to Salvation, as shall verify his own saying, He that will save his life shall lose it. The first Ages of the Church had a more abundant experience of this: What Paul and the rest planted by their Preaching, they watered with their Blood. We know their usage was such, as Christ foretold, he
sent them to Wolves, and the common course then was Christianos ad Leones. For a man to give his name to Christianity in those days, was to list himself a Mar∣tyr, and to bid farewell not only to the pleasures, but also to the hopes of this life. Neither was it a single death only that then attended this profession, but the ter∣rour and sharpness of it was redoubled in the manner and circumstance. They had Persecutors, whose Invention was as great as their cruelty. Wit and Malice con∣spired to find out such tortures, such deaths, and those of such incredible an∣guish, that only the manner of dying was the punishment, Death it self the delive∣rance. To be a Martyr signifies only to witness the truth of Christ, but the witnes∣sing of the truth was then so generally attended with this Event, that Martyrdom now signifies not only to witness, but to witness by death. The word besides its own signification importing their practice. And since Christians have been freed from
Heathens, Christians themselves have tur∣ned persecutors. Since Rome from Hea∣then was turned Christian, it has impro∣ved its persecution into an Inquisition. Now, when Christ and truth are upon these terms, that men cannot confess him, but upon pain of death, the reason of their Apostacy and Denial is clear, men will be wise and leave Truth and Misery to such as love it, they are resolved to be Cunning, let others run the hazard of be∣ing Sincere. If they must be good at so high a rate, they know they may be safe at a cheaper. Si negare sufficiat, quis erit Nocens? If to deny Christ will save them, the truth shall never make them guil∣ty. Let Christ and his flock lie open and exposed to all weather of persecuti∣on, Foxes will be sure to have holes. And if it comes to this, that they must either renounce their Religion, deny and Blaspheme Christ, or forfeit their lives to the fire or the sword, it is but inverting Iob's wife's advice, Curse God, and live.
3. We proceed now to the Third thing, which is to shew, how farr a man may consult his safety, &c. This he may do two ways. 1. By withdrawing his Person. Mar∣tyrdom is an Heroick act of Faith. An Atchievement beyond an Ordinary pitch of it: to you, says the Spirit, it is given to suffer, Phil. 1.29. It is a peculiar ad∣ditional gift: it is a distinguishing excel∣lency of degree, not an essential conse∣quent of its Nature. Be ye harmless as Doves says Christ; and it is as Na∣tural to them to take flight upon dan∣ger, as to be Innocent: Let every man throughly consult the temper of his faith, and weigh his courage with his fears, his weakness and his Resolutions together, and take the measure of both, and see which preponderates, and if his spirit faints, if his heart misgives and melts at the very thoughts of the fire, let him flie and secure his own soul, and Christ's honour. Non negat Christum fugiendo, qui ideò fugit, né
neget: He does not deny Christ by flying, who therefore flies, that he may not de∣ny him. Nay, he does not so much de∣cline, as rather change his Martyrdom: He flies from the flame, but repairs to a Desert; to poverty and hunger in a wil∣derness. Whereas, if he would dispense with his conscience, and deny his Lord, or swallow down two or three Contra∣dictory oaths, he should neither fear the one, nor be forced to the other. 2. By concealing his judgment. A man sometimes is no more bound to speak, than to destroy himself; and as Nature abhorrs this, so Religion does not command that. In the times of the Primitive Church, when the Christians dwelt amongst Heathens, it is reported of a certain Maid, how she came from her Fathers house, to one of the Tribunals of the Gentiles, and declared herself a Christian, spit in the Judges face, and so provoked him to cause her to be executed. But will any say, that this was to confess Christ, or die a
Martyr? He that uncalled for, uncom∣pelled, comes and proclaims a Persecuted Truth, for which he is sure to die, only dies a Confessour of his own folly, and a Sacrifice to his own rashness. Martyr∣dom is stampt such only by God's com∣mand; and he that ventures upon it with∣out a call, must endure it without a Re∣ward: Christ will say, who required this at your hands? His Gospel does not dictate imprudence: No Evangelical Precept justles out that of a lawful self-preservati∣on. He therefore that thus throws him∣self upon the Sword, runs to Heaven be∣fore he is sent for: where though perhaps Christ may in mercy receive the man, yet he will be sure to disown the Martyr. And thus much concerning those law∣ful ways of securing our selves in time of Persecution; not, as if these were always lawfull: For sometimes a man is bound to confess Christ openly, though he dies for it; and to conceal a Truth is to de∣ny it. But now, to shew when it is our
duty, and when unlawfull to take these courses, by some general rule of a perpe∣tual, never-failing truth, none ever would yet presume: For, as Aristotle says, we are not to expect Demonstrations in Ethicks, or Politicks, nor to build certain rules upon the contingency of humane Actions: So, in as much as our flying from persecution, our confessing, or concealing persecuted Truths, vary and change their very na∣ture, according to different circumstan∣ces of time, place, and persons, we cannot limit their Directions within any one u∣niversal Precept: You will say then, How shall we know when to confess, when to conceal a Truth? when to wait for, when to decline persecution? Indeed the only way, that I think can be prescribed in this case, is to be earnest, and importunate with God in Prayer for special direction: And it is not to be imagined, that he, who is both faithfull and mercifull, will leave a sincere soul in the dark upon such an occasion. But this I shall add, that
the Ministers of God are not to evade, or take refuge in any of these two fore∣mentioned ways. They are publique persons: and good Shepherds must then chiefly stand close to the Flock, when the woolf comes. For them to be silent in the cause of Christ, is to renounce it; and to flie, is to desert it. As for that place urged in favour of the contrary, in 23 v. when they persecute you in this City, flee into another, it proves nothing; for the Precept was particular, and concerned only the Apostles; and that, but for that time in which they were then sent to the Jews, at which time Christ kept them as a re∣serve for the future: For when after his death they were indifferently sent both to Jews and Gentiles, we find not this clause in their Commission, but they were to sign the Truths they preached with their blood; as we know they actually did. And moreover, when Christ bids them, being persecuted in one City flie into a∣nother, it was not (as Grotius acutely ob∣serves)
that they might lie hid, or be se∣cure in that city, but that there they might Preach the Gospel: So that their flight here was not to secure their Persons, but to continue their business. I conclude therefore, that faithfull Ministers are to stand and endure the brunt. A common souldier may flie, when it is the duty of him that holds the Standard to die upon the place. And we have abundant en∣couragement so to do. Christ has second∣ed and sweetned his command with his promise: Yea the thing it self is not on∣ly our duty, but our glory. And he, who has done this work, has in the very work partly received his wages. And were it put to my choice, I think I should chuse rather with spitting and scorn to be tumb∣led into the dust in blood, bearing witness to any known Truth of our dear Lord, now opposed by the Enthusiasts of the present Age, than by a denial of those Truths through Blood and Perjury wade to a Scepter, and Lord it in a Throne.
And we need not doubt, but Truth, how∣ever oppressed, will have some followers, and at length prevail. A Christ, though Crucified, will arise: And as it is in the Rev. 11.3. The Witnesses will Prophesie, though it be in Sackcloth. Having thus dispatched the third thing, I proceed to the fourth, which is to shew, what it is for Christ to deny us before his Father in Heaven. Hitherto we have treated of men's carriage to Christ in this world; now we will describe his carriage to them in the other. These words clearly relate to the last Judgment, and they are a summary description of his proceeding with men at that day. And here we will consider: 1. The Action it self, He will deny them. 2. The Circumstance of the Action, He will deny them before his Father, and the holy Angels. 1. Concerning the first: Christ's de∣nying us, is otherwise expressed in the 13
Luke 27. I know you not. To know in Scripture language is to approve; and so, not to know, is to reject and condemn. Now, who knows, how many Woes are crowded into this one sentence, I will de∣ny him? It is (to say no more) a compen∣dious expression of Hell, an Eternity of Torments comprised in a word: it is Con∣demnation it self, and what is most of all, it is Condemnation from the mouth of a Saviour. O the inexpressible horror that will seize upon a poor Sinner when he stands arraigned at the Barr of Divine Justice! When he shall look about and see his Accuser, his Judge, the Witnesses, all of them his remorsless Adversaries: the Law impleading, Mercy, and the Go∣spel upbraiding him, the Devil his grand Accuser, drawing his Indictment; num∣bring his sins with the greatest exactness, and aggravating them with the cruellest bitterness; and Conscience, like a thou∣sand Witnesses, attesting every Article, flying in his face, and rending his very
heart. And then after all, Christ, from whom only Mercy could be expected, owning the Accusation. It will be Hell enough to hear the sentence; the very Promulgation of the Punishment will be part of the Punishment, and anticipate the Execution. If Peter was so abashed when Christ gave him a look after his denial; if there was so much dread in his looks when he stood as Prisoner, how much greater will it be when he sits as a Judge? If it was so fearfull when he looked his Denier into Repentance, what will it be when he shall look him into Destruction? Believe it, when we shall hear an Accusa∣tion from an Advocate, our Eternal doom from our Intercessour, it will con∣vince us that a Denial of Christ is some∣thing more than a few transitory words: What trembling, what outcries, what asto∣nishment will there be upon the pronoun∣cing this sentence! Every word will come upon the sinner like an Arrow stri∣king through his reins; like Thunder,
that is heard, and consumes at the same instant. Yea, it will be a denial with scorn, with taunting exprobrations; and to be miserable without commiseration, is the height of misery. He that falls be∣low Pity, can fall no lower. Could I give you a lively representation of guilt and horrour on this hand, and paint out eternal wrath, and decypher eternal ven∣geance on the other, then might I shew you the condition of a sinner hearing himself denied by Christ: And for those, whom Christ has denied, it will be in vain to appeal to the Father, unless we can imagine, that those, whom Mercy has condemned, Justice will absolve. 2. For the Circumstance, He will deny us before his Father, and the holy Angels. As much as God is more glorious than man, so much is it more glorious to be confes∣sed before him, than before men: And so much glory as there is in being con∣fessed, so much dishonour there is in be∣ing denied. If there could be any room
for comfort after the sentence of damna∣tion, it would be this, to be executed in secret, to perish un-observed. As it is some allay to the infamy of him who died ignominiously, to be buried private∣ly. But when a man's folly must be spread open before the Angels, and all his baseness ript up before those pure Spirits, this will be a double Hell: to be thrust into utter Darkness, only to be punished by it, without the benefit of being con∣cealed. When Christ shall compare him∣self, who was denied, and the thing for which he was denied, together, and pa∣rallel his merits with a lust, and lay Eter∣nity in the Balance with a trifle, then the folly of the sinners choice shall be the greatest sting of his destruction. For a man shall not have the advantage of his former Ignorance and Error, to ap∣prove his sin: Things, that appeared a∣miable by the light of this world, will ap∣pear of a different odious hue in the clear discoveries of the next: As that which
appears to be of this colour by a dim candle, will be found to be of another, look'd upon in the day. So when Christ shall have cleared up men's apprehensi∣ons about the value of things; he will propose that worthy Prize for which he was denyed: He will hold it up to open view, and call upon Men and Angels: Behold, look, here's the things, here's that piece of dirt, that windy applause, that poor transitory pleasure, that contempti∣ble danger, for which I was dishonoured, my Truths disowned, and for which, Life, Eternity, and God himself, was scorned and trampled upon by this sin∣ner: Judge all the world, whether what he so despised in the other life, he de∣serves to enjoy in this? How will the con∣demned sinner then crawl forth, and ap∣pear in his filth and shame, before that un∣defiled Tribunal, like a Toad or a Snake in a King's presence Chamber? Nothing so irksome, as to have ones folly displayed before the Prudent: ones impurity before
the Pure. And all this, before that com∣pany surrounding him, from which he is neither able to look off, nor yet to look upon. A disgrace put upon a man in com∣pany is unsupportable: it is heightened according to the greatness, and multipli∣ed according to the number of the per∣sons that hear it. And now, as this cir∣cumstance [before his Father] fully speaks the shame, so likewise it speaks the danger of Christ's then denying us. For when the accusation is heard, and the person stands convict, God is immediately lift∣ing up his hand to inflict the eternal blow; and when Christ denies to exhibit a ran∣some, to step between the stroak then co∣ming, and the sinner, it must inevitably fall upon him, and sink his guilty soul into that deep and bottomless gulph of endless perdition. This therefore is the summ of Christ's denying us before his Father, viz. unsupportable shame, una∣voidable destruction.
I proceed now to the Uses, which may be drawn from the Truths delivered. And here (Right Honourable) not only the present occasion, but even the words themselves seem eminently to address an Exhortation to your Honours. As, for others not to deny Christ, is openly to profess him; so for you who are invest∣ed with Authority, not to deny him, is to defend him. Know therefore, that Christ does not only desire, but demand your defence, and that, in a double respect. 1. In respect of his Truth. 2. Of his Members. 1. He requires, that you should defend and confess him in his Truth. Heresie is a Tare sometimes not to be pulled up but by the Civil Magistrate. The word Liberty of Conscience, is much abused for the defence of it, because not well under∣stood. Every man may have Liberty of Conscience to think and judge as he pleases, but not to vent what he pleases. The reason is, because Conscience bound∣ing
it self within the thoughts, is of private concernment, and the cognizance of these belong only to God: but when an opi∣nion is published, it concerns all that hear it, and the publique is endamma∣ged, and therefore becomes punishable by the Magistrate, to whom the care of the publique is intrusted. But there is one truth, that concerns both Ministery and Magistracy, and all; which is opposed by those who affirm, That none ought to Govern upon the Earth but Christ in person: Absurdly; as if the Powers that are, de∣stroyed his; as if a Deputy were not con∣sistent with a King; as if there were any Opposition in Subordination. They af∣firm also, that the Wicked have no right to their Estates; but only the Faithfull, that is, themselves, ought to possess the Earth. And it is not to be questioned, but when they come to explain this principle, by putting it into execution, there will be but few that have estates at present, but will be either found, or made Wicked.
I shall not be so urgent, to press you to con∣fess Christ by asserting and owning the Truth contrary to this, since it does not only oppose Truth, but Property; and here to deny Christ, would be to deny your Selves in a sence, which none is like to doe. 2. Christ requires you to own and de∣fend him in his members; and amongst these, the chief of them, and such, as most fall in your way, the Ministers; I say, that despised, abject, oppressed sort of men, the Ministers; whom the world would make Antichristian, and so de∣prive them of Heaven, and also strip them of that poor remainder of their Mainte∣nance, and so allow them no portion upon the Earth. You may now spare that distinction of Scandalous Ministers, when it is even made Scandalous to be a Minister. And as for their discourage∣ment, in the Courts of the Law, I shall onely note This, that for these many years last past, it has been the constant obser∣vation of all, That if a Minister had a
Cause depending in the Court, it was ten to one but it went against him. I can∣not believe your Law justles out the Go∣spel; but if it be thus used to undermine Christ in his Servants, beware that such Judgments passed upon them, doe not fetch down God's Judgments upon the Land; and that, for such abuse of the Law, Christ does not in anger deprive both you and us of its use. (My Lords) I make no doubt, but you will meet with ma∣ny suits in your course, in which the per∣sons we speak of are concerned, as it is easie to prognosticate from those many worthy Petitions preferred against them, for which the well-af∣ficted Whensoever any Petiti∣on was put up to the Par∣liament in the year 1653. for the Taking away of Tythes, the thanks of the House were still returned to them, and that by the Name and Elogy of the well-affected Petitioners. Petitioners will one day receive but small Thanks from the Court of Heaven. But howe∣ver their Causes speed in your Tribunals, know that Christ him∣self will recognize them at a greater. And then, what a different face will be
put upon things! When the usurping, de∣vouring Nimrods of the world shall be cast with scorn on the left hand: And Christ himself in that great consistory shall daign to step down from his Throne, and single out a poor despised Minister, and (as it were taking him by the hand,) present him to, and openly thus confess him before, his Father. Father, here is a poor servant of mine, who, for doing his duty impartially, for keeping a good consci∣ence, and testifying my truths in an Hy∣pocritical pretending age, was wrong'd, trod upon, stript of all: Father, I will, that there be now a distinction made, between such as have owned and confessed me with the loss of the world, and those that have denyed, persecuted and insulted o∣ver me: It will be in vain then to come and creep for mercy: and say, Lord, when did we insult over thee? when did we see thee in our Courts, and de∣spised or oppressed thee? Christ's reply will be then quick and sharp: Verily
in as much as you did it to one of these little, poor despised ones, ye did it un∣to Me. 2. Use is of information, to shew us the danger as well as the baseness of a dastardly Spirit; in asserting the interest and truth of Christ. Since Christ has made a Christian course a Warfare, of all men living, a Coward is the most un∣fit to make a Christian: whose infamy is not so great, but it is sometimes less than his peril. A Coward does not alwaies scape with disgrace, but sometimes also he loses his life: wherefore, let all such know, as can enlarge their consciences like Hell, and call any sinfull compliance submission, and style a Cowardly silence in Christ's cause, discretion and prudence: I say, let them know, that Christ will one day scorn them, and spit them, with their policy and prudence, into Hell; and then let them consult, how politick they were, for a temporal Emolument, to throw away Eternity. The things which
generally cause men to deny Christ, are, either the Enjoyments, or the miseries of this life: but alas! at the day of Judg∣ment, all these will expire; and, as One well Observes, what are we the better for pleasure, or the worse for sorrow, when it is past? But then Sin and Guilt will be still fresh, and Heaven and Hell will be then yet to begin. If ever it was season∣able to preach Courage in the despised, abused cause of Christ, it is now, when his truths are Reformed into nothing, when the hands and hearts of his faithfull Ministers are weakned, and even broke, and his worship extirpated in a mockery, that his honour may be advan∣ced. Well; to establish our hearts in du∣ty, let us before-hand propose to our selves the worst that can happen. Should God in his judgment suffer England to be trans∣formed into a Munster. Should the faith∣full be every where Massacred. Should the places of learning be demolished, and our Colledges reduced (not only as
U. C. A Colonel of the Army, the perfidious cause of Penruddock's Death, and sometime after High-Sheriff of Oxfordshire, openly and frequently af∣firmed the uselessness of the Vniversities, and that three Colledges were suf∣ficient to answer the occa∣sions of the Nation, for the breeding of men up to Learning, so farr as it was either necessary or use∣full. One in his Zeal would have it) to Three, but to none. Yet assu∣redly Hell is worse than all this, and is the por∣tion of such as deny Christ: wherefore let our discouragements be what they will: loss of Places, loss of E∣states, loss of Life and Relations; yet still this sentence stands ratified in the De∣crees of Heaven. Cursed be that man, that for any of these, shall desert the truth, and deny his Lord.
ECCLESIASTICAL POLICY THE BEST POLICY: OR, RELIGION The best Reason of State: In a Sermon preached before the Honoura∣ble Society of LINCOLNS-INN.
1 KING. XIII.33, 34. After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people Priests of the High places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of the High places. And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to de∣stroy it from off the face of the Earth. JEroboam (from the name of a person become the character of impiety,) is reported to Posterity eminent, or rather Infamous, for two things; Usurpation of Government, and Innovation of Religi∣on. 'Tis confessed, the former is expresly said to have been from God; but since God may order, and dispose, what he does not approve; and use the wicked∣ness
of men, while he forbids it; the de∣sign of the first cause does not excuse the malignity of the second: And therefore the advancement and Sceptre of Ieroboam was in that sence only the work of God, in which it is said, Amos 3.6. That there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done. But from his attempts upon the Civil Power, he proceeds to innovate God's Worship; and from the subjection of mens Bodies and Estates, to enslave their Consciences, as knowing that true Religion is no friend to an unjust Title. Such was afterwards the way of Mahomet, to the Tyrant to joyn the Impostor, and what he had got by the Sword to confirm by the Alcoran; raising his Empire upon two Pillars, Conquest, and Inspiration. Ieroboam being thus advanced, and think∣ing Policy the best Piety, though indeed in nothing ever more befooled; the na∣ture of sin being not only to defile, but to infatuate. In the 11. chap. and the 27. v. he thus argues; If this people go up to do
Sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Ierusa∣lem, then shall the heart of this people turn a∣gain unto their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of Iudah, and they shall kill me, and go again unto Rehoboam King of Iudah. As if he should have said, The true Worship of God, and the converse of those that use it, dispose men to a considerate lawfull Subjection. And therefore I must take another course: my Practice must not be better than my Title; what was won by Force must be continued by Delusion. Thus sin is usually seconded with sin: and a man seldom commits one sin to please, but he commits another to defend himself. As 'tis frequent for the Adul∣terer to commit murder, to conceal the shame of his Adultery. But let us see Ieroboam's politick procedure in the next ver. Whereupon the King took counsel, and made two Calves of Gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Ierusalem, behold thy Gods, O Israel. As if he had made such an Edict: I Ieroboam, by the
advice of my council, considering the great di∣stance of the Temple, and the great charges that poor people are put to in going thither; as also the intolerable burden of paying the first-fruits, and tythes, to the Priest, have considered of a way that may be more easie, and less burthensome to the people, as also more comfortable to the Priests themselves; and therefore strictly enjoyn, that none hence∣forth presume to repair to the Temple at Je∣rusalem, especially since God is not tyed to any place or form of Worship; as also because the Devotion of men is apt to be clogged by such Ceremonies; therefore both for the ease of the people, as well as for the advancement of Reli∣gion, we require and command, that all hence∣forth forbear going up to Jerusalem. Que∣stionless these, and such other Reasons the Impostor used to insinuate his devout Idolatry. And thus the Calves were set up, to which Oxen must be sacrificed; the God and the Sacrifice out of the same Herd. And because Israel was not to return to Egypt, Egypt was brought back
to them: that is, the Egyptian way of Worship, the Apis, or Serapis, which was nothing but the Image of a Calf, or Oxe, as is clear from most Historians. Thus Ieroboam having procured his people Gods, the next thing was to provide Priests. Hereupon, to the Calves he adds a Com∣mission, for the approving, trying and admit∣ting the Rascality and lowest of the people to minister in that service: such as kept Cattle, with a little change of their Office, were admitted to make Oblations to them. And doubtless, besides the approbation of these, there was a Commission also, to eject such of the Priests and Levites of God, as being too Ceremoniously ad∣dicted to the Temple, would not serve Ieroboam before God, nor worship his Calves for their Gold, nor approve those two glittering sins for any reason of State whatsoever. Having now perfected Di∣vine Worship, and prepared both Gods and Priests: In the next place, that he might the better teach his false Priests
the way of their new Worship, he begins the Service himself, and so countenances by his example, what he had enjoyned by his command; in the 11. v. of this chapter, And Ieroboam stood by the Altar to burn Incense. Burning of Incense was then the Ministerial Office amongst them, as Preaching is now amongst us. So that to represent to you the nature of Ierobo∣am's Action: It was, as if in a Christian Nation the chief Governour should au∣thorize and encourage all the scum and refuse of the people to Preach, and call them to the Ministry by using to Cromwel (a lively Copy of Jeroboam) did so. Preach, and invade the Ministerial Function himself. But Ieroboam rested not here, but while he was busie in his work, and a Prophet immediately sent by God, declares against his Idolatry, he endeavours to seize upon, and commit him; in the 4. v. He held forth his hand from the Altar, and said, Lay hold of him. Thus we have him compleating his sin, and by a strange
Imposition of hands persecuting the true Pro∣phets, as well as ordaining false. But it was a natural transition, and no ways wonderfull to see him, who stood affron∣ting God with false Incense in the right hand, persecuting with the left, and abet∣ting the Idolatry of one Arm with the Violence of the other. Now, if we lay all these things together, and consider the parts, rise, and degrees of his sin, we shall find, that it was not for nothing, that the Spirit of God, so frequently and bitterly in Scripture stigmatizes this per∣son; for it represents him, first incroach∣ing upon the Civil Government, thence changeing that of the Church, debasing the Office, that God had made sacred; introducing a false way of Worship, and destroying the True. And in this we have a full and fair description of a foul thing; that is of an Usurper, and an Impostor: or, to use one word more comprehensive than both, of Ieroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin.
From the Story and Practice of Ierobo∣am we might gather these Observations. 1 That God some times punishes a No∣torious sin, by suffering the sinner to fall in∣to a worse. Thus God punished the Rebellion of the Israelites by permitting them to fall into Idolatry. 2. There is nothing so absurd, but may be obtruded upon the Vulgar under pretence of Religion. Certainly, otherwise, a Golden Calf could never have been made, either the Object, or the Means of Divine Worship. 3. Sin; especially that of perverting God's Worship, as it leaves a guilt upon the soul, so it perpetuates a blot upon the Name. Hence nothing so frequent, as for the Spirit of God to express wicked, irre∣ligious Kings, by comparing them to A∣hab or Ieroboam. It being usual to make the first and most eminent in any kind, not only the Standard for Comparison, but also the Rule of Expression.
But I shall insist only upon the words of the Text, and what shall be drawn from thence. There are two things in the words that may seem to require Ex∣plication. 1. What is meant by the High Places. 2. What by the Consecration of the Priests. 1. Concerning the High Places. The use of these in the Divine Worship was general and ancient. And as Dionysius Vossius observes in his Notes upon Moses Maimonides, the first way that was used, long before Temples were either built, or thought lawfull. The reason of this seems to be, because those places did not shut up, or confine the Immensity of God, as they thought an house did, and with∣all gave his worshippers a nearer approach to Heaven by their Height. Hence we read that the Samaritans worshipped upon mount Gerizim, Ioh. 4.20. And Samuel went up to the High Place to Sacrifice, 1 Sam. 9.14. And Solomon Sacrificed at the High Place in Gibeon, 1 King. 3.4.
Yea, the Temple it self was at length built upon a mount or High Place, 2 Cor. 3.1. You will say then, Why are these Pla∣ces condemned? I answer, that the use of them was not condemned, as absolutely and always unlawfull in it self, but only after the Temple was built, and that God had professed to put his Name in that place, and no other: Therefore, what was lawfull in the practice of Samuel and Solomon before the Temple was in being, was now detestable in Ieroboam, since it was constituted by God the only place for his worship. To bring this Consideration to the times of Christiani∣ty. Because the Apostles and Primitive Christians preached in houses, and had only private Meetings, in regard they were under Persecution, and had no Churches; this cannot warrant the prac∣tice of those now a-days, that preferr Hou∣ses before Churches, and a Conventicle before the Congregation.
2. For the second thing, which is the Consecration of the Priests; it seems to have been correspondent to Ordination in the Christian Church. Idolaters them∣selves were not so far gone, as to venture upon the Priesthood without Consecra∣tion and a Call. To shew all the solem∣nities of this would be tedious, and here unnecessary: The Hebrew word which we render to Consecrate, signifies to fill the hand, which indeed imports the man∣ner of Consecration, which was done by filling the hand: for the Priest cut a piece of the sacrifice, and put it into the hands of him that was to be consecrated; by which Ceremony he received right to Sa∣crifice, and so became a Priest. As our Ordination in the Christian Church, is said to have been heretofore transacted by the Bishop's delivering of the Bible into the hands of him that was to be or∣dained, whereby he received power Mi∣nisterially to dispense the mysteries con∣tained in it, and so was made a Presby∣ter.
Thus much briefly concerning Con∣secration. There remains nothing else to be ex∣plained in the words: I shall therefore now draw forth the sence of them into these two Propositions: 1. The surest means to strengthen, or the readiest to ruine the Civil Power, is either to establish, or destroy the Worship of God in the right exercise of Religion. 2. The next, and most effectual way to destroy Religion, is to embase the Teachers and Dispensers of it. Of both these in their order. For the prosecution of the former, we are to shew, 1. The truth of the assertion, that it it so. 2. The reason of the assertion, why and whence it is so. 1. For the truth of it: It is abundant∣ly evinced from all Records both of Di∣vine and Prophane History, in which he that runs, may read the ruine of the State
in the destruction of the Church; and that not only portended by it, as its Sign, but also inferred from it, as its Cause. 2. For the Reason of the point; it may be drawn, 1. From the Judicial proceeding of God, the great King of Kings, and su∣preme Ruler of the Universe; who for his commands is indeed carefull, but for his Worship Jealous: And therefore in States notoriously irreligious, by a secret and irresistible power, countermands their deepest projects, splits their Counsels, and smites their most refined Policies with frustration and a curse: being resolved that the Kingdoms of the world shall fall down before him, either in his Adorati∣on, or their own confusion. 2. The reason of the doctrine may be drawn from the necessary dependence of the very Principles of government up∣on Religion. And this I shall pursue more fully. The great business of go∣vernment is to procure obedience, and
keep off disobedience: the great springs upon which those two move, are Rewards and Punishments, answering the two ru∣ling affections of man's mind, Hope and Fear. For since there is a natural oppo∣sition between the Judgment and the Ap∣petite, the former respecting what is ho∣nest, the latter what is pleasing; which two qualifications seldom concurr in the same thing, and withall, man's design in e∣very Action is delight: therefore to ren∣der things honest also practicable: they must be first represented desirable; which cannot be but by Proposing honesty cloathed with pleasure; and since it pre∣sents no pleasure to the sense, it must be fetcht from the apprehension of a future Reward. For questionless duty moves not so much upon command as promise. Now therefore, that which proposes the greatest and most sutable rewards to obedience, and the greatest terrors and punishments to disobedience, doubtless is the most likely to enforce one, and
prevent the other. But it is Religion, that does this, which to happiness and misery joyns Eternity. And these, sup∣posing the Immortality of the soul, which Philosophy indeed conjectures, but only Religion proves, or (which is as good) perswades. I say these two things, eter∣nal happiness and eternal misery, meet∣ing with a perswasion that the Soul is im∣mortal, are, without controversie, of all others, the first, the most desirable, and the latter the most horrible to humane appre∣hension. Were it not for these, Civil govern∣ment were not able to stand before the pre∣vailing swing of corrupt nature, which would know no Honesty but Advantage, no duty but in Pleasure, nor any Law but its own Will. Were not these frequently thundred into the understandings of men, the Magistrate, might enact, order and pro∣claim; Proclamations might be hung upon Walls and Posts, and there they might hang, seen and despised, more like Malefactors, than Laws: But when Religion binds
them upon the Conscience, Conscience will either perswade or terrifie men into their practice. For, put the case, a man knew, and that upon sure grounds, that he might do an advantageous murder or Robbery, and not be discovered; what humane laws could hinder him, which he knows cannot inflict any penalty, where they can make no discovery? But Religion assures him, that no sin, though concealed from humane eyes, can either escape God's sight in this world, or his vengeance in the other. Put the case al∣so, that men looked upon Death without fear, in which sence, it is nothing, or at most very little; ceasing, while it is en∣dured, and pobably without Pain, for it seizes upon the Vitals and benumbs the senses, and where there is no sense, there can be no pain. I say, if while a man is acting his will towards sin, he should al∣so thus act his reason, to despise death; where would be the terror of the magi∣strate, who can neither threaten or in∣flict
any more? Hence an old Malefactor in his Execution, at the Gallows made no other confession but this, That he had very jocundly passed over his life in such courses, and he that would not for fifty years pleasure, endure half an hours pain, deserved to die a worse death than him∣self: questionless this man was not igno∣rant before, that there were such things as Laws, Assizes, and Gallows; but had he considered, and believed the Terrors of another world, he might probably have found a fairer passage out of this. If there was not a Minister in every Pa∣rish, you would quickly find cause to encrease the number of Constables: And if the Churches were not imployed to be places to hear God's law, there would be need of them, to be prisons for the break∣ers of the laws of men. Hence 'tis observa∣ble, that the Tribe of Levi had not one place or portion together like the rest of the Tribes: but, because it was their of∣fice to dispence Religion, they were dif∣fused
over all the Tribes, that they might be continually preaching to the rest, their duty to God; which is the most effectu∣al way, to dispose them to Obedience to man: for he that truly fears God cannot despise the Magistrate. Yea, so near is the connexion between the Civil state, and Religious, that heretofore, if you look upon well regulated, civilized, heathen Nations, you will find the Government and the Priesthood united in the same per∣son: Anius Rex idem hominum, Phaebique Sacerdos. Virg. 3. AEn. If under the true worship of God: Melchisedech king of Sa∣lem, and Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7.1. And afterwards Moses (whom as we acknowledge a pious, so Atheists them∣selves will confess to have been a Wise Prince) he, when he took the Kingly go∣vernment upon himself, by his own choice, seconded by Divine institution, vested the Priesthood in his brother Aaron, both whose concernments were so coupled, that if Nature had not, yet their Religious, nay,
their civil Interests, would have made them brothers. And it was once the de∣sign of the Emperour of Germany, Maxi∣milian the first, to have joyned the Pope∣dom and the Empire together, and to have got himself chosen Pope, and by that means derived the Papacy to his suc∣ceeding Emperors. Had he effected it, doubtless there would not have been such scuffles between them and the Bishop of Rome; the civil interest of the State would not have been undermined by an Ad∣verse Interest, mannaged by the specious and potent pretences of Religion. And to see, even amongst us, how these two are united, how the former is upheld by the latter: The Magistrate sometimes cannot do his own office dexterously, but by acting the Minister: hence it is, that Judges of Assizes find it neces∣sary in their Charges, to use pathetical discourses of Conscience, and if it were not for the sway of this, they would often lose the best Evidence in the world a∣gainst
Malefactors, which is Confession: for no man would confess and be Hang∣ed here, but to avoid being Damned hereafter. Thus I have in general shewn the utter inability of the Magistrate to attain the Ends of Government, without the Aid of Religion. But it may be here replied, that many are not at all moved with arguments drawn from hence, or with the happy or miserable state of the Soul after death; and there∣fore this avails little to procure obedi∣ence, and consequently to advance Go∣vernment. I answer by confession: that this is true of Epicures, Atheists, and some pretended Philosophers, who have sti∣fled the Notions of a Deity, and the Souls immortality; but the Unprepos∣sessed on the one hand, and the well-disposed on the other, who both toge∣ther make much the major part of the world, are very apt to be affected with a due fear of these things: And Religion accommodating it self to the Generality,
though not to every particular temper, sufficiently secures Government, in as much as that stands or falls according to the Behaviour of the multitude. And whatsoever Conscience makes the Gene∣rality obey, to that Prudence will make the rest conform. Wherefore, having proved the dependence of Government upon Religion, I shall now demon∣strate, That the safety of Government depends upon the Truth of Religion. False Religion is in its nature the greatest bane and destruction to Government in the World. The reason is, because what∣soever is False, is also Weak. Ens and Ve∣rum in Philosophy are the same: and so much as any Religion has of Falsity, it loses of Strength and Existence. Falsity gains Authority only from Ignorance, and therefore is in danger to be known; for from Being false, the next immediate step is to be Known to be such. And what prejudice this would be to the Ci∣vil Government, is apparent, if men
should be awed into Obedience, and af∣frighted from sin by Rewards and Pu∣nishments, proposed to them in such a Religion, which afterwards should be detected, and found a mere falsitie, and cheat; for if one part be but found to be false, it will make the whole suspici∣ous. And men will then not only cast off Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, but they will do it with disdain and rage, that they have been deceived so long, and brought to do that out of Consci∣ence which was imposed upon them out of design: For though men are often willingly deceived, yet still it must be under an Opinion of being instructed; though they love the Deception, yet they morrally hate it under that appearance: Therefore it is no ways safe for a Ma∣gistrate, who is to build his Dominion upon the Fears of men, to build those fears upon a false Religion. 'Tis not to be doubted, but the absurdity of Ieroboam's Calves, made many Israelites turn sub∣jects
to Rehoboam's Government, that they might be Proselytes to his Religion. Here∣in the Weakness of the Turkish Religion appears, That it urges Obedience upon the promise of such absurd Rewards, as, that after death they should have Palaces, Gardens, Beautifull Women, with all the Luxury that could be: as if those things, that were the occasions, and incentives of sin in this world, could be the rewards of Holiness in the other. Besides many other inventions, false, and absurd, that are like so many chinks and holes to dis∣cover the rottenness of the whole Fabrick, when God shall be pleased to give light to discover, and open their reasons to discern them. But you will say, What Government more sure and absolute than the Turkish, and yet what Religion more false? Therefore certainly Government may stand sure and strong, be the Reli∣gion professed never so absurd. I answer that it may do so indeed by accident, through the strange peculiar temper and
gross ignorance of a people; as we see, it happens in the Turks, the best part of whose Policy, supposing the absurdity of their Religion, is this, That they prohibit Schools of Learning; for this hinders Knowledge and Disputes, which such a Religion would not bear. But suppose we, that the Learning of these Western Nati∣ons were as great there as here, and the Alcoran as common to them as the Bible to us, that they might have free recourse to search and examine the flaws and follies of it; and withall, that they were of as inquisitive a temper as we: And who knows, but as there are vicissitudes in the Government, so there may hap∣pen the same also in the temper of a Na∣tion? If this should come to pass, where would be their Religion? And then let every one judge, whether the Arcana im∣perii, and Religionis would not fall toge∣ther. They have begun to totter alrea∣dy; for Mahomet, having promised to come and visit his Followers, and trans∣late
them to Paradise after a thousand years, this being expired, many of the Persians began to doubt and smell the cheat, till the Mufti or Chief Priest told them, that it was a mistake in the figure, and assured them, that upon more dili∣gent survey of the Records, he found it Two thousand instead of One. When this is expired, perhaps they will not be able to renew the Fallacy. I say therefore, that though this Government continues firm in the exercise of a false Religion, yet this is by accident, through the present genius of the people, which may change; but this does not prove, but that the Na∣ture of such a Religion, (of which we only now speak) tends to subvert and betray the Civil Power. Hence Machi∣avel himself, in his Animadversions up∣on Livy, makes it appear, That the Weak∣ness of Italy, which was once so strong, was caused by the corrupt practices of the Papacy, in depraving, and misusieng Re∣ligion to that purpose, which he, though
himself a Papist, says, could not have hap∣ned, had the Christian Religion been kept in its first, and native simplicity. Thus much may suffice for the clearing of the first Proposition. The Inferences from hence are two. 1. If Government depends upon Re∣ligion, then this shews the pestilential de∣sign of those that attempt to disjoyn the Civil and Ecclesiastical Interests, setting the latter wholly out of the Tuition of the former. But 'tis clear that the Fana∣ticks know no other step to the Ma∣gistracy but through the ruine of the Mi∣nistery. There is a great Analogy be∣tween the body Natural and Politick; in which the Ecclesiastical or Spiritual part justly supplies the part of the soul; and the violent separation of this from the other, does as certainly inferr death and dissolution, as the disjunction of the body and the soul in the Natural; for when this once departs, it leaves the bo∣dy of the Common-wealth as carcase, noy∣som,
and exposed to be devoured by Birds of prey. The Ministery will be one day found according to Christ's word, the salt of the earth, the onely thing that keeps Societies of men from stench and corruption. These two Interests are of that nature, that 'tis to be feared they cannot be divided, but they will also prove opposite; and not resting in a bare diversity, quickly rise into a Contrariety: These two are to the State, what the E∣lements of Fire and Water to the Body, which united compose, separated destroy it. I am not of the papists Opinion, who would make the Spiritual above the Civil State in power as well as dignity, but rather subject it to the Civil; yet thus much I dare affirm, That the Civil, which is superiour, is upheld and kept in being by the Ecclesiastical and Inferiour; as it is in a Building, where the upper part is supported by the lower; the Church re∣sembling the foundation, which indeed is the lowest part, but the most considerable.
The Magistracy cannot so much protect the Ministery, but the Ministers may doe more in serving the Magistrate. A tast of which truth you may take from the Holy Warr, to which how fast and eagerly did men go, when the Priest perswaded them, that whosoever dyed in that Expedition was a Martyr? Those that will not be convinced what a help this is to the Ma∣gistracy, would find how considerable it is, if they should chance to clash; this would certainly eat out the other. For the Magistrate cannot urge obedience up∣on such potent grounds, as the Minister, if so disposed, can urge disobedience. As for instance, if my Governor should com∣mand me to do a thing, or I must die, or forfeit my Estate; and the Minister steps in, and tells me, that I offend God, and ruin my soul if I obey that command, it's easie to see a greater force in this persua∣sion from the advantage of its ground. And if Divines once begin to curse Meros, we shall see that Levi can use the Sword as
well as Simeon; and although Ministers do not handle, yet they can employ it. This shews the imprudence, as well as the dan∣ger of the Civil Magistrate's exasperating those that can fire mens consciences a∣gainst him, and arm his Enemies with Religion. For I have read heretofore of some, that having conceived an irrecon∣cilable hatred of the Civil Magistrate, prevailed with men so far, that they went to resist him even out of conscience, and a full persuasion and dread upon their spirits, that, not to do it, were to desert God, and consequently to incurr dam∣nation. Now when mens rage is both heightned and sanctified by Conscience, the War will be fierce; for what is done out of Conscience, is done with the ut∣most Activity. And then Campanella's Speech to the King of Spain will be found true, Religio semper vicit, praesertim Armata: Which sentence deserves seriously to be considered by all Governours, and time∣ly to be understood, lest it comes to be felt.
2. If the safety of Government is founded upon the truth of Religion, then this shews the danger of any thing that may make even the true Religion su∣spected to be false. To be false, and to be thought false is all one in respect of men, who act not according to Truth, but Apprehension. As on the contrary, a false Religion, while apprehended true, has the force and efficacy of truth. Now there is nothing more apt to induce men to a suspicion of any Religion, than fre∣quent innovation and change: For since the object of Religion, God, the subject of it, the soul of man, and the business of it, Truth, is always one and the same: Variety and Novelty is a just presumpti∣on of Falsity. It argues sickness and di∣stemper in the mind, as well as in the body, when a man is continually turn∣ing and tossing from one side to the o∣ther. The wise Romans ever dreaded the least Innovation in Religion: Hence we find the advice of Mecoenas to Au∣gustus
Caesar, in Dion Cassius in the 52 Book: where he counsels him to detest, and persecute all Innovators of Divine Worship, not only as contemners of the Gods, but as the most pernicious distur∣bers of the State: For when men venture to make changes in things sacred, it argues great boldness with God, and this natu∣rally imports little belief of him: which if the people once perceive, they will take their Creed also, not from the Magi∣strates Laws, but his example. Hence in England, where Religion has been still Purifying, and hereupon almost always in the Fire and the Furnace; Atheists, and Irreligious persons have took no small advantage from our changes. For in King Edward the sixth's time, the Divine Worship was twice altered in two new Liturgies. In the first of Queen Mary, the Protestant Religion was persecuted with Fire and Faggot, by Law and pub∣lick counsell of the same persons, who had so lately established it. Upon the
coming in of Queen Elizabeth, Religion was changed again, and within a few daies the publick Council of the Nation made it death for a Priest to convert any man to that Religion, which before with so much eagerness of Zeal had been re∣stored. So that it is observed by an Au∣thor, that in the space of twelve years there were four changes about Religion made in England, and that by the pub∣lick Council and Authority of the Realm, which were more than were made by any Christian state throughout the world, so soon one after another, in the space of fifteen hundred years before. Hence it is, that the Enemies of God take occasi∣on to blaspheme, and call our Religion Statism. and now adding to the for∣mer, those many changes that have hap∣ned since, I am afraid we shall not so easily claw off that name: Nor, though we may satisfie our own consciences in what we profess, be able to repell and clear off the objections of the rational
world about us, which not being interest∣ed in our changes as we are, will not judge of them as we judge: but debate them by impartial Reason, by the Na∣ture of the thing, the general Practice of the Church; against which New Lights, suddain Impulses of the Spirit, Extraordina∣ry Calls, will be but weak arguments to prove any thing but the madness of those that use them, and that the Church must needs wither being blasted with such In∣spirations. We see therefore how fatal and ridiculous Innovations in the Church are: And indeed when changes are so frequent, it is not properly Religion, but Fashion. This, I think, we may build upon as a sure ground, That where there is continual Change, there is great shew of Uncertainty, and Uncertainty in Religion is a shrewd motive, if not to deny, yet to doubt of its Truth. Thus much for the first Doctrine. I proceed now to the second, viz. That the next, and most effectual way to destroy
Religion, is to Embase the Teachers and Dispensers of it. in the handling of this I shall shew, 1. How the Dispensers of Religion, the Ministers of the word, are embased or rendred vile. 2. How the Embasing or Vilifying them is a means to destroy Religion. 1. For the first of these, the Ministers and Dispensers of the Word are rendred base or vile two ways: 1. By divesting them of all Tempo∣ral Privileges, and Advantages, as in∣consistent with their Calling. It is strange since the Priests Office heretofore was always Splendid, and almost Regal, that it is now looked upon as a piece of Reli∣gion, to make it low and sordid. So that the use of the word Minister is brought down to the literal signification of it, a Servant: for now to serve and to minister, servile and ministerial, are terms equiva∣lent. But in the Old Testament the same word signifies a Priest, and a Prince,
or chief Ruler: hence, though we translate it Priest of On, Gen. 41.45. and Priest of Midian, Exod. 3.1. and as it is with the people so with the Priest, Esa. 24.2. Iuni∣us and Tremellius render all these places, not by Sacerdos, Priest; but by Praeses, that is, a Prince, or at least a Chief Coun∣cellour, or Minister of State. And it is strange, that the Name should be the same, when the Nature of the thing is so exceeding different. The like also may be observed in other Languages, that the most Illustrious Titles are derived from things Sacred, and belonging to the Wor∣ship of God.  was the Title of the Christian Caesars, correspondent to the Latine Augustus, and it is derived from the same word that , cultus, res sacra, or sacrificium. And it is usual in our Language to make Sacred, an Epi∣thete to Majesty: there was a certain Roy∣alty in things Sacred. Hence the Apostle, who I think was no Enemy to the sim∣plicity of the Gospel, speaks of a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. which shews at least, that there is no contradiction or impiety in those terms. In Old time, before the placing this Office only in the Line of Aaron, the Head of the Family, and the First-born offered Sacrifice for the rest; that is, was their Priest. And we know that such Rule and Dignity be∣longed at first to the Masters of Families, that they had jus vitae & necis, jurisdiction and power of Life and Death in their own Family; and from hence was derived the beginning of Kingly Government; a King being only a Civil Head, or Ma∣ster of a Politick Family, the whole Peo∣ple; so that we see the same was the foun∣dation of the Royal and Sacerdotal Dig∣nity. As for the Dignity of this Office among the Jews, it is so pregnantly set forth in Holy Writ, that it is Unquestio∣nable. Kings and Priests are still men∣tioned together. Lamen. 2.6. The Lord hath despised in the indignation of his Anger, the King and the Priest. Hosea 5.2. Hear
O Priests, and give ear O house of the King. Deut. 17.12. And the man that doth pre∣sumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest that standeth there to minister before the Lord thy God, or unto the Iudge, even that man shall die. Hence Paul together with a blow, received this Reprehension, Act. 5.4. Revilest thou God's High-Priest? And Paul in the next verse does not defend himself, by pleading an extraordinary Motion of the Spirit, or that he was sent to Reform the Church, and might therefore lawful∣ly vilifie the Priesthood, and all Sacred Orders; but in the 5th. v. he makes an excuse, and that from Ignorance, the on∣ly thing that could take away the fault; namely, that he knew not that he was the High-Priest, and subjoins a reason which further advances the Truth here defend∣ed: For it is written, thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. To Holy Writ we might add the Testimony of Iosephus of next Authority to it in things concerning the Jews, who in sundry places
of his History, sets forth the Dignity of the Priests, and in his second Book against Appion the Grammarian, has these words, , the Priests were constituted Judges of all doubtfull causes. Hence Iustin al∣so in his 36th Book has this, Semper apud Iudaeos mos fuit, ut Eosdem Reges & Sacer∣dotes haberent: though this is false, that they were always so, yet it argues that they were so frequently, and that the di∣stance between them was not great. To the Jews we may joyn the Egyptians, the first Masters of Learning and Philosophy. Synesius in his 57. Epist. having shewn the general practice of Antiquity, . gives an instance in the Jews and Egyp∣tians who for many Ages, , had no other Kings but Priests. Next, we may take a view of the Practice of the Romans: Numa Pom∣pilius, that civilized the fierce Romans, is reported in the first Book of Livy, some∣times
to have performed the Priests office himself. Tum Sacerdotibus creandis ani∣mum adjecit, quanquàm ipse plurima sacra obibat, but when he made Priests, he gave them a dignity almost the same with him∣self. And this honour continued toge∣ther with the Valour and Prudence of that Nation. For the Success of the Ro∣mans did not extirpate their Religion. The College of the Priests being in ma∣ny things exempted even from the Juris∣diction of the Senate, afterwards the Su∣preme Power. Hence Iuvenal in his 2. Sat. mentions the Priesthood of Mars, as one of the most honourable places in Rome. And Iul. Caesar, who was chosen Priest in his private Condition, thought it not be∣low him to continue the same Office when he was Created absolute Governour of Rome under the name of Perpetual Di∣ctator. Add to these the practice of the Gauls mentioned by Caesar in his 6. Book de Bello Gallico, where he says of the Druides, who where their Priests,
that they did judge de omnibus ferè contro∣versiis publicis privatisque. See also Homer in the 1. Book of his Iliads representing Chryses Priest of Apollo, with his Golden Scepter; as well as his Golden Censer. But why have I produced all these ex∣amples of the Heathens? Is it to make these a ground of our imitation? No; but to shew that the giving honour to the Priesthood, was a custom Universal a∣mongst all civilized Nations: And what∣soever is Universal, is also Natural, as not being founded upon compact, or the particular humours of men, but flowing from the Native Results of Reason: And that which is Natural, nei∣ther does nor can oppose Religion. But you will say, this concerns not us, who have an express Rule and Word revealed. Christ was himself poor and despised, and withall has instituted such a Ministe∣ry. To the first part of this plea I an∣swer; That Christ came to suffer, yet the sufferings and miseries of Christ, doe not
oblige all Christians to undertake the like. For the second, That the Ministery of Christ was low, and despised by his in∣stitution, I utterly deny. It was so, in∣deed, by the malice and persecution of the Heathen Princes, but what does this argue or inferr for a low, dejected Mini∣stery in a flourishing State, which pro∣fesses to encourage Christianity? But to dash this cavil, read but the practice of Christian Emperours and Kings all a∣long, down from the time of Constantine, in what respect, what honour and splen∣dour they treated the Ministers, and then let our Adversaries produce their puny, pitifull Arguments for the contrary, a∣gainst the general, clear, undoubted vogue and current of all Antiquity. As for two or three little Countries about us, the Learned and Impartial will not value their practice; in one of which places the Minister has been seen, for mere want, to mend shoes on the Saturday, and been heard to preach on the Sunday. In the
other place, stating the several orders of the Citizens, they place their Ministers after their Apothecaries: that is, the Phy∣sician of the Soul after the Drugster of the Body: a fit practice for those, who if they were to rank Things as well as Persons, would place their Religion af∣ter their Trade. And thus much concerning the first way of Debasing the Ministers and Mi∣nistery. 2. The second way is by admitting Ignorant, Sordid, Illiterate persons to this Function. This is to give the Royal stamp to a piece of Lead. I confess, God has no need of any man's Parts, or Learning; but certainly then, he has much less need of his Ignorance, and ill Behaviour. It is a sad thing when all o∣ther Employments shall empty them∣selves into the Ministery: When men shall repair to it, not for Preferment, but Refuge; like Malefactors, flying to the Altar, only to save their lives; or like
those of Eli's Race, 1 Sam. 2.36. that should come crouching, and seek to be put into the Priests Office, that they might eat a piece of Bread. Heretofore there was required splendour of Parentage to recom∣mend any one to the Priesthood, as Iose∣phus witnesses in a Treatise which he wrote of his own Life; where he says, To have right to deal in things Sacred, was, amongst them, accounted an argument of a Noble and Illustrious Descent. God would not accept the Offals of other Pro∣fessions. Doubtless many rejected Christ, upon this thought, That he was the Car∣penter's Son, who would have embraced him, had they known him to have been the Son of David. The preferring unde∣serving persons to this great service, was eminently Ieroboam's Sin, and how Ierobo∣am's practice and offence has been conti∣nued amongst us in another guise, is not unknown: For has not Learning unqua∣lified men for approbation to the Mini∣stery? Have not Parts and Abilities been
reputed Enemies to Grace, and qualities no ways Ministerial? While Friends, Fa∣ction, Well-meaning, and little understanding, have been Accomplishments beyond Stu∣dy and the University; and to falsifie a story of Conversion, beyond pertinent Answers and clear Resolutions to the hard∣est and most concerning Questions. So that matters have been brought to this pass, That if a man amongst his Sons had any blind, or disfigured, he laid him a∣side for the Ministery; and such an one was presently approved, as having a mortified Countenance. In short, it was a fiery Furnace, which often approved Dross and rejected Gold. But thanks be to God, those Spiritual Wickednesses are now discharged from their high places. Hence it was that many rushed into the Ministery, as being the only Calling, that they could profess without serving an Apprenticeship. Hence also we had those that could preach Sermons, but not Defend them. The reason of which is
clear, because the Works and Writings of Learned men might be borrowed, but not the Abilities. Had indeed the Old Levitical Hierarchy still continued; in which it was part of the Ministerial Of∣fice to slay the Sacrifices, to cleanse the Vessels, to scour the Flesh-forks, to sweep the Temple, and carry the filth and rub∣bish to the Brook Kidron, no persons living had been fitter for the Ministery, and to serve in this nature at the Altar. But since it is made a labour of the mind; as to inform mens Judgments, and move their Affections, to resolve difficult places of Scripture, to decide and clear off Controversies, I cannot see how to be a Butcher, Scavinger, or any other such Trade, does at all qualifie, or prepare men for this work. But as unfit as they were, yet to clear a way for such into the Ministery, we have had almost all Sermons full of gibes and scoffs at Hu∣mane Learning. Away with vain Phi∣losophy, with the disputer of this world, and
the enticing words of man's wisdom, and set up the foolishness of Preaching, the simpli∣city of the Gospel: Thus Divinity has been brought in upon the ruines of Humanity; by forcing the Words of the Scripture from the sence, and then haling them to the worst of drudgeries, to set a Ius Di∣vinum upon ignorance and imperfection, and recommend Natural Weakness for Supernatural Grace. Hereupon the Ig∣norant have took heart to venture upon this great Calling, and instead of cutting their way to it, according to the usual course, through the knowledge of the tongues, the Study of Philosophy, School-divinity, the Fathers and Councils, they have taken another and a shorter Cut, and having read perhaps a Treatise or two upon the heart, the bruised Reed, the Crumbs of Comfort, Wollebius in English, and some other little Authors, the usu∣al Furniture of Old Womens Closets, they have set forth as accomplished Di∣vines, and forthwith they present them∣selves
to the Service; and there have not been wanting Ieroboam's as willing to con∣secrate, and receive them, as they to of∣fer themselves. And this has been one of the most fatal, and almost irrecove∣rable blows that has been given to the Ministery. And this may suffice concerning the second way of Embasing God's Ministers; namely by entrusting the Ministery with raw, unlearned, ill-bred Persons; so that what Solomon speaks of a Proverb, in the mouth of a Fool, the same may be said of the Ministery vested in them, that it is like a Pearl in a swine's snout. I proceed now to the second thing proposed in the Discussion of this Do∣ctrine, which is to shew, how the Emba∣sing of the Ministers tends to the destru∣ction of Religion. This it does two ways. 1. Because it brings them under ex∣ceeding scorn and contempt; and then, let none think Religion it self secure:
For the Vulgar have not such Logical heads, as to be able to Abstract, such subtil conceptions, as to separate the Man from the Minister, or to consider the same person under a double capacity, and so honour him as a Divine, while they despise him as poor. But suppose they could, yet Actions cannot distin∣guish, as Conceptions do, and therefore every Act of Contempt strikes at both, and unavoidably wounds the Ministery through the sides of the Minister. And we must know, that the least degree of Contempt weakens Religion, because it is absolutely contrary to the nature of it. Religion properly consisting in a reveren∣tial esteem of things Sacred. Now, that which in any measure weakens Religion will at length destroy it: For the weaken∣ing of a thing is only a partial destructi∣on of it. Poverty and meanness of con∣dition expose the Wisest to scorn, it be∣ing natural for men to place their esteem, rather upon things Great than Good;
and the Poet observes, that this Infelix Paupertas has nothing in it more intole∣rable than this, That it renders men Ri∣diculous. And then, how easie and na∣tural it is for Contempt to pass from the Person to the Office, from him that speaks, to the thing that he speaks of, Experience proves. Counsel being seldom valued so much for the Truth of the thing, as the Credit of him that gives it. Observe an excellent passage to this purpose in Eccl. 9.14, 15. We have an account of a little City with few men in it, besieged by a great and potent King, and in the 15. v. we read that there was found in it a poor Wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City. A worthy service indeed, and certainly we may expect that some honourable Re∣compence should follow it; a Deliverer of his Country, and that in such distress could not but be advanced: but we find a contrary event in the next words of the same verse, Yet none remembred that
same poor man? why? what should be the reason? Was he not a man of parts and Wisdom? and is not Wisdom ho∣nourable? Yes, but he was poor: But was he not also successfull, as well as wise? true; but still he was poor: And once grant this, and you cannot keep off that unavoidable sequel in the next verse, The poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. We may believe it upon Solomon's word, who was Rich, as well as Wise, and therefore knew the force of both: and probably, had it not been for his Riches, the Queen of Sheba would never have come so far only to have heard his Wisdom. Observe her behaviour when she came. Though upon the hear∣ing of Solomon's Wisdom, and the reso∣lution of her hard Questions, she expres∣sed a just admiration, yet when Solomon afterward shew'd her his Palace, his Trea∣sures, and the Temple which he had built, 1 Kings 10.5. it is said, there was no more spirit in her. What was the cause
of this? certainly the magnificence, the pomp and splendour of such a Structure: it struck her into an Ecstasie beyond his wise Answers. She estemed this as much above his Wisdom, as Astonishment is beyond bare Admiration. She admired his Wisdom, but she adored his Magni∣ficence. So apt is the mind, even of wise persons, to be surprized with the superfi∣cies, or circumstance of things, and va∣lue, or undervalue Spirituals, according to the manner of their External Appea∣rance. When Circumstances fail, the substance seldom long survives, cloaths are no part of the Body, yet take away cloaths, and the Body will die. Livy ob∣serves of Romulus, that being to give Laws to his new Romans, he found no better way to procure an esteem and reverence to them, than by first procuring it to him∣self, by splendour of Habit and Retinue, and other signs of Royalty. And the wise Numa, his Successor, took the same course to enforce his Religious Laws,
namely, by giving the same Pomp to the Priest, who was to dispense them. Sa∣cerdotem creavit, insignique eum veste, & curuli Regiâ sellâ adornavit. That is, he adorned him with a rich Robe, and a royal chair of State. And in our Judi∣catures, take away the Trumpet, the Scar∣let, the Attendance, and the Lordship, which would be to make Justice Naked, as well as Blind; and the Law would lose much of its Terror, and consequently of its Authority. Let the Minister be ab∣ject and low, his interest inconsiderable, the Word will suffer for his sake: The Message will still find reception accor∣ding to the Dignity of the Messenger. Imagine an Ambassadour presenting him∣self in a poor freize Jerkin, and tattered cloaths, certainly he would have but small Audience, his Embassy would speed rather according to the weakness of him that brought, than the Majesty of him that sent it. It will fare alike with the Ambassadors of Christ, the People will
give them Audience according to their Presence. A notable example of which we have in the Behaviour of some to Paul himself, 1 Cor. c. 10. v. 10. Hence in the Jewish Church it was cautiously provi∣ded in the Law, that none that was blind or lame, or had any remarkable defect in his body, was capable of the Priestly Of∣fice: because these things naturally make a person contemned, and this presently reflects upon the Function. This there∣fore is the first way by which the low, despised condition of the Ministers, tends to the destruction of the Ministery and Religion: namely, because it subjects their Persons to scorn, and consequently their Calling: and it is not imaginable that men will be brought to Obey what they cannot Esteem. 2. The Second way by which it tends to the ruine of the Ministery is, because it discourages men of fit Parts and Abi∣lities from undertaking it. And certain it is, that as the calling dignifies the man, so
the man much more advances his calling. As a Garment, though it warms the Body, has a return with an advantage, being much more warmed by it. And how often a good cause may miscarry without a wise manager, and the Faith for want of a Defender, is, or at least may be known. 'Tis not the Truth of an Assertion, but the skill of the Disputant that keeps off a baffle; not the Justness of a Cause, but the Valour of the Souldiers that must win the Field: When a Learned Paul was con∣verted, and undertook the Ministery, it stopp'd the mouths of those that said, None but poor, weak Fisher-men Preach∣ed Christianity, and so his Learning silen∣ced the scandal, as well as strengthned the Church. Religion placed in a soul of ex∣quisite knowledge and abilities, as in a Castle, finds not only habitation but defence. And what a learned Gaspar Streso. Foreign Divine said of the English Preaching, may be said of all, Plus est in Artifice quàm in Arte. So much
of moment is there in the Professors of any thing, to depress or raise the Profession. What is it that kept the Church of Rome strong, athletick, and flourishing for so many Centuries, but the happy succession of the choicest wits engaged to her service by sutable preferments? And what strength, do we think, would that give to the True Religion, that is able thus to establish a False? Religion in a great measure stands or falls according to the abilities of those that assert it. And if, as some observe, mens desires are usually as large, as their Abilities, what course have we took to allure the former, that we might engage the latter to our assistance? But we have took all Ways to affright and discourage Scholars from looking towards this sa∣cred calling: For will men lay out their Wit and Iudgment, upon that employment, for the undertaking of which, both will be questioned? would men, not long since, have spent toylsome days and watchfull nights in the laborious quest of knowledge preparative to this work, at
length to come and dance attendance for approbation, upon a Iuncto of petty Ty∣rants, acted by Party and Prejudice, who denyed Fitness from Learning, and Grace from Morality? will a man ex∣haust his livelihood upon Books, and his Health, the best part of his life, upon Stu∣dy, to be at length thrust into a poor Vil∣lage, where he shall have his due preca∣riously, and entreat for his own, and when he has it, live poorly and contemptibly upon it, while the same or less labour bestowed upon any other calling, would bring not only comfort but splendor, not only main∣tenance but abundance? 'Tis I confess the duty of Ministers to endure this con∣dition: but neither Religion nor Reason does oblige either them to approve, or others to choose it. Doubtless Parents will not throw away the towardness of a child, and the expence of Education up∣on a Profession, the labour of which is encreased, and the rewards of which are vanished: To condemn promising, live∣ly
parts to contempt and penury in a despised calling, what is it else, but the casting of a Moses into the mud, or the offering a Son upon the Altar: and in∣stead of a Priest to make him a Sacri∣fice? Neither let any here reply, That it becomes not a Ministerial spirit to under∣take such a calling for reward; for they must know, that it is one thing to under∣take it for a reward, and not to be willing to undertake it without one. It is one thing to perform good works only that we may receive the recompense of them in Heaven, and another thing not to be wil∣ling to follow Christ and forsake the world if there were no such recompence. But besides, suppose it were the duty of Scholars to choose this calling in the midst of all its discouragements: Yet a prudent governour, who knows it to be his wis∣dom, as well as his duty, to take the best course to advance Religion, will not con∣sider mens duty, but their practice: not what they ought to do, but what they use
to do: and therefore draw over the best qualified to this service, by such ways, as are most apt to perswade and induce men. Solomon built his Temple with the Tallest Cedars: and surely when God refused the defective, and the maimed for sacrifice, we cannot think that he requires them for the Priest-hood. When learning, abilities and what is excellent in the world, forsake the Church, we may easily foretel its ruine without the gift of Prophecy. And when ignorance succeeds in the place of learning, weakness in the room of judgment, we may be sure, Heresie and Confusion will quickly come in the room of Religion. For un∣doubtedly there is no way so effectual to betray the Truth, as to procure it a weak Defender. Well now; instead of raising any parti∣cular Uses from the Point, that has been delivered, let us make a brief Recapitula∣tion of the whole. Government, we see, depends upon Religion, and Religion up∣on the Encouragement of those, that are
to dispense, and assert it. For the further Evidence of which truths, we need not travel beyond our own Borders; but leave it to every one impartially to Judge, whether from the very first day that our Religion was unsettled, and Church Go∣vernment flung out of doors, the Civil Government has ever been able to fix upon a sure foundation. We have been changing even to a Proverb. The indig∣nation of Heaven has been rolling and turn∣ing us from one form to another, till at length such a giddiness seized upon govern∣ment, that it fell into the very dregs of Se∣ctaries, who threatned an equal ruine both to Minister and Magistrate. and how the State has Symphathized with the Church, is apparent. For have not our Princes as well as our Priests been of the lowest of the People? Have not Coblers, Draymen, Mechanicks, governed, as well as Preached? Nay, have not they by Preaching come to Govern? was ever that of Solomon more verified, that Servants have Rid, while Prin∣ces
and Nobles have gone on Foot? But God has been pleased by a miracle of mercy to dissipate this confusion and Chaos, and to give us some openings, some dawnings of liberty and settlement. But now let not those who are to rebuild our Ierusalem, think that the Temple must be built last: For if there be such a thing as a God, and Religion, as, whether men believe it or no, they will one day find and feel, assured∣ly he will stop our Liberty, till we re∣store him his worship. Besides, it is a sensless thing in reason, to think that one of these interests can stand without the o∣ther, when in the very order of Natural causes, Government is preserved by Religion. But to return to Ieroboam with whom we first began. He laid the foundation of his Government in destroying, though doubtless he coloured it with the name of Reforming God's worship: but see the issue. Consider him Cursed by God; maintaining his usurped title, by continu∣al vexatious wars against the Kings of
Iudah; smote in his posterity, which was made like the dung upon the face of the Earth, as low and vile as those Priests whom he had employed. Consider him branded, and made odious to all after-ages. And now, when his Kingdom and glory was at an end, and he and his Poste∣rity rotting under ground, and his Name stinking above it; Judge what a worthy prize he made in getting of a Kingdom, by destroying the Church. Wherefore the sum of all is this; to advise and de∣sire those whom it may concern, to con∣sider Ieroboam's punishment, and then they will have little heart to Ieroboam's sin.
A SERMON Preached at LAMBETH-CHAPEL on the 25th. of November, Upon the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. IOHN DOLBEN Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD JOHN, Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER, Dean of the Cathedral Church of WESTMINSTER, AND Clerk of the Closet to His Majesty. My Lord, THough the interposal of my Lord of Canterbury's Command for the Publication of this mean Discourse, may seem so far to determine, as even to take away, my Choice; yet I must own it to the World, that it is solely and entirely my own Inclination, seconded by my Obligations to your Lordship, that makes this, that was so
lately an humble attendant upon your Lord∣ship's Consecration, now ambitious to Con∣secrate it self with your Lordship's Name. It was my Honour to have lived in the same College with your Lordship, and now to be∣long to the same Cathedral, where at present you credit the Church as much by your Go∣vernment, as you did the school formerly by your Wit. Your Lordship even then grew up into a constant Superiority above others; and all your After-greatness seems but a Paraphrase upon those Promising beginnings: for whatsoever you are or shall be, has been but an easie Prognostick from what you were. It is your Lordship's unhappiness to be cast upon an Age in which the Church is in its Wane, and if you do not those glorious things that our English Prelates. did two or three hundred years since; it is not because your Lordship is at all less than they, but because the Times are worse. Witness those magni∣ficent Buildings in Christ-Church in Ox∣ford, begun and carried on by your Lord∣ship; when by your Place you governed, and
by your Wisdom encreased the Treasure of that Colledge: and, which must eternally set your Fame above the reach of Envy and Detraction, these great Structures you at∣tempted at a time when you returned poor and bare, to a College as bare, after a long Persecution, and before you had laid so much as one Stone in the Repairs of your own Fortunes: By which incomparably high and generous undertaking, you have shewn the World how fit a Person you were to build upon Wolsey's foundation: A Prelate, whose great designs you Imitate, and whose mind you Equal. Briefly, That Christ-Church stands so high above ground, and that the Church of Westminster lies not flat upon it, is your Lordship's Commendation. And there∣fore your Lordship is not behind-hand with the Church, paying it as much Credit and Sup∣port, as you receive from it; for you owe your Promotion to your Merit, and, I am sure, your Merit to your Self. All men Court you, not so much because a great Per∣son, as a Publick good. For, as a Friend,
there is none so hearty, so Nobly warm and active to make good all the Offices of that endearing Relation: As a Patron, none more able to oblige and reward your Dependants; and, which is the Crowning Ornament of Power, none more willing. And lastly, as a Diocesan, you are like even to out-do your self in all other Capacities; and, in a word, to exemplifie and realize every Word of the following Discourse; which is here most hum∣bly and gratefully presented to your Lord∣ship, By Your Lordship's most obliged Servant Robert South. From St. James's. Dec. 3. 1666.
TITUS II. ult. These things Speak and Exhort, and Rebuke with all Authority. Let no man De∣spise thee. IT may possibly be expected, that the very taking of my Text out of this Epistle to Titus, may engage me in a Discourse about the Nature, Original, and Divine Right of Episcopacy; and if it should, it were no more than what some of the greatest, and the learned'st persons in the world (when men served Truth instead of Design) had done be∣fore: For, I must profess that I cannot look upon Titus as so far un-Bishop'd yet, but that he still exhibits to us all the es∣sentials of that Jurisdiction, which to this day is claimed for Episcopal. We are told in the fifth Verse of the first Chap∣ter,
That he was left in Crete to set things in order, and to ordain Elders in every City; which Text, one would think, were suf∣ficiently clear and full, and too big with Evidence to be perverted; but when we have seen Rebellion commented out of the thirteenth of the Romans; and since there are few things, but admit of gloss and probability, and consequently may be expounded as well as disputed on both sides; it is no such wonder, that some would bear the world in hand, that the Apostle's design and meaning is for Presbytery, though his words are all the time for Episcopacy: No wonder, I say, to us at least, who have conversed with too many strange unparallell'd Actions, Occurrences and Events, now to wonder at any thing; Wonder is from Surprize; and Surprize ceases upon Experience. I am not so much a Friend to the stale Starched Formality of Preambles, as to detain so great an Audience with any previous discourse extrinsick to the Sub∣ject
matter and design of the Text; and therefore I shall fall directly upon the Words, which run in the form of an Ex∣hortation, though in appearance a very strange one; for the matter of an Exhor∣tation should be something naturally in the Power of him to whom the Exhorta∣tion is directed. For no man exhorts ano∣ther to be strong, beautifull, witty, or the like; these are the felicities of some Con∣ditions, the object of more Wishes, but the effects of no man's Choice. Nor seems there any greater reason for the Apostle's exhorting Titus, That no man should despise him; for how could another man's Action be his Duty? Was it in his power that men should not be wicked and injuri∣ous? and if such persons would despise him, could any thing pass an obligation upon him not to be despised? No, this cannot be the meaning; and therefore it is clear, that the Exhortation lies not a∣gainst the Action it self, which is onely in the Despiser's power; but against the just
occasion of it, which is in the will and power of him that is Despised; it was not in Titus's power that men should not despise him, but it was in his power to bereave them of all just cause of doing so; it was not in his power not to be Derided, but 'twas in his power not to be Ridiculous. In all this Epistle it is evident that St. Paul looks upon Titus as advanced to the dignity of a prime Ruler of the Church, and entrusted with a large Diocess, con∣taining many particular Cities under the immediate Government of their respe∣ctive Elders; and those deriving Autho∣rity from his Ordination, as was specified in the fifth Verse of the first Chapter. And now looking upon Titus under this Qua∣lification, he addresses a long Advice and Instruction to him, for the discharge of so important a Function, all along the first and second Chapters: but sums up all in the last Verse, which is the subject of the ensuing Discourse, and contains in it these Two things.
1. An account of the Duties of his Place or Office. 2. Of the means to facilitate, and make effectual their Execution. The Duties of his place were two. 1. To Teach. 2. To Rule. Both com∣prized in these words; These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. And then the means; the onely means to make him Successfull, Bright, and Victorious in the performance of these great works, was to be above Con∣tempt, to shine like the Baptist, with a clear, and a triumphant Light. In a word, it is every Bishop's duty to Teach, and to Govern; and his way to doe it, is not to be despised. We will discourse of each respectively, in their Order. 1. And first, for the first branch of the great work incumbent upon a Church Ruler, which is to Teach. A work that none is too great or too high for: it is a work of Charity, and Charity is the
work of Heaven, which is always laying it self out upon the Needy, and the Im∣potent; nay, and it is a work of the highest and the noblest Charity; for he that teacheth another, gives an Alms to his Soul; he cloathes the nakedness of his Understanding, and relieves the wants of his impoverished Reason: he indeed that governs well, leads the Blind; but he that teaches, gives him Eyes; and it is a glorious thing to have been the Repairer of a decayed Intellect, and a Sub-worker to Grace, in freeing it from some of the inconveniencies of Original Sin. It is a Benefaction that gives a man a kind of Prerogative: for even in the common Dialect of the world, every Teacher is called a Master: it is the property of In∣struction to descend, and upon that very account, it supposes him, that instructs, the Superiour, or at least makes him so. To say a man is advanced too high to condescend to teach the Ignorant, is as much as to say, That the Sun is in too
high a place to shine upon what is below it. The Sun is said to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night: but do they not Rule them only by enlightning them? Doctrine is that, that must prepare men for Discipline; and men never go on so chearfully, as when they see where they go. Nor is the dullness of the Scholar to extinguish, but rather to inflame the charity of the Teacher: for, since it is not in men as in vessels, that the smallest ca∣pacity is the soonest filled; where the la∣bour is doubled, the value of the work is enhaunced; for it is a sowing, where a man never expects to reap any thing but the Comfort and Conscience of having done vertuously. And yet we know moreover, that God sometimes converts even the dull and the slow, turning very Stones into Sons of Abraham; where be∣sides, that the difficulty of the Conquest advances the Trophee of the Conquerer; it often falls out, that the backward Lear∣ner
makes amends another way, recom∣pencing Sure for Sudden, expiating his want of Docility with a deeper and a more rooted Retention. Which alone were argument sufficient to enforce the Apostle's injunction of being instant in season and out of season; even upon the highest and most exalted Ruler in the Church. He that sits in Moses chair, sits there to Instruct, as well as to Rule: and a General's office engages him to Lead, as well as to Command his Army. In the first of Ecclesiastes, Solomon represents himself both as Preacher and King of Is∣rael: and every soul that a Bishop gains, is a new accession to the extent of his Power; he preaches his Jurisdiction wi∣der, and enlarges his spiritual Diocess, as he enlarges mens apprehensions. The Teaching part indeed of a Romish Bishop, is easie enough, whose Grand business is onely to teach men to be Ig∣norant, to instruct them how to know Nothing, or which is all one, to know
upon Trust, to believe implicitly, and in a word, to see with other mens eyes, till they come to be lost in their own souls. But our Religion is a Religion that dares to be understood; that offers it self to the search of the Inquisitive, to the inspection of the severest and the most awakened Reason: for being secure of her substan∣tial Truth and Purity, she knows that for her to be seen and lookt into, is to be embraced and admired: as, there needs no greater argument for men to love the light than to see it. It needs no Legends, no Service in an unknown tongue, no inquisition against Scripture, no purging out the heart and sence of Authors, no altering or bribing the voice of Antiquity to speak for it; it needs none of all these laborious Artifices of ignorance; none of all these cloaks and coverings. The Romish Faith indeed must be covered, or it cannot be kept warm; and their Cler∣gy deal with their Religion as with a great Crime; if it is discovered, they
are undone. But there is no Bishop of the Church of England, but accounts it his Interest, as well as his Duty to comply with this Precept of the Apostle Paul to Titus, These things teach and exhort. Now this Teaching may be effected two ways: 1. Immediately by himself. 2. Mediately by others. And first, immediately by himself. Where God gives a Talent, the Episcopal Robe can be no Napkin to hide it in. Change of Condition changes not the abilities of Nature, but makes them more illustrious in their exercise; and the Episcopal dig∣nity added to a good Preaching faculty, is like the erecting of a stately Fountain upon a Spring, which still, for all that, remains as much a Spring, as it was be∣fore, and flows as plentifully, onely it flows with the circumstance of greater State and Magnificence. Height of place is intended only to stamp the endow∣ments of a private condition with Lustre
and Authority: And, thanks be to God, neither the Church's profess'd enemies, nor her pretended friends, have any cause to asperse her in this respect, as having over her such Bishops, as are able to si∣lence the Factious, no less by their Preach∣ing, than by their Authority. But then on the other hand, let me add also, That this is not so absolutely necessa∣ry, as to be of the vital Constitution of this Function. He may teach his Diocess who ceases to be able to preach to it: for he may do it by appointing Teachers, and by a vigilant exacting from them the care and the instruction of their re∣spective Flocks. He is the Spiritual Fa∣ther of his Diocess; and a Father may see his Children taught, though he him∣self does not turn Schoolmaster. It is not the gift of every Person, nor of every Age, to harangue the multitude, to Voice it high and loud, & Dominari in Concioni∣bus. And since Experience fits for Govern∣ment, and Age usually brings Experience,
perhaps the most Governing years are the least Preaching years. In the 2. Second place therefore, there is a teaching Mediately, by the Subordinate ministration of others; in which, since the Action of the Instrumental agent is, upon all grounds of Reason, to be ascribed to the Principal, He who ordains and fur∣nishes all his Churches with able Preach∣ers, is an Universal Teacher; he instructs, where he cannot be Present; he speaks in every mouth of his Diocess, and every Congregation of it every Sunday feels his Influence, though it hears not his Voice. That Master deprives not his Family of their food, who orders a faithfull Steward to dispense it. Teaching is not a Flow of Words, nor the draining of an Hour∣glass, but an effectual procuring, that a man comes to know something which he knew not before, or to know it better. And therefore Eloquence and Ability of Speech is to a Church-Governour, as Tul∣ly said it was to a Philosopher, Si affera∣tur,
non repudianda; si absit, non magnopere desideranda: and to find fault with such an one for not being a Popular Speaker, is to blame a Painter for not being a good Musician. To Teach, indeed, must be confess'd his Duty; but then there is a Teaching by Example, by Authority, by restraining Se∣ducers, and so removing the Hindrances of knowledge. And a Bishop does his Church, his Prince and Countrey more Service by ruling other mens Tongues, than he can by imploying his own. And thus much for the first Branch of the great Work belonging to a Pastor of the Church, which was to Teach and to Ex∣hort. 2. The second is to Rule, Expressed in these words; Rebuke with all Authority. By which I doubt not but the Apostle principally intends Church-Censures; and so the Words are a Metonymy of the Part for the Whole, giving an instance in Ecclesiastical Censures, instead of all
other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. A Juris∣diction, which in the Essentials of it is as old as Christianity, and even in those Circumstantial Additions of secular en∣couragement, with which the Piety and Wisdom of Christian Princes always thought necessary to support it against the Encroachments of the injurious World, much Older, and more Venerable, than any Constitution, that had divested the Church of it. But to speak directly to the Thing before us; We see here the great Apostle employing the utmost of his Authority in commanding Titus to use his: and what he said to Him, he says to every Christian Bishop after him, Rebuke with all Authority. This Authority is a Spiritual Sword put into the hands of every Church-Ruler; and God put not this Sword into his hands, with an intent that he should keep it there for no other pur∣pose, but only for Fashion-sake, as men use to wear one by their sides. Govern∣ment
is an Art above the Attainment of an ordinary Genius, and requires a wi∣der, a larger, and a more Comprehend∣ing Soul than God has put into every Body. The Spirit which animates and acts the Universe, is a Spirit of Govern∣ment; and that Ruler that is possessed of it, is the Substitute and Vicegerent of Providence, whether in Church or State. Every Bishop is God's Curate. Now the Nature of Government contains in it these three parts. 1. An Exaction of Duty from the Per∣sons placed under it. 2. A Protection of them in the per∣formance of their Duty. 3. Coercion and Animadversion upon such as neglect it. All which are in their Proportion, ingredients of that Govern∣ment which we call Ecclesiastical. 1. And first, it implies Exaction of Duty from the Persons placed under it: for it is both to be confessed and lamen∣ted, that men are not so ready to Offer it,
where it is not exacted: Otherwise, what means the Service of the Church so im∣perfectly, and by halves read over, and that by many who profess a Conformity to the Rules of the Church? What makes them mince and mangle that in their Practice, which they could swallow whole in their Subscriptions? Why are the Pub∣lick Prayers curtail'd and left out, Pray∣ers composed with Sobriety, and injoyn∣ed with Authority, onely to make the more room for a long, crude, impertinent, upstart Harangue before the Sermon? Such persons seem to Conform (the signification of which Word they never make good) onely that they may despise the Church's Injunctions under the Church's Wing, and Contemn Authority within the protection of the Laws. Duty is but another English Word for Debt; and God knows, that it is well if men pay their Debts when they are call'd upon. But if Governors do not remind men of, and call them to Obedience, they will
find, that it will never come as a Free-will offering, no not from many, who even serve at the Altar. 2. Government imports a Protection, and Encouragement of the Persons under it, in the Discharge of their Duty. It is not for a Magistrate to frown upon, and brow-beat those who are hearty and exact in the management of their Ministry; and with a Grave insignificant Nod, to call a well Regulated, and Resolved Zeal, Want of Prudence and Moderation. Such Discouraging of men in the ways of an Active Conformity to the Church's Rules, is that, which will crack the Sinews of Government; for it weakens the Hands, and damps the Spirits of the Obedient. And if onely Scorn and Rebuke shall at∣tend men for asserting the Church's Dig∣nity, and taxing the murther of Kings, and the like; many will choose rather to neglect their Duty safely and creditably, than to get a broken Pate in the Church's Service, onely to be rewarded with that,
which shall Break their Hearts too. 3. The third thing implied in Govern∣ment, is Coercion and Animadversion upon such as neglect their Duty. With∣out which Coercive Power, all Govern∣ment is but Toothless and Precarious, and does not so much command, as beg obedience. Nothing, I confess, is more becoming a Christian, of what Degree soever, than Meekness, Candor and Con∣descension; but they are Vertues that have their proper Sphere and Season to act and shew themselves in, and conse∣quently not to interfere with others: Different indeed in their Nature, but altogether as Necessary in their Use. And when an insolent despiser of Discipline, nurtur'd into Impudence and Contempt of all Order by a long Risque of Licence and Rebellion, shall appear before a Church Governour, Severity and Resolu∣tion are that Governour's Vertues, and Justice it self is his Mercy; for by ma∣king such an one an example, (as much
as in him lies) he will either Cure him, or at least Preserve others. Were indeed the Consciences of men as they should be, the Censures of the Church might be a sufficient Coercion upon them; but being, as most of them now-adays are, Hell and Damnation-proof, her bare Anathema's fall but like so many Bruta fulmina upon the Obstinate and Schismatical: who are like to think them∣selves shrewdly hurt (forsooth) by being cut off from that Body, which they choose not to be of; and so being punish∣ed into a Quiet enjoyment of their belo∣ved Separation. Some will by no means allow the Church any further power than onely to Exhort and to Advise, and this but with a Proviso too, that it extends not to such as think themselves too Wise, and too Great to be Advised: according to the Hypothesis of which persons, the Au∣thority of the Church, and the obliging force of all Church-Sanctions, can bespeak men onely thus; These and these things it
is your duty to doe, and if you will not doe them, you may as well let them alone. A strict and efficacious Constitution indeed, which invests the Church with no power at all, but where men will be so very Ci∣vil as to obey it, and so at the same time pay it a Duty, and do it a Courtesie too. But when in the Judgment of some men, the Spiritual Function as Such, must render a Churchman, though other∣wise never so discreet and qualified, yet merely because he is a Churchman, unfit to be intrusted by his Prince with a share of that Power and Jurisdiction, which in many circumstances his Prince has judg∣ed but too necessary, to secure the Affairs and Dignity of the Church; and which, every thriving Grasier can think himself but ill dealt with, if within his own Coun∣trey he is not mounted to: It is a sign, that such discontented Persons intend not that Religion shall advise them upon any other Terms, than that they may Ride and Govern their Religion.
But surely all our Kings, and our Par∣liaments, understood well enough what they did, when they thought fit to prop and fortifie the Spiritual Order with some power that was Temporal; and such is the present state of the World, in the judgment of any observing Eye, that if the Bishop has no other defensatives but Excommunication, no other power but that of the Keys, he may, for any notable effect that he is like to do upon the factious and contumacious, surrender up his Pastoral Staff, shut up the Church, and put those Keys under the Door. And thus I have endeavoured to show the Three things included in the general Nature of Government; but, to prescribe the manner of it in particular, is neither in my Power, nor Inclination: onely, I suppose, the Common Theory and Spe∣culation of things is free and open to any one whom God has sent into the world with some ability to contemplate, and by continuing him in the World, gives
him also opportunity. In all, that has been said, I do not in the least pretend to Advise, or Chalk out Rules to my Su∣periors; for some men cannot be Fools with so good acceptance as others. But whosoever is call'd to speak upon a cer∣tain occasion, may, I conceive, without offence take any Text sutable to that oc∣casion; and having taken it, may, or at least ought, to speak sutably to that Text. I proceed now to the second thing proposed from the Words, which is the Means assigned for the Discharge of the Duties mentioned, and exhibited under this one short Prescription, Let not man despise thee: In the handling of which I shall shew, 1. The ill effects and destructive In∣fluence that Contempt has upon Govern∣ment. 2. The groundless Causes upon which Church-Rulers are frequently despised. 3. And lastly, the just causes that
would render them, or indeed any other Rulers, worthy to be despised. All which being clearly made out, and im∣partially laid before our eyes, it will be easie and obvious for every one, by a∣voiding the Evil so mark'd out, to an∣swer and come up to the Apostle's Ex∣hortation. And first, we will discourse of Con∣tempt, and the malign hostile Influence it has upon Government. As for the thing it self, every man's Experience will inform him, that there is no Action in the Behaviour of one man towards an∣other, of which humane Nature is more Impatient than of Contempt; it being a thing made up of these two Ingredients, an undervaluing of a Man upon a belief of his utter Uselesness and Inability, and a Spitefull endeavour to engage the rest of the World in the same Belief, and slight Esteem of him. So that the im∣mediate Design of Contempt, is the shame of the Person contemned; and
Shame is a Banishment of him from the good Opinion of the World, which e∣very man most earnestly Desires, both upon a Principle of Nature and of In∣terest. For it is Natural to all men to affect a good Name; and he that de∣spises a man, Libels him in his Thoughts, Reviles and Traduces him in his Judg∣ment. And there is also Interest in the Case: For a Desire to be well thought of, directly Resolves it self into that owned and mighty Principle of self-pre∣servation: For as much as Thoughts are the first wheels and motives of A∣ction; and there is no long passage from one to the other. He that Thinks a man to the ground, will quickly en∣deavour to Lay him there: for while he Despises him, he Arraigns and Con∣demns him in his Heart; and the after-Bitterness and Cruelties of his practices, are but the Executioners of the Sentence passed before upon him by his Judg∣ment. Contempt, like the planet Sa∣turn,
has first an ill Aspect, and then a destroying Influence. By all which, I suppose, it is sufficient∣ly proved, how Noxious it must needs be to every Governour: For, can a man respect the person whom he Despises? and can there be Obedience where there is not so much as Respect? will the Knee bend, while the Heart Insults? and the Actions Submit, while the Apprehensi∣ons Rebel? And therefore the most ex∣perienced Disturbers and Underminers of Government, have always laid their first Train in Contempt, endeavouring to blow it up in the Judgment and E∣steem of the subject. And was not this method observed in the late most flou∣rishing and successfull Rebellion? for how studiously did they lay about them, both from the Pulpit and the Press, to cast a slurr upon the King's person, and to bring his governing Abilities under a Disrepute? and then, after they had sufficiently Blast∣ed him in his Personal Capacity, they
found it an easie Work to dash and o∣verthrow him in his Political. Reputation is Power: and consequent∣ly to Despise is to Weaken. For where there is Contempt, there can be no Awe; and where there is no Awe, there will be no Subjection; and if there is no Sub∣jection, it is impossible, without the help of the former Distinction of a Politick Capacity, to imagine how a Prince can be a Governour. He that makes his Prince despised and undervalued, blows a Trumpet against him in mens Breasts, beats him out of his Subjects hearts, and fights him out of their Affections; and after this, he may easily strip him of his other Garrisons, having already dispos∣sess'd him of his strongest, by dismantling him of his Honour, and seizing his Re∣putation. Nor is, what has been said of Princes, less true of all other Governours, from Highest to Lowest, from him that Heads an Army, to him that is Master of a Fa∣mily,
or of one single Servant; the for∣mal Reason of a thing equally extending it self to every particular of the same kind. It is a proposition of Eternal Ve∣rity, that None can Govern while he is Despised. We may as well imagine that there may be a King without Ma∣jesty, a Supreme without Soveraignty. It is a paradox, and a Direct contra∣diction in practice: for where Contempt takes place, the very Causes and Capa∣cities of Government cease. Men are so far from being Govern∣ed by a despised person, that they will not so much as be taught by Him. Truth it self shall lose its Credit, if Delivered by a person that has none. As on the Contrary, be but a person in Vogue and Credit, with the Multitude, he shall be able to commend and set off whatsoever he says, to authorize any Nonsence, and to make popular, rambling, incoherent Stuff, (seasoned with Twang and Tauto∣logy,) pass for high Rhetorick and moving
Preaching; such indeed, as a Zealous Tradesman would even Live and Die under. And now, I suppose it is no ill Topick of Argumentation, to shew the prevalence of Contempt, by the contra∣ry Influences of Respect; which thus (as it were) dubbs every little, petit Ad∣mired person, Lord and Commander of all his Admirers. And certain it is, that the Ecclesiastical, as well as the Civil Governour, has cause to pursue the same Methods of Securing and Confirming himself; the grounds and means of Go∣vernment being founded upon the same bottom of Nature in both, though the Circumstances, and Relative Considera∣tions of the Persons may differ. And I have nothing to say more upon this Head, but that, if Churchmen are called upon to Discharge the parts of Governours, they may with the highest Reason expect those Supports and Helps that are indispensa∣bly Requisite thereunto: and that those men are but Trapann'd, who are called
to Govern, being invested with Authori∣ty, but bereaved of Power; which ac∣cording to a true and plain Estimate of things, is nothing else but to mock and betray them into a Splendid and Ma∣gisterial way of being Ridiculous. And thus much for the ill Effects and destru∣ctive Influence that Contempt has upon Government. I pass now to the 2. Thing, which is to shew the Groundless Causes, upon which Church-Rulers are frequently De∣spised. Concerning which, I shall premise this; That nothing can be a reasona∣ble Ground of Despising a man, but some Fault or other chargeable upon him; and nothing can be a Fault that is not Naturally in a man's power to pre∣vent; otherwise, it is a man's Unhappi∣ness his Mischance or Calamity, but not his Fault. Nothing can justly be De∣spised, that cannot justly be Blamed; and it is a most certain Rule in Reason
and moral Philosophy, That where there is no Choice, there can be no Blame. This premised, we may take notice of two usual grounds of the Contempt men cast upon the Clergy, and yet for which no man ought to think himself at all the more worthy to be Contemned. 1. The first is their very Profession it self: Concerning which, it is a sad, but an experimented Truth, that the Names derived from it, in the refined Language of the present Age, are made but the Appellatives of Scorn. This is not char∣ged Universally upon all, but experience will affirm, or rather proclaim it of much the greater part of the World; and men must perswade us that we have lost our Hearing, and our common Sence, before we can believe the Contrary. But sure∣ly the Bottom and Foundation of this Behaviour towards Persons set apart for the Service of God, that this very Re∣lation should entitle them to such a pe∣culiar
Scorn, can be nothing else but A∣theism; the growing, rampant Sin of the Times. For call a man Oppressor, Griping, Covetous, or Over-reaching person, and the Word indeed being ill befriended by Custom, perhaps sounds not well, but generally, in the apprehension of the Hearer, it signifies no more, than, that such an one is a Wise, and a Thriving, or in the common Phrase, a Notable man; which will certainly procure him a Re∣spect: And say of another, that he is an Epicure, a Loose or a Vicious man; and it leaves in men no other Opinion of him, than that he is a Merry, Plea∣sant, and a Gentile Person: and that he that taxes him, is but a Pedant, an unex∣perienced, and a Morose fellow; one that does not know men, nor understand what it is to Eat and Drink well; But call a man Priest or Parson, and you set him, in some mens Esteem, ten degrees below his own Servant.
But let us not be Discouraged, or Dis∣pleased, either with our Selves, or our Profession upon this account. Let the Vertuoso's Mock, Insult, and Despise on: yet after all, they shall never be able to Droll away the Nature of things; to trample a Pearl into a Pebble, nor to make Sacred things Contemptible, any more than themselves, by such speeches, Honourable. 2. Another groundless Cause of some mens despising the Governours of our Church, is their loss of that former Gran∣deur, and Privilege that they enjoyed. But it is no real Disgrace to the Church merely to lose her privileges, but to for∣feit them by her Fault or Misdemeanor, of which she is not conscious. Whatso∣ever she injoyed in this kind, she readily acknowledges to have streamed from the Royal Munificence, and the favours of the Civil power shining upon the Spiri∣tual; which Favours the same power may retract and gather back into it self
when it pleases. And we envy not the Greatness and Lustre of the Romish Cler∣gy; neither their Scarlet Gowns, nor their Scarlet Sins. If our Church cannot be Great; which is better, she can be Hum∣ble, and content to be Reformed into as low a Condition, as men for their own private Advantage would have her; who wisely tell her, that it is best and safest for her to be without any power, or Tem∣poral advantage; like the good Physician, who out of tenderness to his Patient, lest he should hurt himself by Drinking, was so kind as to rob him of his silver Cup. The Church of England Glories in no∣thing more, than that she is the truest Friend to Kings, and to Kingly Govern∣ment of any other Church in the World; that they were the same Hands and Prin∣ciples that took the Crown from the King's Head, and the Mitre from the Bi∣shop's. It is indeed the Happiness of some Professions and Callings, that they can equally square themselves to, and
thrive under all Revolutions of Govern∣ment; but the Clergy of England nei∣ther know nor affect that Happiness; and are willing to be Despised for not doing so. And so far is our Church from en∣croaching upon the Civil power; as some who are Backfriends to both, would maliciously insinuate, that were it stript of the very Remainder of its Privi∣leges, and made as like the primitive Church for its Bareness, as it is alrea∣dy for its purity; it could Cheerfully, and what is more, Loyally, want all such Pri∣vileges; and in the want of them pray heartily, that the Civil power may flou∣rish as much, and stand as secure from the Assaults of Fanatick, Antimonarchi∣cal principles, (grown to such a dreadful height, during the Churches late Con∣fusions,) as it stood while the Church enjoyed those privileges. And thus much for the two groundless Causes upon which Church Rulers are frequently De∣spised. I descend now to the
3. And last thing, which is to show those just Causes, that would render them, or indeed any other Rulers worthy to be Despised. Many might be Assigned, but I shall pitch only upon Four; in Discoursing of which, rather the Time, than the Subject will force me to be ve∣ry Brief. 1. And the first is Ignorance. We know how great an Absurdity our Sa∣viour accounted it, for the Blind to lead the Blind; and to put him that cannot so much as See, to discharge the Office of a Watch. Nothing more exposes to Con∣tempt than Ignorance. When Sampson's eyes were out, of a publick Magistrate, he was made a publick Sport. And when Eli was blind, we know how well he Go∣vern'd his Sons, and how well they Go∣vern'd the Church under him. But now the Blindness of the Understanding is Greater and more Scandalous; especial∣ly, in such a seeing Age as Ours; in which the very Knowledge of former times,
passes but for Ignorance in a better Dress: an Age that flies at all Learning, and enquires into every thing, but especially, into Faults and Defects. Ignorance in∣deed, so far as it may be Resolved into Natural inability, is, as to men, at least, Inculpable, and consequently, not the Object of Scorn, but Pity: but in a Go∣vernour, it cannot be without the Con∣junction of the highest Impudence: For who bid such an one aspire to Teach, and to Govern? A blind man sitting in the Chimney corner is pardonable e∣nough, but sitting at the Helm he is In∣tolerable. If men will be Ignorant and Illiterate, let them be so in Private, and to themselves, and not set their Defects in an high place, to make them Visible and Conspicuous. If Owls will not be hooted at, let them keep close within the Tree, and not perch upon the upper Boughs. 2. A Second thing, that makes a Go∣vernour justly despised, is Viciousness and
ill Morals. Vertue is that, which must tip the preacher's Tongue, and the Ru∣ler's Scepter, with Authority. And there∣fore with what a Controlling, Overpower∣ing force did our Saviour tax the Sins of the Iews, when he ushered in his Rebukes of them, with that high assertion of him∣self, Who is there amongst you that convinces me of Sin? Otherwise, we may easily guess with what impatience the world would have heard an incestuous Herod discoursing of Chastity, a Iudas condemn∣ing Covetousness, or a Pharisee preach∣ing against Hypocrisy: Every word must have recoiled upon the Speaker. Guilt is that, which quells the Courage of the Bold, ties the Tongue of the Eloquent, and makes Greatness it self sneak and lurk, and behave it self poorly. For, let a Vicious person be in never so high Command, yet still he will be lookt up∣on but as one great Vice, empowered to Correct and Chastise others. A Cor∣rupt Governour is nothing else but a
reigning Sin. And a Sin in Office may Command any thing but Respect. No Man can be Credited by his Place or Power; who by his Vertue does not first Credit that. 3. A Third thing that makes a Go∣vernour justly despised, is fearfulness of, and Mean Compliances with bold, po∣pular Offenders. Some indeed account it the very Spirit of Policy and Prudence, where Men refuse to come up to a Law, to make the Law come down to them. And for their so doing, have this infalli∣ble Recompence, that they are not at all the more Loved, but much the less Feared; and, which is a sure Consequent of it, accordingly Respected. But believe it, it is a Resolute tenacious Adherence to well Chosen Principles, that adds Glory to Greatness, and makes the face of a Go∣vernour shine in the Eyes of those that see and examine his Actions. Disobedience, if complyed with, is infinitely encroach∣ing, and having gain'd one degree of Li∣berty
upon Indulgence, will demand ano∣ther upon Claim. Every Vice Interprets a Connivence an Approbation. Which being so, is it not an Enor∣mous indecency, as well as a gross im∣piety, that any one who owns the Name of a Divine, hearing a great Sinner brave it against Heaven, talk Atheistically, and scoff Profanely at that Religion, by which he owns an Expectation to be saved, if he cares to be saved at all, should in∣stead of Vindicating the Truth to the Blasphemer's Teeth, think it Discretion and Moderation (forsooth) with a Com∣plying Silence, and perhaps a Smile to boot, tacitly to approve, and strike in with the Scoffer, and so go Sharer both in the Mirth and Guilt of his prophane Jests? But let such an one be assured, that even that Blasphemer himself, would in∣wardly Reverence him, if rebuked by him; as on the Contrary, he in his Heart really Despises him for his cowardly,
base Silence. If any one should reply here, That the Times and Manners of men will not bear such a practice, I con∣fess, that it is an Answer from the mouth of a profess'd Time-server, very Rational: But, as for that man, that is not so, Let him satisfie himself of the Reason, Justice and Duty of an Action, and leave the e∣vent of it to God, who will never fail those, who do not think themselves too wise to trust him. For let the worst come to the worst, a man in so doing would be ruined more Honourably, than other∣wise preferred. 4. And Lastly. A fourth thing, that makes a Governour justly Despised, is a proneness to Despise others. There is a kind of Respect due to the Meanest person, even from the Greatest; for it is the mere favour of providence, that he who is Actually the Greatest, was not the Meanest. A man cannot cast his Respects so low, but they will Rebound and Return upon him. What Heaven
bestows upon the Earth in kind Influ∣ences, and benign Aspects, is payed it back again in Sacrifice, Incense and A∣doration. And surely, a great person gets more by Obliging his Inferior, than by Disdaining him; as a man has a greater advantage by Sowing and Dres∣sing his Ground, than he can have by trampling upon it. It is not to insult and domineer, to look disdainfully, and revile imperiously, that procures an E∣steem from any one: it will indeed make men keep their Distance sufficiently; but it will be Distance without Reverence. And thus I have shewn four several Causes, that may justly render any Ruler Despised; and by the same Work, I hope, have made it Evident, how lit∣tle Cause men have to Despise the Rulers of our Church. God is the Fountain of Honour, and the Conduit, by which he Conveys it to
the Sons of men, are Vertuous and Ge∣nerous Practices. But as for Us, who have more Immediately and Nearly De∣voted, both our persons and concerns to his Service; it were infinitely vain to ex∣pect it upon any other Terms. Some indeed may please and promise them∣selves high Matters, from full Revenues, stately Palaces, Court-Interests, and great Dependances. But that which makes the Clergy glorious, is to be knowing in their Profession, Unspotted in their Lives, Active and Laborious in their Charges, Bold and Resolute in opposing Seducers, and daring to look Vice in the face, though never so Potent and Illustri∣ous. And lastly, to be Gentle, Courte∣ous, and Compassionate to all. These are our Robes, and our Maces, our Escutcheons and highest Titles of Honour: for by all these things God is honoured, who has Declared this the Eternal Rule and Standard of all Ho∣nour
deriveable upon men, That those who Honour Him, shall be Honoured by Him. To which God, fearfull in Praises, and working Wonders, be rendred and ascri∣bed as is most due, all Praise, Might Majesty and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached upon IOHN VII. 17.
JOHN VII.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. WHen God was pleased to new model the World by the introduction of a new Religion, and that in the room of one set up by himself, it was requisite, that he should recommend it to the Reasons of men with the same Authority, and evi∣dence, that inforced the Former; and that a Religion established by God him∣self should not be displaced by any thing under a Demonstration of that Di∣vine Power that first introduced it. And the whole Jewish Oeconomy, we know, was brought in with miracles; the Law was writ and confirmed by the same
Almighty hand. The whole Universe was subservient to its Promulgation. The signs of AEgypt and the Red Sea; Fire and a Voice from Heaven; the Heights of the one, and the Depths of the other; so that (as it were) from the Top to the Bottom of nature, there issued forth one Universal United Testimony of the Divinity of the Mosaick Law and Religion. And this stood in the World for the space of two thousand years; till at length, in the fulness of Time, the rea∣son of men ripening to such a Pitch, as to be above the Paedagogy of Moses's Rod, and the Discipline of Types, God thought fit to display the substance with∣out the Shadow, and to read the World a Lecture of an higher, and more sub∣lime Religion in Christianity. But the Jewish was yet in possession; and there∣fore that this might so enter, as not to intrude, it was to bring its Warrant from the same hand of Omnipotence. And for this cause, Christ, that he might not
make either a suspected, or precarious address to mens understandings, out-does Moses, before he displaces him: shews an Ascendent Spirit above him: raises the Dead, and cures more Plagues, than he brought upon AEgypt, casts out Devils, and heals the Deaf, speaking such Words, as even gave ears to hear them: cures the Blind and the Lame; and makes the very Dumb to speak for the Truth of his Doctrine. But what was the result of all this? Why, some look upon him as an Impostor, and a Conjurer, as an Agent for Beelzebub, and therefore reject his Gospel, hold fast their Law, and will not let Moses give place to the Magician. Now the Cause that Christ's Doctrine was rejected, must of necessity be one of these two. 1. An insufficiency in the Arguments brought by Christ to inforce it. Or, 2. An indisposition in the Persons, to whom this Doctrine was addressed, to receive it. And for this; Christ who had not
onely an infinite Power to work miracles, but also an equal Wisdom both to know the just force, and measure of every argu∣ment, or motive to persuade, or cause Assent; and withall to look through and through all the Dark Corners of the Soul of man, all the Windings and Turnings, and various Workings of his Faculties; and to discern how, and by what means they are to be wrought upon; and what prevails upon them, and what does not. He, I say, states the whole matter upon this Issue. That the Arguments by which his Doctrine addressed it self to the minds of men, were proper, adequate, and suffi∣cient to compass their respective ends in persuading, or convincing the Persons to whom they were proposed: and moreo∣ver, that there was no such defect in the Natural light of man's understanding, or Knowing faculty; but that, considered in it self, it would be apt enough to close with, and yield its assent to the Evidence of those Arguments duly offered to, and laid be∣fore
it. And yet, that after all this, the Event proved otherwise; and that, not∣withstanding both the Weight and fitness of the Arguments to persuade, and the light of man's Intellect to meet this per∣suasive evidence with a sutable assent, no Assent followed, nor were men thereby actually persuaded; he Charges it wholly upon the Corruption, the Perverseness, and Vitiosity of man's will, as the onely Cause that rendred all the Arguments, his Do∣ctrine came cloathed with, unsuccessfull. And consequently, he affirms here in the Text, That men must love the Truth, be∣fore they throughly believe it; and that the Gospel has then onely a free admission into the Assent of the Understanding, when it brings a Passport from a rightly disposed will; as being the great faculty of Dominion, that commands all, that shuts out, and lets in, what Objects it pleases, and in a Word, keeps the Keys of the whole Soul. This is the Design, and purport of
the Words; which I shall draw forth and handle in the Prosecution of these four following Heads. 1. I shall shew; What the Doctrine of Christ was, that the World so much stuck at, and was so averse from Believing. 2. I shall shew; That mens unbelief of it, was from no Defect or Insufficiency in the Arguments brought by Christ to inforce it. 3. I shall shew; What was the True and proper cause, into which this unbe∣lief was resolved. 4. And lastly, I shall shew; That a Pious and well disposed mind, attended with a readiness to obey the Known will of God, is the surest and best means to enlighten the Understanding to a belief of Christianity. Of these in their order: and, First for the Doctrine of Christ. We must take it in the Known and Common Division of it, into matters of Belief, and matters of Practice.
The matters of Belief related chiefly, to his Person and Offices. As, that he was the Messias, that should come in∣to the World. The Eternal Son of God, begotten of him before all Worlds. That in time, he was made man, and born of a pure Virgin. That he should die and satisfie for the Sins of the World: and that he should rise again from the Dead: and ascend into Hea∣ven: and there sitting at the right hand of God, hold the Government of the whole World, till the great and last day: in which he should judge both the Quick and the Dead, raised to life again with the very same Bodies: and then deliver up all Rule and Govern∣ment into the hands of his Father. These were the great Articles and Creden∣da of Christianity, that so much startled the World, and seemed to be such, as not only brought in a New Religion amongst men, but also required a New Reason to embrace it.
The other part of his Doctrine lay in matters of Practice: Which we find con∣tained in his several Sermons, but Princi∣pally in that glorious, full, and admira∣ble discourse upon the Mount; recorded in the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of St. Matthew. All which particulars if we would reduce to one general Comprehensive Head, they are all wrapt up in the Doctrine of Self-denial, prescribing to the World the most inward purity of Heart, and a Con∣stant Conflict with all our sensual Appe∣tites, and worldly Interests; even to the quitting of all that is dear to us, and the Sacrificing of Life it self, rather than knowingly to omit the least Duty, or commit the least Sin. And this was that, which grated harder upon, and raised greater tumults and boilings in the Hearts of men, than the strangeness and seeming unreasonableness of all the for∣mer Articles, that took up Chiefly in Speculation and Belief. And that this was so, will appear from
a Consideration of the state and conditi∣on the World was in, as to religion, when Christ promulged his Doctrine. Nothing further than the outward Acti∣on was then lookt after; and when that failed, there was an Expiation ready in the Opus operatum of a Sacrifice. So that all their Vertue, and Religion lay in their Folds and their Stalls; and what was wanting in the Innocence, the Blood of Lambs was to supply. The Scribes, and Pharisees, who were the great Do∣ctors of the Jewish Church, expound∣ed the Law no further. They account∣ed no man a murtherer, but he that struck a Knife into his Brother's heart. No man an Adulterer, but He that a∣ctually defiled his neighbour's Bed. They thought it no injustice nor irreligion to prosecute the Severest Retaliation or Re∣venge: so that, at the same time their outward man might be a Saint, and their inward man a Devil. No care at all was had to curb the Unruliness of
Anger, or the Exorbitance of Desire. A∣mongst all their Sacrifices, they never sacrificed so much as one Lust. Bulls and Goats bled apace, but neither the Violence of the one, nor the Wanton∣ness of the other ever dyed a Victim at any of their Altars. So that no Won∣der, that a Doctrine that arraigned the Irregularities of the most inward motions, and affections of the Soul, and told men, that anger and harsh Words were mur∣der, and looks and desires Adultery; that a man might Stab with his Tongue, and assassinate with his mind, pollute himself with a Glance, and forfeit Eter∣nity by a cast of his eye. No wonder, I say, that such a Doctrine made a strange bustle and disturbance in the World, which then sat Warm and Easie in a free Enjoyment of their Lusts; ordering mat∣ters so, that they put a Trick upon the great Rule of Vertue, the Law, and made a Shift to think themselves guiltless, in spite of all their Sins; to break the Pre∣cept,
and at the same time to baffle the Curse. Contriving to themselves such a sort of Holiness, as should please God and themselves too; justifie and save them harmless, but never Sanctifie nor make them Better. But the severe Notions of Christiani∣ty turned all this upside down; filling all with Surprise, and Amazement: they came upon the World, like light darting full upon the face of a man asleep, who had a mind to sleep on, and not to be dis∣turbed: They were terrible astonishing Alarms to Persons grown fat and weal∣thy by a long and successfull Imposture; by suppressing the True sence of the Law, by putting another Veil upon Moses; and in a word, persuading the World, That men might be honest and Religious, hap∣py and Blessed, though they never deny∣ed, nor mortified any one of their Cor∣rupt Appetites. And thus much for the first thing pro∣posed; which was to give you a brief
Draught of the Doctrine of Christ, that met with so little assent from the World in general, and from the Jews in particu∣lar. I come now to the Second thing proposed. Which was to Shew, That mens unbelief of Christ's doctrine, was from no defect, or insufficiency in the Arguments brought by Christ to inforce it. This I shall make appear two ways. 1. By shewing, that the Arguments, spoken of, were in themselves Convin∣cing and sufficient. 2. By shewing, that upon supposition they were not so, yet their Insufficiency was not the Cause of their Rejection. And first for the first of these. That the Arguments brought by Christ for the Con∣firmation of his Doctrine were in themselves Convincing and Sufficient. I shall insist only upon the Convincing Power of the two Principal. One from the Prophecies recor∣ded concerning him; the other from the Miracles done by him. Of both very briefly. And for the former. There was a full,
entire Harmony, and Consent of all the Divine Predictions receiving their Com∣pletion in Christ. The strength of which Argument lies in this; That it Evinces the Divine Mission of Christ's person, and thereby proves him to be the Messias; which by Consequence proves and as∣serts the Truth of his Doctrine. For He that was so sent by God, could declare nothing but the Will of God. And so evidently do all the Prophecies agree to Christ, that I dare with great Confidence affirm, That if the Prophecies recorded of the Messiah are not fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth, It is impossible to know or di∣stinguish, When a Prophecy is fulfil∣led, and when not, in any thing or Per∣son whatsoever; which would utterly e∣vacuate the use of them. But in Christ they all meet with such an invincible Lustre, and Evidence, as if they were not Predictions, but after-Relations; and the Pen-men of them not Prophets, but E∣vangelists. And now, can any Kind of
Rationcination allow Christ all the marks of the Messiah, and yet deny him to be the Messiah? could he have all the signs, and yet not be the Thing signified? could the Shadows that followed him, and were cast from him, belong to any other Body? All these things are absurd and unnatural. And therefore the force of this Argument was Undeniable. Nor was that other from the Miracles done by him at all inferior. The strength and force of which, to prove the Things they are alledged for, consists in this, That a Miracle being a Work exceeding the power of any Created Agent, and conse∣quently being an effect of the Divine Omnipotence, when it is done to give Credit, and Authority to any Word or Doctrine declared to proceed from God, either that Doctrine must really proceed from God, as it is declared; or God by that Work of his Almighty power must bear Witness to a falshood, and so bring the Creature, under the greatest Obliga∣tion
that can possibly engage the Assent of a Rational Nature to believe and as∣sent to a Lye. For surely a greater Rea∣son than this, cannot be produced for the Belief of any thing, than for a man to stand up and say, This and This I tell you as the Mind and Word of God; and to prove that it is so, I will do that be∣fore your Eyes, that you your selves shall confess can be done by nothing, but the Almighty power of that God, that can neither deceive, nor be deceived. Now if this be an irrefragable Way to Con∣vince, as the Reason of all Mankind must confess it to be, then Christ's Doctrine came attended, and enforced with the greatest means of Conviction imagina∣ble. Thus much for the Argument in Thesi; and then for the Assumption that Christ did such Miraculous and Super∣natural Works to Confirm what he said, we need only repeat the Message sent by him to Iohn the Baptist: That the Dumb spake, the Blind saw, the Lame walked, and
the Dead were Raised. Which particulars none of his bitterest Enemies ever preten∣ded to deny; they being conveyed to them by an Evidence past all Exception, even the Evidence of Sense; nay of the quick∣est, the surest, and most authentick of all the Senses, the Sight: which if it be not certain in the Reports and representati∣ons it makes of things to the mind, there neither is, nor can be naturally, any such thing as Certainty, or Knowledge in the World. And thus much for the first part of the second General thing proposed: namely, That the Arguments brought by Christ for the proof of his Doctrine, were in themselves Convincing and Sufficient. I come now to the other part of it, which is to shew, That admitting or sup∣posing that they were not sufficient, yet their insufficiency was not the Cause of their Actual Rejection. Which will appear from these following Reasons. First, Because those, who rejected Christ's Doctrine and the Arguments by
which he confirmed it, fully believed and assented to other things conveyed to them with less evidence. Such as were even the Miracles of Moses himself: upon the Credit and Authority of which stood the whole Oeconomy of the Jewish Con∣stitution. For though I grant, that they believed his Miracles upon the Credit of constant unerring Tradition, both written and unwritten, and grant also, that such Tradition was of as great Cer∣tainty as the Reports of Sense; yet still I affirm, that it was not of the same Evi∣dence; which yet is the greatest, and most immediate ground of all Assent. The Evidence of Sense (as I have no∣ted) is the clearest that naturally the Mind of Man can receive; and is in∣deed the foundation both of all the Evi∣dence and Certainty too, that Tradition is capable of: which pretends to no other Credibility from the Testimony and Word of some Men, but because their word is at length traced up to, and ori∣ginally
terminates in, the Sence and Expe∣rience of some others: which could not be known beyond that compass of Time, in which it was exercised, but by being told and reported to such, as, not living at that Time, saw it not, and by them to others, and so down from One Age to another. For we therefore believe the Report of some Men concerning a thing, because it implies that there were some others who actually saw that thing. It is clear therefore, that Want of Evidence could not be the Cause that the Jews re∣jected and disbelieved the Gospel, Since they embraced and believed the Law, upon the Credit of those Miracles that were less Evident. For those of Christ they knew by sight and sense, those of Moses only by Tradition: which though equally certain, yet were by no means equally Evident with the Other. Secondly, they believed and assented to things, that were neither Evident, nor Certain, but onely Probable: For they
conversed, they traded, they merchandi∣zed, and by so doing, frequently ventu∣red their whole Estates and Fortunes up∣on a probable Belief or persuasion, of the Honesty and Truth of those whom they dealt and corresponded with. And Inte∣rest, especially in Worldly matters, and yet more especially with a Jew, never pro∣ceeds but upon supposal at least, of a firm, and sufficient Bottom: From whence it is manifest, that since they could believe and Practically rely upon, and that even in their Dearest Concerns, bare Probabilities, they could not with any Colour of Rea∣son, pretend want of Evidence for their Disbelief of Christ's Doctrine, which came enforced with Arguments far surpassing all such Probabilities. Thirdly, They believed and assented to things neither evident nor certain, nor yet so much as Probable, but actually false and fallacious. Such as were the absurd Do∣ctrines, & Stories of their Rabbins. Which, though since Christ's time, they have
grown much more numerous, and fabu∣lous than before, yet even then did so much pester the Church, and so grosly abuse and delude the minds of that People, that Contradictions themselves asserted by Rabbies were Equally received and re∣vered by them as the Sacred and Infalli∣ble Word of God. And whereas they rejected Christ and his Doctrine, though every Tittle of it came enforced with miracle, and the best Arguments that Hea∣ven and Earth could back it with; yet Christ then foretold, and after Times confirmed that Prediction of his, in the 5. Iohn 43. that they should receive many Cheats and Deceivers coming to them in their own name. Fellows that set up for Messias's, only upon their own Heads, without pretending to any thing sin∣gular or miraculous, but Impudence and Imposture. From all which it follows, that the Jews could not alledge so much as a Pretence of the Want of Evidence in the
Arguments brought by Christ to prove the Divinity and Authority of his Do∣ctrine, as a Reason of their Rejection and disbelief of it; since they embraced, and believed many things; for some of which they had no Evidence, and for o∣thers of which they had no Certainty, and for most of which they had not so much as Probability. Which being so, from whence then could such an obstinate In∣fidelity, in matters of so great Clear∣ness and Credibility take its rise? Why, this will be made out to us in the Third thing proposed. Which was to shew, What was the True and proper Cause, into which this Unbelief of the Pha∣risees was resolved. And that was, in a Word, The Captivity of their wills and affections to Lusts directly opposite to the Design and Spirit of Christianity. They were extremely ambitious and in∣satiably Covetous; and therefore no Im∣pression from Argument or Miracle could reach them; but they stood proof
against all Conviction. Now to shew, how the Pravity of the Will could in∣fluence the understanding to a disbelief of Christianity, I shall premise these two Considerations. First, That the Understanding in its assent to any Religion, is very different∣ly wrought upon in persons bred up in it, and in persons at length converted to it. For in the first, it finds the mind Naked, and unprepossessed with any former No∣tions, and so easily and insensibly gains upon the Assent, grows up with it, and incorporates into it. But in persons adult, and already possessed with other Noti∣ons of Religion, the understanding can∣not be brought to quit these, and to change them for new, but by great Con∣sideration and examination of the Truth and firmness of the one, and comparing them with the flaws and weakness of the other. Which cannot be done without some Labour and Intention of the mind, and the thoughts dwelling a considerable
time, upon the Survey and Discussion of each Particular. Secondly, the other thing to be con∣sidered, is; That in this great Work, the Understanding is chiefly at the disposal of the will. For though it is not in the Power of the Will, directly either to cause or hinder the Assent of the Understanding to a thing proposed, and duly set before it, yet it is antecedently in the power of the Will, to apply the understanding faculty to, or to take it off from the considerati∣on of those Objects, to which, without such a Previous consideration, it cannot yeild its Assent. For all assent presuppo∣ses a simple apprehension or knowledge of the Terms of the Proposition to be assented to. But unless the Understand∣ing imploy and exercise its cognitive, or Apprehensive Power about these Terms, there can be no actual Appre∣hension of them. And the Understanding, as to the Exercise of this Power, is subject to the command of the Will, though as
to the Specifick nature of its Acts it is de∣termined by the Object. As for instance; My Understanding cannot assent to this Proposition, That Iesus Christ is the Son of God; but it must first consider, and so apprehend, what the Terms and Parts of it are, and what they signifie. And this cannot be done, if my will be so Sloth∣fully, Worldly, or Voluptuously disposed, as never to suffer me at all to think of them; but perpetually to carry away, and apply my mind to other things. Thus far is the Understanding at the Dis∣posal of the will. Now these two considerations being premised: namely, That Persons grown up in the Belief of any Religion, cannot change that for another, without apply∣ing their Understanding duly to consi∣der and compare both: and then, That it is in the power of the Will, whether it will suffer the Understanding thus to dwell upon such Objects, or no. From these two, I say, we have the true Philo∣sophy
and Reason of the Pharisees Un∣belief: For they could not relinquish their Judaism, and embrace Christianity, without considering, weighing and col∣lating both Religions: and this their Understanding could not apply to, if it were diverted, and took off by their Will; and their Will would be sure to divert and take it off, being wholly pos∣sessed and governed by their Covetous∣ness and Ambition, which perfectly ab∣horr'd the Precepts of such a Doctrine. And this is the very Account, that our Saviour himself gives of this matter, in Iohn 5.44. How can ye believe (says he) who receive honour One of Another? He lookt upon it as a thing morally impos∣sible, for Persons infinitely Proud and Ambitious, to frame their minds to an Impartial, unbyassed Consideration of a Religion that taught nothing but Self-denial, and the Cross; That Humility was honour, and that the Higher men Climb'd, the further they were from Heaven.
They could not with patience so much as think of it; and therefore, you may be sure, would never assent to it. And again, when Christ discoursed to them of Alms, and a pious distribution of the goods and riches of this World in Luke 16. it is said in the 14. v. That the Pha∣risees who were Covetous, heard all those things and derided him. Charity and Li∣berality is a Paradox to the Covetous. The Doctrine that teaches Alms, and the Persons that need them are by such e∣qually sent packing. Tell a Miser of Boun∣ty to a friend, or Mercy to the Poor, and point him out his Duty with an Evi∣dence, as bright and piercing as the Light, yet he will not understand it, but shuts his Eyes as close as he does his hands, and resolves not to be Convinced. In both these Cases, there is an Incurable Blindness caused by a Resolution not to see: And to all intents and purposes, he, who will not open his eyes, is for the pre∣sent as Blind, as he that cannot. And
thus I have done with the third thing proposed, and shown what was the true Cause of the Pharisees disbelief of Christ's Doctrine. It was the Predominance of those two great Vices over their Will, their Covetousness, and Ambition. Pass we now to the Fourth and Last, Which is to shew, That a Pious and well disposed Mind attended with a readiness to obey the known will of God, is the surest and best Means to enligh∣ten the Understanding to a belief of Chri∣stianity. That it is so, will appear up∣on a double Account. First, upon the Account of God's good∣ness, and the method of its dealing with the Souls of men: which is, to reward every degree of sincere obedience to his will, with a further discovery of it. I un∣derstand more than the Ancients, says Da∣vid, Psalm 119.100. verse. But how did he attain to such an Excellency of un∣derstanding? was it by longer Study, or a greater quickness and felicity of
Parts, than was in those before him. No; he gives the Reason in the next Words: It was because I keep thy Statutes. He got the start of them in point of Obe∣dience, and thereby out stript them at length in point of Knowledge. And who in old time were the men of Extraordi∣nary Revelations, but those who were also men of Extraordinary Piety? who were made Privy to the Secrets of Hea∣ven, and the Hidden will of the Al∣mighty, but such as performed his Re∣vealed will at an higher rate of Strictness than the rest of the World? They were the Enochs, the Abrahams, the Elijahs, and the Daniels; such as the Scripture remarkably testifies of that they walked with God. And surely, he that walks with Another, is in a likelier way to know and understand his mind, than He, that follows him at a distance. Upon which account, the Learned Jews still made this one of the Ingredients that went to Constitute a Prophet, that he should be
perfectus in moralibus: A Person of ex∣act Morals and unblameable in his Life. The gift of Prophecy being a Ray of such a light, as never darts it self upon a Dunghill. And what I here observe oc∣casionally of extraordinary Revelation, and Prophecy, will by Analogy and due Proportion extend even to those Com∣munications of God's Will, that are re∣quisite to mens Salvation. An honest, hearty simplicity, and proneness to do all that a man knows of God's Will, is the ready, certain, and infallible way to know more of it. For I am sure it may be said of the practical knowledge of Religion, that to him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly. I dare not, I confess, joyn in that bold Assertion of some, that Facienti quod in se est, Deus nec debet, nec potest denegare Gra∣tiam. Which indeed, is no less than a direct contradiction in the very Terms: for if Deus debet, then id quod debetur non est gratia: there being a perfect incon∣sistency
between that which is of Debt, and that which is of free Gift. And there∣fore leaving the non debet, and the non po∣test, to those, that can bind and loose the Almighty at their pleasure; so much I think, we may pronounce safely in this matter; That the goodness and mercy of God is such, that he never deserts a sincere Person, nor suffers any one that shall live (even according to these mea∣sures of sincerity) up to what he knows, to perish for want of any Knowledge ne∣cessary, and what is more, sufficient, to save him. If any one should here say: Were there then none living up to these measures of sincerity, amongst the Heathen? and if there were, did the goodness of God af∣ford such persons Knowledge enough to save them? My answer is according to that of St. Paul, I judge not those that are without the Church; they stand or fall to their own Master: I have nothing to say of them. Secret things belong to God, it
becomes us to be thankfull to God, and charitable to Men. Secondly, A pious and well-disposed Will is the readiest means to enlighten the Understanding to a Knowledge of the Truth of Christianity, upon the account of a Natural Efficiency; for as much as a Will so disposed will be sure to engage the mind in a severe Search into the great and concerning Truths of Religion: nor will it only engage the mind in such a Search; but it will also accompany that Search with two Dispositions, directly tending to, and principally productive of, the Discoveries of Truth; namely, Diligence, and Impartiality. And, 1. for the Diligence of the Search. Diligence is the great Harbinger of Truth; which rarely takes up in any mind, till that has gone before, and made room for it. It is a steady, constant and pertinacious Study, that naturally leads the Soul into the Knowledge of that, which at first seemed lockt up from it.
For this keeps the Understanding long in Converse with an object, and long Con∣verse brings Acquaintance. Frequent Consideration of a Thing wears off the strangeness of it; and shews it in its se∣veral lights and various ways of Ap∣pearance to the View of the Mind. Truth is a great Strong-hold, barr'd and fortified by God and Nature; and Diligence is properly the Understanding's laying siege to it: So that, as in a Kind of Warfare; it must be perpetually upon the Watch; observing all the Avenues and Passes to it, and accordingly making its Approaches. Sometimes it thinks it gains a point; and presently again, it finds it self baffled and beaten off: yet still it renews the on-set; attacks the Difficulty a fresh; plants this reasoning and that Argument, this consequence and that di∣stinction, like so many intellectual Bat∣teries, till at length it forces a Way and Passage into the obstinate enclosed Truth, that so long withstood, and defied all its Assaults.
The Jesuits have a Saying common a∣mongst them, touching the Institution of Youth (in which their chief Strength and Talent lies) that Vexatio dat intel∣lectum. As when the mind casts, and turns it self restlesly from one thing to another, strains this Power of the Soul to apprehend, that to judge, another to di∣vide, a fourth to remember: thus tracing out the nice and scarce observable Diffe∣rence of some things, and the real Agree∣ment of others, till at length it brings all the Ends of a long and various Hypo∣thesis together; sees how one part co∣heres with and depends upon another; and so clears off all the appearing Con∣trarieties and Contradictions, that seemed to lie cross and uncouth, and to make the whole unintelligible. This is the Laborious and Vexatious Inquest that the Soul must make after Science. For Truth, like a stately Dame, will not be seen, nor shew her self at the first Visit, nor match with the Understanding upon an ordi∣nary
Courtship or Address. Long and tedious Attendances must be given, and the hardest Fatigues endured, and digest∣ed: nor did ever the most pregnant Wit in the World bring forth any thing great, lasting, and considerable, without some Pain and Travail, some Pangs and Throwes before the Delivery. Now all this, that I have said, is to shew the force of Diligence in the investigati∣on of Truth, and particularly of the Noblest of all Truths, which is that of Religion. But then, as Diligence is the great Discoverer of Truth, so is the Will the great Spring of Diligence. For no man can heartily search after that, which he is not very desirous to find. Diligence is to the Understanding, as the Whetstone to the Razor; but the Will is the Hand, that must apply one to the other. What makes many men so strangely immerse themselves, some in Chymical, and some in Mathematical Enquiries, but because they strangely love the things
they labour in? Their intent Study gives them Skill and Proficiency; and their par∣ticular affection to these Kinds of Know∣ledge, puts them upon such Study. Ac∣cordingly, let there be but the same Pro∣pensity, and Bent of Will to Religion, and there will be the same sedulity and indefatigable Industry in mens Enquiry into it. And then, in the Natural course of things, the consequent of a sedulous Seeking is finding, and the fruit of Enqui∣ry is Information. Secondly, A pious and well disposed Will gives not only Diligence, but also Impartiality to the Understanding, in its Search into Religion; which is as abso∣lutely Necessary to give success to our Enquiries into Truth, as the former: It being scarce possible for that man to hit the Mark, whose Eye is still glancing upon something beside it. Partiality is properly the Understanding's judging according to the Inclination of the Will and Affections, and not according to the
Exact Truth of things, or the Merits of the Cause before it. Affection is still a Briber of the Judgment; and it is hard for a man to admit a Reason against the Thing he loves; or to confess the force of an Argument against an Interest. In this case, he prevaricates with his own Understanding, and cannot serious∣ly and sincerely set his mind to consider the Strength, to poise the Weight, and to discern the Evidence of the clearest and best Argumentations, where they would conclude against the Darling of his De∣sires. For still, that beloved thing posses∣ses, and even engrosses him; and like a Colour'd Glass before his Eyes, casts its own Colour and Tincture upon all the Images and Idea's of things that pass from the Fancy to the Understand∣ing: and so absolutely does it sway that, that if a strange irresistible Evidence of some unacceptable Truth should chance to surprise and force Reason to assent to the Premises, Affection would yet step
in at last, and make it quit the Conclu∣sion. Upon which Account, Socinus, and his followers state the Reason of a man's believing or embracing Christianity, upon the Natural goodness or Vertuous disposition of his mind, which they sometimes call Naturalis Probitas, and sometimes Animus in Virtutem Pronus. For (say they) the whole Doctrine of Christianity teaches nothing, but what is perfectly sutable to, and coincident with, the Ruling Principles that a ver∣tuous, and well inclined man is Acted by; and with the main Interest, that he proposes to himself. So that, as soon as ever it is declared to such an one, he pre∣sently closes in, accepts, and complies with it. As a prepared Soil eagerly takes in, and firmly retains such seed or plants, as particularly agree with it. With ordinary minds, such, as much the greatest part of the World are, 'tis the Sutableness, not the Evidence of a Truth,
that makes it to be assented to. And it is seldom, that any thing practically con∣vinces a Man, that does not please him first. If you would be sure of him, you must inform, and gratifie him too. But now, Impartiality strips the mind of pre∣judice and passion, keeps it tight and even from the Byass of Interest and De∣sire; and so presents it like a Rasa Tabula equally disposed to the Reception of all Truth. So that the Soul lies prepared, and open to entertain it; and preposses∣sed with Nothing that can oppose, or thrust it out. For where Diligence opens the Door of the Understanding, and Im∣partiality keeps it, Truth is sure to find both an Entrance and a Welcome too. And thus I have done with the fourth and last General thing proposed, and Pro∣ved by Argument, that a Pious and well-disposed Mind, attended with a Readiness to obey the known Will of God, is the surest and best Means to enlighten the Understanding to a Belief of Christianity.
Now, from the foregoing particulars, by way of Use, we may collect these two things. First, The true Cause of that Atheism, that Scepticism and Cavilling at Reli∣gion, that we see, and have cause to la∣ment in too many in these days. It is not from any thing weak or wanting in our Religion to support, and enable it to look the strongest Arguments, and the seve∣rest and most Controlling Reason in the face. But men are Atheistical, because they are first Vitious; and question the Truth of Christianity, because they hate the Practice. And therefore, that they may seem to have some Pretence, and Colour to sin on freely, and to surrender up themselves wholly to their Sensuali∣ty, without any Imputation upon their judgment, and to quit their morals, with∣out any discredit to their Intellectuals, they fly to several stale, trite, pitifull Objecti∣ons and Cavils, some against Religion in general, and some against Christianity
in particular, and some against the very first Principles of Morality, to give them some poor Credit and Countenance in the pursuit of their bruitish Courses. Few practical Errors in the world are embraced upon the Stock of Conviction, but Inclination: For though indeed the judgment may err upon the account of Weakness, yet where there is one Error that enters in at this door, ten are lett into it through the Will. That for the most part being set upon those things, which Truth is a direct obstacle to the Enjoyment of; and where both cannot be had, a man will be sure to buy his En∣joyment, though he pays down Truth for the purchase. For in this case, the fur∣ther from Truth, the further from Trouble. Since Truth shows such an one, what he is unwilling to see, and tells him what he hates to hear. They are the same beams that shine and enlighten, and are apt to scorch too: and it is impossible for a man engaged in any wicked way, to
have a clear understanding of it, and a quiet mind in it together. But these Sons of Epicurus, both for Voluptuousness, and Irreligion also, (as it is hard to support the former without the latter) these, I say, rest not here; but (if you will take them at their word;) they must also pass for the only Wits of the Age; though greater Arguments I am sure may be produced against this, than any they can alledge against the most improbable Article of Christianity. But heretofore the Rate and Standard of Wit was very different from what it is now-a-days. No man was then ac∣counted a Wit for speaking such things, as deserved to have the Tongue cut out that spake them. Nor did any man pass for a Philosopher, or a man of depth, for talking atheistically; or a man of Parts for imploying them against that God that gave them. For then, the World was ge∣nerally better enclined; Vertue was in so much Reputation, as to be pretended
to at least. And Vertue, whether in a Christian, or in an Infidel, can have no Interest to be served either by Atheism or Infidelity. For which Cause, could we but pre∣vail with the greatest Debauchees a∣mongst us to change their Lives, we should find it no very hard matter to change their Judgments. For notwith∣standing all their talk of Reason and Phi∣losophy, which (God knows) they are deplorably strangers to; and those unan∣swerable Doubts, and Difficulties, which, over their Cups or their Coffee, they pretend to have against Christianity; persuade but the Covetous man not to deifie his money; the Proud man not to adore himself; the Lascivious man to throw off his lewd amours; the Intem∣perate man to abandon his revels; and so for any other vice, that is apt to abuse and pervert the mind of man; and I dare undertake, that all their Giant-like obje∣ctions against Christian Religion shall
presently vanish and quit the field. For he that is a good man, is three quarters of his way towards the being a good Chri∣stian, wheresoever he lives, or whatsoever he is called. Secondly, In the next place, we learn from hence the most effectual way and means of proficiency and growth in the Knowledge of the great and profound Truths of Religion; and how to make us all not only good Christians, but also expert Divines. It is a knowledge, that men are not so much to study, as to live themselves into. A knowledge that passes into the Head through the Heart. I have heard of some, that in their latter years, through the feebleness of their Limbs, have been forced to study upon their knees: and I think it might well become the youngest, and the strongest, to doe so too. Let them daily and inces∣santly pray to God for his Grace; and if God gives grace, they may be sure that knowledge will not stay long behind.
Since it is the same Spirit and Principle, that purifies the Heart, and clarifies the Understanding. Let all their Enquiries into the deep and mysterious points of Theology be begun and carried on with fervent Petitions to God; that he would dispose their minds to direct all their Skill and Knowledge to the Promotion of a good life, both in themselves and others; that he would use all their No∣blest Speculations, and most Refined No∣tions, only as Instruments, to move, and set a Work the great Principles of Acti∣ons, the Will, and the Affections; that he would convince them of the Infinite Vanity and uselessness of all that Lear∣ning that makes not the Possessor of it a Better man: that He would keep them from those Sins that may grieve and pro∣voke his holy Spirit, the fountain of all true light and knowledge, to withdraw from them; and so seal them up under Darkness, Blindness, and Stupidity of mind. For where the Heart is bent up∣on,
and held under the power of any vicious Course, though Christ himself should take the contrary Vertue for his Doctrine, and doe a miracle before such an ones Eyes, for its Application; yet he would not Practically gain his Assent, but the Result of all would end in a non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris. Few Consider, what a Degree of Sottishness, and Confirmed Ignorance men may sin themselves into. This was the case of the Pharisees. And no doubt, but this very Considera∣tion also gives us the true Reason and full Explication of that notable and strange passage of Scripture, in Luke 16. and the last verse: That if men will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the Dead. That is, where a strong, inve∣terate Love of Sin, has made any Do∣ctrine or Proposition, wholly unsutable to the Heart; no Argument, or Demon∣stration, no nor miracle whatsoever, shall
be able to bring the Heart cordially to close with and receive it. Whereas on the Contrary; if the Heart be piously dispo∣sed, the Natural goodness of any Doctrine is enough to vouch for the Truth of it: for the Sutableness of it will endear it to the Will, and by endearing it to the Will, will naturally slide it into the Assent also. For in Morals, as well as in Metaphy∣sicks, there is nothing really good, but has a Truth Commensurate to its Goodness. The Truths of Christ crucified are the Christians Philosophy, and a good life is the Christians Logick; that great Instru∣mental introductive Art, that must guide the mind into the former. And where a long Course of Piety, and close Com∣munion with God has purged the Heart, and rectified the Will, and made all things ready for the Reception of God's Spirit: Knowledge will break in upon such a Soul, like the Sun shining in his full might, with such a Victorious light, that nothing shall be able to resist it.
If now at length, some should object here; that from what has been delivered, it will follow, That the most Pious men are still the most Knowing; which yet seems contrary to common Experience and observation: I answer, That as to all things directly conducing, and necessary to Sal∣vation, there is no doubt, but they are so: as the meanest common Souldier, that has fought often in an Army, has a truer and better knowledge of War, than He that has read and writ whole Volumes of it, but never was in any Battel. Practical Sciences are not to be learnt, but in the way of Action. It is Experi∣ence that must give Knowledge in the Christian Profession, as well as in all o∣thers. And the Knowledge drawn from Experience, is quite of another Kind from that which flows from Speculation, or Discourse. It is not the Opinion, but the Path of the Iust, that, the wisest of men tells us, Shines more and more unto a perfect Day. The Obedient, and the men
of Practice are those Sons of Light, that shall outgrow all their doubts and igno∣rances, that shall ride upon these Clouds, and triumph over their present Imperfecti∣ons; till Persuasion pass into Knowledge, and Knowledge advance into Assurance, and all come at length to be Compleat∣ed in the Beatifick Vision, and a Full Frui∣tion of those Joys, which God has in Re∣serve for them, whom by his Grace he shall prepare for Glory. To which God Infinitely Wise, Holy, and Iust, he rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty and Do∣minion, both now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
SIX SERMONS PREACHED By Robert South, D. D. Never before Printed. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1692.
SIX SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions.
A SERMON Preached at the Consecration of a Chapel, 1667. PREFACE. AFter the happy expiration of those Times, which had Reformed so many Churches to the ground, and in which men used to express their Honour to God and their Allegiance to their Prince the same way, demolishing the Palaces of the One, and the Temples of the Other, it is now our glory and felicity, that God has changed Mens Tempers with the Times, and made a Spirit of Build∣ing succeed a Spirit of Pulling down; by a miraculous Revolution, reducing many from the
Head of a triumphant Rebellion to their old condition of Masons, Smiths, and Carpen∣ters, that in this capacity they might repair what, as Colonels and Captains, they had ruined and defaced. But still it is strange to see any Ecclesia∣stical Pile, not by Ecclesiastical cost and in∣fluence, rising above ground: especially in an Age in which Mens Mouths are open against the Church, but their hands shut towards it; an Age in which, respecting the generality of Men, we might as soon expect Stones to be made Bread, as to be made Churches. But the more Epidemical and prevailing this Evil is, the more Honourable are those who stand and shine as Exceptions from the Common Practice; and may such places, built for the Divine Worship, derive an Honour and a Blessing upon the Head of the Builders, as great and lasting, as the Curse and Infamy that never fails to rest upon the Sacrilegious Violaters of them; and a greater, I am sure, I need not, I cannot wish.
Now the Foundation of what I shall Discourse upon the present Subject and Occasion shall be laid in that place in PSALM LXXXVII.2. God hath loved the Gates of Sion more than all the Dwellings of Iacob. THE Comparison here exhibited between the Love God bore to Sion, the great place of his Solemn Wor∣ship, and that which he bore to the other dwellings of Israel, imports, as all other Comparisons do in the superiour part of them, Two things; Difference and Pre∣heminence: And accordingly, I cannot more commodiously and naturally con∣trive the prosecution of these words, than by casting the Sence of them into these two Propositions. I. That God bears a different respect to places set apart and consecrated to his Worship, from what he bears to all other
places design'd to the uses of common life. II. That God preferrs the Worship paid him in such places, above that which is offered him in any other places what∣soever. As to the former of these, This Dif∣ference of Respect, born by God to such places, from what he bears to others, may be evinced these three several ways. 1. By those eminent interposals of Pro∣vidence, both for the erecting and preser∣ving of such places. 2. By those Notable Judgments shewn by God upon the Violaters of them. 3. Lastly, by declaring the ground and reason why God shews such a diffe∣rent respect to those places from what he manifests to others. Of all which in their order. 1. First of all then, Those eminent interposals of the Divine Providence for the Erecting and Preserving such places,
will be One pregnant and strong Argu∣ment to prove the Difference of God's re∣spect to them and to others of Common Use. That Providence that universally casts its eye over all the parts of the Creation, is yet pleased more particularly to fasten it upon some. God made all the world that he might be worshipp'd in some parts of the world; and therefore in the first and most early times of the Church, what care did he manifest to have such places erected to his honour! Iacob he admonished by a Vision, as by a Messen∣ger from Heaven, to build him an Al∣tar, and then what awe did Iacob express to it! How dreadfull (says he) is this place, for surely it is no other than the House of God. What particular inspi∣rations were there upon Aholiab to fit him to work about the Sanctuary! The Spirit of God was the Surveyer, Directer, and Manager of the whole business. But a∣bove all, how exact and (as we may say
with reverence) how nice was God about the building of the Temple! David, though a man of most intimate converse and acquaintance with God, and one who bore a Kingly preheminence over others, no less in point of Piety, than of Majesty, after he had made such rich, such vast, and almost incredible Provisi∣on of Materials for the building of the Temple, yet because he had dipt his hands in blood, though but the blood of God's enemies, had the Glory of that work took out of them, and was not permitted to lay a stone in that Sacred Pile, but the whole work was entirely reserved for So∣lomon, a Prince adorned with those parts of Mind, and exalted by such a concur∣rence of all prosperous events to make him Glorious and Magnificent, as if God had made it his business to build a Solo∣mon, that Solomon might build him an House. To which, had not God bore a very different respect from what he bore to all other places, why might not David
have been permitted to build God a Tem∣ple, as well as to rear himself a Palace? why might not he, who was so pious as to design, be also so prosperous as to fi∣nish it? God must needs have set a more than ordinary esteem upon that, which David, the Man after his own heart, the Darling of Heaven, and the most flam∣ing example of a vigorous love to God, that ever was, was not thought fit to have an hand in. And to proceed; when after a long tract of time, the sins of Israel had even unconsecrated and profaned that Sacred Edifice, and thereby robb'd it of its onely defence, the Palladium of God's presence, so that the Assyrians laid it even with the ground; yet after that a long Captivity and Affliction had made the Iews fit again for so great a privilege, as a publick place to worship God in, how did God put it into the heart even of an Heathen Prince, to promote the building of a Second Tem∣ple! How was the work undertook and
carried on amidst all the unlikelihoods and discouraging circumstances imagi∣nable! the Builders holding the Sword in one hand, to defend the Trowel wor∣king with the other: yet finish'd and completed it was, under the conduct and protection of a peculiar Providence, that made the Instruments of that great de∣sign prevalent and victorious, and all those Mountains of Opposition to be∣come Plains before Zorobabel. And lastly, when Herod the Great, whose Magnificence served him instead of Piety to prompt him to an Action, if not in him Religious, yet Heroick at least, thought fit to pull down that Tem∣ple, and to build one much more Glo∣rious, and fit for the Saviour of the World to appear, and to preach in. Io∣sephus in his 15th. Book of the Jewish An∣tiquities and the 14th. Chapter, says, That during all the time of its building, there fell not so much as a Shower to interrupt the work, but the Rain still fell by night,
that it might not retard the business of the day. If this were so, I am not of the number of those who can ascribe such great and strange passages to Chance, or satisfy my Reason in assigning any other cause of this, but the kindness of God himself to the place of his Worship, making the common influences of Hea∣ven to stop their course, and pay a kind of Homage to the Rearing of so sacred a Structure. Though I must confess, that David's being prohibited, and Herod permitted, to build God a Temple, might, seem strange, did not the Absoluteness of God's good pleasure satisfy all sober minds of the Reasonableness of God's proceedings, though never so strange and unaccountable. Add to all this, that the extraordina∣ry manifestations of God's Presence were still in the Sanctuary: The Cloud, the Urim and Thummim, and the Oracular Answers of God were graces, and prero∣gatives proper, and peculiar to the Sa∣credness
of this place. These were the Dignities that made it (as it were) the Pre∣sence-Chamber of the Almighty, the room of Audience, where He decla∣red that He would receive and an∣swer Petitions from all places under Heaven, and where He displayed his Royalty and Glory. There was no Parlour or Dining-room in all the Dwel∣lings of Iacob that he vouchsafed the like privileges to. And moreover, How full are God's expressions to this purpose! Here have I placed my Name, and here will I dwell, for I have a delight there∣in. But to evidence, how different a respect God bears to things consecrated to his own Worship, from what he bears to all other things, let that one Eminent passage of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, be proof beyond all exception: In which, the Censers of those wretches, who, I am sure, could derive no Sanctity to them from their own persons; yet upon this
account, that they had been Consecrated by the offering Incense in them, were, by God's special command, sequestred from all common use, and appointed to be beaten into broad plates, and fastned as a Covering upon the Altar, Numb. 16.28. The Censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make broad Plates for a Covering of the Altar: for they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hal∣lowed. It seems this one single Use left such an indelible sacredness upon them, that neither the Villainy of the persons, nor the impiety of the Design could be a sufficient reason to unhallow, and degrade them to the same common use, that other Vessels may be applyed to. And the argument holds equally good for the Consecration of places. The Apostle would have no revelling, or junketting upon the Altar, which had been used, and by that use consecrated to the Celebration of a more Spiritual, and Divine Repast. Have ye not Houses to Eat and to Drink in? or de∣spise
ye the Church of God? says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.22. It would have been no answer to have told the Apostle, What? is not the Church Stone and Wood as well as other Buildings? and is there any such peculiar sanctity in this parcel of Brick and Mortar? and must God who, has declared himself No respecter of per∣sons, be now made a respecter of places? No; this is the language of a more spi∣ritualized and refined Piety than the A∣postles and Primitive Christians were ac∣quainted with. And thus much for the first Argument brought to prove the different respect that God bears to things and places consecrated and set apart to his own Worship from what he bears to others. The Second argument for the proof of the same assertion, shall be taken from those remarkable Judgments shewn by God, upon the Violaters of things consecra∣ted and set apart to Holy Uses. A Coal (we know) snatcht from the
Altar once fired the Nest of the Eagle, the Royal and commanding Bird; and so has Sacrilege consumed the Families of Princes, broke Scepters, and destroyed Kingdoms. We read how the Victori∣ous Philistines were worsted by the Cap∣tivated Ark, which forraged their Coun∣try more than a conquering Army; they were not able to cohabit with that Holy Thing; it was like a Plague in their Bowels and a Curse in the midst of them: So that they were forced to re∣store their Prey, and to turn their Tri∣umphs into Supplications. Poor Uzzah for but touching the Ark, though out of Care and Zeal for its preservation, was struck dead with a blow from Hea∣ven. He had no right to touch it, and therefore his very Zeal was a Sin, and his Care an Usurpation: nor could the Purpose of his heart excuse the Errour of his hand. Nay, in the promulgation of the Mosaick Law, if so much as a Brute Beast touch'd the mountain, the Bow of
Vengeance was ready, and it was to be struck through with a dart, and to die a Sacrifice for a fault it could not under∣stand. But to give some higher, and clearer instances of the Divine judgments upon Sacrilegious persons. In 1 K. 14.26. We find Shishak King of AEgypt spoil∣ing and robbing Solomon's Temple: and that we may know what became of him, we must take notice that Iosephus calls him Susae, and tells us that Hero∣dotus calls him Sesostris; and withal re∣ports, that immediately after his return from this very expedition, such disastrous Calamities befell his Family; that he burnt two of his Children himself; that his Brother conspir'd against him; and lastly, that his Son who succeeded him, was struck blind: yet not so blind (in his Understanding at least) but that he saw the cause of all these mischiefs, and there∣upon, to redeem his Father's Sacrilege, gave more and richer things to Temples,
than his Father had Stollen from them: Though, (by the way) it may seem to be a strange method of repairing an inju∣ry done to the true God, by adorning the Temples of the false. See the same sad effect of Sacrilege in the great Ne∣buchadnezzar: He plunders the Temple of God, and we find the fatal doom, that afterwards befell him: he lost his King∣dom, and by a new unheard-of Judg∣ment, was driven from the Society and converse of Men, to table with the Beasts, and to graze with Oxen; the impiety and inhumanity of his sin making him a fitter companion for them than for those, to whom Religion is more Natural, than Reason it self. And since it was his un∣happiness to transmit his sin together with his Kingdom to his Son, while Bel∣shazzar was quaffing in the sacred Ves∣sels of the Temple; which in his pride he sent for, to abuse with his impious Sen∣suality, he sees his fatal Sentence writ by the finger of God, in the very midst of
his profane mirth. And he stays not long for the Execution of it; that very Night losing his Kingdom and his Life too. And that which makes the Story direct for our purpose is, that all this comes upon him for his profaning those sacred Vessels. God himself tells us so much by the mouth of his Prophet in Dan. 5.23. where this only sin is charged upon him, and particularly made the cause of his sudden, and utter ruine. These were Violaters of the First Temple; and those that prophaned and abused the Second sped no better. And for this, take for instance that first born of sin and Sacrilege, Antiochus: the story of whose profaning God's House, you may read in the 1. book of Maccab. 1 ch. and you may read also at large what success he found after it, in the 6th. ch. where the Author tells us that he never prospered aftewards in any thing, but all his designs were frustrated, his Captains slain, his Armies defeated; and
lastly, himself falls sick and dies a miser∣able death. And (which is most con∣siderable as to the present business) when all these Evils befell him, his own con∣science tells him, that it was even for this, that he had most Sacrilegiously pil∣laged and invaded God's House. 1 Mac∣cab. 6. vers. 12, 13. Now I remem∣ber (says he) the Evils I did at Ierusalem, how I took the Vessels of Gold and Silver: I perceive therefore, that for this cause these Evils are come upon me, and behold I perish for grief in a strange land. The Sinner's Conscience is for the most part the best Expositor of the mind of God, under any Judgment or Affliction. Take another notable instance in Ni∣canor, who purposed and threatned to burn the Temple, 1 Maccab. 7.35. and a curse lights upon him presently after: His great Army is utterly ruined, he him∣self slain in it, and his head and right hand cut off, and hung up before Ierusa∣lem. Where two things are remarkable
in the Text. 1. That he himself was first slain, a thing that does not usually; befall a General of an Army. 2. That the Iews prayed against him to God, and desired God to destroy Nicanor, for the injury done to his Sanctuary only, na∣ming no sin else. And God ratify'd their Prayers by the judgment they brought down upon the head of him, whom they prayed against. God stopt his bla∣sphemous Mouth, and cut off his sacri∣legious Hand, and made them teach the world, what it was for the most potent sinner under Heaven, to threaten the Al∣mighty God, especially in his own House; for so was the Temple. But now, lest some should puff at these instances, as being such as were un∣der a different Oeconomy of Religion, in which God was more tender of the shell, and ceremonious part of his Wor∣ship, and consequently not directly per∣tinent to ours, therefore to shew that all prophanation, and invasion of things Sa∣cred,
is an offence against the eternal Law of nature, and not against any positive Institution after a time to Expire, we need not go many Nations off, nor many Ages back, to see the Vengeance of God upon some Families, raised upon the Ruines of Churches, and enriched with the spoils of Sacrilege, gilded with the name of Reformation. And for the most part, so unhappy have been the purchasers of Church-lands, that the world is not now to seek for an argument from a long ex∣perience to convince it, that though in such purchases, Men have usually the cheapest Penny-worths, yet they have not always the best bargains. For the Holy thing has stuck fast to their sides like a fatal shaft, and the Stone has cryed out of the Consecrated Walls they have lived within, for a Judgment upon the head of the Sacrilegious intruder; and Heaven has heard the cry, and made good the curse. So that when the Heir of a blasted fami∣ly has rose up and promised fair, and
perhaps flourished for some time, upon the stock of excellent parts and great fa∣vour; yet at length a Cross event has certainly met and stopt him in the Ca∣reer of his fortunes; so that he has ever after withered and declined, and in the end come to nothing, or to that which is worse. So certainly does that which some call blind Superstition, take aim when it shoots a Curse at the Sacrilegi∣ous person. But I shall not engage in the odious task of recounting the families, which this sin has blasted with a Curse. Only, I shall give one Eminent instance in some persons who had Sacrilegiously procured the Demolishing of some pla∣ces consecrated to Holy Uses. And for this (to shew the world that Papists can commit Sacrilege as freely as they can object it to Protestants) it shall be in that great Cardinal and Minister of State, Woolsey, who obtained leave of Pope Clement the 7th. to Demolish 40 Religious houses: which he did by
the service of Five men, to whose con∣duct he committed the effecting of that business; every one of which came to a sad and fatal end. For the Pope him∣self was ever after an unfortunate Prince, Rome being twice taken and sacked in his reign, himself taken Prisoner, and at length dying a miserable Death. Woolsey (as is known) incurr'd a Praemunire, for∣feited his Honour, Estate, and Life, which he ended, some say, by Poyson; but cer∣tainly in great Calamity. And for the Five Men employed by him, two of them quarrelled, one of which was slain, and the other hang'd for it; the third drown'd himself in a Well, the fourth (though Rich) came at length to beg his Bread, and the fifth was miserably Stabbed to death at Dublin in Ireland. This was the Tragical end of a Knot of Sacrilegious persons from highest to low∣est. The consideration of which and the like passages, one would think, should make men keep their Fingers off from
the Churches Patrimony, though not out of Love to the Church, (which few men have) yet at least out of Love to them∣selves, which (I suppose) few want. Nor is that instance in one of another Religion to be passed over, (so near it is to the former passage of Nicanor) of a Commander in the Parliament's Rebel-Army, who coming to Rifle and De∣face the Cathedral at Litchfield, solemnly at the head of his Troops, begged of God to shew some remarkable Token of his approbation, or dislike of the work they were going about. Immediately after which looking out at a Window, he was Shot in the Forehead by a Deaf and Dumb man. And this was on St. Chadd's day, the name of which Saint that Church bore, being dedicated to God in memo∣ry of the same. Where we see, that as he asked of God a sign, so God gave him one, Signing him in the Forehead, and that with such a mark as he is like to be known by to all Posterity.
There is nothing, that the United Voice of all History proclaims so loud, as the certain unfailing Curse, that has pursued and overtook Sacrilege. Make a Catalogue of all the prosperous Sacri∣legious persons that have been from the beginning of the world to this day, and I believe they will come within a very narrow compass, and be repeated much sooner than the Alphabet. Religion claims a great interest in the world, even as great as its Object, God, and the Souls of Men. And since God has resolved not to alter the course of Nature; and upon Principles of Nature, Religion will scarce be supported with∣out the encouragement of the Ministers of it; Providence, where it loves a Nati∣on, concerns it self to own, and assert the interest of Religion, by blasting the spoi∣lers of Religious Persons and Places. Many have gaped at the Church Revenues, but before they could swallow them, have had their mouths stopt in the Church-yard.
And thus much for the Second Argu∣ment to prove the different respect that God bears to things Consecrated to Ho∣ly Uses; namely, His Signal Judgments upon the Sacrilegious Violaters of them. 3. I descend now to the Third and Last thing proposed for the proof of the first Proposition, which is, To assign the ground and reason, why God shews such a concern for these things. Touching which we are to observe, 1. Negatively, that it is no Worth or Sanctity naturally inherent in the things themselves, that either does or can procure them this e∣steem from God: for by Nature all things have an equally common use. Nature freely and indifferently opens the bosom of the Universe to all Mankind: and the very Sanctum Sanctorum had originally no more Sacredness in it than the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, or any other place in Iudaea. Positively therefore, the sole ground and reason of this different esteem vouchsafed by God to consecrated things
and places, is this, That he has the sole property of them. It is a known Maxim, that in Deo sunt Iura omnia; and consequently, that he is the Proprietor of all things, by that grand and transcendent Right founded upon Creation. Yet notwithstanding, he may be said to have a greater, because a sole, property in some things, for that he per∣mits not the use of them to Men, to whom yet he has granted the free use of all other things. Now this Property may be found∣ed upon a double ground. 1. God's own fixing upon, and institu∣tion of a Place or Thing, to his peculiar use. When he shall say to the Sons of Men, as he spoke to Adam concerning the Forbidden Fruit, Of all things, and places that I have enrich'd the Universe with, you may freely make use for your own oc∣casions: But as for this spot of Ground, this Person, this Thing, I have selected and appropriated, I have enclosed it to my self and my own use; and I will en∣dure
no Sharer, no Rival or Companion in it. He that invades them, usurps, and shall bear the guilt of his Usurpation. Now, upon this account, the Gates of Sion, and the Tribe of Levi, became God's proper∣ty. He laid his hand upon them, and said, These are mine. 2. The other ground of God's sole property in any thing or place, is the Gift, or rather the return of it made by Man to God: by which Act he relinquishes and delivers back to God, all his Right to the Use of that thing, which before had been freely granted him by God. After which Donation, there is an absolute change and alienation made of the pro∣perty of the thing Given, and that as to the Use of it too. Which being so alie∣nated, a man has no more to do with it, than with a thing bought with another's Money, or got with the sweat of another's Brow. And this is the ground of God's sole property in Things, Persons, and Places,
now under the Gospel. Men by free Gift consign over a Place to the Divine Worship, and thereby have no more right to apply it to another use, than they have to make use of another man's goods. He that has Devoted himself to the Ser∣vice of God in the Christian Priesthood, has given himself to God, and so can no more dispose of himself to another Em∣ployment, than he can dispose of a thing that he has sold or freely given away. Now in passing a thing away to another by Deed of Gift, Two things are required. 1. A Surrender on the Giver's part of all the property and right he has in the thing given: and to the making of a a thing or place Sacred, this Surrender of it by its right Owner, is so Necessary, that all the Rites of Consecration used upon a place against the Owner's Will, and without his giving up his property, make not that place Sacred, forasmuch as the property of it is not hereby altered: and therefore says the Canonist, Qui sine
voluntate Domini consecrat, reverà desecrat: the like judgment passed that learned Bi∣shop Synesius upon a place so consecrated. . I account it not (says he) for any holy thing. For we must know, that Consecration makes not a place Sacred, any more than Coronation makes a King, but only So∣lemnly declares it so. It is the Gift of the Owner of it to God which makes it to be solely God's, and consequently Sa∣cred: After which, every Violation of it is as really Sacrilege, as to Conspire against the King is Treason before the Solemnity of his Coronation. And moreover, as Consecration makes not a thing Sacred without the Owner's gift, so the Owner's gift of it self alone makes a thing Sacred without the Ceremonies of Consecration; for we know, that Tithes and Lands gi∣ven to God are never, and Plate, Vest∣ments, and other Sacred Utensils are sel∣dom Consecrated: Yet certain it is, that after the Donation of them to the Church,
it is as really Sacrilege, to steal or alienate them from those Sacred Uses, to which they were dedicated by the Donors, as it is to pull down a Church, or turn it into a Stable. 2. As in order to the passing away a thing by Gift, there is required a Sur∣render of all Right to it on his part that gives; so there is required also an Ac∣ceptation of it on his part to whom it is given. For Giving being a Relative Action (and so requiring a Correlative to answer it) Giving on one part transferrs no Property, unless there be an Accep∣ting on the other: for as Volenti non fit Injuria, so in this case Nolenti non fit Be∣neficium. And if it be now asked, how God can be said to Accept what we give, since we are not able to transact with him in Person? To this I answer, 1. That we may and do converse with God in Per∣son really, and to all the purposes of Giving and Receiving, though not visi∣bly:
For Natural Reason will evince, that God will receive Testimonies of Honour from his Creatures amongst which the Homage of Offerings and the parting with a Right, is a very great one. And where a Gift is sutable to the Person to whom it is offered, and no re∣fusal of it testified; silence in that case (even amongst those who transact vi∣sibly and corporally with one ano∣ther) is, by the General voice of Reason reputed an Acceptance. And therefore much more ought we to con∣clude that God accepts of a thing suta∣ble for him to receive, and for us to give, where he does not declare his Re∣fusal and disallowance of it. But 2dly, I add further, That we may transact with God in the Person of his and Christ's Sub∣stitute, the Bishop, to whom the Deed of Gift ought, and uses to be delivered by the owner of the thing given, in a for∣mal Instrument Signed, Sealed, and Le∣gally attested by Witnesses, wherein he
resigns up all his Right and Property in the Thing to be Consecrated. And the Bishop is as really Vicarius Christi to receive this from us in Christ's behalf, as the Levitical Priest was Vicarius Dei to the Iews to manage all transactions be∣tween God and them. These two things therefore concurring, the Gift of the owner, and God's Accep∣tance of it, either immediately by him∣self, which we rationally presume, or mediately by the hands of the Bishop, which is visibly done before us, is that which vests the sole property of a Thing or Place in God. If it be now asked, of what use then is Consecration, if a thing were Sacred before it? I answer, Of very much; even as much as Coronation to a King, which conferrs no Royal Authority upon him, but by so solemn a Declarati∣on of it, imprints a deeper Awe and Re∣verence of it in the Peoples Minds, a thing surely of no small moment. And, 2dly, The Bishop's solemn Benediction and
Prayers to God for a Blessing upon those, who shall seek him in such Sacred places, cannot but be supposed a direct and most effectual means to procure a bles∣sing from God upon those Persons who shall address themselves to him there, as they ought to do. And surely this also Vouches the great reason of the E∣piscopal Consecration. Add to this in the 3d. place, that all who ever had a∣ny awefull Sense of Religion and Reli∣gious matters (whether Jews or Chri∣stans, or even Heathens themselves) have ever used Solemn Dedications, and Con∣secrations of things set apart, and de∣signed for Divine Worship: which sure∣ly could never have been so Universal∣ly practised, had not right Reason di∣ctated the high Expediency and great use of such Practices. Eusebius (the Earliest Church-Histori∣an) in the 10th. Book of his Ecclesi∣astical History; as also in the Life of Constantine, speaks of these Consecrations
of Churches, as of things generally in use, and withall sets down those Actions particularly, of which they consisted, sty∣ling them , Laws or Customs of the Church becoming God. What the Greek and Latin Churches used to do, may be seen in their Pontificals containing the set Forms for these Consecrations; though indeed (for these 6, or 7 last Centuries) full of many tedious, superfluous, and ridicu∣lous fopperies; setting aside all which, if also our Liturgy had a set Form for the Consecration of Places, as it has of Per∣sons, perhaps it would be never the less Perfect. Now from what has been above discoursed, of the ground of God's sole Property in things set apart for his Service; we come at length to see how all things given to the Church, Whether Houses, or Lands, or Tithes, belong to Church∣men. They are but usufructuarii, and have only the use of these things; the Pro∣perty and Fee remaining wholly in God;
and consequently the Alienating of them, is a robbing of God. Mal. 3.89. Ye are Cursed with a Curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, in Tythes and Offer∣ings. If it was God that was robbed, it was God also that was the owner of what was took away in the Robbery: Even our own common Law speaks as much: For so says our Magna Charta, in the 1. ch. Concessimus Deo—quòd Eccle∣sia Anglicana libera erit, &c. Upon which words, that great Lawyer in his Institutes Comments thus. When any thing is grant∣ed for God, it is deemed in Law to be granted to God: and whatsoever is grant∣ed to the Church for his Honour, and the maintenance of his Service, is grant∣ed for and to God. The same also appears from those Forms of Expression, in which the Do∣nation of Sacred things usually ran. As Deo Omnipotenti hâc praesente Chartâ donavimus, with the like. But most un∣deniably is this proved by this one Ar∣gument:
That in case a Bishop should commit Treason, and Felony, and there∣by forfeit his Estate with his Life; yet the Lands of his Bishoprick become not forfeit, but remain still in the Church, and pass intire to his Successour; which sufficiently shews that they were none of his. It being therefore thus proved, That God is the sole Proprietor of all Sa∣cred things, or places; I suppose his pe∣culiar Property in them, is an abundant∣ly pregnant Reason, of that Different Respect that he bears to them. For, is not the Meum, and the Separate Property of a thing the great cause of its endear∣ment amongst all Mankind? Does any one respect a common, as much as he does his Garden? or the Gold that lies in the Bowels of a Mine as much as that which he has in his purse? I have now finish'd the first Propo∣sition, drawn from the Words: Namely, That God bears a different respect to
places set apart and consecrated to his Worship, from what he bears to all other places, designed to the uses of common Life: And also shewn the reason why he does so. I proceed now, to the o∣ther Proposition, which is, That God preferrs the Worship paid him, in such Places, above that which is offered him in any other places whatsoever. And that for these Reasons. 1. Because such places are naturally apt to excite a greater Reverence, and De∣votion in the discharge of Divine Ser∣vice, than places of common Use. The place properly reminds a man of the Business of the place, and strikes a kind of awe into the thoughts, when they reflect upon that great and sacred Majesty they use to treat and converse with there. They find the same Holy consternation upon themselves, that Iacob did at his Consecra∣ted Bethel, which he called the Gate of Heaven: And if such places are so, then surely a daily expectation at the Gate,
is the readiest way to gain admittance in∣to the House. It has been the advice of some Spiri∣tual Persons, that such as were able, should set apart some certain place in their dwel∣lings, for their private Devotions on∣ly; which if they constantly perfor∣med there, and nothing else, their very entrance into it, would tell them what they were to doe in it, and quickly make their Chamber-thoughts, their Table-thoughts, and their jolly, worldly, but much more their sinfull thoughts, and purposes fly out of their hearts. For is there any man (whose heart has not shook off all sense of what is Sa∣cred) who finds himself no otherwise af∣fected, when he enters into a Church, than when he enters into his Parlour, or his Chamber? if he does, for ought I know, he is fitter to be there always than in a Church. The mind of man, even in Spirituals, Acts with a Corporeal, Dependance, and
so is help'd or hinder'd in its Operations, according to the different Quality of Ex∣ternal Objects that incurr into the Senses. And perhaps, sometimes the sight of the Altar, and those Decent preparations for the work of Devotion, may compose, and recover the wandring mind much more effectually than a Sermon, or a ra∣tional Discourse. For these things in a manner preach to the Eye, when the Ear is dull, and will not hear, and the Eye dictates to the Imagination, and that at last moves the Affections. And if these little impulses set the great Wheels of Devotion on work, the largeness, and height of that shall not at all be prejudi∣ced by the smalness of its occasion. If the fire burns bright and vigorously, it is no matter by what means it was at first kindled: there is the same force, and the same refreshing vertue in it, kindled by a spark from a flint, as if it were kind∣led by a Beam from the Sun. I am far from thinking that these Ex∣ternal
things, are either parts of our De∣votion, or by any strength in themselves direct causes of it: but the grace of God is pleased to move us by ways suta∣ble to our Nature, and so Sanctify these sensible, inferiour helps to greater and high∣er purposes. And, since God has placed the Soul in a Body, where it receives all things by the Ministry of the out∣ward Senses, he would have us secure these Cinque-ports (as I may so call them) against the Invasion of vain thoughts, by suggesting to them such Objects as may prepossess them with the contrary. For God knows, how hard a lesson Devotion is, if the senses prompt one thing, when the heart is to utter ano∣ther. And therefore let no man pre∣sume to think, that he may present God with as acceptable a Prayer in his shop, and much less in an Alehouse, or a Ta∣vern, as he may in a Church, or in his Closet: unless he can rationally promise himself, (which is impossible) that he
shall find the same Devout motions, and impresses upon his Spirit there, that he may here. What says David in Psalm 77.13. Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary. It is no doubt but that Holy Person continu∣ed a strict and most Pious communion with God, during his wandrings upon the Mountains, and in the Wilderness; but still he found in himself, that he had not those kindly, warm meltings upon his heart, those raptures and ravishing tran∣sports of Affection, that he used to have in the fix'd, and Solemn place of God's Worship. See the two first verses of the 63 Psalm, Entituled, a Psalm of David, when he was in the Wilderness of Iudah. How Emphatically, and Divinely does every word proclaim the truth, that I have been speaking of! O God (says he) thou art my God, early will I seek Thee. My Soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is, to see thy Power and thy Glory, so
as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Much different was his wish from that of our Non-conforming Zealots now-a-days, which expresses it self in another kind of Dialect; as, When shall I enjoy God as I used to do at a Conventicle? When shall I meet with those blessed breathings, those Hea∣venly Hummings, and Hawings, that I used to hear at a private meeting, and at the end of a Table? In all our worshippings of God, we return him but what he first gives us; and therefore he preferrs the service offer∣ed him in the Sanctuary, because there he usually vouchsafes more helps to the Piously disposed person, for the discharge of it. As we value the same kind of Fruit growing under one Climate more than under another; because, under one it has a directer, and a warmer influence from the Sun than under the other, which gives it both a better Savour, and a greater worth. And perhaps I should not want a fur∣ther Argument, for the confirmation of
the truth discours'd of, if I should ap∣peal to the experience of many in this Nation, who having been long bred to the Decent way of Divine Service, in the Cathedrals of the Church of Eng∣land, were afterwards driven into foreign Countries where, though they brought with them the same Sincerity to Church, yet perhaps they could not find the same enlargements, and flowings out of spirit, which they were wont to find here. E∣specially in some Countries, where their very Religion smelt of the Shop; and their Ruder and Courser methods of Di∣vine Service, seemed only adapted to the Genius of Trade, and the Designs of Parsimony; though one would think, that Parsimony in God's Worship were the worst husbandry in the World, for fear God should proportion his Blessings to such Devotions. 2. The other Reason why God pre∣ferrs a Worship paid him in places so∣lemnly Dedicated and set apart for that
purpose is, because in such places it is a more direct service and testification of our Homage to him. For surely, If I should have something to ask of a great Person, it were a greater respect to wait upon him with my Petition at his own House, than to desire him to come and receive it at mine. Set Places, and Set Hours for Divine Worship, as much as the Laws of Ne∣cessity and Charity permit us to observe them, are but parts of that due Reverence that we owe it: for he that is strict in ob∣serving these, declares to the World that he accounts his attendance upon God, his greatest and most important Business: and surely, it is infinitely more reasona∣ble that we should wait upon God, than God upon us. We shall still find, that when God was pleased to vouchsafe his people a meeting, he himself would prescribe the Place. When he commanded Abraham to Sacrifice his Only and Beloved Isaac, the place of
the Offering was not left undetermined, and to the Offerer's Discretion: But in Gen. 22.2. Get thee into the Land of Moriah (says God) and offer him for a Burnt-offering upon one of the Mountains that I shall tell thee of. It was part of his Sacrifice, not only What he should Offer, but Where. When we serve God in his own House, his Ser∣vice (as I may so say) leads all our other secular affairs in triumph after it. They are all made to stoop and bend the Knee to Prayer, as that does to the Throne of Grace. Thrice a year were the Israelites from all, even the remotest parts of Palaestine, to go up to Ierusalem, there to Worship, and pay their Offerings at the Temple. The great distance of some places from thence, could not excuse the Inhabitants from making their appearance there, which the Mosaick Law exacted as indis∣pensable. Whether or no they had Coaches, to the Temple they must go: Nor could
it excuse them to plead God's Omnisci∣ence, that he could equally see, and hear them in any place: nor yet their own good will and intentions; as if the readi∣ness of their Mind to go, might, forsooth, warrant their Bodies to stay at home. Nor lastly, could the real danger of lea∣ving their Dwellings to go up to the Temple, excuse their Journey: for they might very plausibly, and very rationally have alledged, That, during their absence, their Enemies round about them, might take that advantage to invade their Land. And therefore, to obviate this fear and ex∣ception, which indeed was built upon so good ground, God makes them a promise, which certainly is as remarka∣ble as any in the whole Book of God, Exod. 34.24. I will cast out the Nations before thee, neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in a year. While they were appearing in God's House, God himself engages to keep and defend theirs;
and that by little less than a Miracle, put∣ting forth an over-powring work and in∣fluence upon the very Hearts and Wills of Men; that when their Opportunities should induce, their Hearts should not serve them, to annoy their Neighbours. For surely a rich Land, guardless and undefended, must needs have been a dou∣ble incitement; and such an one, as might not only admit, but even invite the Ene∣my. It was like a fruitfull Garden, or a fair Vineyard without an Hedge, that quickens the Appetite to enjoy so tempt∣ing, and withall so easie a prize. But the great God, by ruling mens Hearts, could, by consequence, hold their Hands; and turn the very desires of Interest and Nature out of their common Channel, to comply with the Designs of his Wor∣ship. But now, had not God set a very pe∣culiar value upon the Service paid him in his Temple, surely he would not have thus (as it were) made himself his Peoples
Convoy, and exerted a supernatural work to secure them in their passage to it. And therefore that Eminent Hero in Religion, Daniel, when in the Land of his Captivity, he used to pay his daily Devotions to God, not being able to go to the Temple, would at least look to∣wards it, advance to it in wish and de∣sire; and so, in a manner, bring the Temple to his Prayers, when he could not bring his Prayers to that. And now, what have I to do more, but to wish that all this Discourse may have that blessed Effect upon us, as to send us both to this, and to all other solemn places of Divine Worship, with those three excellent Ingredients of Devotion, Desire, Reverence, and Confidence! 1. And first, for Desire. We should come hither, as to meet God in a place where he loves to meet us: and where (as Isaac did to his Sons) he gives us Blessings with Embraces. Many fre∣quent the Gates of Sion; but is it because
they love them, and not rather because their Interest forces them, much against their Inclination, to endure them? Do they hasten to their Devotions with that ardor, and quickness of Mind, that they would to a lewd Play, or a Ma∣squerade? Or do they not rather come hither slowly, sit here uneasily, and depart desirously? all which is but too evident a sign, that Men repair to the House of God, not as to a place of Fruition, but of Task and Trou∣ble; not to enjoy, but to afflict them∣selves. Secondly, We should come full of Reverence to such Sacred Places; and where there are Affections of Reverence, there will be Postures of Reverence too. Within Consecrated Walls, we are more directly under God's Eye, who looks through and through every one that ap∣pears before him, and is too jealous a God to be affronted to his Face. Thirdly and lastly, God's peculiar
property in such places should give us a Confidence in our Addresses to him here. Reverence and confidence are so far from being inconsistent, that they are the most direct and proper qualifications of a De∣vout, and Filial approach to God. For where should we be so confident of a Blessing, as in the Place, and Element of Blessings? The place, where God both promises and delights to dispense larger proportions of his favour; even for this purpose, that he may fix a mark of Ho∣nour upon his Sanctuary; and so recom∣mend, and endear it to the Sons of men, upon the stock of their own interest, as well as his Glory: who has declared him∣self, The High and the Lofty one that in∣habits Eternity, and dwells not in houses made with mens hands, yet is pleased to be present in the Assemblies of his Saints. To whom be rendred and ascribed as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at WESTMINSTER-ABBEY, February 22. 1684/5.
PROVERBS XVI.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing of it is of the Lord. I cannot think myself engaged from these words to discourse of Lots, as to their Nature, Use, and Allow∣ableness; and that not only in mat∣ters of moment and business, but also of Recreation; which latter is indeed im∣pugned by some, though better defended by others; but I shall fix only upon the design of the words, which seems to be a declaration of a Divine Perfection by a signal instance: a proof of the Exactness and universality of God's Providence from its influence upon a thing of all others the most Casual and fortuitous, such as is the Casting of Lots. A Lot is properly a Casual Event purpose∣ly applyed to the Determination of some doubt∣full Thing.
Some there are, who utterly proscribe the Name of Chance, as a word of Im∣pious and Profane signification: and in∣deed, if it be taken by us in that sence, in which it was used by the Heathen, so as to make any thing Casual, in respect of God himself, their Exception ought justly to be admitted. But to say a thing is a Chance, or Casualty, as it re∣lates to Second Causes, is not Prophane∣ness, but a great Truth; as signifying no more, than that there are some Events, besides the Knowledge, Purpose, Expecta∣tion, and Power of second Agents. And for this very Reason, because they are so, it is the royal prerogative of God him∣self, to have all these loose, uneven, fickle, uncertainties under his disposal. The subject therefore, that from hence we are naturally carryed to the conside∣ration of, is, the admirable Extent of the Divine Providence, in managing the most contingent passages of Human Af∣fairs; which that we may the better treat
of, we will consider the Result of a Lot. I. In reference to Men. II. In reference to God. 1. For the first of these, If we consi∣der it as relating to men, who suspend the Decision of some dubious case upon it, so we shall find that it naturally im∣plies in it, these two Things. 1. Something future. 2. Something contingent. From which two Qualifications, these two things also follow. 1. That it is absolutely out of the Reach of man's Knowledge. 2. That it is equally out of his Power. This is most clear; for otherwise why are men in such cases doubtfull, and con∣cerned, what the Issue, and Result should be? For no man doubts of what he sees, and knows; nor is sollicitous about the event of that which he has in his power, to dispose of to what Event he pleases.
The light of man's Understanding, is but a short, diminutive, contracted light, and looks not beyond the present: He knows nothing future, but as it has some kind of presence in the stable, constant manner of Operation belonging to its cause; by virtue of which, we know, that if the fire continues for twenty years, it will certainly burn so long; and that there will be Summer, Winter, and Harvest, in their respective Seasons: but whether God will continue the world till to mor∣row or no, we cannot know by any cer∣tain Argument, either from the Nature of God, or of the World. But when we look upon such things as relate to their immediate Causes, with a perfect indifference, so that in respect of them, they equally may, or may not be; Humane Reason can then at the best, but conjecture what will be. And in some things, as here in the casting of Lots; a man cannot upon any ground of Rea∣son,
bring the Event of them so much as under conjecture. The choice of man's will is indeed un∣certain, because in many things free; but yet there are certain Habits, and Princi∣ples in the Soul, that have some kind of sway upon it, apt to byass it more one way than another; so that upon the pro∣posal of an agreeable Object, it may rati∣onally be conjectur'd, that a man's Choice will rather incline him to accept, than to refuse it. But when Lots are shuffled together in a Lap, Urn, or Pitcher; or a man blind-fold casts a Dye, what reason in the world, can he have to presume that he shall draw a White Stone rather than a Black, or throw an Ace rather than a Sise? Now if these things are thus out of the compass of a man's knowledge, it will unavoidably follow, that they are also out of his Power. For no man can govern, or command that which he cannot possibly know; Since to dispose of a thing implies both
a knowledge of the thing to be disposed of, and of the End that it is to be dis∣posed of to. And thus we have seen how a contin∣gent Event baffles man's knowledge, and evades his power: Let us now Consider the same in respect of God; and so we shall find that it falls under, 1. A certain knowledge, and 2. A Determining providence. 1. First of all then, the most casual event of things, as it stands related to God, is conprehended by a certain knowledge. God by reason of his E∣ternal, Infinite, and Indivisible Nature, is, by one single act of duration, pre∣sent to all the successive portions of time; and consequently to all things successive∣ly existing in them. Which eternal, in∣divisible act of his existence, makes all futures actually present to him; and it is the Presentiality of the Object which founds the unerring certainty of his know∣ledge. For whatsoever is known, is
some way or other present; and that which is present, cannot but be known by him who is Omniscient. But I shall not insist upon these spe∣culations; which when they are most re∣fined, serve only to shew how impossi∣ble it is for us, to have a clear, and Ex∣plicit Notion of that which is infinite. Let it suffice us in general, to acknow∣ledge and adore the vast compass of God's Omniscience. That it is a light shining into every dark corner, ripping up all secrets, and steadfastly grasping the grea∣test, and most slippery uncertainties. As when we see the Sun shine upon a a River, though the waves of it move and rowl this way, and that way by the Wind, yet for all their unsetledness, the Sun strikes them with a direct and a cer∣tain Beam. Look upon things of the most accidental, and mutable Nature; accidental, in their production, and mu∣table in their continuance; yet God's prescience of them is as certain in him,
as the memory of them is or can be in us. He knows which way the Lot, and the Dye shall fall, as perfectly as if they were already cast. All futurities are Naked before that all-seeing Eye, the sight of which is no more hindered by distance of time, than the sight of an Angel can be determined by distance of place. Secondly, as all Contingencies are com∣prehended by a certain Divine Know∣ledge, so they are governed by as certain and steady a Providence. There is no wandring out of the reach of this; no slipping through the hands of Omnipotence. God's Hand is as steady as his Eye; and certainly thus to reduce Contingency to Method, Instability and Chance it self, to an unfailing Rule and Order, argues such a Mind as is fit to go∣vern the World; and I am sure, nothing less than such an one can. Now God may be said to bring the greatest Casualties under his Providence upon a twofold account.
1. That he directs them to a Certain End. 2. Oftentimes to very Weighty and Great Ends. 1. And first of all, He directs them to a Certain End. Providence never shoots at Rovers. There is an Arrow that flies by Night, as well as by Day; and God is the per∣son that shoots it, who can take aim then as well as in the Day. Things are not left to an AEquilibrium, to hover under an Indifference, whether they shall come to pass, or not come to pass; but the whole train of Events is laid before hand, and all proceed by the Rule and Limit of an antecedent Decree: for otherwise, who could manage the Affairs of the World, and govern the dependance of one Event upon another, if that Event hapned at Random, and was not cast into a certain method and relation to some foregoing purpose to direct it? The Reason why men are so short and
weak in Governing, is, because most things fall out to them accidentally, and come not into any compliance with their preconceiv'd Ends, but they are forced to comply subsequently, and to strike in with things as they fall out, by post∣liminious after-applications of them to their purposes, or by framing their pur∣poses to them. But now there is not the least thing that falls within the cognizance of Man, but is directed by the counsel of God. Not an hair can fall from our head, nor a Sparrow to the ground, without the Will of our Heavenly Father. Such an Universal Superintendency has the Eye and Hand of Providence over all, even the most minute and inconsiderable things. Nay, and sinfull Actions too, are over∣ruled to a certain Issue: Even that hor∣rid Villainy of the Crucifixion of our Sa∣viour was not a thing left to the disposal of Chance and Uncertainty, but in Acts 2.23. it is said of him, That he was de∣livered
to the wicked hands of his murtherers, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God: for surely the Son of God could not die by chance, nor the greatest thing that ever came to pass in Nature, be left to an undeterminate Event. Is it ima∣ginable, that the great Means of the World's Redemption, should rest only in the Number of Possibilities, and hang so loose in respect of its futurition, as to leave the Event in an equal poise, whe∣ther ever there should be such a thing or no? Certainly the Actions and Procee∣dings of Wise men run in a much grea∣ter closeness and coherence with one ano∣ther, than thus to drive at a Casual Is∣sue, brought under no forecast or design. The Pilot must intend some Port before he steers his Course, or he had as good leave his Vessel to the direction of the Winds, and the government of the Waves. Those that suspend the Purposes of God, and the Resolves of an Eternal
Mind upon the Actions of the Creature, and make God first wait and expect what the Creature will do, (and then frame his Decrees and Counsels accordingly) forget that He is the First Cause of all things, and discourse most unphilosophi∣cally, absurdly, and unsutably to the Na∣ture of an Infinite Being; whose influ∣ence in every Motion must set the first Wheel a-going. He must still be the First Agent, and what he does, he must will and intend to do, before he does it, and what he wills and intends Once, he willed and intended from all Eternity; it being grosly contrary to the very first Notions we have of the infinite perfecti∣on of the Divine Nature, to state or sup∣pose any New Immanent Act in God. The Stoicks indeed held a Fatality, and a fix'd unalterable course of Events; but then they held also that they fell out by a necessity emergent from, and inhe∣rent in the things themselves, which God himself could not alter: so that they sub∣jected
God to the fatal Chain of Causes, whereas they should have resolved the Necessity of all inferior Events into the Free Determination of God himself; who executes Necessarily, that which he first purposed freely. In a word, if we allow God to be the Governour of the World, we cannot but grant, that he orders and disposes of all Inferiour Events; and if we allow him to be a Wise and a Rational Governour, he cannot but direct them to a certain End. 2. In the next place, he directs all these appearing Casualties, not only to Certain, but also to very Great Ends. He that created something out of no∣thing, surely can raise great things out of small; and bring all the scattered and disordered passages of Affairs into a great, beautifull, and exact Frame. Now this over-ruling, directing power of God may be considered,
1. In reference to Societies, or Uni∣ted Bodies of Men. 2. In reference to Particular Persons. 1. And first for Societies. God and Nature do not principally concern them∣selves in the preservation of Particulars, but of Kinds and Companies. Accord∣ingly, we must allow Providence to be more intent and sollicitous about Nati∣ons and Governments, than about any private Interest whatsoever. Upon which account, it must needs have a peculiar In∣fluence upon the Erection, Continuance, and Dissolution of every Society. Which great Effects it is strange to consider by what small, inconsiderable means they are oftentimes brought about, and those so wholly undesigned by such as are the immediate visible Actors in them. Ex∣amples of this, we have both in Holy Writ, and also in other Stories. And first for those of the former sort. Let us reflect upon that strange and unparallelled Story of Ioseph and his Bre∣thren;
a Story that seems to be made up of nothing else but chances and little con∣tingencies, all directed to mighty Ends. For was it not a mere chance that his Fa∣ther Iacob should send him to visit his Brethren, just at that time that the Ish∣maelites were to pass by that way, and so his unnatural Brethren take occasion to sell him to them, and they to carry him into AEgypt? and then that he should be cast into Prison, and thereby brought at length to the knowledge of Pharaoh in that unlikely manner that he was? yet by a joynt connexion of every one of these ca∣sual Events, Providence served it self in the preservation of a Kingdom from Fa∣mine, and of the Church, then circum∣scrib'd within the Family of Iacob. Like∣wise by their sojourning in AEgypt, he made way for their Bondage there, and their Bondage for a Glorious Deliverance, through those prodigious Manifestations of the Divine Power, in the several Plagues inflicted upon the AEgyptians. It
was hugely accidental that Ioash King of Israel, being commanded by the Pro∣phet to strike upon the ground, 2 Kings 13. should strike no oftner than just three times; and yet we find there that the fate of a Kingdom depended upon it, and that his Victories over Syria were con∣cluded by that number. It was very casual, that the Levite and his Concubine should linger so long, as to be forced to take up their Lodging at Gibeah, as we read in Iudges 19. and yet we know what a Villainy was occasion'd by it, and what a Civil War that drew after it, almost to the destruction of a whole Tribe. And then for Examples out of other Histories, to hint a few of them. Perhaps there is none more remarka∣ble, than that Passage about Alexander the Great, in his famed Expedition against Darius. When in his March towards him, chancing to bathe himself in the River
Cydnus, through the excessive coldness of those Waters, he fell sick near unto death for three days; during which short space the Persian Army had advanced it self in∣to the strait passages of Cilicia; by which means Alexander with his small Army was able to equal them under those Disad∣vantages, and to fight and conquer them. Whereas had not this stop been given him by that accidental Sickness, his great Cou∣rage and promptness of Mind, would, beyond all doubt, have carried him di∣rectly forward to the Enemy, till he had met him in the vast open Plains of Per∣sia; where his Paucity and small numbers would have been contemptible, and the Persian multitudes formidable; and, in all likelihood of reason, Victorious. So that this One, Little Accident of that Prince's taking a fancy to bathe himself at that time, caused the interruption of his March, and that interruption gave oc∣casion to that great Victory that founded the Third Monarchy of the World. In
like manner, how much of Casualty was there in the preservation of Romulus, as soon as born exposed by his Uncle, and took up and nourished by a Shepherd (for the Story of the She-wolf is a Fable) and yet in that one Accident was laid the Foundation of the Fourth Universal Mo∣narchy. How doubtfull a case was it, whether Hannibal after the Battle of Cannae, should march directly to Rome, or divert into Campania! Certain it is, that there was more reason for the former; and he was a Person that had sometimes the command of Reason, as well as of Re∣giments; yet his Reason deserted his Con∣duct at that time, and by not going to Rome he gave occasion to those Recruits of the Roman strength, that prevailed to the Conquest of his Countrey, and at length to the Destruction of Carthage it self, one of the most puissant Cities in the World.
And to descend to Occurrences within our own Nation. How many strange Accidents concurred in the whole business of King Henry the Eighth's Divorce! yet we see Providence directed it and them to an entire Change of the Affairs and State of the whole Kingdom. And surely there could not be a greater Chance than that which brought to light the Pow∣der Treason, when Providence (as it were) snatch'd a King and Kingdom out of the very Jaws of Death, only by the mistake of a Word in the Direction of a Letter. But of all Cases, in which Little Ca∣sualties produce great and strange Effects, the chief is in War; upon the Issues of which hangs the Fortune of States and Kingdoms. Caesar, I am sure, whose great Sagacity and Conduct put his Success as much out of the power of Chance as Humane Reason could well do, yet upon occasion of a Notable Experiment, that had like
to have lost him his whole Army at Dyr∣rachium, tells us the Power of it in the Third Book of his Commentaries, De Bello Civili Fortuna, quae plurimum potest cùm in aliis rebus, tum praecipuè in bello, parvis momentis magnas rerum mutatio∣nes efficit. Nay, and a greater than Caesar, even the Spirit of God himself, in Eccles. 6.11. expresly declares, That the Battle is not always to the strong. So that upon this account, every Warriour may in some sence be said to be a Souldier of For∣tune; and the best Commanders to have a kind of Lottery for their Work, as, a∣mongst us, they have for their Reward. For how often have whole Armies been routed by a little Mistake, or a suddain Fear, raised in the Souldiers minds upon some trivial Ground or Occasion? Sometimes the misunderstanding of a word, has scattered and destroy'd those who have been even in possession of Victory, and wholly turned the fortune of the day. A spark of fire, or an un∣expected
gust of Wind may ruine a Na∣vy. And sometimes a false, senceless report has spread so far, and sunk so deep into the Peoples minds, as to cause a Tumult, and that Tumult, a Rebel∣lion, and that Rebellion has ended in the Subversion of a Government. And in the late War between the King, and some of his Rebel Subjects, has it not sometimes been an even cast, whether his Army should march this way, or that way? Whereas had it took that way, which actually it did not, things afterwards so fell out, that in very high Probability of Reason, it must have met with such success, as would have put an happy Issue to that wretched War; and thereby have continued the Crown upon that blessed Prince's Head, and his Head upon his Shoulders. Upon supposal of which Event, most of those sad and strange alterations that have since hap∣pened, would have been prevented; the ruine of many honest men hindered, the
Punishment of many great villains hastned, and the preferment of greater spoil'd. Many passages happen in the world, much like that little Cloud in 1 Kings 18. that appear'd at first to Elijah's Servant no bigger than a man's Hand, but presently after grew and spread, and black∣ned the face of the whole Heaven, and then discharged it self in Thunder, and Rain, and a mighty Tempest. So these accidents, when they first happen, seem but small and contemptible, but by de∣grees they branch out, and widen them∣selves into such a Numerous train of mischievous consequences, one drawing after it another, by a continued depen∣dance and multiplication, that the Plague becomes Victorious and Universal; and a personal miscarriage determines in a National calamity. For who that should view the small, despicable Beginnings of some things and persons at first, could imagine or Prog∣nosticate those vast and stupendious en∣creases
of fortune that have afterwards followed them? Who that had lookt upon Agathocles first handling the Clay, and making Pots under his Father, and afterwards turning Robber, could have thought that from such a condition he should come to be King of Sicily? Who that had seen Masianello, a poor Fisherman with his red Cap, and his An∣gle, could have reckon'd it possible to see such a pitifull thing within a Week after, shining in his Cloth of Gold, and with a Word, or a Nod, absolutely Command∣ing the whole City of Naples? And who that had beheld such a Bank∣rupt, Beggarly fellow as Cromwell, first en∣tring the Parliament-House with a Thread∣bare, Torn Cloak, and a Greasy Hat, (and perhaps neither of them paid for) could have suspected that in the space of so few years, he should, by the Murder of one King, and the Banishment of a∣nother, ascend the Throne, be invested
in the Royal Robes and want nothing of the state of a King but the change∣ing of his Hat into a Crown? 'Tis (as it were) the Sport of the Al∣mighty, thus to baffle and confound the Sons of men by such Events, as both cross the methods of their actings, and sur∣pass the measure of their Expectations. For according to both these, Men still suppose a Gradual, Natural Progress of things; as that from great, Things and Persons should grow greater, till at length by many steps and ascents, they come to be at greatest; not considering, that when Providence designs strange and mighty changes, it gives men Wings in∣stead of Legs; and instead of Climbing leisurely, makes them at once fly to the Top and Height of all Greatness and Power. So that the world about them (looking up to those Illustrious upstarts) scarce knows who, or whence they were, nor they themselves where they are.
It were infinite to insist upon Parti∣cular instances; Histories are full of them, and Experience seals to the truth of History. In the next place, let us consider to what great purposes God directs these little Casualties with reference to particu∣lar Persons; and those either Publick or Private. 1. And first for publick Persons, as Princes. Was it not a mere accident that Pharaoh's Daughter met with Moses? Yet it was a means to bring him up in The AEgyptian Court, then the School of all Arts and Policy; and so to fit him for that great and arduous Imployment that God designed him to. For see up∣on what little Hinges that great Affair turned: For had either the Child been cast out, or Pharaoh's Daughter come down to the River, but an hour sooner, or later; or had that little Vessel not been cast by the Parents, or carryed by the Water into that very place, where it was,
in all likelyhood the Child must have un∣dergone the common Lot of the other Hebrew Children, and been either star∣ved or drowned; or however, not advan∣ced to such a peculiar height and happi∣ness of Condition. That Octavius Caesar should shift his Tent (which he had ne∣ver used to doe before) just that very night that it hapned to be took by the Enemy, was a mere Casualty, yet such an one as preserved a Person who lived to establish a total Alteration of Govern∣ment in the Imperial City of the World. But we need not go far for a Prince preserved by as Strange a Series of little Contingencies, as ever were managed by the Art of Providence to so great a purpose. There was but an hair's breadth be∣tween him and certain Destruction for the space of many days. For had the Rebel Forces gone one way, rather than ano∣ther, or come but a little sooner to his hiding place, or but mistrusted some∣thing
which they passed over; (all which things might very easily have happened,) we had not seen this face of things at this day; but Rebellion had been still Enthro∣ned, Perjury and Cruelty had Reigned, Majesty had been proscribed, Religion ex∣tinguish'd, and both Church and State throughly Reformed, and Ruined with Confusions, Massacres, and a Total De∣solation. On the contrary, when Providence de∣signs Judgment, or Destruction to a Prince, no body knows by what little, unusual, unregarded means the fatal blow shall reach him. If Ahab be designed for Death, though a Souldier in the Ene∣mies Army draws a Bow at a venture, yet the sure, unerring directions of Providence shall carry it in a direct course to his heart, and there lodge the Revenge of Heaven. An old Woman shall cast down a Stone from a Wall, and God shall send it to the Head of Abimelech, and so Sacrifice
a King in the very head of his Army. How many warnings had Iulius Caesar of the fatal Ides of March! whereupon sometimes he resolved not to go to the Senate, and sometimes again he would go; and when at length he did go, in his very passage thither, one put into his hand, a Note of the whole Conspiracy against him, together with all the Names of the Conspirators, desiring him to read it forthwith, and to remember the Gi∣ver of it as long as he lived. But con∣tinual Salutes and Addresses entertaining him all the way, kept him from sa∣ving so great a Life, but with one glance of his Eye upon the Paper, till he came to the fatal place where he was stabb'd, and dyed with the very Means of preventing Death in his hand. Henry the Second of France, by a Splinter, unhappily thrust into his Eye at a solemn Justing, was dispatch'd and sent out of the world by a sad, but very Accidental Death.
In a word, God has many ways to reap down the Grandees of the Earth; an Arrow, a Bullet, a Tile, or Stone from an House, is enough to do it: And besides all these ways, sometimes, when he intends to bereave the world of a Prince, or an Illustrious Person, he may cast him upon a bold, self-opinion'd Phy∣sician, worse than his Distemper, who shall Dose, and Bleed, and Kill him secundum artem, and make a shift to cure him into his Grave. In the last place, we will consider this Directing influence of God, with reference to private Persons; and that, as touching things of nearest concernment to them. As, 1. Their Lives. 2. Their Health. 3. Their Reputation. 4. Their Friendships. And, 5. And lastly, their Employments, or Preferments.
And first, for mens Lives. Though these are things for which Nature knows no Price, or Ransom; yet I appeal to uni∣versal Experience, whether they have not, in many men, hung oftentimes upon a very slender Thread, and the distance between them and Death, been very nice, and the escape wonderfull. There have been some, who upon a slight, and per∣haps groundless, occasion, have gone out of a Ship, or House, and the Ship has sunk, and the House has fell, immediate∣ly after their departure. He that in a great Wind, suspecting the strength of his House, betook him∣self to his Orchard, and walking there, was knockt on the Head by a Tree, fal∣ling through the fury of a suddain gust, wanted but the advance of one or two steps, to have put him out of the way of that mortal Blow. He that being subject to an Apoplex, used still to carry his remedy about him; but upon a time shifting his Cloaths, and
not taking that with him, chanced upon that very day, to be surprized with a Fit, and to die in it, certainly owed his Death to a mere Accident, to a little inadver∣tency, and failure of Memory. But not to recount too many particulars: May not every Souldier, that comes alive out of the Battle, pass for a living Monument of a benign Chance, and an happy Pro∣vidence? For was he not in the nearest Neighbourhood to Death? And might not the Bullet, that perhaps rased his Cheek, have as easily gone into his Head? And the Sword that glanced upon his Arm, with a little diversion have found the way to his Heart? But the workings of Providence are marvellous, and the methods secret and untraceable, by which it disposes of the Lives of Men. In like manner, for Mens Health, it is no less wonderfull to consider to what strange Casualties, many Sick Persons often-times owe their Recovery. Perhaps an unusual Draught, or Morsel, or some
Accidental violence of Motion has remo∣ved that Malady, that for many years has baffled the Skill of all Physicians. So that, in effect, he is the best Physician, that has the best luck; he prescribes, but it is chance that Cures. That Person, that (being provoked by excessive Pain) thrust his Dagger into his Body, and thereby, instead of reaching his Vitals, opened an Imposthume, the un∣known cause of all his pain, and so Stab∣bed himself into perfect Health, and Ease, surely had great reason to acknowledge Chance for his Chirurgeon, and Provi∣dence for the Guider of his Hand. And then also for mens Reputation; and that either in point of Wisdom, or of Wit. There is hardly any thing which (for the most part) falls under a greater Chance. If a man succeeds in any at∣tempt, though undertook with never so much folly and rashness, his success shall vouch him a Politician; and good Luck shall pass for deep contrivance: For give
any one Fortune, and he shall be thought a wise man in spite of his Heart; nay, and of his Head too. On the contrary, be a design never so artificially laid, and spun in the finest Thread of Policy, if it chances to be defeated by some cross accident, the man is then run down by an Universal Vogue; his counsels are derided, his Prudence questioned, and his Person despised. Ahitophel was as great an Oracle, and gave as good counsel to Absolom, as ever he had given to David; but not having the good luck to be believed, and there∣upon losing his former repute, he thought it high time to Hang himself. And on the other side, there have been some, who for several years have been Fools with tolerable good Reputation, and never discovered themselves to be so, till at length they attempted to be Knaves also, but wanted Art and Dexterity. And as the repute of Wisdom, so that of Wit also, is very Casual. Sometimes
a lucky Saying, or a pertinent Reply, has procured an esteem of Wit, to per∣sons otherwise very shallow, and no ways accustomed to utter such things by any standing ability of mind; so that if such an one should have the ill hap at any time to strike a man Dead with a smart Saying, it ought, in all Reason and Con∣science, to be judged but a Chance-med∣ly; the poor Man (God knows) being no ways guilty of any design of Wit. Nay, even where there is a real stock of Wit, yet the Wittyest Sayings, and Sen∣tences will be found in a great measure the issues of Chance, and nothing else, but so many lucky hits of a roving Fancy. For consult the Acutest Poets, and Speakers, and they will confess, that their quickest and most admired conceptions, were such as darted into their minds like sudden flashes of Lightning, they knew not how, nor whence; and not by any certain consequence, or dependence of
one thought upon another, as it is in matters of Ratiocination. Moreover sometimes a man's Reputa∣tion rises or falls, as his Memory serves him in a performance; and yet there is no∣thing more fickle, slippery, and less under command, than this Faculty. So that ma∣ny, having used their utmost diligence to secure a faithfull retention of the things or words committed to it, yet after all can∣not certainly know where it will trip and fail them. Any suddain diversion of the Spirits, or the justling in of a transi∣ent thought, is able to deface those little images of things; and so breaking the Train that was laid in the mind, to leave a man in the Lurch. And for the o∣ther part of memory, called Reminiscence: which is the Retreiving of a thing, at pre∣sent forgot, or but confusely remembred, by setting the mind to hunt over all its notions, and to ransack Every little Cell of the Brain. While it is thus busied, how accidentally oftentimes does the
thing sought for, offer it self to the mind? and by what small petit hints, does the mind catch hold of, and recover a va∣nishing notion? In short though Wit and Learning are certain and habitual perfections of the mind, yet the declaration of them (which alone brings the repute) is subject to a thousand hazards. So that every Wit runs something the same risk with the Astrologer, who if his Predictions come to pass, is cryed up to the Stars from whence he pretends to draw them; but if not, the Astrologer himself grows more out of Date than his Almanack. And then, in the 4th. place, for the Friendships, or Enmities that a man con∣tracts in the world,; than which surely there is nothing that has a more direct and potent influence upon the whole course of a man's Life, whether as to Happi∣ness, or Misery, yet Chance has the Ru∣ling stroke in them all. A man by mere peradventure lights
into company, possibly is driven into an House by a shower of Rain for present Shelter, and there begins an acquaintance with a person; which acquaintance and endearment grows and continues, even when Relations fail, and perhaps proves the support of his mind and of his For∣tunes to his dying day. And the like holds in Enmities, which come much more easily than the other. A word unadvisedly spoken on the one side, or misunderstood on the other; any, the least surmise of neglect; some∣times a bare gesture; nay, the very unsu∣tableness of one man's Aspect to another man's fancy, has raised such an Aversion to him, as in time has produced a perfect hatred of him; and that so strong and so tenacious, that it has never left vexing, and troubling him, till perhaps at length it has worried him to his Grave; yea, and after Death too, has pursued him in his surviving shadow, exercising the same Tyranny upon his very Name and Me∣mory.
It is hard to please men of some tem∣pers, who indeed hardly know, what will please themselves; and yet if a man does not please them, which it is ten thousand to one if he does, if they can but have Power equal to their Malice, (as some∣times, to plague the World, God lets them have) such an one must expect all the Mischief that power and spite, lighting upon a base mind, can possibly do him. In the last place. As for Mens Em∣ployments, and Preferments, every man that sets forth into the World, comes in∣to a great Lottery, and draws some one certain Profession to Act, and Live by, but knows not the Fortune that will at∣tend him in it. One Man perhaps proves miserable in the Study of the Law, who might have flourish'd in that of Physick, or Divinity. Another runs his Head against the Pulpit, who might have been very serviceable to his Country at the Plough. And a Third proves a very dull and heavy Philoso∣pher,
who possibly would have made a good Mechanick, and have done well enough at the usefull Philosophy of the Spade, or the Anvil. Now, let this man reflect upon the Time when all these several Callings, and Professions were equally offered to his Choice, and consider how Indiffe∣rent it was once for him to have fixed upon any one of them, and what Little Accidents and Considerations cast the Balance of his Choice, rather one way than the other; and he will find how ea∣sily Chance may throw a Man upon a Profession, which all his Diligence can∣not make him fit for. And then for the Preferments of the World. He that would reckon up all the Accidents that they depend upon, may as well undertake to count the Sands, or to summ up Infinity; so that Great∣ness, as well as an Estate, may, upon this account, be properly called a Man's Fortune, forasmuch as no man can state
either the Acquisition, or Preservation of it upon any certain Rules: Every man, as well as the Merchant, being here tru∣ly an Adventurer. For the ways, by which it is obtained, are various, and frequently contrary: One man by sneaking and flattering, comes to Riches and Honour, (where it is in the power of Fools to be∣stow them;) upon Observation whereof, another presently thinks to arrive to the same Greatness, by the very same means; but striving, like the Ass, to court his Ma∣ster, just as the Spaniel had done before him, instead of being stroked and made much of, he is only rated off and cudgel∣led for all his Courtship. The Source of Mens Preferments, is most commonly the Will, Humour, and Fancy of Persons in Power: whereupon, when a Prince, or Grandee, manifests a liking to such a Thing, such an Art, or such a Pleasure, Men generally set about to make themselves considerable for such things, and thereby, through his Favour,
to advance themselves; and at length, when they have spent their whole time in them, and so are become fit for nothing else, that Prince, or Grandee, perhaps, dies, and another succeeds him, quite of a different Disposition, and enclining him to be pleased with quite different Things. Whereupon these Men's Hopes, Studies, and Expectations are wholly at an end. And besides, though the Grandee whom they build upon, should not die, or quit the Stage; yet the same Person does not always like the same things. For Age may alter his Constitution, Humour, or Appetite; or the Circumstances of his Affairs may put him upon different Cour∣ses, and Counsels; every one of which Accidents wholly alters the road to pre∣ferment. So that those who travel that Road must be (like High-way Men) ve∣ry dexterous in shifting the Way upon e∣very Turn: and yet their very doing so sometimes proves the Means of their being found out, understood and abhorred;
and for this very Cause that they are rea∣dy to doe any thing, are justly thought fit to be preferr'd to Nothing. Caesar Borgia (base Son to Pope Alex∣ander the 6th.) us'd to boast to his friend Machiavel, that he had contrived his Af∣fairs and Greatness, into such a Posture of Firmness, that whether his Holy Father lived or died, they could not but be se∣cure. If he lived, there could be no doubt of them, and if he died he laid his In∣terest so, as to over-rule the next Election, as he pleased. But all this while the Po∣litician never thought, or considered, that he might in the mean time fall dange∣rously sick, and that Sickness necessitate his Removal from the Court, and du∣ring that his absence, his Father die, and so his Interest decay, and his Mortal E∣nemy be chosen to the Papacy; as in∣deed it fell out. So that for all his ex∣act Plot, down was he cast, from all his Greatness, and forced to end his Days in a mean Condition: As it is pity but all such Politick Opiniators should.
Upon much the like account, we find it once said of an Eminent Cardinal, by reason of his great and apparent Like∣lihood, to step into St. Peter's Chair, that in Two Conclaves, he went in Pope, and came out again Cardinal. So much has Chance the casting Voice in the Disposal of all the great things of the World. That which Men call Merit, is a Mere Nothing. For even when Persons of the greatest Worth, and Merit, are pre∣ferr'd, it is not their Merit, but their For∣tune that preferrs them. And then, for that other so much admired Thing called Po∣licy, it is but little better. For when Men have busied themselves, and beat their Brains never so much, the whole Result both of their Counsels, and their Fortunes is still at the Mercy of an Accident. And therefore, whosoever that Man was, that said, that he had rather have a Grain of Fortune, than a Pound of Wisdom, as to the things of this Life, spoke nothing but the Voice of Wisdom and great Expe∣rience.
And now I am far from affirming, that I have recounted all, or indeed the Hun∣dredth part of those Casualties of Human Life, that may display the full Compass of Divine Providence; but surely I have rec∣koned up so many, as sufficiently enforce the Necessity of our Reliance upon it, and that in Opposition to Two Extreams, that Men are usually apt to fall into. 1. Too much Confidence and Pre∣sumption, in a prosperous Estate. Da∣vid, after his Deliverances from Saul, and his Victories over all his Enemies round about him, in Psalm 30. v. 7, 8. con∣fesses, that this his Prosperity had raised him to such a Pitch of Confidence, as to make him to say, That he should never be moved, God of his favour had made his hill so strong: but presently he adds, almost in the very same breath, Thou didst hide thy Face, and I was troubled. The Sun shines in his full Brightness, but the very moment before he passes un∣der a Cloud. Who knows what a Day,
what an Hour; nay, what a Minute may bring forth. He who builds upon the Present, builds upon the narrow Com∣pass of a Point: and where the Founda∣tion is so narrow, the Superstructure can∣not be High, and Strong too. Is a Man confident of his present Health and Strength? why, an Unwhol∣some blast of Air, a Cold, or a Surfeit took by Chance, may shake in pieces his Hardy Fabrick; and (in spite of all his Youth and Vigour) send him, in the ve∣ry flower of his years, pining, and droop∣ing, to his long home. Nay, he cannot with any Assurance, so much as step out of his Doors, but (unless God commis∣sions his Protecting Angel to bear him up in his hands,) he may dash his foot against a Stone, and fall, and in that fall breath his last. Or is a Man confident of his Estate, Wealth, and Power? why, let him read of those strange unexpected Dissolutions of the great Monarchies, and Govern∣ments
of the World. Governments that once made such a Noise, and lookt so big in the Eyes of Mankind, as being founded upon the deepest Counsels, and the strongest Force; and yet, by some slight Miscarriage, or cross Accident (which let in Ruine and Desolation upon them at first,) are now so utterly extinct, that Nothing remains of them but a Name; nor are there the least Signs, or Traces of them to be found but only in Story. When (I say) he shall have well reflected upon all this, let him see what Security he can promise himself, in his own little Personal Domestick Concerns, which at the best have but the Protection of the Laws, to Guard and Defend them, which (God knows) are far from being able to Defend themselves. No Man can rationally account him∣self secure, unless he could command all the Chances of the World; but how should he command them, when he can∣not so much as number them? Possibili∣ties
are as infinite as God's Power; and whatsoever may come to pass, no Man can certainly conclude shall not come to pass. Feople forget how little it is that they know, and how much less it is that they can do, when they grow confident upon any present State of Things. There is no one Enjoyment that a Man pleases himself in, but is liable to be lost by ten thousand Accidents, whol∣ly out of all Mortal Power, either to foresee, or to prevent. Reason allows none to be Confident, but Him only who governs the World, who knows all things, and can do all things; and therefore can neither be surprized, nor over∣powered. 2. The other Extreme, which these Con∣siderations should arm the Heart of Man against, is, utter Despondency of mind in a Time of pressing Adversity. As he, who presumes, steps into the Throne of God, so that he that despairs,
limits an Infinite Power to a Finite Ap∣prehension, and measures Providence by his own little, contracted Model. But the Contrivances of Heaven are as much above our Politicks, as beyond our A∣rithmetick. Of those many Millions of Casualties, which we are not aware of, there is hard∣ly One, but God can make an Instrument of our Deliverance. And most Men, who are at length delivered from any great Distress indeed, find that they are so, by Ways that they never thought of; Ways above, or beside their Imaginati∣on. And therefore let no Man, who owns the Belief of a Providence, grow despe∣rate, or forlorn, under any Calamity, or Strait whatsoever; but compose the An∣guish of his Thoughts, and rest his ama∣zed Spirits upon this one Consideration, That he knows not which way the Lot may fall, or what may happen to him; he comprehends not those strange, unac∣countable
Methods, by which Providence may dispose of him. In a Word. To summ up all the fore∣going Discourse: Since the Interest of Governments, and Nations, of Princes, and private Persons, and that, both as to Life, and Health, Reputation, and Ho∣nour, Friendships and Enmities, Employ∣ments, and Preferments, (Notwithstand∣ing all the Contrivance and Power, that Human Nature can exert about them,) remain so wholly Contingent, as to us, surely all the Reason of Man∣kind cannot suggest any solid ground of Satisfaction, but in making that God our Friend, who is the sole and ab∣solute Disposer of all these things: And in carrying a Conscience so clear to∣wards him, as may encourage us with Confidence to cast our selves upon him: And in all Casualities still to promise our selves the best Events from his Providence, to whom Nothing is casual. Who constantly wills the truest
Happiness to those that trust in him, and works all things according to the Counsel of that Blessed Will. To whom be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at WESTMINSTER-ABBEY, April 30. 1676.
1 COR. III.19. For the Wisdom of this World, is Foolish∣ness with God. THE Wisdom of the World, so called, by an Hebraism, fre∣quent in the Writings of this Apostle, for Worldly Wis∣dom, is taken in Scripture, in a double Sence. 1. For that sort of Wisdom, that con∣sists in Speculation; called, (both by St. Paul and the Professours of it) Philoso∣phy; the great Idol of the Learned part of the Heathen World, and which divi∣ded it into so many Sects and Denomi∣nations, as Stoicks, Peripateticks, Epicu∣reans, and the like; it was professed and owned by them for the grand Rule of Life, and certain Guide to Man's chief Happiness. But for its utter insufficiency
to make good so high an Undertaking, we find it termed by the same Apostle, Coloss. 28. Vain Philosophy: and 1 Tim. 6.20. Science falsly so called; and a full Account of its Uselesness we have in this 1 Cor. 1.21. where the Apostle speaking of it, says, that the World by Wisdom knew not God. Such a worthy kind of Wisdom is it. Only making Men accurately and laboriously ignorant of what they were most concerned to know. 2. The Wisdom of this World is sometimes taken in Scripture, for such a Wisdom as lies in Practice, and goes commonly by the Name of Policy: and consists in a certain Dexterity or Art of managing Business for a Man's secular Advantage: And so being indeed that ruling Engine that governs the World, it both claims and finds as great a Prehe∣minence above all other Kinds of Know∣ledge, as Government is above Con∣templation; or the leading of an Ar∣my above the making of Syllogisms,
or managing the little Issues of a Dis∣pute. And so much is the very Name and Reputation of it affected, and valued by most Men, that they can much rather brook their being reputed Knaves, than for their Honesty be accounted Fools; as they easily may: Knave in the mean time passing for a Name of Credit, where it is only another Word for Poli∣tician. Now, this is the, Wisdom here intended in the Text; namely, that practical Cun∣ning, that shews it self in political Mat∣ters, and has in it really the Mystery of a Trade, or Craft. So that in this lat∣ter part of Vers. 19. God is said to take the Wise in their own Craftiness. In short, it is a Kind of Trick or Slight, got not by Study, but Converse, learn'd not from Books, but Men: And those also for the most part, the very worst of Men of all Sorts, Ways, and Professions. So that if it be in Truth
such a precious Jewel as the World takes it for, yet as precious as it is, we see that they are forced to rake it out of Dung∣hills; and accordingly the Apostle gives it a value sutable to its Extract, brand∣ing it with the most degrading and ig∣nominious Imputation of Foolishness. Which Character running so cross to the general Sense, and Vogue of Mankind concerning it, who are still admiring, and even adoring it, as the Mistriss and Queen Regent of all other Arts whatso∣ever. Our Business in the following Dis∣course, shall be to enquire into the Rea∣son of the Apostle's passing, so severe a Remark upon it: And here, indeed, since we must allow it for an Art, and since every Art is properly an Habitual Know∣ledge of certain Rules and Maxims, by which a Man is governed and directed in his Actions, the Prosecution of the Words will most naturally lye in these two Things.
1. To shew what are those Rules or Principles of Action, upon which the Policy or Wisdom here condemned by the Apostle does proceed. 2. To shew and demonstrate the Fol∣ly and Absurdity of them, in Relation to God; in whose Account they receive a very different Estimate, from what they have in the Worlds. And first, for the first of these; I shall set down four several Rules or Principles, which that Policy or Wisdom, which car∣ries so great a Vogue and Value in the World, governs its Actions by. 1. The first is, That a Man must main∣tain a constant continued Course of Dissimu∣lation, in the whole Tenor of his Behaviour. Where yet, we must observe, that Dissi∣mulation admits of a two-fold Ac∣ception. 1. It may be taken for a bare Concealment of ones mind: In which Sence we commonly say, that it is Prudence to dissemble Injuries; that is, not always to declare our Resentments of
them; and this must be allowed not on∣ly lawfull, but in most of the Affairs of Humane Life, absolutely Necessary: For certainly it can be no Man's Duty, to write his Heart upon his Forehead, and to give all the inquisitive and malicious World round about him, a Survey of those Thoughts, which it is the Prerogative of God only to know, and his own great Interest to conceal. Nature gives eve∣ry one a Right to defend himself, and Silence surely is a very innocent De∣fence. 2. Dissimulation is taken for a Man's positive professing himself to be, what in∣deed he is not; and what he resolves not to be: And consequently it emploies all the Art and Industry imaginable, to make good the Disguise; and by false Appearances to render its Designs the less visible, that so they may prove the more effectual: And this is the Dissimu∣lation here meant, which is the very Ground-work of all worldly Policy. The
Superstructure of which being Folly, it is but Reason that the Foundation of it should be Falsity. In the Language of the Scripture, it is Damnable Hypocrisie; but of those who neither believe Scripture nor Damnation, it is voted Wisdom; nay, the very Primum Mobile, or great Wheel, upon which all the various Arts of Policy move, and turn: The Soul, or Spirit, which (as it were) animates and runs through all the parti∣cular Designs and Contrivances, by which the great Masters of this Mysterious Wis∣dom, turn about the World. So that he who hates his Neighbour mortally, and wisely too, must profess all the Dearness and Friendship, all the Readiness to serve him (as the Phrase now is) that Words and Superficial Actions can express. When he purposes one thing, he must swear, and lye, and damn himself with ten thousand Protestations, that he designs the clean contrary. If he really intends to ruine and murther his Prince, (as Crom∣well,
an Experienced Artist, in that Per∣fidious and bloody Faculty once did,) he must weep and call upon God, use all the Oaths and Imprecations, all the Sanctifi'd Perjuries, to perswade him, that he resolves Nothing but his Safety, Honour and Esta∣blishment, as the same grand Exemplar of Hypocrisie, did before. If such Persons project the Ruine of Church and State, they must appeal to God the Searcher of all Hearts, that they are ready to sacrifice their dearest Blood, for the Peace of the one, and the Purity of the other. And now, if Men will be prevailed up∣on so far, as to renounce the sure and im∣partial Judgment of Sense and Experience, and to believe that Black is White, provi∣ded there be somebody to swear that it is so; they shall not want Arguments of this Sort, good Store, to convince them: There being Knights of the Post, and Holy Cheats enough in the World, to swear the Truth of the broadest Contra∣dictions, and the highest Impossibilities,
where Interest, and Pious Frauds shall give them an Extraordinary Call to it. It is look'd upon as a great piece of Weakness, and Unfitness for Business (forsooth) for a Man to be so clear and open, as really to think not only, what he says, but what he swears: And when he makes any Promise, to have the least intent of performing it; but when his Interest serves instead of Veracity, and engages him rather to be true to another, than false to himself. He only now-a-days, speaks like an Oracle, who speaks Tricks, and Ambiguities. Nothing is thought beautifull, that is not painted: So that what between French Fashions, and Italian Dissimulations, the Old, Generous, English Spirit, which heretofore made this Nation so great in the Eyes of all the World round about it, seems utterly lost and extinct; and we are degenerated into a mean, sharking, fallacious, undermining Way of Converse; there being a Snare and a Trapan almost in every Word we
hear, and every Action we see. Men speak with Designs of Mischief, and therefore they speak in the Dark. In short, this seems to be the true, inward Judgment of all our Politick Sages, That Speech was given to the Ordinary Sort of Men, whereby to Communicate their Mind; but to wise Men, whereby to conceal it. 2. The second Rule, or Principle, up∣on which this Policy, or Wisdom of the World does proceed; is, That Conscience and Religion ought to lay no Restraint upon Men at all, when it lies opposite to the Prose∣cution of their Interest. The great Patron, and Coryphaeus of this Tribe, Nicholas Machiavel, laid down this for a Master-rule in his political Scheme, That the Shew of Religion was helpfull to the Politician, but the Reality of it hurtfull, and pernicious. Accordingly having shewn, how the former part of his Maxim has been followed by these Men, in that first and fundamental Principle of Dissimula∣tion already spoken to by us; we come
now to shew further, that they cannot with more Art dissemble the Appearance of Religion, than they can with Ease lay aside the Substance. The Politician, whose very Essence lies in this, that he be a Person ready to doe any thing, that he apprehends for his Ad∣vantage, must first of all, be sure, to put himself into a State of Liberty, as free, and large, as his Principles: And so to provide Elbow-room enough for his Con∣science to lay about, and have its full play in. And for that purpose, he must re∣solve to shake off all inward Awe of Re∣ligion; and by no means, to suffer the Li∣berty of his Conscience to be enslaved, and brought under the Bondage of ob∣serving Oaths, or the Narrowness of Men's Opinions, about Turpe & Hone∣stum, which ought to vanish, when they stand in Competition, with any solid, re∣al Good; that is, (in their Judgment) such as concerns Eating, or Drinking, or Taking Money.
Upon which account these Children of Darkness, seem excellently well to imitate the Wisdom of those Children of Light, the great Illuminati of the late times, who professedly laid down this as the Basis of all their Proceedings; That whatsoever they said or did, for the present, under such a Measure of Light, should oblige them no lon∣ger, when a greater Measure of Light, should give them other Discoveries. And this Principle they professed was of great use to them; as how could it be otherwise, if it fell into skilfull hands? For since this Light was to rest within them, and the Judgment of it to remain wholly in themselves, they might safely and uncontroulably pretend it greater or less, as their Occasions should enlighten them. If a Man has a prospect of a fair E∣state, and sees a way open to it, but it must be through Fraud, Violence and Oppres∣sion. If he see large Preferments tender∣ed him, but conditionally upon his doing
base and wicked Offices. If he sees he may crush his Enemy, but that it must be by slandering, belying, and giving him a Secret Blow: and Conscience shall here, according to its Office, interpose and pro∣test the Illegality, and Injustice of such Actions, and the Damnation that is ex∣presly threatned to them, by the Word of God. The thorough pac'd Politician, must presently laugh at the Squeamishness of his Conscience, and read it another Lecture, and tell it, that Iust and Unjust are but Names grounded only upon O∣pinion, and authorized by Custom, by which the Wise and the Knowing part of the World serve themselves upon the Ig∣norant and Easie; and that, whatsoever fond Priests may talk, There is no Devil like an Enemy in power, no Damnati∣on like being poor, and no Hell like an empty Purse; and therefore that those Courses, by which a Man comes to rid himself of these Plagues, are ipso facto, prudent, and consequently pious: The
former being with such wise Men, the only measure of the latter. And the truth is, the late Times of Confusion, in which the Heights and Refinements of Religion, were professed in Conjunction with the Practice of the most Execrable Villainies that were ever acted upon the Earth. And the Weakness of our Church-Discipline since its Restauration, whereby it has been scarce able to get any hold on Men's Consciences, and much less able to keep it; and the great prevalence of that Atheistical Doctrine of the Leviathan; and the unhappy Propagation of Erastianism; these things (I say) with some others, have been the sad and fatal Causes, that have loosed the Bands of Conscience, and eaten out the very Heart and Sense of Christi∣anity amongst us, to that degree, that there is now scarce any religious Tye or Restraint upon persons, but merely from those faint Remainders of Natural Con∣science, which God will be sure to keep alive upon the Hearts of Men, as long as
they are Men, for the great Ends of his own Providence, whether they will or no. So that, were it not for this sole Obstacle, Religion is not now so much in danger of being divided, and torn piece-meal by Sects and Factions, as of being at once devour'd by Atheism. Which being so, let none wonder that Irreligion is accounted Policy, when it is grown even to a fashion; and passes for Wit, with some, as well as for Wisdom with others. For certain it is, that Ad∣vantage now sits in the Room of Consci∣ence, and steers all: And no Man is esteemed any ways considerable for Po∣licy, who wears Religion otherwise than as a Cloak; that is, as such a Garment as may both cover, and keep him warm, and yet hang loose upon him too. The third Rule or Principle, upon which this Policy, or Wisdom of the World proceeds, is, That a Man ought to make himself, and not the Publick the Chief, if not the sole End of all his Actions. He
is to be his own Centre and Circumfe∣rence too: That is, to draw all things to himself, and to extend nothing beyond himself: He is to make the greater World serve the less; and not only, not to love his Neighbour as himself, but indeed to ac∣count none for his Neighbour, but himself. And therefore to die or suffer for his Country, is not only exploded by him as a great Paradox in Politicks, and fit∣ter for Poets to sing of, than for wise Men to practise: But also, to make him∣self so much as one Penny the poorer, or to forbear one base gain, to serve his Prince, to secure a whole Nation, or to credit a Church, is judged by him a great want of Experience, and a piece of Romantick Melancholy, unbecoming a Politician; who is still to look upon himself as his Prince, his Country, his Church; nay, and his God too. The general Interest of the Nation is nothing to him, but only that Portion of it, that he either does, or would possess.
'Tis not the Rain that waters the whole Earth, but that which falls into his own Cistern, that must relieve him: Not the Common, but the Enclosure, that must make him rich. Let the Publick sink or swim, so long as he can hold up his Head above Wa∣ter: Let the Ship be cast away, if he may but have the Benefit of the Wreck. Let the Government be ruin'd by his Ava∣rice, if by the same Avarice, he can scrape together, so much as to make his peace, and maintain him as well under another. Let Foreigners invade and spoil the Land, so long as he has a good Estate in Bank else-where. Peradventure, for all this, Men may curse him as a Covetous Wretch, a Traitour, and a Villain: But such words are to be look'd upon only as the splendid Declaimings of Novices, and Men of Heat, who, while they rail at his Person, perhaps envy his Fortune: or possibly of Losers, and Male-contents, whose Portion and Inheritance is a Free∣dom
to speak. But a Politician must be above words. Wealth, he knows answers all, and if it brings a Storm upon him, will provide him also a Coat to weather it out. That such Thoughts and Principles as these, lie at the Bottom of most Men's Actions; at the Bottom do I say? Nay, sit at the Top, and visibly hold the Helm in the Management of the weightiest Af∣fairs of most Nations, we need not much History, nor Curiosity of Observa∣tion to convince us: For though there have not been wanting such heretofore, as have practised these unworthy Arts, (for as much as there have been Villains in all Places, and all Ages) yet now-a-days they are owned above-board; and whereas, Men formerly had them in de∣sign, amongst us they are openly vouch∣ed, argued, and asserted in common Discourse. But this, I confess, being a new, un∣exemplified kind of Policy, scarce comes
up to that which the Apostle here con∣demns for the Wisdom of the World, but must pass rather for the Wisdom of this particular Age, which as in most other things it stands alone, scorning the Ex∣amples of all former Ages; so it has a Way of Policy and Wisdom also peculiar to it self. 4. The fourth and last Principle, that I shall mention, upon which this Wis∣dom of the World proceeds, is this. That in shewing Kindness, or doing Fa∣vours, no Respect at all is to be had to Friendship, Gratitude, or Sense of Honour, but that such Favours are to be done only to the Rich or Potent, from whom a Man may receive a further Advantage, or to his Ene∣mies, from whom he may otherwise fear a Mischief. I have here mentioned Gratitude, and Sense of Honour, being (as I may so speak) a Man's Civil Conscience, prompting him to many things, upon the Accounts of common Decency, which Religion would
otherwise bind him to, upon the Score of Duty. And it is sometimes found, that some who have little or no Reverence for Religion, have yet those innate Seeds and Sparks of Generosity, as make them scorn to doe such things, as would render them mean in the Opinion of sober and worthy Men; and with such Persons, Shame is instead of Piety, to restrain them from many base and degenerous practi∣ces. But now our Politician having baffled his Greater Conscience, must not be non∣plus'd with Inferiour Obligations; and having leapt over such Mountains, at length poorly lie down before a Mole∣hill: But he must add Perfection to Per∣fection; and being past Grace, endeavour, if need be, to be past Shame too. And accordingly, he looks upon Friendship, Gratitude, and Sense of Honour, as terms of Art to amuse and impose upon weak, undesigning Minds. For an Ene∣my's Money he thinks may be made as
good a Friend as any; and Gratitude looks backward, but Policy forward: and for Sense of Honour, if it impoverisheth a man, it is in his Esteem, neither Honour, nor Sense. Whence it is, that now-a-days, only Rich men, or Enemies, are accounted the Rational Objects of Benefaction. For to be kind to the former is Traffick; and in these Times Men present, just as they Soyl their Ground, not that they love the Dirt, but that they expect a Crop: and for the latter, the Politician well ap∣proves of the Indian's Religion, in wor∣shipping the Devil, that he may do him no hurt; how much soever he hates him, and is hated by him. But if a Poor, Old, Decayed Friend or Relation, whose Purse, whose House and Heart had been formerly free, and open to such an one, shall at length up∣on change of Fortune come to him with Hunger and Rags, pleading his past Ser∣vices, and his present Wants, and so crave
some Relief of one, for the Merit and Memory of the other; the Politician, who imitates the Serpent's Wisdom, must turn his deaf Ear too to all the insignifi∣cant Charms of Gratitude and Honour, in behalf of such a Bankrupt, undone Friend; who having been already used, and now squeezed dry, is fit only to be cast aside. He must abhorr Gratitude, as a worse kind of Witchcraft, which only serves to conjure up the pale, meagre Ghosts of dead, forgotten Kindnesses, to haunt and trouble him; still respecting what is past, whereas such Wise men as himself, in such cases, account all that is past, to be also gone: and know, that there can be no gain in Refunding, nor any profit in paying Debts. The sole mea∣sure of all his Courtesies is, what return they will make him, and what Revenue they will bring him in. His Expectati∣ons govern his Charity. And we must not vouch any man for an exact Master in the Rules of our Modern Policy, but
such an one as hath brought himself so far to hate and despise the absurdity of being kind upon free cost, as (to use a known Expression) not so much as to tell a Friend what it is a Clock for nothing. And thus I have finished the first Ge∣neral Head proposed from the Text, and shewn some of those Rules, Principles and Maxims that this Wisdom of the World acts by: I say Some of them, for I nei∣ther pretend nor desire to know them all. I come now to the other General Head, which is, to shew the Folly and Absur∣dity of these Principles in Relation to God. In order to which we must ob∣serve that Foolishness, being properly a man's Deviation from Right Reason in point of Practice, must needs consist in one of these two things. 1. In his pitching upon such an End as is unsutable to his Condition; or, 2. In his pitching upon Means unsu∣table to the Compassing of his End.
There is Folly enough in either of these; and my business shall be to shew, That such as act by the forementioned Rules of Worldly Wisdom, are eminently Foolish upon both accounts. 1. And first, for that first sort of Foo∣lishness imputable to them; namely, That a man by following such Principles pitches upon that for his End which no ways sutes his Condition. Certain it is, and indeed self-evident, That the Wisdom of this World looks no further than this World. All its Designs and Efficacy terminate on this side Hea∣ven, nor does Policy so much as pretend to any more than to be the great Art of raising a man to the Plenties, Glories and Grandeurs of the World. And if it ar∣rives so far as to make a man Rich, Po∣tent and Honourable, it has its End, and has done its utmost. But now that a man cannot rationally make these things his End, will appear from these two Con∣siderations.
1. That they reach not the measure of his Duration or Being; the Perpetuity of which surviving this mortal State, and shooting forth into the endless Eternities of another World, must needs render a man infinitely miserable and forlorn, if he has no other Comforts, but what he must leave behind him in this. For nothing can make a man happy, but that which shall last as long as he lasts. And all these Enjoyments are much too short for an immortal Soul to stretch it self upon; which shall persist in being not only when Profit, Pleasure, and Ho∣nour, but when time it self shall cease and be no more. No man can transport his large Reti∣nue, his Sumptuous Fare, and his Rich Furniture into another World. Nothing of all these things can continue with him then but the memory of them. And surely the bare remembrance that a man was formerly Rich or Great, cannot make him at all happier there, where an
Infinite Happiness, or an Infinite Misery shall equally swallow up the sense of these poor Felicities. It may indeed con∣tribute to his Misery, heighten the anguish, and sharpen the Sting of Conscience, and so add fury to the everlasting flames, when he shall reflect upon the abuse of all that Wealth and Greatness that the good providence of God had put as a price into his hand for worthier purposes than to Damn his Nobler and better part, only to please and gratify his worse. But the Politician has an answer ready for all these melancholy considerations; That he, for his part, believes none of these things: As that there is either an Heaven, or an Hell, or an immortal Soul. No, he is too great a friend to Real know∣ledge, to take such troublesom Assertions as these upon Trust. Which if it be his Belief, as no doubt it is, let him for me continue in it still, and stay for its Confu∣tation in another world; which, if he can destroy by disbelieving, his Infidelity will
do him better service, than as yet he has any cause to presume that it can. But, 2ly. Admitting, that either these enjoy∣ments were eternal, or the Soul mortal; and so, that one way or other they were commensurate to its duration, yet still they cannot be an end sutable to a ra∣tional nature, for as much as they fill not the measure of its desires. The foun∣dation of all Man's unhappiness here on Earth, is the great disproportion be∣tween his enjoyments and his appetites; which appears evidently in this, That let a man have never so much, he is still desiring something or other more. Alex∣ander, we know, was much troubled at the scantiness of Nature it self, that there were no more Worlds for him to disturb: And in this respect, every man living has a Soul as great as Alexander, and put under the same circumstances, would own the very same dissatisfactions. Now this is most certain, that in Spi∣ritual Natures, so much as there is of de∣sire,
so much there is also of capacity to receive. I do not say there is always a capacity to receive the very thing they desire, for that may be impossible: But for the degree of happiness, that they propose to themselves from that thing, this I say they are capable of. And as God is said to have made man after his own Image, so upon this quality he seems pe∣culiarly to have stampt the resemblance of his Infinity. For Man seems as bound∣less in his desires, as God is in his Being; and therefore nothing but God himself can satisfy him. But the great Inequa∣lity of all things else to the appetites of a rational Soul, appears yet further from this. That in all these worldly things, that a man pursues with the grea∣test eagerness, and intention of mind imaginable, he finds not half the plea∣sure in the actual possession of them, that he proposed to himself in the ex∣pectation. Which shews that there is a great Cheat or Lye which over spreads
the World, while all things here below, beguile mens expectations, and their ex∣pectations cheat their experience. Let this therefore be the first thing in which the Foolishness of this worldly wis∣dom is manifest. Namely, that by it a man proposes to himself an end wholly unsutable to his condition; as bearing no proportion to the measure of his du∣ration, or the Vastness of his desires. The other thing in which Foolishness is seen, is a man's pitching upon means unsutable to that which he has made his end. And here, we will for the present, suppose the things of the world to have neither that shortness, nor emptiness in them, that we have indeed proved them to have. But that they are so adaequate to all the concerns of an intelligent Nature, that they may be rationally fixt upon by men, as the Ultimate end of all their Designs, yet the folly of this Wisdom appears in this, that it sug∣gests
those means for the acquisition of these enjoyments, that are no ways fit to compass or acquire them: and that upon a double account. 1. That they are in themselves un∣able, and Insufficient for: And, 2. That they are frequently opposite to a successfull attainment of them. 1. And first, for their Insufficiency. Let Politicians contrive as accurately, project as deeply, and pursue, what they have thus contrived and projected, as diligently, as it is possible for Human Wit and industry to do: Yet still the success of all depends upon the favour of an over-ruling hand. For God ex∣presly claims it as a special part of his Prerogative, to have the intire disposal of Riches, Honours, and whatsoever else is apt to command the desires of man∣kind here below. Deuteronomy 8.18. It is the Lord thy God that giveth thee power to get wealth. And in 1 Sam. 2.30. God peremptorily declares himself the
Sole Fountain of Honour, telling us, that Those that Honour him shall be Honoured, and that those that despise him, shall be light∣ly esteemed. And then for Dignities and Prefer∣ments, we have the word of one, that could dispose of these things as much as Kings could do: Prov. 29.26. where he tells us, that many seek the Rulers fa∣vour: That is, apply themselves both to his Interest and Humour, with all the arts of Flattery and Obsequiousness, the surest and the readiest ways (one would think) to advance a man; and yet, af∣ter all, it follows in the next words, that every man's judgment cometh of the Lord. And that, whatsoever may be expected here, 'tis resolved only in the Court of Hea∣ven, whether the man shall proceed Fa∣vourite in the Courts of Princes, and af∣ter all his Artificial attendance come to sit at the Right hand, or be made a Foot∣stool. So that upon full Tryal of all the courses that Policy could either devise
or practise, the most experienced Ma∣sters of it have been often forced to sit down with that complaint of the Di∣sciples. We have toiled all night, and have caught nothing. For do we not some∣times see that Traytors can be out of favour, and Knaves be beggars, and lose their Estates, and be stript of their of∣fices as well as honester Men? And why all this? Surely not always for want of craft to spy out where their game lay; nor yet for want of irreligi∣on to give them all the scope of ways lawfull, and unlawfull, to prosecute their intentions. But, because the providence of God strikes not in with them, but dashes and even dispirits all their Endea∣vours, and makes their designs heartless and ineffectual. So that it is not their feeing this man, their belying another, nor their sneaking to a third, that shall be able to do their business, when the designs of Heaven will be served by their disappointment. And this is the true
cause why so many politick concepti∣ons so elaborately, formed and wrought, and grown at length ripe for delivery, doe yet, in the issue, miscarry and prove abortive: for being come to the Birth, the all-disposing providence of God denies them strength to bring forth. And thus the Authors of them, having missed of their mighty aims, are fain to retreat with frustration and a baffle; and having played the Knaves unsuccessfully, to have the ill luck to pass for Fools too. The means suggested by Policy and worldly Wisdom, for the attainment of these Earthly, enjoyments are unfit for that purpose, not only upon the account of their insufficiency for, but also of their frequent opposition, and contrariety to the accomplishment of such ends. No∣thing being more usual, than for these unchristian fishers of men to be fatally caught in their own Nets. For does not the Text expresly say, that God taketh the Wise in their own Craftiness. And has
not our own experience sufficiently Com∣mented upon the Text, when we have seen some by the very same ways by which they had designed to rise uncon∣troulably, and to clear off all obstructi∣ons before their ambition, to have direct∣ly procured their utter downfall, and to have broke their necks from that very Ladder, by which they had thought to have climb'd as high as their Father Lucifer; and there from the top of all their great∣ness to have look'd down with scorn up∣on all below them. Such Persons are the proper and law∣full objects of Derision; for as much as God himself laughs at them. Haman wanted nothing to compleat his greatness, but a Gallows upon which to hang Mordecai: But it matter'd not for whom he provided the Gallows, when pro∣vidence designed the Rope for him. With what contempt does the Apostle here in the 20th. verse of this 3d. ch. of the 1 Ep. to the Corin. repeat those words
of the Psalmist concerning all the fine Ar∣tifices of worldly Wisdom? The Lord, says he, knoweth the thoughts of the Wise, that they are vain. All their contri∣vances are but thin, slight, despicable things, and, for the most part, destructive of themselves. Nothing being more e∣qual in Justice, and indeed more Natu∣ral in the direct consequence and con∣nexion of Effects and Causes, than for men wickedly Wise to outwit themselves; and for such as Wrestle with Providence, to trip up their own heels. It is clear therefore, that the charge of this second sort of Foolishness is made good upon worldly Wisdom: for that, ha∣ving made men pitch upon an end un∣fit for their condition, it also makes them pitch upon means unfit to attain that end. And that both by reason of their Inability for, and frequent contrariety to the bringing about such designs. This, I say, has been made good in the General; but since particulars con∣vince
with greater life and evidence, we will resume the forementioned Prin∣ciples of the Politician, and shew seve∣rally in each of them, how little effica∣cy they have to advance the practicers of them, to the things they aspire to by them. 1. And first, for his first Principle, That the Politician must maintain a con∣stant, Habitual dissimulation. Concerning which I shall lay down this as certain; That dissimulation can be no further usefull, than it is concealed; for as much as no man will trust a known Cheat: And it is also as certain, that as some men use dissi∣mulation for their interest, so others have an Interest as strongly engaging them, to use all the art and industry, they can, to find it out; and to assure themselves of the truth or falsehood of those with whom they deal; which renders it infi∣nitely hard, if not morally impossible, for a man to carry on a constant course of dissimulation without discovery. And
being once discovered, it is not only no help, but the greatest impediment of acti∣on in the world. For since man is but of a very limited, narrow power in his own person, and consequently can effect no great matter merely by his own perso∣nal strength, but as he acts in Society and conjunction with others, and since no man can engage the active assistance of others, without first engaging their trust: and moreover, since men will trust no further than they Judge a per∣son for his Sincerity fit to be trusted, it follows that a discover'd Dissembler can atchieve nothing great or conside∣rable; for not being able to gain mens Trust, he cannot gain their concurrence, and so is left alone to act singly, and upon his own bottom; and while that is the sphere of his activity, all that he can do must needs be contempti∣ble. We know how successfull the late Usurper was,Cromwell. while his army believed him real in his Zeal against Kingship. But
when they found out the Imposture, up∣on his aspiring to the same himself, he was presently deserted and opposed by them, and never able to crown his U∣surped greatness with the addition of that Title, which he so passionately thirsted after. Add to this the judgment of as great an English Author as ever wrote, with great confidence affirming, That the ablest men that ever were, had all an o-penness and frankness of dealing: and that, if at any time such did dissemble, their dissimulation took effect, merely in the strength of that Reputa∣tion they had gained by their Veracity and clear dealing in the main. From all which it follows, that Dissimulation can be of no further use to a man, than just to guard him within the compass of his own personal concerns; which yet may be more easily, and not less effectually done by that silence, and Reservedness that every man may innocently practise, without the putting on of any contrary disguise.
2ly. The Politicians second principle was, That Conscience or Religion ought ne∣ver to stand between any man and his Tem∣poral advantage. Which indeed is proper∣ly Atheism; and, so far as it is practised tends to the dissolution of Society; the bond of which is Religion. For as much as a man's Happiness, or Misery in his converse with other men, depends chiefly upon their doing, or not doing those things which human Laws can take no Cognizance of: Such as are all acti∣ons capable of being done in Secret, and out of the view of mankind, which yet have the greatest Influence upon our Neighbour, even in his nearest and dea∣rest concerns. And if there be no in∣ward sense of Religion to awe men from the doing unjust Actions, provided they can do them without discovery, it is im∣possible for any man to sit secure or hap∣py in the possession of any thing that he enjoys. And this inconvenience the Po∣litician must expect from others, as well
as they have felt from him; unless he thinks that he can ingross this Principle to his own practice, and that others can∣not be as false, and Atheistical as himself; especially having had the advantage of his Copy to write after. 3ly. The third Principle was, That the Politician ought to make himself, and not the publick, the chief, if not the sole end of all that he does. But here, we shall quickly find, that the Private Spirit will prove as pernicious in Temporals, as ever it did in Spirituals. For while every particular member of the publick, provides singly and solely for it self, the several Joynts of the Body Politick do thereby separate and disunite, and so become unable to support the whole; and when the publick Interest once fails, let private Interests subsist if they can, and prevent an Universal Ruine from involving in it Particulars. It is not a man's wealth, that can be sure to save him, if the Enemy be wise enough
to refuse part of it tendred as a ransom, when it is as easy for him to destroy the owner, and to take the whole. When the hand finds it self well warmed, and co∣vered, let it refuse the trouble of feeding the mouth, or guarding the Head, till the Body be starved, or killed, and then we shall see, how it will fare with the Hand. The Athenians, the Romans, and all other Nations that grew great out of lit∣tle or nothing, did so merely by the pub∣lick-mindedness of particular Persons; and the same courses that first raised Na∣tions and Governments, must support them. So that, were there no such thing as Religion, Prudence were enough to enforce this upon all. For our own parts, let us reflect up∣on our glorious and renowned English An∣cestours, men eminent in Church and State, and we shall find that this was the method by which they preserved both. We have succeeded into their Labours,
and the fruits of them: And it will both concern, and become us to succeed al∣so into their Principles. For it is no Man's duty to be Safe, or to be Rich; but I am sure, it is the duty of every one to make good his Trust. And it is a Calamity to a whole Nation, that any Man should have a Place or an Em∣ployment more large and publick than his Spirit. 4ly. The 4th. and last Principle men∣tioned, was, That the Politician must not, in doing kindnesses, consider his Friends, but only gratify Rich men or Enemies. Which Principle (as to that branch of it Relating to Enemies) was certainly first borrow∣ed, and fetched up from the very bottom of Hell; and utter'd (no doubt) by par∣ticular and immediate inspiration of the Devil. And yet (as much of the Di∣vil as it carries in it) it neither is nor can be more villainous and detestable, than it is really silly, Sensless and Impoli∣tick.
But to go over the several parts of this Principle; and to begin with the suppo∣sed Policy of Gratifying only the Rich and Opulent. Does our wise man think that the grandee, whom he so courts, does not see through all the little Plots of his courtship, as well as he himself? and so, at the same time, while he accepts the gift, laugh in his Sleeve at the design, and despise the giver. But, for the neglect of Friends, as it is the height of baseness, so it can never be proved rational, till we prove the Person using it Omnipotent and self-sufficient, and such as can never need any mortal assist∣ance. But if he be a Man, that is, a poor, weak Creature, subject to Change and Misery, let him know, that it is the Friend only, that God has made for the day of adversity, as the most sutable and sove∣reign help that Humanity is capable of. And those (though in highest place) who slight and disoblige their Friends, shall
infallibly come to know the value of them, by having none, when they shall most need them. That Prince, that maintains the reputa∣tion of a true, fast, generous Friend, has an Army always ready to fight for him, maintained to his hand without pay. As for the other part of this Principle, that concerns the gratifying of Enemies; it is (to say no more) an absurdity paral∣lell to the former. For when a man shall have done all he can, given all he has, to oblige an Enemy, he shall find, that he has armed him indeed, but not at all altered him. The Scripture bids us Pray for our Enemies, and Love our Enemies, but no where does it bid us trust our Enemies; nay, it strictly cautions us against it, Prov. 26.25. When he speaketh thee fair (says the Text) Believe him not, for there are yet Seven Abominations in his heart. And, in good earnest, it would be a rarity worth
the seeing, could any one shew us such a thing as a perfectly reconciled Enemy. Men are generally credulous at first, and will not take up this great and safe Truth at the cost of other mens Experience, till they come to be bitten into a sense of it by their own; but are apt to take fair professions, fawning looks, treats, enter∣tainments, visits, and such like pitifull stuff, for Friendship and Reconcilement, and so to admit the Serpent into their Bosom: But let them come once to depend upon this new made Friend, or reconciled Enemy, in any great or real concern of life, and they shall find him false as Hell, and cruel as the Grave. And, I know nothing more to be won∣dred at, than that those reconcilements that are so difficult, and even next to Im∣possible in the Effect, should yet be so fre∣quent in the Attempt; especially since the reason of this difficulty lies as deep as Nature it self; which, after it has done an
injury, will for ever be suspicious; and I would fain see the Man that can per∣fectly Love the Person whom he suspects. There is a noted story of Hector and Ajax, who having combated one another, ended that combat in a reconcilement, and testify'd that Reconcilement by Mu∣tual presents: Hector giving Ajax a Sword, and Ajax presenting Hector with a Belt. The consequence of which was, that Ajax slew himself with the Sword given him by Hector, and Hector was dragg'd about the walls of Troy by the Belt given him by Ajax. Such are the gifts, such are the killing-kindnesses of reconciled Enemies. Confident Men may try what conclu∣sions, they please, at their own peril, but let History be consulted, Reason heard, and Experience called in to speak impar∣tially, what it has found, and I believe, they will all with one Voice declare, that (what∣soever the grace of God may do in the
miraculous Change of Mens hearts) yet according to the common methods of the world, a man may as well expect to make the Devil himself his Friend, as an E∣nemy that has given him the first blow. And thus I have gone over the two general Heads, proposed from the Words, and shewn both what those Principles are, upon which this Wisdom of the World does proceed; and also wherein the Folly and Absurdity of them does consist. And now, into what can we more naturally improve the whole foregoing Discourse, than into that practical Infe∣rence of our Apostle, in the Verse before the Text? That if any Man desires the Re∣putation of Wisdom, he should become a Fool that he may be wise; that is a Fool to the World, that he may be wise to God. Let us not be asham'd of the Folly of being sincere, and without Guile; with∣out Traps, and Snares in our Converse; of being fearfull to build our Estates up∣on
the Ruine of our Consciences; of preferring the publick Good, before our own private Emolument; and lastly, of being true to all the Offices of Friend∣ship, the Obligations of which are sa∣cred, and will certainly be exacted of us by the great Judge of all our Actions. I say, Let us not blush to be found guilty of all these Follies, (as some ac∣count them) rather than to be expert in that Kind of Wisdom, that God himself, the great Fountain of Wisdom, has pronounced to be Earthly, Sensual, Devilish; and of the wretched Absurdity of which, all Histories, both Ecclesiasti∣cal and Civil, have given us such preg∣nant and convincing Examples. Reflect upon Ahitophel, Haman, Se∣janus, Caesar Borgia: And other such Ma∣sters of the Arts of Policy, who thought they had fixed themselves upon so sure a Bottom, that they might even defie and dare Providence to the Face; and yet
how did God bring an absolute Disap∣pointment, like one great Blot, over all their fine, artificial Contrivances! Every one of those mighty and pro∣found Sages, coming to a Miserable and Disastrous End. The Consideration of which, and the like Passages, one would think, should make Men grow weary of dodging and shewing Tricks with God in their own crooked Ways: And even force them to acknowledge it for the surest, and most unfailing Prudence, wholly to commit their Persons, and Concerns to the wise, and good Providence of God, in the Strait, and open Ways of his own Com∣mands. Who, we may be confident, is more tenderly concern'd for the good of those that truly fear, and serve him, than it is possible for the most selfish of Men to be concern'd for themselves: And who, in all the Troubles, and Disturbances,
all the Cross, Difficult and Perplexing Passages that can fall out, will be sure to guide all to this happy Issue; That all things shall work together for good, to those that love God. To which God, infinitely Wise, Holy, and Iust, be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for ever∣more. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH, Oxon, Before the University, May 3. 1685.
2 COR. VIII.12. For if there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted according to that a Man hath, and not according to that he hath not. IN dealing with Men's Consciences, for the taking them off from Sin, I know nothing of so direct and efficacious an Influence, as the right stating of those general Rules and Prin∣ciples of Action, that men are apt to guide their Lives and Consciences by: For if these be true, and withal rightly applied, Men must needs proceed upon firm and safe Grounds; but if either false in themselves, or not right in their par∣ticular Application, the whole Course, that Men are thereby engaged in, being founded in Sin and Error, must needs lead to, and, at length, end in Death and Con∣fusion: There being (as the Wise man
tells us a Way that may seem Right in a Man's own Eyes, when, nevertheless, the End of that Way is Death. Now, as amongst these Principles or Rules of Action, the pretences of the Spi∣rit, and of tenderness of Conscience, and the like, have been the late grand Artifices, by which Crafty and designing Hypo∣crites have so much abused the world; so, I shall now instance in another, of no less Note, by which the generality of Men are as apt to abuse themselves. And that is a certain Rule or sentence got al∣most into every Man's mouth, That God accepts the Will for the Deed. A principle (as usually apply'd) of less malice I con∣fess, but considering the easiness, and with∣all the Fatality of the delusion, of more mischief than the other. And this I shall endeavour to search into, and lay open in the following dis∣course. The words hold forth a general Rule, or Proposition delivered upon a Particu∣lar
Occasion. Which was the Apostle's exhorting the Corinthians to an Holy and Generous Emulation of the Charity of the Macedonians, in contributing freely to the Relief of the poor Saints at Ierusalem. Upon this great Encouragement, that in all such Works of Charity, it is the Will that gives worth to the Oblation, and, as to God's Acceptance, sets the poorest Giver upon the same Level with the Richest. Nor is this all; but so per∣fectly does the Value of all Charitable Acts, take its Measure, and Proportion from the Will, and from the Fulness of the Heart, rather than that of the Hand, that a lesser Supply may be oftentimes a greater Charity; and the Widow's Mite, in the Balance of the Sanctuary, out-weigh the Shekels, and perhaps the Talents of the most Opulent and Wealthy. The All, and utmost of the One being certain∣ly a Nobler Alms, than the Superflui∣ties of the Other. And all this upon the Account of the great Rule here set down
in the Text. That, in all transactions between God and Man, wheresoever there is a full Resolution, drift, and purpose of Will to please God, there, what a man can do, shall, by virtue thereof, be accept∣ed, and what he cannot do, shall not be required. From whence these Two Pro∣positions, in Sence and Design much the same, do naturally result. 1. The first of them expressed in the Words. To wit, That God ac∣cepts the Will, where there is no Pow∣er to perform. 2. The other of them Implyed. Name∣ly, That where there is a Power to Per∣form, God does not accept the Will. Of all the Spiritual tricks and legerde∣main, by which men are apt to shift off their Duty, and to impose upon their own Souls, there is none so common, and of so fatal an import as these Two. The Plea of a good intention. And the Plea of a good Will. One or both of them being used by
Men, almost at every turn, to elude the Precept, to put God off with something instead of Obedience, and so, in effect, to out-wit him whom they are called to Obey. They are certainly two of the most Effectual Instruments and Engines in the Devil's hands, to wind and turn the Souls of Men by, to whatsoever he pleases. For, first, the Plea of a Good Inten∣tention will serve to Sanctifie and Autho∣rize the very Worst of Actions. The proof of which is but too full and mani∣fest, from that Lewd and Scandalous Doctrine of the Jesuits concerning the Di∣rection of the Intention, and likewise from the whole Mannage of the late accursed Rebel∣lion. In which, it was this insolent and impudent Pretence, that emboldened the Worst of Men to wade through the blood of the Best of Kings, and the Loyallest of Subjects; namely, That in all that risk of Villainy, their Hearts, forsooth, were right towards God; and that all their Plunder, and Rapine, was for nothing
else but to place Christ on his Throne, and to establish amongst us the Power of God∣liness, and the Purity of the Gospel; by a further Reformation (as the Cant goes) of a Church which had but too much felt the Meaning of that Word before. But such persons consider not, that, though an Ill Intention is certainly sufficient to spoil and corrupt an Act in it self Ma∣terially Good, yet no Good Intention what∣soever can rectifie, or infuse a Moral Goodness into an Act otherwise Evil. To come to Church is, no doubt, an Act in it self Materially Good; yet he who does it with an Ill Intention, comes to God's House upon the Devil's Errand; and the whole Act is thereby rendred absolutely Evil, and Detestable before God. But on the other side; if it were possible for a Man to Intend well, while he Does ill; yet no such Intention, though never so good, can make that Man Steal, Lye, or Mur∣ther with a good Conscience; or convert a Wicked Action into a Good.
For these things are against the Nature of Morality; in which, nothing is or can be really good, without an Universal concurrence of all the Principles and In∣gredients requisite to a Moral Action; though the failure of any one of them will imprint a Malignity upon that Act, which, in spight of all the other requisite Ingredients, shall stamp it absolutely Evil, and corrupt it past the Cure of a Good Intention. And thus, as I have shewn, that the Plea of a Good Intention is used by Men to Warrant and Patronize the most Vil∣lainous and Wicked Actions; so, in the next place, the Plea of a Good Will will be found equally efficacious to supersede, and take off the Necessity of all Holy and Good Actions. For still (as I have observed) the great Art of the Devil, and the principal deceit of the Heart, is, to put a Trick upon the Command, and to keep fair with God himself, while men fall foul upon his Laws. For both
Law, and Gospel call aloud for Active Obedience, and such a Piety, as takes not up either with faint Notions, or idle, in∣significant Inclinations, but such an One, as shews it self in the Solid Instances of Practice and Performance. For, Do this and live, saith the Law, Luk. 10.28. And, if ye Know these things, Happy are ye if ye Do them, says the Gospel, Joh. 13.17. And, not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that Doth the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 7.21. And, Let no man deceive you; He that doth Righteousness is Righteous, 1 Joh. 3.7. With innume∣rable more such places. All of them ter∣rible and severe Injunctions of Practice, and equally severe Obligations to it. But then, in comes the benign Lati∣tude of the Doctrine of Good-Will, and cuts asunder all these hard, pinching Cords; and tells you, That if this be but piously, and well inclined; if the Bent of the Spirit (as some call it) be towards
God and Goodness, God accepts of this above, nay, instead of, all External Works; those being but the Shell, or Husk, this the Kernel, the Quintessence, and the ve∣ry Soul of Duty. But for all this, these Bents, and Propensities, and Inclinations, will not do the Business; the bare bending of the Bow will not hit the Mark with∣out shooting the Arrow; and Men are not called to Will, but to Work out their Salvation. But what then? Is it not as Certain from the Text, that God sometimes ac∣cepts the Will, as it is from those fore∣mentioned Scriptures, that God com∣mands the Deed? Yes, no doubt: Since it is impossible for the Holy Ghost to contradict that in one place of Scripture, which he had affirmed in another. In all the foregoing places, Doing is expresly commanded, and no Happiness allowed to any thing short of it; and yet here God is said to accept of the Will; and can both these stand together without
manifest contradiction? That which en∣joyns the Deed, is certainly God's Law; and it is also as certain, that the Scrip∣ture that allows of the Will, is neither the Abrogation, nor Derogation, nor Dispensation, nor Relaxation of that Law. In order to the clearing of which, I shall lay down these Two Assertions. 1. That every Law of God com∣mands the Obedience of the Whole Man. 2. That the Will is never accepted by God, but as it is the Obedience of the Whole Man. So that the Allowance or Acceptance of the Will, mentioned in the Text, takes off Nothing from the Obligation of those Laws, in which the Deed is so plainly and positively enjoyned; but is only an In∣terpretation, or Declaration of the true Sence of those Laws, shewing the Equity of them: Which is as really Essential to Every Law, and gives it its obliging
Force as much, as the Justice of it; and indeed, is not another, or a distinct thing from the Justice of it, any more than a Particular Case is from an Universal Rule. But you will say, How can the Obe∣dience of the Will ever be proved to be the Obedience of the Whole Man? For answer to which, we are first to consider Every Man as a Moral, and con∣sequently as a Rational, Agent; and then to consider, what is the Office and In∣fluence of the Will in Every Moral Acti∣on. Now the Morality of an Action is founded in the Freedom of that Prin∣ciple, by virtue of which, it is in the Agent's Power, having all things ready and requisite to the performance of an Action, either to perform, or not to perform it. And, as the Will is endued with this Freedom, so is it also endued with a Power to Command all the other Fa∣culties, both of Soul and Body, to Exe∣cute what it has so Will'd, or Decreed,
and that without Resistance; So that up∣on the last Dictate of the Will for the Doing of such or such a thing, all the other Faculties proceed immediately to act according to their respective Offices. By which it is manifest, that in point of Action, the Will is Virtually the Whole Man; as containing in it all that, which by virtue of his other Faculties he is able to do: Just as the Spring of a Watch is virtually the whole Motion of the Watch; forasmuch as it imparts a Motion to all the Wheels of it. Thus as to the Soul. If the Will bids the Understanding Think, Study, and Consider, it will accordingly apply it self to Thought, Study, and Considera∣tion. If it bids the Affections Love, Re∣joyce, or be Angry, an Act of Love, Joy, or Anger will follow. And then for the Body; if the Will bids the Leg go, it goes; if it bids the Hand do this, it does it. So that a Man is a Moral Agent only, as he is endued with, and acts by
a Free, and Commanding Principle of Will. And therefore when God says, My Son, give me thy Heart, (which there signifies the Will,) it is as much, as if he had com∣manded the Service of the Whole Man; for whatsoever the Will commands, the Whole Man must do: the Empire, or Dominion of the Will over all the Fa∣culties of Soul and Body (as to most of the Operations of each of them) be∣ing absolutely Over-ruling and Despoti∣cal. From whence it follows, That when the Will has exerted an Act of Com∣mand upon any Faculty of the Soul, or Member of the Body, it has by so do∣ing done all that the Whole Man as a Moral Agent can do for the Actual Ex∣ercise or Employment of such a Faculty or Member. And if so, then what is not done in such a case, is certainly not in a man's Power to doe; and conse∣quently is no part of the Obedience re∣quired of him. No man being comman∣ded,
or obliged to obey beyond his Pow∣er. And therefore the Obedience of the Will to God's Commands, is the Obedi∣ence of the whole Man (forasmuch as it includes and inferrs it) which was the Assertion that we undertook to prove. But you will say, If the Prerogative of the Will be such, that where it com∣mands the Hand to give an Alms, the Leg to Kneel, or to go to Church, or the Tongue to utter a Prayer, all these things will infallibly be done; Suppose we now a man be bound hand and foot by some outward violence, or be laid up with the Gout, or disabled for any of these Functions by a Palsy, can the Will by its Command, make a man in such a condition, utter a Prayer, or Kneel, or go to Church? No; 'tis manifest it cannot: but then you are to know also, that neither is Vocal Prayer, or Bodily Kneeling, or going to Church, in such a case, any part of the Obedience requi∣red of such a person: But that Act of
his Will hitherto spoken of, that would have put his Body upon all these Acti∣ons, had there been no impediment, is that man's whole Obedience; and for that very Cause that it is so, and for no other, it stands here accepted by God. From all which Discourse, this must naturally and directly be inferr'd, as a certain Truth, and the chief foundation of all that can be said upon this Subject: namely, That whosoever Wills the Doing of a thing, if the Doing of it be in his power, he will certainly Doe it: and whosoever does not doe that Thing, which he has in his power to doe, does not really and properly Will it. For though the Act of the Will Command∣ing, and the Act of any other faculty of Soul or Body executing that which is so Commanded, be Physically and in the Precise Nature of things, distinct and se∣veral, yet Morally, as they proceed, in Subordination, from one Entire, Free, Moral Agent, both in Divinity and Mo∣rality,
they pass but for one and the same Action. Now, that, from the foregoing Parti∣culars, we may come to understand how far this Rule of God's accepting the Will for the Deed holds good in the Sence of the Apostle, we must consider in it these Three things: 1. The Original Ground and Reason of it. 2. The just Measure, and Bounds of it: And, 3. The Abuse or Misapplication of it. And first, for the Original Ground, and Reason of this Rule; it is founded upon that Great, Self-evident, and Eternal Truth, that the Just, the Wise, and Good God neither does nor can require of Man any thing that is Impossible, or Na∣turally beyond his Power to Doe: And therefore in the Second place, the Mea∣sure of this Rule, by which the just ex∣tent and bounds of it are to be determi∣ned,
must be that Power or Ability that Man Naturally has to doe, or perform the Things Willed by him. So that wheresoever such a Power is found, there this Rule of God's Accepting the Will has no place; and wheresoever such a Power is not found, there this Rule presently be∣comes in force. And accordingly in the Third and Last place, The Abuse, or Mis∣application of this Rule will consist in these Two Things: 1. That Men do very often take that to be an Act of the Will, that really and truly is not so. 2. That they reckon many things im∣possible, that indeed are not impossi∣ble. And first, to begin with Men's mi∣stakes about the Will and the Acts of it; I shall Note these Three, by which Men are extremely apt to impose upon them∣selves. 1. As first, the bare Approbation of the Worth and Goodness of a Thing, is not pro∣perly
the Willing of that Thing; and yet Men do very commonly account it so. But this is properly an Act of the Under∣standing or Judgment; a faculty, wholly distinct from the Will; and which makes a Principal part of that, which, in Divi∣nity, we call Natural Conscience; and in the Strength of which, a Man may ap∣prove of things good and excellent, with∣out ever willing or intending the Practice of them. And accordingly the Apostle, Rom. 2.18. gives us an account of some who Approved of things excellent, and yet Practised, and consequently Willed things clean contrary; Since no Man can com∣mit a Sin but he must Will it first. Who∣soever observes and looks into the work∣ings of his own heart, will find that no∣ted Sentence—Video meliora proboque, Dete∣riora sequor, too frequently and fatally verify'd upon himself. The 7th of the Romans (which has been made the Un∣happy Scene of so much Controversie a∣bout these Matters) has several passages
to this purpose. In a word, to Judge what ought to be done, is one Thing; and to Will the doing of it, is quite another. No doubt, Vertue is a beautifull, and a glorious thing in the Eyes of the most Vicious person breathing; and all that he does, or can, hate in it, is the Diffi∣culty of its Practice: For it is Practice a∣lone that Divides the World into Vertu∣ous and Vitious; but otherwise, as to the Theory and Speculation of Vertue, and Vice, Honest, and Dishonest, the Gene∣rality of Mankind are much the same: For Men do not approve of Vertue by Choice and free Election; but it is an Homage which Nature commands all Understandings to pay to it, by necessary Determination; and yet after all, it is but a faint, unactive thing; for in Defiance of the Judgment, the Will may still re∣main as perverse, and as much a stranger to Vertue, as it was before. In fine, there is as much Difference between the Appro∣bation of the Iudgment, and the Actual
Volitions of the Will, with relation to the same Object, as there is between a Man's viewing a Desirable thing with his Eye, and his reaching after it with his Hand. 2dly. The Wishing of a Thing is not properly the Willing of it; though too often mistaken by Men for such: But it is that, which is called by the Schools an Imperfect Velleity, and imports no more than an idle, Un-operative complacency in, and desire of the End without any Consideration of, nay, for the most part, with a Direct Abhorrence of the Means; of which Nature, I account that Wish of Balaam in Numb. 23.10. Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like his. The thing it self appeared Desirable to him, and accordingly he could not but like and desire it; but then, it was after a very irrational, absurd way, and contrary to all the Methods, and Principles of a Rational Agent; which
never Wills a Thing really and properly, but it applies to the Means, by which it is to be acquired. But at that very time that Balaam desired to Die the Death of the Righteous, he was actually following the Wages of Unrighteousness, and so thereby engaged in a Course quite con∣trary to what he desired; and conse∣quently such, as could not possible bring him to such an End. Much like the Sot, that cried Utinam hoc esset Laborare, while he lay Lazing and Lolling upon his Couch. But every true Act of Volition im∣ports a respect to the End, by and through the Means; and Wills a Thing only in that way, in which it is to be compassed or effected; which is the foundation of that most true Aphorism, That He who Wills the End, Wills also the Means. The truth of which is founded in such a Ne∣cessary Connexion of the terms, that I look upon the Proposition, not only as True, but as Convertible; and that, as a
Man cannot truly and properly Will the End, but he must also Will the Means; so neither can he Will the Means, but he must Vertually, and by Interpretation at least, Will the End. Which is so true, that in the account of the Divine Law, a man is reckoned to Will even those things that Naturally are not the Object of Desire; such as Death it self, Ezek. 18.31. only because he Wills those Ways and Courses, that naturally tend to, and end in it. And even our own Common Law looks upon a Man's raising Arms against, or Imprisoning his Prince, as an Imagi∣ning, or Compassing of his Death: For∣asmuch as these Actions are the Means directly leading to it, and, for the most part, actually concluding in it: and con∣sequently that the Willing of the One, is the Willing of the Other also. To Will a thing therefore, is certainly much another thing from what the Gene∣rality of Men, especially in their Spiritual concerns, take it to be. I say, in their
Spiritual concerns; for in their Tempo∣ral, it is manifest, that they Think and Judge much otherwise; and in the Things of this World, no man is allowed or believed to Will any thing heartily, which he does not endeavour after proportiona∣bly. A Wish is properly a man of Desire, sitting, or lying still; but an Act of the Will, is a Man of Business vigorously go∣ing about his Work: And certainly there is a great deal of Difference, between a Man's stretching out his Arms to work, and his stretching them out only to yawn. 3dly and Lastly. A mere Inclination to a thing is not properly a Willing of that thing; and yet in matters of Duty, no doubt, men frequently reckon it for such. For otherwise, why should they so often plead, and rest in the goodness of their Hearts? and the honest, and well-inclin'd disposition of their Minds, when they are justly charged with an Actual non-perfor∣mance of what the Law requires of them?
But that an Inclination to a thing is not a Willing of that thing, is irrefraga∣bly proved by this one Argument; That a man may Act vertuously against his In∣clination, but not against his Will. He may be inclined to one thing, and yet will another; and therefore Inclination, and Will, are not the same. For a man may be Naturally inclined to Pride, Lust, Anger, and strongly in∣clined so too, (forasmuch as these Incli∣nations are founded in a Peculiar Crasis and Constitution of the Blood and Spi∣rits,) and yet by a steady, frequent Repe∣tition of the Contrary Acts of Humility, Chastity, and Meekness, carried thereto by his Will, (a Principle not to be Control∣led by the Blood or Spirits,) he may at length plant in his Soul all those Contrary Habits of Vertue: And therefore it is certain, that while Inclination bends the Soul One way, a Well-disposed and Re∣solved Will, may effectually draw it Another. A sufficient Demonstration,
doubtless, that they are Two very Dif∣ferent things; for, where there may be a Contrariety, there is certainly a Diversi∣ty. A good Inclination, is but the first Rude draught of Vertue; but the finish∣ing Strokes are from the Will. Which if well-disposed, will by Degrees perfect; if ill-dispos'd, will, by the Super-induction of ill Habits, quickly deface it. God never accepts a good Inclination, instead of a good Action, where that Acti∣on may be done; Nay, so much the Contrary, that if a good Inclination be not Seconded by a good Action, the Want of that Action is thereby made so much the more Criminal and Inexcusable. A man may be naturally well, and vertuously inclined, and yet never do One good or vertuous Action all his life. A Bowl may lie still for all its Byass; but it is impossible for a man to Will Vertue, and Vertuous Actions, Heartily, but he must in the same Degree offer at the Practice of them: Forasmuch as the Di∣ctates
of the Will are (as we have shewn) Despotical, and Command the Whole man. It being a Contradiction in Morality, for the Will to go One way, and the Man A∣nother. And thus as to the First Abuse, or Mis-application of the great Rule, mentioned in the Text, about God's Accepting the Will, I have shewn Three notable Mistakes, which men are apt to entertain concern∣ing the Will; and proved, that neither a Bare Approbation of, nor a Mere Wishing, or Unactive Complacency in; nor, lastly, a Natural Inclination to Things Vertuous and Good, can pass before God for a man's Willing of such things; and, con∣sequently, if men, upon this account, will needs take up, and acquiesce in an airy, ungrounded Persuasion, that they Will those things which really they do not Will, they fall thereby into a gross and fatal Delusion. A Delusion that must, and will shut the Door of Salvation a∣gainst them. They catch at Heaven,
but embrace a Cloud; they mock God, who will not be mocked; and deceive their own Souls, which (God knows) may too ea∣sily be both Deceived, and Destroyed too. Come we now, in the next place, to Consider the other way, by which Men are prone to abuse and pervert this impor∣tant Rule of God's accounting the Will for the Deed; and that is, by reckoning ma∣ny things Impossible, which in truth are not Impossible. And this I shall make appear, by shew∣ing some of the Principal Instances of Du∣ty, for the Performance of which, men commonly plead want of Power; and thereupon persuade themselves, that God and the Law rest satisfied with their Will. Now these Instances are Four. 1. In Duties of very Great and Hard Labour. Labour is confessedly a great Part of the Curse; and therefore, no wonder if men fly from it: Which they
do with so great an Aversion, that few men know their own strength for want of trying it; and, upon that account, think themselves really unable to do many things, which Experience would convince them, they have more Abi∣lity to Effect, than they have Will to Attempt. It is Idleness, that Creates Impossibili∣ties; and, where men care not to Doe a Thing, they shelter themselves under a persuasion, that it cannot be done. The shortest, and the surest way to prove a Work possible, is strenuously to set a∣about it; and no wonder, if that proves it possible, that, for the most part, makes it so. Dig, says the Unjust Steward, I can∣not; but why? Did either his Legs or his Arms fail him? No; but Day-labour was but an hard, and a dry kind of Livelihood to a man that could get an Estate with two or three Strokes of his Pen; and find so great a Treasure, as
he did, without Digging for it. But such excuses will not pass Muster with God, who will allow no man's Hu∣mour or Idleness to be the measure of Possible, or Impossible. And to manifest the wretched Hypocrisie of such preten∣ces, those very things, which, upon the bare obligation of Duty, are declined by men as Impossible; presently become not only Possible, but readily Practicable too, in a Case of Extreme Necessity. As, no doubt, that fore-mention'd Instance of Fraud and Laziness, the Unjust Stew∣ard, who pleaded that he could neither Dig nor Beg, would quickly have been brought, both to Dig and to Beg too, ra∣ther than starve? And if so, what reason could such an one produce before God why, he could not submit to the same Hardships, rather than Cheat and Lye? the former being but Destructive of the Body, this latter of the Soul: And cer∣tainly the Highest and Dearest Concerns of a Temporal Life, are infinitely less
Valuable than those of an Eternal; and consequently ought, without any De∣murr at all, to be Sacrificed to them, whensoever they come in Competition with them. He who can Digest any La∣bour, rather than Die, must refuse no Labour, rather than Sin. 2dly. The Second Instance shall be in Duties of great and apparent Danger. Danger (as the world goes) generally absolves from duty. This being a case, in which most men, according to a ve∣ry ill Sence, will needs be a Law to them∣selves. And, where it is not safe for them to be Religious, their Religion shall be to be safe. But Christianity teaches us a very different Lesson: For if fear of suffering could take off the necessity of Obeying, the Doctrine of the Cross would certainly be a very Idle, and a Senceless thing; and Christ would never have prayed, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, had the bitterness of
the draught made it impossible to be Drunk of. If Death, and Danger are things that really cannot be endured, no Man could ever be obliged to suffer for his Conscience, or to die for his Reli∣gion; it being altogether as absurd, to imagine a man obliged to Suffer, as to Doe Impossibilities. But those Primitive Hero's of the Chri∣stian Church, could not so easily blow off the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as to make the fear of being Passive a dis∣charge from being Obedient. No, they found Martyrdom not only possible, but in many cases a Duty also; a Duty dres∣sed up indeed with all that was terrible and afflictive to Human Nature, yet not at all the less a Duty for being so. And such an height of Christianity possess'd those Noble Souls, that every Martyr could keep one Eye steadily fixed upon his Du∣ty, and look Death and Danger out of countenance with the other: Nor did they flinch from Duty, for fear of Mar∣tyrdom,
when one of the most quick∣ning motives to Duty, was their Desire of it. But to prove the possibility of a Thing, there is no argument to that, which looks backwards; for what has bin done, or suffered, may certainly be done or suffer∣ed again. And to prove, that Men may be Martyrs, there needs no other demon∣stration, than to shew that many have been so. Besides, that the grace of God has not so far abandoned the Christian World, but that those high, Primitive instances of Passive fortitude in the case of duty and danger Rivalling one another, have been exemplifyed, and (as it were) revived by several glorious Copies of them in the succeeding Ages of the Church. And (thanks be to God) we need not look very far backward for some of them, even amongst our selves. For when a violent, victorious Faction, and Rebel∣lion had over-run all, and made Loyalty to the King, and Conformity to the
Church, crimes unpardonable, and of a guilt not to be expiated, but at the price of Life or Estate, when Men were put to Swear away all interest in the next World, to secure a very poor one in this; (for they had then Oaths to Mur∣der Souls, as well as Sword and Pistol for the Body:) nay, when the Persecuti∣on ran so high, that that Execrable Mon∣ster Cromwell, made and published that Barbarous, Heathenish, or rather unhu∣man Edict against the poor suffering, Episcopal Clergy,☜ That they should neither Preach, nor Pray in publick, nor Baptize, nor Marry, nor Bury, nor teach School, no, nor so much as live in any Gentleman's House, who in mere Charity and Com∣passion, might be inclin'd to take them in from perishing in the streets: that is, in other words, that they must starve and dye ex officio, and being turned out of their Churches, take possession only of the Church-yard, as so many Victims to the remorsless rage of a foul ill-bred Ty∣rant,
professing Piety without so much as common Humanity; I say, when Rage and Persecution, Cruelty, and Cromwel∣lism were at that Diabolical pitch, ty∣rannizing over every thing that lookt like Loyalty, Conscience, and Confor∣mity, so that he, who took not their en∣gagement, could not take any thing else, though it were given him; being thereby debarred from the very common Bene∣fit of the Law, in sueing for, or recover∣ing of his Right in any of their Courts of Justice (all of them still following the motion of the High one): yet even then, and under that black and dismal state of Things, there were many thousands who never bowed the Knee to Baal-Cromwell, Baal-Covenant, or Baal-Engagement, but with a steady, fix'd, unshaken Reso∣lution, and in a glorious imitation of those Heroick Christians in the 10, and 11th. Chapters of the Ep. to the Heb. Endured a great fight of afflictions, were made a gazing Stock by reproaches, took joy∣fully
the spoiling of their Gods, had trial of cruel Mockings; moreover of bonds and im∣prisonments, sometimes were tempted, some∣times were slain with the Sword, wandred about in Hunger, and Nakedness, being de∣stitute, afflicted, tormented. All which suf∣ferings surely ought to Entitle them to that concluding character in the next words, Of whom the world was not worthy. And, I wish I could say of England, that it were worthy of those Men now. For I look upon the old Church of England Royallists (which I take to be only ano∣ther name for a Man who preferrs his Conscience before his interest) to be the best Christians and the most meritorious Subjects in the world; as having passed all those terrible Tests and Trials, which conquering, domineering Malice could put them to, and carried their Credit and their Conscience clear and trium∣phant through, and above them all, con∣stantly firm, and immoveable by all that they felt either from their professed E∣nemies,
or their false Friends. And what these Men did and suffer'd, others might have done and suffered too. But they, good Men had another and more artificial sort of Conscience, and a way to interpret off a command, where they found it dangerous, or un∣profitable to do it. God knows my heart (says one) I love the King cordially; and I wish well to the Church (says another) but you see the state of Things is altered; and we cannot do, what we would doe. Our Will is good, and the King Gra∣cious, and we hope he will accept of this, and dispense with the rest. A Good∣ly Present, doubtless, as they meant it; and such as they might freely give, and yet part with Nothing; and the King, on the other hand, receive, and gain just as much. But now, had the whole Nation mock∣ed God and their King at this Shuffling, Hypocritical rate, what an Odious, In∣famous
People must that Rebellion have represented the English to all Posterity? Where had been the Honour of the Re∣form'd Religion, that could not afford a Man Christian enough, to suffer for his God and his Prince? But the old Royal∣lists did both, and thereby demonstrated to the world, That no danger could make Duty impossible. And, upon my Conscience, if we may assign any other Reason, or motive of the late mercies of God to these poor King∣doms, besides his own proneness to shew Mercy, it was for the sake of the old, suffering Cavaliers, and for the sake of none else whatsoever, that God deliver∣ed us from the two late accursed Con∣spiracies. For they were the Brats and Offspring of two contrary factions, both of them equally mortal, and inveterate Enemies of our Church; which they have been, and still are, perpetually pecking and striking at, with the same malice, though with different methods.
In a word: The old tryed-Church of England-Royallists were the Men, who, in the darkest and foulest day of persecuti∣on, that ever befell England, never plead∣ed the Will, in excuse of the Deed, but proved the Integrity and Loyalty of their Wills, both by their Deeds and their Sufferings too. But, on the contrary, when Duty and Danger stand confronting one another, and when the Law of God says, Obey, and assist your King; and the faction says, Do if you dare. For Men in such a case, to think to divide themselves, and to pretend that their Will obeys that Law, while all besides their Will obeys, and serves the Faction; what is this but a gross, fulsome juggling with their Duty, and a kind of Trimming it between God and the Devil? These things I thought fit to remark to you, not out of any intemperate Hu∣mour of reflecting upon the late times of confusion, (as the guilt or spight of some
may suggest) but because I am satisfi∣ed in my Heart and Conscience, that it is vastly the concern of his Majesty, and of the peace of his Government, both in Church and State, that the youth of the Nation (of which such Auditories as this chiefly consist) should be principled, and possessed with a full, fixed, and through perswasion of the justness, and goodness of the Blessed Old King's Cause; and of the excellent Piety, and Christianity of those Principles upon which the Loyal part of the Nation adhered to him, and that against the most horrid and inex∣cusable Rebellion, that was ever set on foot, and acted upon the stage of the world: Of all which, whosoever is not perswaded, is a Rebel in his heart, and deserves not the protection which he en∣joys. And the rather do I think such Re∣marks as these necessary of late years, because of the vile arts, and restless en∣deavours, used by some sly, and ve∣nomous
factors for the old Republican Cause, to poyson and debauch Men from their Allegiance; sometimes creeping into Houses, and sometimes creeping into Stu∣dies; but in both equally pimping for the Faction, and stealing away as many Hearts from the Son, as they had for∣merly employed Hands against the Fa∣ther. And this with such success, that it cannot but be matter of very sad, and Melancholy reflexion, to all sober and Loyal minds, to consider, That several who had stood it out, and persevered firm, and unalterable Royallists in the late Storm, have since (I know not by what unhappy fate) turned Trimmers in the Calm. 3ly. The third instance, in which Men use to plead the Will instead of the Deed, shall be in Duties of Cost and Expence. Let a business of expensive Charity be proposed; and then, as I shew'd be∣fore, that, in matters of Labour, the La∣zy Person could find no hands where∣with
to Work; so neither, in this Case, can the Religious Miser find any hands wherewith to give It is wonderfull to consider, how a command, or call to be Liberal, either upon a Civil or Religious account, all of a sudden, impoverishes the Rich, breaks the Merchant, shuts up eve∣ry private Man's Exchequer, and makes those Men in a minute have nothing at all to give, who, at the very same instant, want nothing to spend. So that instead of releiving the poor, such a command strangely encreases their number, and transforms Rich Men into beggars pre∣sently. For, let the danger of their Prince and Country, knock at their Purses, and call upon them to contribute against a Publick enemy, or calamity; then imme∣diately they have nothing, and their Riches, upon such occasions (as Solomon expresses it) never fail to make themselves Wings, and to fly away. Thus, at the Siege of Constantinople, then the wealthiest City in the world,
the Citizens had nothing to give their Emperour for the defence of the place, though he begged a supply of them with tears; but, when by that means the Turks took and Sack'd it, then those who before had nothing to give, had more than enough to lose. And, in like man∣ner, those who would not support the necessities of the old Blessed King, against his Villainous Enemies, found that Plun∣der could take, where Disloyalty would not give; and Rapine open those Chests, that Avarice had shut. But, to descend to matters of daily, and common Occurrence; What is more u∣sual in conversation, than for Men to ex∣press their unwillingness to do a thing, by saying, They cannot do it; and for a Co∣vetous Man, being asked a little Money in Charity, to answer, That he has none? Which as it is, if true, a sufficient answer, to God and Man; so, if false, it is into∣lerable Hypocrisy towards both. But, do men in good earnest think,
that God will be put off so? or can they imagine that the Law of God will be baffled with a Lye, cloathed in a Scoff? For such pretences are no better, as appears from that notable account, gi∣ven us by the Apostle of this windy, in∣significant Charity of the Will, and of the worthlesness of it, not enlivened by Deeds. Iames 2. v. 15, 16. If a Bro∣ther or a Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled: notwithstanding ye give them not those things that are needfull to the Body, what doth it profit? Profit, does he say? why, it profits just as much as fair words com∣mand the Market, as good wishes buy Food and Rayment, and pass for cur∣rent payment in the Shops. Come to an old, rich, professing Vulpony, and tell him, That there is a Church to be built, beautified, or endowed in such a place, and that he cannot lay out his Money more to God's Honour, the pub∣lick
good, and the comfort of his own Conscience, than to bestow it liberally up∣on such an occasion; and in answer to this, it is ten to one, but you shall be told, How much God is for the Inward, Spiritual, Worship of the Heart; and, That the Al∣mighty neither dwells, nor delights in Temples made with hands; but hears, and accepts the Prayers of his People in Dens, and Caves; Barns, and Stables; and in the homeliest, and meanest Cot∣tages, as well as in the stateliest, and most magnificent Churches. Thus I say, you are like to be answered. In reply to which, I would have all such sly, sanctified Cheats (who are so often harp∣ing upon this string) know, once for all, That, that God, who accepts the Pray∣ers of his People in Dens, and Caves; Barns, and Stables, when, by his afflict∣ing Providence, he has driven them from the appointed places of his solemn Wor∣ship, so that they cannot have the use of them, will not, for all this, endure to be
served, or prayed to by them in such places, nor accept of their Barn-Wor∣ship, nor their Hogsty-Worship; no, nor yet of their Parlour, or their Chamber-Worship, where he has given them both Wealth & Power to build him Churches. For he that commands us to Worship him in the Spirit, commands us also to Honour him with our Substance. And, never pretend that thou hast an heart to Pray, while thou hast no heart to give; since he that serves Mammon with his Estate, cannot possibly serve God with his Heart. For, as in the Heathen Worship of God, a Sacrifice, without an Heart, was accounted Ominous; so in the Christian Worship of him, an Heart without a Sacrifice is worth∣less and impertinent. And thus much for mens pretences of the Will, when they are called upon to Give, upon a Religious account: according to which, a man may be well enough said (as the common word is) to be all Heart, and yet the arrantest Miser in the World.
But, come we now to this old, rich, pretender to Godliness, in another case, and tell him, That there is such an one, a man of a good Family, good Educa∣tion, and who has lost all his Estate for the King, now ready to rot in Prison for Debt; come, what will you give to∣wards his release? Why, then answers the Will, instead of the Deed, as much the rea∣dier speaker of the two, The truth is, I al∣ways had a respect for such Men; I love them with all my heart; and it is a thousand pities that any that have ser∣ved the King so faithfully, should be in such want. So say I too, and the more shame is it for the whole Nation, that they should be so. But still, what will you give? Why, then answers the Man of Mouth-Charity again, and tells you, That you could come in a worse Time; That money is now-a-days very scarce with him; and, that therefore he can give nothing, but he will be sure to pray for the poor Gentleman.
Ah thou Hypocrite! when thy Bro∣ther has lost all that ever he had, and lies languishing, and even gasping under the utmost extremities of poverty and distress, dost thou think thus to lick him whole again, only with thy Tongue? just like that old formal Hocus, who denyed a Beggar a farthing, and put him off with his Blessing. Why? what are the Prayers of a Co∣vetous Wretch worth? what will thy Blessing go for? what will it buy? Is this the Charity that the Apostle, here, in the Text, presses upon the Corinthians? This the case, in which God accepts the Willing∣ness of the Mind, instead of the Liberali∣ty of the Purse? No assuredly: But the Measures that God marks out to thy Cha∣rity, are these: Thy Superfluities must give place to thy Neighbour's great Con∣venience: Thy Convenience must veil to thy Neighbour's Necessity: And lastly, Thy very Necessities must yield to thy Neighbour's Extremity.
This is the Gradual Process that must be thy Rule; and, he that pretends a Dis∣ability to Give, short of this, prevaricates with his Duty, and evacuates the Precept. God sometimes calls upon thee to relieve the Needs of thy poor Brother, some∣times the Necessities of thy Country, and, sometimes the urgent Wants of thy Prince: Now, before thou flyest to the old, stale, usual pretence, That thou canst do none of all these things, consider with thy self, That there is a God, who is not to be flamm'd off with Lyes, who knows exactly, what thou canst do, and what thou canst not; and consider, in the next place, that it is not the best Husbandry in the world, to be Damn'd to save Char∣ges. 4thly. The fourth and last Duty, that I shall mention, in which men use to plead want of Power to Doe the thing they have a Will to, is, The conquering of a long, inveterate, ill Habit, or Custom. And, the truth is, there is nothing that
leaves a man less power to good, than this does. Nevertheless, that which wea∣kens the hand, does not therefore cut it off. Some Power to good, no doubt, a man has left him for all this. And there∣fore, God will not take the Drunkard's Excuse, That he has so long accustom'd himself to Intemperate Drinking, that now he cannot leave it off; nor admit of the Passionate man's Apology, That he has so long given his Unruly Passions their Head, that he cannot now Govern or Controul them. For, these things are not so: Since no man is guilty of an Act of Intemperance of any sort, but he might have forborn it; not without some trou∣ble, I confess, from the strugglings of the contrary Habit: but still the thing was Possible to be done; and he might, after all, have forborn it. And, as he forbore one Act, so he might have forborn ano∣ther, and after that another, and so on, till he had, by degrees, weakned, and, at length, mortified and extinguished the Ha∣bit
it self. That these things indeed, are not quickly or easily to be effected, is manifest, and nothing will be more rea∣dily granted; and therefore the Scri∣pture it self owns so much, by expressing, and representing these mortifying courses, by Acts of the greatest toil and labour; such as are, Warfare, and taking up the Cross: And by Acts of the most terrible Violence and Contrariety to Nature; such as are, Cutting off the Right Hand, and Plucking out the Right Eye: things infinitely grei∣vous and afflictive, yet still, for all that, feasible in themselves; or else, to be sure, the Eternal Wisdom of God, would ne∣ver have advised, and much less have commanded them. For, what God has commanded must be done; and, what must be done, assuredly may be done; and therefore, all Pleas of Impotence, or Inability, in such Cases, are utterly false, and impertinent; and will infallibly be thrown back in the Face of such as make them.
But you will say, Does not the Scrip∣ture it self, acknowledge it as a thing im∣possible, for a man, brought under a cu∣stom of sin, to forbear sinning? in Ier. 13.23. Can the AEthiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? then may ye also doe good, that are accustomed to doe evil. Now, if this can be no more done than the former, is it not a Demonstration, that it cannot be done at all? To this I answer, That the Words mentioned are Tropical or Figurative, and import an Hyperbole, which is a way of expressing things beyond what really, and naturally they are in themselves; and consequently the design of this Scripture, in saying that this cannot be done, is no more than to shew, That it is very hardly, and very rarely done; but not in strict truth, utterly impossible to be done. In vain therefore do men take Sanctu∣ary in such misunderstood expressions as these; and, from a false perswasion, that they cannot Reform their Lives, break
off their ill Customs, and root out their old, vicious Habits, never so much as at∣tempt, endeavour, or go about it. For, admit, that such an Habit, seated in the Soul, be, as our Saviour calls it, a Strong Man armed, got into Possession; yet still he may be dispossessed, and thrown out by a Stronger, Luke 11.21, 22. Or, be it, as St. Paul calls it, A Law in our Members, Rom. 7.23. yet certainly, Ill Laws may be Broken and Disobeyed, as well as Good. But, if Men will suffer themselves to be enslaved, and carried away by their Lusts, without Resistance, and, wear the Devil's Yoke quietly, rather than be at the trou∣ble of throwing it off; and, thereupon, sometimes feel their Consciences galled and greived by wearing it, they must not, from these secret Stings and Remor∣ses, felt by them in the Prosecution of their sins, presently conclude, That there∣fore their Will is good, and well-disposed; and consequently, such as God will ac∣cept though their Lives remain all the
while unchanged, and as much under the dominion of sin as ever. These Reasonings, I know, lie deep in the minds of most Men, and relieve and support their hearts, in spight, and in the midst of their sins; but they are all but So∣phistry, and Delusion, and false Propositi∣ons, contrived by the Devil, to hold Men fast in their sins, by final impenitence. For, though possibly the grace of God may, in some cases, be irresistible; yet it would be an infinite reproach to his Providence, to affirm, That Sin either is, or can be so. And thus I have given you four Prin∣cipal Instances, in which Men use to plead the Will, instead of the Deed, upon a preten∣ded Impotence, or Disability for the Deed. Namely, In Duties of great labour: In Duties of much danger: In Duties of Cost and Expence: And lastly, In Duties requiring a Resistance, and an Extirpation of inveterate, sinfull Habits. In the neglect of all which, Men re∣lieve
their Consciences, by this one great fallacy, running through them all, That they mistake Difficulties, for Impossibilities. A Pernicious mistake certainly; and the more pernicious, for that Men are seldom convinced of it, 'till their conviction can do them no good. There cannot be a weightier, or more important case of Conscience, for Men to be resolved in, than to know certainly, how far God accepts the Will for the Deed, and how far he does not: And withal to be in∣formed truly when Men do really Will a Thing, and when they have real∣ly no Power to Doe, what they have Wil∣led. For surely, it cannot but be matter of very dreadfull, and Terrifying consi∣deration, to any one, Sober, and in his Wits, to think seriously with himself, what horror and confusion must needs surprize that Man, at the last, and great day of Account, who had lead his whole Life, and
governed all his Actions by one Rule, when God intends to judge him by another. To which God, the great Searcher and Iudge of Hearts, and Rewarder of Men according to their Deeds, be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH, Oxon. Before the University, Octob. 17. 1675.
JUDGES VIII.34, 35. And the Children of Israel remembred not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their Enemies, on every side. Neither shewed they kindness to the House of Ierubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel. THese words being a Result, or Judg∣ment given upon matter of fact, naturally direct us to the foregoing Sto∣ry, to inform us of their occasion. The subject of which Story, was that Heroick, and Victorious Judge of Israel, Gideon. Who, by the greatness of his Atchieve∣ments, had merited the offer of a Crown, and Kingdom, and, by the greatness of his mind, refused it. The whole Narrative
is contained, and set before us, in the 6. 7.8. and 9. Chapters of this Book. Where we read, that when the Children of Israel, according to their usual method of sinning, after Mercies and Delive∣rances, and thereupon returning to a fresh Enslavement to their Enemies, had now passed Seven years, in cruel Subjection to the Midianites, a potent, and insulting Enemy, and who oppres∣sed them to that degree, that they had scarce Bread to fill their Mouths, or Houses to cover their Heads: For in the 2d. v. of the 6. ch. we find them House∣ing themselves under ground, in Dens, and Caves: and in v. 3, 4. no sooner had they sown their Corn, but we have the Enemy coming up in Armies, and destroying it. In this sad and calamitous condition, I say, in which one would have thought, that a deliverance from such an oppressour, would have even re∣vived them, and the deliverer eternally obliged them, God raised up the Spirit
of this great Person, and ennobled his courage, and conduct with the Intire over∣throw of this mighty, and numerous, or rather innumerable Host of the Midiani∣tes; and that, in such a manner, and with such strange, and unparallell'd Cir∣cumstances, that, in the whole Action, the Mercy, and the Miracle, seem'd to strive for the Preheminence. And, so quick a Sense, did the Israelites, immediately after it, seem to entertain of the Merits of Gi∣deon, and the obligation he had laid up∣on them, that they all as one Man, ten∣der him the Regal, and Hereditary Go∣vernment of that People, in the 22. v. of this 8th. ch. Then said the Men of Israel to Gideon, Rule thou over us; both thou, and thy Son, and thy Son's Son also, for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian. To which he answer'd as Magnanimously, and by that answer redoubled the obliga∣tion in the next verse, I will not rule over you, neither shall my Son rule over you, but the Lord shall rule over you.
Thus far then we see the Workings of a just Gratitude in the Israelites; and goodness on the one side, nobly answered with greatness on the other. And now, after so vast an Obligation, owned by so free an acknowledgment, could any thing be expected, but a continual interchange of Kindnesses, at least on their part, who had been so infinitely Obliged, and so gloriously Delivered? Yet in the 9th. Chapter, we find these very Men turning the Sword of Gideon into his own Bowels; cutting off the very Race and Posterity of their Deliverer, by the slaughter of threescore and ten of his Sons, and setting up the Son of his Concubine, the Blot of his Family, and the Monument of his Shame, to Reign over them; and all this, without the least provocation, or offence given them, either by Gideon himself, or by any of his House. After which hor∣rid fact, I suppose we can no longer wonder at this unlookt for account, gi∣ven of the Israelites in the Text: That, they
remembred not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their Enemies on every side. Neither shewed they kindness to the House of Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel. The truth is, they were all along, a cross, odd, untoward sort of People, and such, as God seems to have chosen, and (as the Prophets sometimes phrase it) to have espoused to himself, upon the very same account that Socrates espoused Xantippe, only for her extreme ill conditions, above all that he could possibly find, or pick out of that Sex; and so, the fittest Ar∣gument both to exercise, and declare his admirable Patience to the world. The words of the Text, are a charge given in against the Israelites; a charge of that foul, and odious sin of Ingratitude; and that both towards God, and towards Man. Towards God in the 34th. v. and towards. Man in the 35th. Such being ever the growing contagion of this ill quality, that if it begins at God,
it naturally descends to Men; and if it first exerts it self upon Men, it infallibly ascends to God. If we consider it as directed against God, it is a Breach of Religion, if as to Men, it is an offence against Morality. The passage from one to the other is very easy. Breach of of Duty towards our Neighbour, still involving in it a Breach of Duty to∣wards God too; and no Man's Religi∣on ever survives his Morals. My purpose is, from this remarkable Subject, and occasion, to treat of Ingra∣titude, and that chiefly in this latter sence: and from the case of the Israelites, to∣wards Gideon, to traverse the Nature, Principles, and Properties of this detesta∣ble Vice; and so drawing before your Eyes the several Lineaments, and Parts of it, from the ugly aspect of the Pi∣cture, to leave it to your own hearts to judge of the original. For the Effecting of which, I shall do these following Things.
I. I shall shew, what gratitude is, and upon what the obligation to it, is ground∣ed. II. I shall give some account of the nature, and baseness of Ingratitude. III. I shall shew the Principle, from which Ingratitude proceeds. IV. I shall shew those ill qualities, that inseparably attend it, and are never disjoyn'd from it. And, V. and lastly, I shall draw some use∣full Inferences, by way of Application, from the Premises. And first, for the first of these: What gratitude is, and upon what the obligation to it, is grounded. Gratitude is properly a vertue, dispo∣sing the mind to an Inward sense, and an outward acknowledgment of a Be∣nefit received, together with a readiness to return the same, or the like, as the occasions of the Doer of it shall re∣quire, and the Abilities of the Recei∣ver extend to.
This, to me, seems to contain a full Description; or, rather, Definition of this Vertue. From which it appears, that Gratitude includes in it these three parts. 1. A particular Observation, or ta∣king notice of a kindness received, and con∣sequently of the good Will and Affection of the Person, who did that kindness. For still, in this case, the mind of the giver is more to be attended to, than the mat∣ter of the Gift: it being this, that stamps it properly a favour, and gives it the no∣ble and endearing denomination of a Kindness. 2. The 2d. part of Gratitude is that, which brings it from the Heart, into the Mouth, and makes a Man express the sense he has of the benefit done him, by Thanks, Acknowledgments, and Gra∣tulations; and where the Heart is full of the one, it will certainly over flow, and run over in the other. 3. The third, and last is An endea∣vour to recompence our Benefactour,
and to do something that may redound to his advantage, in consideration of what he has done towards Ours. I state it upon En∣deavour, and not upon Effect; for this lat∣ter may be often Impossible. But it is in the Power of every one, to do as much as he can: to make some essay at least, some offer and attempt this way; so as to shew, that there is a spring of motion within, and that the heart is not idle, or insensible, but that it is full and big, and knows it self to be so, though it wants strength to bring forth. Having thus shewn what Gratitude is, the next thing is, to shew the Obligation that it brings upon a Man, and the Ground and Reason of that Obligation. As for the obligation, I know no Moralists, or Casuists, that treat Scholasti∣cally of Iustice, but treat of Gratitude un∣der that general Head, as a part or spe∣cies of it. And the Nature, and Office of Justice, being to dispose the mind to a constant, and perpetual readiness to
render to every Man his Due, Suum cui∣que tribuere, it is Evident that, if Grati∣tude be a part of Justice, it must be con∣versant about some thing that is due to another. And whatsoever is so, must be so by the force of some Law. Now, all Law, that a Man is capable of be∣ing obliged by, is reducible to one of these three. 1. The Law of Nature. 2dly. The Positive Law of God, revealed in his Word. 3dly. The Law of Man, enact∣ed by the civil Power, for the Preservati∣on, and Good of Society. 1. And first, for the Law of Nature, which I take to be nothing else, but the mind of God, signified to a Rational agent by the bare discourse of his Rea∣son, and dictating to him, that he ought to act sutably to the Principles of his Na∣ture, and to those Relations, that he stands under. For every thing sustains both an Absolute, and a Relative Capacity. An Absolute, as it is such a thing, endued with
such a Nature; and a Relative, as it is a Part of the Universe, and so stands in such an Order, and Relation, both to the Whole, and to the rest of the Parts. After which, the next Consideration, immediately subsequent to the Being of a thing, is what agrees, or disagrees, with that thing; what is sutable or unsutable to it: and from this springs the Notion of Decencyor Undecency; that which be∣comes or mis-becomes, and is the same with Honestum & Turpe. Which De∣cency, or , (as the Greeks term it) imports a certain measure or proportion of one thing to another; which to trans∣gress, is to do contrary to the Natural order of things; the preservation of which, is properly that Rule, or Law, by which every thing ought to act; and consequently, the Violation of it implies a Turpitude or Undecency. Now those Actions that are sutable to a Rational Nature, and to that , that Decency, or Honestum, belonging to it, are contain∣ed,
and expressed in certain Maxims or Propositions, which, upon the repeated exercise of a Man's Reason about such Objects as come before him, do natu∣rally result, and are collected from thence; and so remaining upon his Mind, become both a Rule to Direct, and a Law to Ob∣lige him in the Whole Course of his Acti∣ons. Such as are these Maxims: That the Supreme Being, Cause, and Governour of all things, ought to be worshipped and depen∣ded upon. That Parents are to be Honour∣ed. That a man should do as he would be done by. From which last alone, may sufficiently be deduced all those Rules of Charity and Justice that are to govern the Offices of Common Life; and which alone is enough to found an Obligation to Gratitude: For as much as no man, having done a kindness to another, would acquiesce, or think himself justly dealt with, in a total Neglect and Unconcern∣edness of the Person who had received that kindness from him; and consequent∣ly,
neither ought he to be Unconcerned in the same case himself. But I shall from other and nearer Principles, and those the unquestionable Documents and Dictates of the Law of Nature, evince the Obligation and Debt lying upon every man, to shew Grati∣tude, where he has received a Benefit. Such as are these Propositions. 1. That, according to the Rule of Na∣tural Justice, one man may merit and deserve of another. 2. That, whosoever deserves of another, makes something due to him from the person of whom he deserves. 3. That, One Man's deser∣ving of another, is founded upon his con∣ferring on him some Good, to which that Other had no Right or Claim. 4. That, no man has any Antecedent Right or Claim to that which comes to him by free gift. Fifthly, and Lastly, That, all Desert imports an equality between the good Conferred, and the good De∣served, or made Due. From whence it
follows, That He who conferrs a Good upon another, Deserves, and consequent∣ly has, a Claim to an equal Good from the Person upon whom it was Conferred. So that from hence, by the Law of Na∣ture, springs a Debt; the acknowledg∣ing and re-paying of which Debt (as a man shall be able) is the proper Office and Work of Gratitude. As certain therefore, as by the Law of Nature there may be, and often is, such a thing as Merit and Desert from one man to another; and as Desert gives the person deserving a Right or Claim to some good from the person of whom he deserves; and as a Right in one to Claim this Good, inferrs a Debt and Obligation in the other to pay it; So certain it is, by a direct Gradation of Consequences from this Principle of Merit, that the Obligation to Gratitude flows from, and is enjoyn'd by, the first Dictates of Na∣ture. And, the truth is, the greatest and most Sacred ties of Duty, that Man is
capable of, are founded upon Gratitude. Such as are the Duties of a Child to his Parent, and of a Subject to his Sove∣reign. From the former of which, there is required Love and Honour, in recom∣pence of Being; and from the latter, Obedience and Subjection, in recompence of Protection and Well-being. And in General, if the conferring of a Kindness did not bind the person upon whom it was conferred, to the returns of Grati∣tude, why, in the Universal Dialect of the World, are Kindnesses still called Obli∣gations? And thus much for the first ground, enforcing the Obligations of Gratitude; namely, the Law of Nature. In the next Place, 2. As for the Positive Law of God revealed in his Word, it is evident, that Gratitude must needs be enjoyned, and made necessary by all those Scrip∣tures, that upbraid or forbid Ingrati∣tude: as in 2 Tim. 3.2. The Unthankfull
stand reckoned among the highest and most enormous Sinners; which suffici∣ently evinces the Vertue opposite to Un∣thankfulness to bear the same place in the rank of Duties, that its contrary does in the Catalogue of Sins. And the like, by consequence, is inferr'd from all those pla∣ces, in which we are commanded to Love our Enemies, and to do good to those that hate us: And therefore certainly much more are we by the same commanded, to do good to those that have prevented us with good, and actually obliged us. So that it is manifest, that by the Positive written Law of God, no less than by the Law of Nature, Gratitude is a Debt. 3. In the Third and Last place: As for the Laws of Men, Enacted by the Civil Power; it must be confessed, that Gra∣titude is not enforced by them: I say, not enforced; that is, not enjoyned by the Sanction of Penalties, to be in∣flicted upon the Person that shall not be found Gratefull. I grant indeed, that
many Actions are punish'd by Law, that are Acts of Ingratitude; but this is mere∣ly accidental to them, as they are such Acts; for if they were punished proper∣ly under that Notion, and upon that account, the punishment would equally reach all Actions of the same kind; but they are punish'd and provided against by Law, as they are gross and dange∣rous Violations of Society, and that Common Good, that it is the Business of the Civil Laws of all Nations to pro∣tect, and to take care of. Which Good not being violated or endangered by e∣very Omission of Gratitude between Man and Man, the Laws make no peculiar provision to secure the Exercise of this Vertue, but leave it as they found it, sufficiently enjoyn'd, and made a Duty by the Law of God and Nature. Though in the Roman Law indeed, there is this particular provision against the Breach of this Duty, in case of Slaves: That if a Lord Manumits, and makes
Free his Slave, gross Ingratitude in the person so made Free, forfeits his Free∣dom, and Re-asserts him to his former Condition of Slavery; Though, perhaps, even this also, upon an Accurate consi∣deration, will be found not a Provision against Ingratitude, properly and for∣mally as such, but as it is the Ingratitude of Slaves, which if left unpunish'd in a Common-wealth, where it was the Cu∣stom for Men to be served by Slaves, as in Rome it was, would quickly have been a Publick Nusance and Disturbance; for such is the peculiar Insolence of this sort of Men, such the uncorrigible Vileness of all slavish Spirits, that though Free∣dom may rid them of the Baseness of their Condition, yet it never takes off the Base∣ness of their Minds. And now, having shewn both, what Gratitude is, and the Ground and Rea∣son of Men's obligation to it; we have a full account of the proper and parti∣cular Nature of this Vertue, as consisting
adequately in these two Things: First, That it is a Debt; and, secondly, That it is such a Debt as is left to every Man's Ingenuity (in respect of any Legal Co-action) whether he will pay or no; for there lies no Action of Debt against him, if he will not. He is in danger of no Ar∣rest, bound over to no Assize, nor forced to hold up his unworthy Hand (the In∣strument of his Ingratitude) at any Barr. And this it is that shews the rare and di∣stinguishing Excellency of Gratitude, and sets it as a Crown upon the Head of all other Vertues, that it should plant such an over-ruling Generosity in the Heart of Man, as shall more effectually encline him to what is brave and becoming, than the Terrour of any Penal Law what∣soever. So that he shall feel a greater force upon himself from within, and from the Controll of his own Principles, to en∣gage him to do worthily, than all Threat∣nings and Punishments, Racks and Tor∣tures, can have upon a low and servile
Mind, that never acts vertuously, but as it is acted, that knows no Principle of Doing well, but Fear; no Conscience, but Constraint. On the contrary; the Gratefull person fears no Court, or Judge, no Sentence or Executioner, but what he carries about him in his own Breast: And being still the most severe exactor of Himself, not only confesses, but pro∣claims his Debts: his Ingenuity is his Bond, and his Conscience a thousand Witnesses: So that the Debt must needs be sure, yet he scorns to be Sued for it; nay, rather, he is always suing, impor∣tuning, and even reproaching himself, till he can clear accounts with his Bene∣factour. His Heart is (as it were) in continual labour, it even travails with the Obligation, and is in pangs till it be delivered: and (as David in the over∣flowing Sense of God's Goodness to him) cries out in the 116 Psalm, verse 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits towards me? So the Gratefull
person, pressed down under the appre∣hension of any great kindness done him, eases his burthened mind a little by such Expostulations with himself as these. What shall I do for such a Friend, for such a Patron, who has so frankly, so generously, so unconstrainedly, relieved me in such a Distress; supported me against such an Enemy; supplied, che∣rished, and upheld me, when Relati∣ons would not know me, or at least could not help me; and, in a word, has prevented my Desires, and out∣done my Necessities? I can never do enough for him; my own Conscience would spit in my face, should I ever slight or forget such Favours. These are the Expostulating Dialogues and Contests, that every Gratefull, every truly Noble and Magnanimous Person has with himself. It was, in part, a brave Speech of Lu. Cornelius Sylla, the Roman Dictator, who said, That, He found no sweetness in being Great or Powerfull, but
only that it enabled him to Crush his Enemies, and to Gratifie his Friends. I cannot warrant or defend the first part of this Saying; but, surely, he that imploys his Greatness in the latter, be he never so great, it must and will make him still greater. And thus much for the first General thing proposed; which was, to shew, What Gratitude is, and upon what the Obligation to it is grounded. I proceed now to the Second, Which is to give some account of the Nature and Baseness of Ingra∣titude. There is not any one Vice, or ill Qua∣lity, incident to the mind of Man; against which, the World has raised such a loud and universal Out-cry, as against Ingra∣titude: A Vice, never mention'd by any Heathen Writer, but with a particular height of Detestation; and of such a Malignity, that Human Nature must be stript of Humanity it self, before it can be guilty of it. It is instead of all other
Vices; and, in the Balance of Morality, a Counterpoise to them all. In the Charge of Ingratitude, Omnia dixeris: It is one great Blot upon all Morality: It is all in a word: It says Amen to the Black Roll of Sins: It gives Completion and Confirmation to them all. If we would state the Nature of it, Recourse must be had to what has been already said of its contrary: and so it is properly an Insensibility of kindnesses received, without any Endeavour either to acknowledge or re-pay them. To re-pay them, indeed, by a Return equivalent, is not in every one's Power, and, consequently, cannot be his Duty; but Thanks are a Tribute payable by the poorest: The most forlorn Widow has her two Mites; and there is none so in∣digent, but has an Heart to be sensible of, and a Tongue to express its Sense of a Benefit received. For surely Nature gives no man a Mouth to be always Eating, and never
saying Grace; nor an Hand only to grasp, and to receive: But as it is furnished with Teeth for the One, so it should have a Tongue also for the Other; and the Hands that are so often reach'd out to Take, and to Accept, should be, sometimes, lifted up also to Bless. The World is maintain'd by Intercourse; and, the whole Course of Nature is a great Exchange, in which One good turn, is, and ought to be, the stated price of A∣nother. If you consider the Universe as one Body, you shall find Society and Con∣versation to supply the Office of the Blood and Spirits; and it is Gratitude that makes them Circulate: Look over the whole Creation, and you shall see, that the Band or Cement that holds to∣gether all the Parts of this great and glorious Fabrick, is Gratitude, or some∣thing like it: You may observe it in all the Elements; for does not the Air feed the Flame? and does not the Flame at
the same time warm and enlighten the Air? Is not the Sea always sending forth, as well as taking in? And does not the Earth quit Scores with all the Elements, in the Noble Fruits and Productions that issue from it? And in all the Light and Influence that the Heavens bestow upon this Lower World, though the Lower World cannot equal their Benefaction, yet with a kind of Gratefull return, it reflects those Rays, that it cannot recom∣pence; so that there is some Return how∣ever, though there can be no Requital. He who has a Soul wholly void of Gra∣titude, should do well to set his Soul to learn of his Body; for all the Parts of that minister to one another. The Hands, and all the other Limbs, labour to bring in Food and Provision to the Stomach, and the Stomach returns what it has received from them, in Strength and Nutriment, diffused into all the Parts and Members of the Body. It would be endless to pursue the like Allusions: In
short, Gratitude is the great Spring that sets all the Wheels of Nature a-going; and the whole Universe is supported, by Giving and Returning, by Commerce and Commutation. And now thou Ungratefull Brute, thou Blemish to Mankind, and Reproach to thy Creation; what shall we say of thee, or to what shall we compare thee? for thou art an Exception from all the visible World; neither the Heavens above, nor the Earth beneath, afford any thing like thee: And therefore, if thou would'st find thy Paral∣lel, go to Hell, which is both the Re∣gion, and the Emblem of Ingratitude; for, besides thy self, there is nothing but Hell, that is always Receiving, and never Restoring. And thus much for the Nature and Baseness of Ingratitude, as it has been re∣presented in the Description given of it. Come we now to the Third Thing proposed, which is to shew the Principle, from which it proceeds.
And to give you this in one word, It proceeds from that which we call Ill-nature. Which being a word that oc∣currs frequently in discourse, and in the Characters given of Persons; it will not be amiss, to enquire into the proper Sence, and Signification of this Expression. In order to which, we must observe, that according to the Doctrine of the Phi∣losopher, Man being a Creature designed, and framed by Nature for Society, and Conversation. Such a Temper, or dis∣position of Mind, as enclines him to those Actions, that promote Society, and mutual fellowship, is properly called good-Nature: Which Actions, though almost innumerable in their particulars, yet seem reduceable in general, to these Two Principles of Action. 1. A proneness to do good to o∣thers. 2. A ready Sense of any Good done by others.
And where these two meet together, as they are scarce ever found asunder, it is impossible for that Person not to be Kind, Beneficial, and Obliging to all whom he converses with. On the con∣trary, Ill-nature is such a Disposition, as enclines a Man to those Actions that thwart, and sower, and disturb Conver∣sation between Man, and Man; and ac∣cordingly consists of 2. Qualities, direct∣ly contrary to the former. 1. A Proneness to do ill turns, attended with a complacency, or secret joy of Mind up∣on the sight of any mischief that befals ano∣ther. And, 2ly. An utter insensibility of any good, or kindness done him by others. I mean not, that he is unsensible of the good it self, but, that although he finds, feels, and en∣joys the good that is done him, yet he is wholly unsensible, and unconcerned to value, or take notice of the Benignity of him that does it. Now either of these ill Qualities, and
much more both of them together, de∣nominate a Person Ill-natured; they be∣ing such as make him grievous, and un∣easy to all whom he deals, and associ∣ates himself with. For, from the former of these, proceed envy, an aptness to slan∣der and revile, to cross and hinder a Man in his Lawfull advantages. For these, and such like Actions feed and gra∣tify, that Base humour of Mind, which gives a Man a delight in making, at least in seeing, his Neighbour miserable: And from the latter, issues that vile thing which we have been hitherto speaking of, to wit, Ingratitude. Into which all Kind∣nesses, and good Turns fall as into a kind of dead Sea. It being a Quality that confines and (as it were) shuts up a Man wholly within himself, leaving him void of that Principle which alone should dis∣pose him to communicate and impart those redundancies of good, that he is possessed of. No Man ever goes sharer with the ungratefull Person; be he never
so full, he never runs over. But (like Gi∣deon's fleece) though fill'd and replenish'd with the Dew of Heaven himself, yet he leaves all dry and empty about him. Now this surely, if any thing, is an effect of Ill-nature. And what is Ill-na∣ture, but a pitch beyond Original Cur∣ruption? It is Corruptio pessimi. A further Depravation of that, which was stark naught before. But, so certainly does it shoot forth, and shew it self in this Vice, that wheresoever you see Ingratitude, you may as infallibly conclude, that there is a growing stock of Ill-nature in that Breast, as you may know that Man to have the Plague, upon whom you see the To∣kens. Having thus shewn you, from whence this Ill-quality proceeds, pass we now to the Fourth Thing propos'd, which is to shew those other Ill-qualities that inseparably attend Ingratitude, and are never disjoyned from it. It is a saying common in use, and True in Observation, That the Dispositi∣on,
and Temper of a Man, may be gathe∣red as well from his Companion, or As∣sociate, as from himself. And it holds in Qualities, as it does in Persons. It being seldom, or never, known that any great Vertue, or Vice, went alone; for Great∣ness in every thing will still be attended on. How Black, and Base a Vice Ingrati∣tude is, we have seen, by considering it, both in its own Nature, and in the Prin∣ciple from which it springs; and we may see the same yet more fully in those Vices, which it is always in combination with. Two of which I shall mention, as being of near Cognation to it, and constant Coherence with it. The first of which is Pride. And the second, Hard-heartedness or want of Compassion. 1. And first for Pride. This is of such Intimate, and even Essential Connexion with Ingratitude, that the Actings of In∣gratitude seem directly resolveable into Pride, as the principal Reason and Cause
of them. The original ground of Man's obligation to Gratitude was (as I have hinted) from this, That each Man has but a limited right to the good things of the World; and, that the Natural allowed way, by which he is to compass the pos∣session of these Things, is, by his own industrious acquisition of them; and con∣sequently, when any good is dealt forth to him any other way, than by his own labour, he is accountable to the Person who dealt it to him, as for a thing to which he had no Right, or Claim, by any Action of his own entitling him to it. But now, Pride shuts a Man's Eyes a∣gainst all this, and so fills him with an opinion of his own Transcendent worth, that he imagines himself to have a Right to all things, as well those that are the effects and fruits of other Men's labours as of his own. So that if any advan∣tage accrues to him, by the liberality and Donation of his Neighbour, he looks
not upon it as matter of free, undeserved Gift, but rather as a just Homage to that worth and Merit which he conceives to be in himself, and to which all the World ought to become Tributary. Upon which thought no wonder, if he reckons himself wholly unconcerned to acknowledge or re∣pay any good that he receives. For, while the Courteous Person thinks that he is obliging, and doing such an one a kind∣ness, the Proud Person, on the other side, accounts him to be only paying a Debt. His Pride makes him even worship, and idolize himself: and indeed, every proud, ungratefull Man has this property of an Idol, that, though he is plyed with never so many, and so great Offerings, yet he takes no notice of the Offerer at all. Now, this is the true account of the most inward Movings, and Reasonings of the very Heart, and Soul of an Un∣gratefull Person. So that you may rest upon this as a Proposition of an Eter∣nal, unfailing Truth, that there neither
is, nor ever was any person remarkably ungratefull, who was not also insuffera∣bly Proud; nor, convertibly, any one Proud, who was not equally ungratefull. For, as snakes breed in Dunghills not singly, but in Knots, so in such base, noysom Hearts, you shall ever see Pride and Ingratitude indivisibly wreathed, and twisted together. Ingratitude over looks all Kindnesses, but it is, because Pride makes it carry its head so high. See the greatest Examples of Ingrati∣tude equally notorious for their Pride, and Ambition. And to begin with the Top and Father of them all, the Devil himself. That excellent and glorious Nature which God has oblig'd him with, could not prevent his Ingratitude, and Apostacy, when his Pride bid him a∣spire to an Equality with his Maker, and say, I will ascend, and be like the Most High. And, did not our first Parents write exactly after his Copy? Ingratitude making them to trample upon the Com∣mand,
because Pride made them desire to be as Gods, and to brave Omniscience it self in the knowledge of Good and Evil? What made that ungratefull wretch, Abso∣lom, kick at all the kindnesses of his Indul∣gent Father, but because his Ambition would needs be fingering the Scepter, and hoisting him into his Father's Throne? And in the Courts of Princes, is there any thing more usual than to see those that have been raised by the favour, and interest of some great Minister, to tram∣ple upon the steps by which they rose, to rival him in his Greatness, and at length (if possible) to step into his place? In a word, Ingratitude is too base, to return a kindness, and too Proud to regard it; much like the tops of Mountains, Barren indeed, but yet Lofty; they pro∣duce nothing, they feed no Body, they cloath no Body, yet are high, and state∣ly, and look down upon all the world about them.
2. The other Concomitant of Ingrati∣tude is Hard-heartedness, or want of Com∣passion. This, at first, may seem to have no great Cognation with Ingratitude; but upon a due inspection into the Na∣ture of that ill Quality it will be found directly to follow it, if not also to result from it. For the Nature of Ingratitude, being founded in such a disposition, as encloses all a Man's concerns within himself, and consequently, gives him a perfect uncon∣cernedness in all things, not judged by him immediately to relate to his own interest; it is no wonder, if the same temper of mind, which makes a Man un∣apprehensive of any good done him by o∣thers, makes him equally unapprehensive, and insensible of any Evil, or Misery suffered by others. No such thought e∣ver strikes his Marble, obdurate Heart, but it presently flies off and rebounds from it. And the truth is, it is impossible for a Man to be perfect, and thorough-paced
in Ingratitude, till he has shook of all Fetters of Pity and Compassion. For all Relenting, and Tenderness of heart, makes a Man but a puny in this sin; it spoils the Growth, and cramps the last and Crowning exploits of this Vice. Ingratitude indeed put the Ponyard in∣to Brutus's hand; but it was want of com∣passion which thrust it into Caesar's Heart. When some fond, easy Fathers think fit to strip themselves before they lie down to their long sleep, and to set∣tle their whole Estates upon their Sons, has it not been too frequently seen that the Father has been requited with Want, and Beggary, Scorn and Contempt? But now, could bare Ingratitude (think we) have ever have made any one so Un∣natural, and Diabolical, had not Cruel∣ty, and Want of Pity came in as a Second to its Assistance, and clear'd the Villain's Breast of all Remainders of Humanity? Is it not this, which has made so many Miserable Parents even curse their own
Bowels, for bringing forth Children that seem to have none? Did not this make Agrippina, Nero's Mother, cry out to the Assassinate sent by her Son to Murder her, to direct his Sword to her Belly, as be∣ing the only Criminal for having brought forth such a Monster of Ingratitude into the world? And to give you yet an high∣er instance of the Conjunction of these two Vices, since nothing could transcend the Ingratitude, and Cruelty of Nero, but the Ingratitude and Cruelty of an Imperious Woman. When Tullia, Daugh∣ter of Servius Tullius 6th. King of Rome, having marryed Tarquinius Superbus, and put him first upon Killing her Father, and then invading his Throne, came through the Street where the Body of her Father lay newly Murdred and wallow∣ing in his Blood, She commanded her Trembling Coach-man to drive her Cha∣riot and Horses over the Body of her King, and Father triumphantly, in the face of all Rome, looking upon her with
Astonishment and Detestation. Such was the Tenderness, Gratitude, Filial Affection, and good Nature of this weaker Vessel. And then, for Instances, out of Sacred Story; to go no further than this of Gideon; Did not Ingratitude first make the Israelites forget the Kindness of the Fa∣ther, and then Cruelty make them im∣brue their hands in the Blood of his Sons? could Pharaoh's Butler so quickly have for∣got Ioseph, had not want of Gratitude to him as his Friend, met with an equal want of compassion to him as his Fellow-Prisoner? a poor, innocent, forlorn, Stranger, languishing in Durance upon the false accusations of a lying, insolent, whorish Woman! I might even weary you with Exam∣ples of the like Nature, both sacred and civil, all of them representing Ingratitude (as it were) sitting in its Throne, with Pride at its Right hand, and Cruelty at its Left, worthy Supporters of such a State∣ly Quality, such a Reigning Impiety.
And it has been sometimes observed, that persons signally and eminently ob∣liged, yet missing of the utmost of their greedy designs in Swallowing both Gifts and Giver too, instead of Thanks for re∣ceived Kindnesses, have betook themselves to barbarous Threatnings, for defeat of their insatiable Expectations. Upon the whole matter, we may firmly conclude, That Ingratitude and Compassion, never cohabit in the same Breast. Which remark I do here so much insist upon, to shew the Superlative malignity of this Vice, and the baseness of the Mind in which it dwells: for we may with great Confidence and equal Truth affirm, That since there was such a thing as Mankind in the world, there never was any heart truly great and generous, that was not also tender, and compassionate. It is this noble Quality that makes all Men to be of one Kind, for every Man would be (as it were) a distinct species to him∣self, were there no sympathy amongst In∣dividuals.
And thus I have done with the Fourth Thing proposed, and shewn the Two Vices that inseparably attend Ingratitude; and now, if Falsehood also, should chance to strike in as the Third, and make up the Triumvirate of its attendants, so that In∣gratitude, Pride, Cruelty, and Falsehood, should all meet together and joyn forces in the same Person; as not only very of∣ten, but for the most part they doe; in this case, if the Devils themselves should take Bodies, and come and live amongst us, they could not be greater Plagues and Greivances to Society, than such per∣sons. From what has been said, let no man ever think to meet Ingratitude single and alone. It is one of those Grapes of Gall, mentioned by Moses, Deuteron. 32. v. 32. and therefore expect always to find it One of a Cluster. I proceed now to the Fifth and Last thing proposed, which is, to draw some usefull Consequences by
way of Application, from the Premises. As, 1. Never enter into a League of Friend∣ship with an ungratefull Person. That is, plant not thy Friendship upon a Dung∣hill. It is too noble a Plant for so base a Soil. Friendship consists properly in mutual offices, and a generous strife in Alternate Acts of Kindness. But he who does a Kindness to an ungratefull Person, sets his Seal to a Flint, and sows his Seed upon the Sand: Upon the former he makes no Impression, and from the lat∣ter he finds no Production. The only Voice of Ingratitude, is, Give, give; but when the Gift is once received, then, like the Swine at his Trough, it is silent and insatiable. In a word, the Un∣gratefull person is a Monster which is all Throat and Belly; a kind of thorough∣fare, or common-shore, for the good things of the world to pass into; and of whom, in respect of all Kindnesses con∣ferr'd
on him, may be verified that Ob∣servation of the Lion's Den; before which, appeared the foot-steps of many that had gone in thither, but no prints of any that ever came out thence. The Ungratefull person is the only thing in Nature, for which no body living, is the better. He lives to himself, and subsists by the Good Nature of others, of which, he himself, has not the least grain. He is a mere encroachment upon Society, and, con∣sequently, ought to be thrust out of the World as a Pest, and a Prodigy, and a Creature of the Devil's making, and not of God's. 2dly. As a man tolerably discreet ought by no means to attempt the ma∣king of such an one his Friend; so nei∣ther is he, in the next place, to presume to think, that he shall be able, so much as to alter or meliorate the Humour of an Ungratefull person, by any Acts of Kindness, though never so frequent, ne∣ver so obliging.
Philosophy will teach the Learned, and Experience may teach all, that it is a thing hardly feasible. For, Love such an one, and he shall despise you. Com∣mend him, and, as occasion serves, he shall revile you. Give to him, and he shall but laugh at your easiness. Save his life; but when you have done, look to your own. The greatest Favours to such an one, are but like the Motion of a Ship upon the Waves; they leave no trace, no sign, be∣hind them; they neither soften, nor win upon him; they neither melt, nor endear him, but leave him as hard, as rugged, and as unconcerned as ever. All Kind∣nesses descend upon such a Temper, as Showers of Rain, or Rivers of fresh Wa∣ter falling into the main Sea: The Sea swallows them all, but is not at all chan∣ged, or sweetned, by them. I may truly say of the Mind of an Ungratefull per∣son, that it is Kindness-proof. It is im∣penetrable, unconquerable; Unconquer∣able
by that, which conquers all things else, even by Love it self. Flints may be melted (we see it daily) but an Un∣gratefull heart cannot; no, not by the strongest and noblest Flame. After all your Attempts, all your Experiments, for any thing that Man can doe, He that is Ungratefull, will be Ungratefull still. And the reason is manifest; for you may remember, that I told you, that Ingrati∣tude sprang from a Principle of Ill-nature. Which being a thing founded in such a certain Constitution of Blood and Spi∣rits, as being born with a Man into the World, and upon that account called Nature, shall prevent all Remedies that can be applied by Education, and leaves such a Byass upon the Mind, as is before∣hand with all Instruction. So that you shall seldom or never meet with an Ungratefull person, but if you look backward, and trace him up to his Original, you will find that he was born so; and if you could look forward
enough, it is a Thousand to One, but you will find, that he also dies so; for, you shall never light upon an ill-natur'd Man, who was not also an ill-natur'd Child; and gave several Testimonies of his being so, to discerning Persons, long before the Use of his Reason. The thread that Nature spins, is sel∣dom broken off by any thing, but Death. I do not by this limit the Operation of God's Grace; for that may do Wonders: But humanly speaking, and according to the method of the World, and the little Correctives supplied by Art and Disci∣pline, it seldom fails, but an ill Princi∣ple has its Course, and Nature makes good its Blow. And therefore where In∣gratitude begins remarkably to shew it self, he surely judges most wisely, who takes the Alarm betimes; and arguing the Fountain from the Stream, concludes, that there is Ill-nature at the bottom; and so reducing his Judgment into Practice, timely withdraws his frustraneous, baffled
Kindnesses, and sees the folly of Endea∣vouring to stroke a Tyger into a Lamb, or to court an AEthiopian out of his Co∣lour. 3dly. In the Third and Last place. Wheresoever you see a Man notoriously Ungratefull, rest assured, that there is no true Sense of Religion in that Person. You know the Apostle's argument, in 1 Iohn 4.20. He who loveth not his Bro∣ther, whom he hath seen; how can he love God, whom he hath not seen? So, by an exact parity of Reason, we may argue. If a man has no Sense of those Kindnes∣ses that pass upon him, from One like himself, whom he sees, and knows, and converses with sensibly, how much less shall his Heart be affected with the grate∣full Sense of his Favours, whom he con∣verses with only by imperfect Specula∣tions, by the Discourses of Reason, or the Discoveries of Faith; neither of which equal the quick and lively Impressions of Sense? If the Apostles reasoning was
Good and Concluding, I am sure this must be Unavoidable. But the thing is too evident to need any proof. For shall that man pass for a Proficient in Christ's School, who would have been Exploded in the School of Zeno, or Epictetus? Or shall he pretend to Religious Attainments, who is defective and short in Moral? Which yet are but the Rudiments, the Beginnings, and first Draught of Religion; as Religion is the Perfection, the Refinement, and the Sub∣limation of Morality; so that it still pre-supposes it, it builds upon it, and Grace never adds the Superstructure, where Vertue has not laid the Founda∣tion. There may be Vertue indeed, and yet no Grace; but Grace is never without Vertue. And therefore, though Gratitude does not inferr Grace, it is certain that Ingratitude does exclude it. Think not to put God off by fre∣quenting Prayers, and Sermons, and
Sacraments, while thy Brother has an Action against thee in the Court of Hea∣ven; an Action of Debt, of that Cla∣morous and Great Debt of Gratitude. Rather, as our Saviour Commands, Leave thy Gift upon the Altar, and first go and clear accompts with thy Brother. God scorns a Gift from him who has not paid his Debts. Every Ungratefull person, in the sight of God and Man, is a Thief, and let him not make the Altar his Re∣ceiver. Where there is no Charity, it is certain, there can be no Religion; and can that man be Charitable, who is not so much as Just? In every Benefaction between Man and Man, Man is only the Dispencer, but God the Benfactour; and therefore let all Ungratefull Ones, know, that where Gra∣titude is the Debt, God himself is the chief Creditor: Who, though he causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall, upon the Evil and Unthankfull in this World, has
another kind of Reward for their Un∣thankfulness in the next. To which God, the great Searcher and Iudge of Hearts, and Rewarder of Men according to their Deeds, be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.
A SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH, Oxon. Before the University, Octob. 14. 1688.
PROV. XII.22. Lying Lips are abomination to the Lord. I Am very sensible, that by discour∣sing of Lyes and Falshood, which I have pitched upon for my present Subject, I must needs fall into a very large Common Place; though, yet not by half so large, and Common, as the Practice. Nothing in Nature being so Universally decryed, and withall so U∣niversally practised, as Falshood. So that, most of those things that have the mightiest, and most controlling Influ∣ence upon the Affairs, and Course of the World, are neither better, nor worse, than down-right Lyes. For, what is common Fame, which sounds from all Quarters of the World, and re-sounds back to them again, but generally a
Loud, Ratling, Impudent, Overbearing Lye? What are most of the Histories of the World, but Lyes? Lyes immorta∣lized, and consigned over as a perpetual Abuse, and Flam upon Posterity? What are most of the Promises of the World, but Lyes? Of which we need no other Proof, but our own Experience. And what are most of the Oaths in the World, but Lyes? And such as need rather a Pardon for being took, than a Dispen∣sation from being kept? And lastly, what are all the Religions of the World, except Judaism and Christianity, but Lyes? And even in Christianity it self, are there not those who teach, warrant, and defend Lying? And scarce use the Bible for any other Purpose, but to swear upon it, and to lye against it? Thus a mighty, governing Lye, goes round the World, and has almost ba∣nish'd Truth out of it; and so reigning Triumphantly in its stead, is the True Source of most of those Confusions, and
dire Calamities, that infest, and plague the Universe. For look over them all, and you shall find, that the greatest An∣noyance, and Disturbance of Mankind, has been from one of these Two things, Force, or Fraud. Of which, as boisterous, and violent a Thing as Force is, yet it rarely atchieves any thing considerable, but under the Conduct of Fraud. Slight of Hand has done that, which Force of Hand could never do. But why do we speak of Hands? It is the Tongue, that drives the World before it. The Tongue, and the Lying Lip, which there is no Fence against: For when that is the Weapon, a Man may strike where he cannot reach; and a Word shall do Execution, both fur∣ther, and deeper, than the mightiest Blow. For the Hand can hardly lift up it self high enough to strike, but it must be seen; so that, it warns, while it threat∣ens; but a false, insidious Tongue, may whisper a Lye so close, and low, that,
though you have Ears to hear, yet you shall not hear; and indeed, We generally come to know it, not by hearing, but by feeling what it says. A Man, perhaps, casts his Eye this way, and that way, and looks round a∣bout him, to spy out his Enemy, and to defend himself; but alass! the fatal Mis∣chief, that would trip up his Heels, is all the while under them. It works in∣visibly, and beneath: And the Shocks of an Earthquake (we know) are much more dreadfull, than the highest, and loudest Blusters of a Storm. For there may be some Shelter against the Vio∣lence of the One, but no Security a∣gainst the Hollowness of the Other: which never opens its Bosom, but for a killing Embrace. The Bowels of the Earth in such Cases, and the Mercies of the False in all, being equally without Compas∣sion. Upon the whole Matter, it is hard to assign any One Thing, but Lying, which
God, and Man, so unanimously joyn in the Hatred of; and it is as hard to tell, whether it does a greater Dishonour to God, or Mischief to Man: It is certainly, an Abomination to both: And I hope to make it appear such, in the following Discourse. Though I must confess my self, very unable to speak, to the utmost Latitude of this Subject; and I thank God, that I am so. Now the Words of the Text, are a Plain, Entire, Categorical Proposition; and therefore, I shall not go about to darken them, by any needless Explicati∣on, but shall immediately cast the Pro∣secution of them, under these Three fol∣lowing Particulars. As, 1st. I shall enquire into the Nature of a Lye, and the proper essential Malig∣nity of all Falshood. 2dly. I shall shew the pernicious Effects of it. And, 3dly. And lastly: I shall lay before you the Rewards, and Punishments, that
will certainly attend, or, at least, fol∣low it. Every one of which, I suppose, and, much more, all of them together, will afford Arguments, more than sufficient, to prove (though it were no Part of Ho∣ly Scripture) that Lying Lips are an Abo∣mination to the Lord. And first for the first of these. 1. What a Lye is, and wherein the Na∣ture of it does consist. A Lye is proper∣ly, an outward signification of something contrary to, or at least, beside the In∣ward Sense of the Mind; so that when One thing is signified, or expressed, and the same thing not meant, or intended, that is properly a Lye. And forasmuch as God has endued Man with a Power, or Faculty, to insti∣tute, or appoint Signs of his Thoughts; and that, by vertue hereof, he can appoint, not only Words, but also Things, Actions, and Gestures, to be signs of the inward thoughts and conceptions
of his Mind, it is evident, that he may as really Lye, and Deceive by Actions, and Gestures, as he can by Words; for as much as, in the Nature of them, they are as capable of being made Signs; and consequently, of being as much abused, and misapplied, as the Other: Though, for Distinction Sake, a Deceiving by Words, is commonly called a Lye, and a Deceiving by Actions, Gestures, or Behaviour, is called Simulation, or Hypo∣crisie. The Nature of a Lye, therefore, con∣sists in this, That it is, a false Significa∣tion knowingly, and voluntarily used; in which the Sign expressing is no ways a∣greeing with the Thought, or Conception of the Mind pretended to be thereby ex∣pressed. For, Words signifie not imme∣diately, and primely, Things themselves, but the Conceptions of the Mind, concern∣ing things; and therefore, if there be an Agreement between our Words, and our Thoughts, we do not speak falsly, though,
it sometimes so falls out, that our Words agree not with the Things themselves: Upon which Account, though in so speak∣ing, we offend indeed against Truth; yet we offend not properly by Falshood, which is a speaking against our Thoughts; but by Rashness, which is an Affirming, or Denying, before we have sufficiently informed our selves of the Real and True Estate of those Things, whereof we affirm, or deny. And thus having shewn, What a Lye is, and wherein it does consist, the next Consideration is, of the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of it. And in this, we have but too sad, and scandalous an Instance, both of the Corruption, and Weakness of Man's Reason, and of the strange Byass, that it still receives from Interest, that such a Case as this, both with Philo∣sophers, and Divines, Heathens, and Chri∣stians, should be held disputable. Plato accounted it lawfull for States∣men, and Governours; and so did Cice∣ro,
and Plutarch; and the Stoicks, (as some say) reckoned it amongst the Arts, and Perfections of a Wise-man, to lye dextrously, in due Time, and Place. And for some of the Ancient Doctors of the Christian Church; such as Origen, Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Lactantius, and Chrysostom; and generally, all before St. Austin, several Passages have fallen from them, that speak but too favoura∣bly of this ill Thing. So that Paul Lay∣man, a Romish Casuist, says, That it is a Truth, but lately known, and received in the World, That a Lye is absolutely sinfull, and unlawfull: I suppose, he means, that part of the World, where the Scriptures are not read, and where Men care not to know, what they are not willing to pra∣ctise. But then, for the Mitigation of what has proceeded from these great Men, we must take in that Known, and Celebrated Division of a Lye into those Three seve∣ral Kinds of it. As,
1st. The Pernicious Lye, uttered for the Hurt, or Disadvantage of our Neigh∣bour. 2dly. The Officious Lye, uttered for our Own, or our Neighbour's Advan∣tage: And, 3dly, and lastly. The Ludicrous and Io∣cose Lye, uttered by way of Jest, and only for Mirth's Sake, in common Converse. Now, for the first of these, which is the Pernicious Lye; it was, and is, Universal∣ly condemned by all; but the other Two have found some Patronage from the Writings of those forementioned Au∣thors. The Reason of which seems to be, that those Persons did not estimate the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of a Lye, from the intrinsick Nature of the Thing it self, but either from those External Ef∣fects that it produced, or from those Ends to which it was directed; which accordingly as they proved, either Help∣full, or Hurtfull, Innocent, or Offensive, so the Lye was reputed, either Lawfull,
or Unlawfull. And therefore, since a Man was helped by an Officious Lye, and not Hurt by a Iocose, both of thefe came to be esteemed Lawfull, and in some Cases, Laudable. But the Schoolmen, and Casuists, ha∣ving too much Philosophy to go about to clear a Lye from that intrinsick Inor∣dination, and Deviation from right Rea∣son inherent in the Nature of it, and yet withall unwilling to rob the World, and themselves especially, of so sweet a Mor∣sel of Liberty, held that a Lye was indeed absolutely, and universally Sinfull; but then they held also, that only the Perni∣cious Lye, was a Mortal Sin, and the o∣ther Two were only Venial. It can be no part of my Business here, to overthrow this Distinction, and to shew the Nullity of it: Which has been solidly, and suffici∣ently done by most of our Polemick Wri∣ters of the Protestant Church. But, at present, I shall only take this their Con∣cession, That every Lye is sinfull, and, con∣sequently,
unlawfull; and if it be a Sin, I shall suppose it already prov'd to my hands, to be, what all Sin essentially is, and must be, Mortal. So that, thus far have we gone, and this Point have we gained, That it is absolutely, and universally unlawfull to lye, or to falsify. Let us now, in the next Place, enquire from whence this Unlawfulness springs, and upon what it is grounded, To which, I answer: That upon the Principles of Natural Reason, the Unlawfulness of Ly∣ing is grounded upon this, That a Lye is properly a Sort, or Species of Injustice, and a Violation of the Right of that Per∣son, to whom the false Speech is directed: For all speaking, or signification of Ones Mind, implies, in the Nature of it, an Act, or Address of one Man to another: It be∣ing evident, that no Man, though he does speak false, can be said to lye to himself. Now to shew, what this Right is, We must know, that in the beginnings, and first Establishments of Speech, there was
an implicit Compact amongst Men, founded upon common Use and Con∣sent, that such and such Words, or Voices, Actions, or Gestures, should be Means, or Signs, whereby they would Express, or Convey their Thoughts one to ano∣ther; and That Men should be obliged to use them for that Purpose; for as much as, without such an Obligation, those Signs could not be Effectual for such an End. From which Compact there arising an Obligation upon every One, so to conveigh his Meaning, there ac∣crews also a Right to every One, by the same Signs to judge of the Sence or Meaning of the Person so obliged to express himself: And consequently, if these Signs are applied and used by him so, as not to signifie his Meaning, the Right of the Person, to whom he was obliged so to have done, is hereby vio∣lated and the Man by being deceived, and kept ignorant of his Neighbour's Meaning, where he ought to have known
it, is so far deprived of the Benefit of any Intercourse, or Converse with him. From hence therefore we see, that the Original Reason of the Unlawfulness of Lying, or Deceiving, is, That it carries with it an Act of Injustice, and a Viola∣tion of the Right of him, to whom we were obliged to signifie or impart our Minds. But then, we must observe also (which I noted at first) That, as it is in Man's Power to institute, not only Words, but also Things, Actions, or Gestures, to be the Means whereby he would signifie, and express his Mind; so on the other∣side, those Voices, Actions, or Gestures, which Men have not by any Compact a∣greed to make the Instruments of convey∣ing their Thoughts one to another, are not the proper Instruments of Deceiving, so as to denominate the Person using them, a Lyar, or Deceiver, though the Person, to whom they are addressed, takes occasion from thence, to form in his
Mind, a false Apprehension, or Belief of the Thoughts of those, who use such Voices, Actions, or Gestures towards him. I say, in this Case, the Person using these Things cannot be said to Deceive; since all Deception is a Misapplying of those Signs, which by Compact or Institution, were made the Means of Men's signifying, or conveying their Thoughts; But here, a Man only does those Things, from which another takes occasion to deceive himself. Which one Consideration, will solve most of those Difficulties, that are usually started on this Subject. But yet, this I do, and must grant, that though it be not against strict Iustice, or Truth, for a man to do those things, which he might, otherwise, Lawfully do, albeit his Neighbour does take Occasion from thence to conceive in his mind a false Belief, and so to deceive himself; yet Christian Charity will, in many Cases, restrain a Man here too, and prohibit him to use his own Right and Liberty, where
it may turn considerably to his Neigh∣bour's Prejudice. For, herein is the Ex∣cellency of Charity seen, that the Charita∣ble man not onely does no Evil himself, but that, to the utmost of his Power, he also hinders any Evil from being done even by Another. And, as we have shewn, and proved, that Lying and Deceiving, stand condem∣ned upon the Principles of Natural Ju∣stice, and the Eternal Law of Right Rea∣son; so are the same much more con∣demned, and that with the Sanction of the highest Penalties, by the Law of Chri∣stianity, which is eminently, and transcen∣dently called the Truth, and the Word of Truth; and in nothing more surpasses all the Doctrines, and Religions in the World, than in this, That it enjoyns the Clearest, the Openest, and the Sincerest Dealing, both in Words, and Actions; and is the rigidest Exacter of Truth, in all our Behaviour, of any other Doctrine, or Institution whatsoever.
And thus much for the First general Thing proposed, which was to enquire in∣to the Nature of a Lye, and the proper, es∣sential Malignity of all Falshood. I pro∣ceed now to the Second, Which is to shew the Pernicious Effects of it. Some of the Chief, and the most remarkable of which are these that follow: As, First of all, It was this that introdu∣ced Sin into the World. For, how came our first Parents to sin, and to lose their Primitive Innocence? Why, they were deceived; and by the Subtilty of the De∣vil brought to believe a Lye. And indeed, Deceit is of the very Essence and Nature of Sin; there being no sinfull Action, but there is a Lye wrapt up in the Bowels of it. For, Sin prevails upon the Soul by representing that as sutable, and desira∣ble, that really is not so. And no man is ever induced to Sin, but by a Perswasi∣on, that he shall find some Good, and Happiness in it, which he had not before.
The wages, that Sin bargains with the Sinner, to serve it for, are Life, Pleasure, and Profit; but the Wages it pays him with, are Death, Torment, and Destruction. He that would understand the Falshood, and Deceit of Sin throughly, must com∣pare its Promises, and its Payments to∣gether. And, as the Devil first brought Sin into the World by a Lye, (being equally the base Original of both,) so he still propagates and promotes it by the same. The Devil reigns over none but those whom he first deceives. Geographers and Historians dividing the Habitable World into Thirty parts, give us this ac∣count of them: That but five of those Thirty are Christian; and, for the rest, Six of them are Iew and Mahometan, and the remaining nineteen perfectly Heathen: All which he holds and governs by pos∣sessing them with a Lye, and bewitching them with a false Religion. Like the Moon and the Stars, he rules by night, and
his Kingdom, even in this World, is per∣fectly a Kingdom of Darkness. And, there∣fore our Saviour, who came to dethrone the Devil, and to destroy Sin, did it by be∣ing the Light of the World, and by bearing Witness to the Truth. For so far as Truth gets ground in the World, so far Sin loses it. Christ saves the World, by un∣deceiving it; and sanctifies the Will, by first enlightning the Understanding. 2dly. A Second Effect of Lying and Falshood, is all that Misery and Calami∣ty that befalls Mankind: For the Proof of which, we need go no further, than the former Consideration. For Sorrow being the natural and direct Effect of Sin, that which first brought Sin into the World, must by necessary Conse∣quence bring in Sorrow too. Shame and Pain, Poverty and Sickness; yea, Death and Hell it self, are, all of them, but the Trophies of those fatal Conquests, got by that Grand Impostor, the Devil, over
the deluded Sons of men. And hardly can any Example be produced of a man in extream Misery, who was not, one way or other, first deceived into it. For, have not the greatest Slaughters of Ar∣mies been effected by Stratagem? And, have not the fairest Estates been destroyed by Surety-ship? in both of which there is a Fallacy; and the Man is over-reached, before he is overthrown. What betrayed and delivered the Poor, old Prophet into the Lyon's mouth, 1 King. 13. but the mouth of a false Prophet, much the crueller, and more remorseless of the two? How came Iohn Husse, and Ierome of Prague, to be so cruelly, and basely used by the Coun∣cil of Constance, those Ecclesiastical Com∣missioners of the Court of Rome? Why, they promised those Innocent men asafe Conduct; who thereupon took them at their Word, and accordingly were burnt alive, for trusting a Pack of perfidious
Wretches, who regarded their own Word as little, as they did God's Of which last, see an Instance in the 13 Session of this Council. In which it Decrees, with a non obstante to Christ's express Institution of the Blessed Eucharist in both Kinds, That the contrary Cu∣stom and Practice of receiving it, only in one Kind, ought to be accounted and observed as a Law: and that, if the Priest should Administer it otherwise, he was to be Excommunicated.. And how came so many Bonfires to be made in Queen Mary's days? Why, she had abused and deceived her People with Lyes; promising them the free Exercise of their Religion, before she got into the Throne, and when she was once in, she performed her Promise to them at the Stake. And, I know no Security we had from seeing the same again in Our days, but One or two Proclamati∣ons forbidding Bonfires. Some sort of Promises are edged Tools, and it is dan∣gerous laying hold on them. But to pass from hence to Phanatick Treachery; That is, from one Twin to the Other, How came such multi∣tudes
of our own Nation, at the begin∣ning of that monstrous (but still Sur∣viving and Successful) Rebellion, in the Year 1641. to be spunged of their Plate and Money, their Rings and Jewels, for the carrying on of the Schismatical, Dis∣senting, King-killing Cause? Why, next to their own Love of being Cheated, it was the Publick, or rather Prostitute, Faith, of a Company of faithless Miscre∣ants that drew them in, and deceived them. And, how came so many thou∣sands to fight, and die in the same Re∣bellion? Why, they were deceived into it, by those spiritual Trumpeters, who followed them with continual Alarms of Damnation, if they did not venture Life, Fortune, and All, in that which Wickedly and Devillishly, those Impostors called the Cause of God. So that I my Self have heard Colonel Ax∣tell. One say, (whose Quarters have since hung about that City, where he had been first deceived)
that he, with many more, went to that execrable War with such a controlling Horrour upon their Spirits, from those He particu∣larly mention'd those of Brooks and Calamy. Sermons, that they verily believed they should have been accursed by God for ever, if they had not Acted their part in that dismal Tragedy, and heartily done the Devil's work, being so Effectually called, and commanded to it in God's Name. Infinite would it be to pursue all In∣stances of this Nature: But, consider those grand Agents, and Lieutenants of the Devil, by whom he scourges, and plagues the World under him, to wit, Tyrants; and, was there ever any Ty∣rant, since the Creation, who was not al∣so false and perfidious? Doe not the Bloody, and the Deceitful Man, still go hand in hand together, in the Language of the Scripture? Psal. 55.23. Was ever any People more cruel, and withal more false than the Carthaginians? And had not
the Hypocritical Contrivers, of the Mur∣der of that Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, their Masks and Vizards, as well as his Executioners? No man, that designs to rob Ano∣ther of his Estate, or Life, will be so im∣pudent, or ignorant, as, in plain Terms, to tell him so. But, if it be his Estate, that he drives at, he will dazle his Eyes, and bait him in with the luscious Proposal of some gainfull Purchase, some rich Match, or advantageous Project; till the easie Man is caught, and hampered; and so, partly by Lyes, and partly by Law-suits together, comes at length to be stript of all, and brought to a Piece of Bread, when he can get it. Or, if it be a Man's Life, that the Malice of his Enemy seeks after, he will not presently clap his Pistol to his Breast, or his Knife to his Throat; but, will rather take Absalom for his Pa∣tern, who invited his dear Brother to a Feast, hugged and embraced, courted and caressed him, till he had well dosed
his weak Head with Wine, and his foo∣lish Heart with Confidence, and Creduli∣ty; and then, in he brings him an old Reckoning, and makes him pay it off with his Blood. Or, perhaps, the Cut∣throat may rather take his Copy from the Parisian Massacre; One of the horrid∣est Instances of barbarous Inhumanity, that ever the World saw, but ushered in with all the Pretences of Amity, and the Festival Treats of a Reconciling Marri∣age, a new and excellent Way (no doubt) of proving Matrimony, a Sacrament. But, such Butchers know, what they have to doe. They must sooth and allure, before they strike; and, the Ox must be fed, before he is brought to the Slaugh∣ter; and the same Course must be taken with some Sort of Asses too. In a word, I verily believe, that no sad Disaster, ever yet befell any Person, or People, nor any Villainy, or flagitious Action was ever yet committed, but up∣on a due Enquiry into the Causes of it,
it will be found, that a Lye, was first, or last, the principal Engine to effect it: And that, whether Pride, Lust, or Cruel∣ty, brought it forth, it was Falshood, that begot it; This gave it being, whatsoever other Vice might give it Birth. 3dly. As we have seen how much Lying, and Falshood disturbs; so, in the next Place, we shall see also, how it tends ut∣terly to dissolve Society. There is no doubt, but all the Safety, Happiness, and Convenience, that Men enjoy in this Life, is from the Combination of particular Persons, into Societies, or Corporations: The Cause of which, is Compact; and, the Band, that knits together, and sup∣ports all Compacts, is Truth, and Faith∣fulness. So that, the Soul and Spirit, that animates, and keeps up Society, is, mutu∣al Trust, and the Foundation of Trust, is Truth, either known, or at least supposed in the Persons, so trusted. But now, where Fraud, and Falshood, like a Plague, or Canker, comes once to
invade Society, the Band, which held to∣gether the Parts compounding it, present∣ly breaks; and Men are thereby put to a Loss, where to league, and to fasten their Dependances; and so are forced to scatter, and shift every one for himself. Upon which Account, every notoriously false Person, ought to be look'd upon, and detested, as a Publick Enemy, and to be pursued as a Wolf, or a mad Dog, and a Disturber of the Common Peace, and Welfare of Mankind. There being no particular Person whatsoever, but has his private Interest concerned, and endan∣gered, in the Mischief, that such a Wretch does to the Publick. For, look into great Families, and you shall find some one false, paultry Tale∣bearer, who, by carrying Stories, from One to Another, shall inflame the Minds, and discompose the Quiet of the whole Family. And, from Families pass to Towns, or Cities; and Two, or Three, Pragmatical, Intriguing, Medling Fellows,
(Men of Business, some call them) by the Venom of their false Tongues, shall set the whole Neighbourhood together by the Ears. Where Men practise Falshood, and shew Tricks with one another, there will be perpetual Suspicions, evil Sur∣misings, Doubts, and Jealousies, which, by sowring the Minds of Men, are the Bane, and Pest of Society. For, still So∣ciety is built upon Trust, and Trust, upon the Confidence, that Men have of one ano∣thers Integrity. And, this is so evident, that, without Trusting, there could not only, be no Hap∣piness, but indeed, no living in this World. For, in those very things, that Minister to the daily Necessities of common Life, how can any one be assured, that the ve∣ry meat and drink, that he is to take in∣to his Body, and the Cloaths he is to put on, are not Poyson'd, and made un∣wholsome for him, before ever they are brought to him. Nay, in some places, (with Horror be it spoke) how can a
Man be secure in taking the very Sacra∣ment it Self? For, there have been those, who have found something in this Spiri∣tual Food, that has proved very fatal to their Bodies, and more than prepared them for another World. I say, how can any One warrant himself in the use of these things, against such Suspicions, but in the Trust he has in the common Ho∣nesty, and Truth of men in general, which ought and uses to keep them from such Villainies? Nevertheless, know this certainly before hand he cannot, forasmuch as such things have been done, and, consequently may be done again. And therefore, as for any Infallible assurance to the contra∣ry, he can have none; but, in the great Concerns of Life and Health, every Man must be forced to proceed upon Trust, there being no knowing the Intention of the Cook or Baker, any more than of the Priest himself. And yet, if a Man should forbear his Food, or Raiment, or most of his Business in the World, till he had Science and Certainty of the Safeness of
what he was going about, he must starve and die Disputing; for there is neither Eating, nor Drinking, nor Living by Demonstration. Now, this shews the high Malignity of Fraud and Falshood, that, in the direct and natural Course of it, tends to the De∣struction of common Life, by destroy∣ing that Trust, and mutual Confidence, that Men should have in one another; by which the common Entercourse of the World must be carried on, and, without which, Men must first Distrust, and then Divide, Separate and stand upon their Guard, with their Hand against every One, and every ones Hand against them. The Felicity of Societies, and Bodies Politick, consists in this, That all Relati∣ons in them do regularly Discharge their respective Duties and Offices. Such as are the Relation between Prince and Sub∣ject, Master and Servant, a Man and his Friend, Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, Buyer and Seller, and the like. But
now, where Fraud and Falshood take place, there is not one of all these, that is not perverted, and, that does not, from an help of Society, directly become an hinde∣rance. For first, it turns all above us into Tyranny, and Barbarity; and all of the same Region, and Level with us, into Discord and Confusion. It is This alone that poysons that Sovereign, and Divine Thing, called Friendship; so that, when a Man thinks, that he leans upon a Breast as loving, and true to him, as his own, he finds that he relies upon a bro∣ken Reed, that not onely basely fails, but also cruelly pierces the Hand, that rests upon it. It is from this, that, when a Man thinks he has a Servant, or Depen∣dant, an Instrument of his Affairs, and a Defence of his Person, he finds a Tray∣tour, and a Iudas, an Enemy that eats his Bread, and lies under his Roof, and per∣haps readier to doe him a Mischief, and a shrewd Turn, than an open and pro∣fessed Adversary. And lastly, from this
Deceit, and Falshood it is, that when a Man thinks himself matched to One, who by the Laws of God, and Nature, should be a Comfort to him in all Conditions, a Consort of his Cares, and a Compani∣on in all his Concerns, instead thereof, he finds in his Bosom, a Beast, a Serpent, and a Devil. In a word: He that has to doe with a Lyar, knows not where he is, nor what he does, nor with whom he deals. He walks upon Bogs, and Whirlpools; wheresoever he treads, he sinks, and con∣verses with a Bottomless Pit, where it is impossible for him to fix, or to be at any Certainty. In fine; He catches at an Ap∣ple of Sodom, which though it may enter∣tain his Eye, with a florid, jolly, white and red; yet, upon the Touch, it shall fill his Hand only with stench and foul∣ness: Fair in Look, and rotten at Heart; as the gayest, and most taking Things, and Persons in the World, generally are.
Fourthly, and Lastly: Deceit and Fals∣hood doe, of all other ill Qualities, most peculiarly indispose the Hearts of Men, to the Impressions of Religion. For these are Sins perfectly spiritual, and so pre∣possess the proper Seat, and Place of Re∣ligion, which is the Soul, or Spirit: And, when that is once filled, and taken up with a Lye, there will hardly be Admis∣sion, or Room for Truth. Christianity is known in Scripture by no Name so significantly, as by the Simplicity of the Gospel. And if so, Does it not look like the greatest Paradox, and Prodigy in Nature, for any one to pretend it lawfull, to equi∣vocate, or lye for it? To face God, and Out-face Man, with the Sacrament, and a Lye in ones Mouth together? Can a good Intention, or rather a very wicked one, so mis-called, sanctifie and transform Perjury, and Hypocrisie, into Merit and Perfection? Or, can there be a greater Blot cast upon any Church, or Religi∣on
(whatsoever it be) than by such a Practice? For, will not the World be in∣duced to look upon my Religion, as a Lye, if I allow my self to lye for my Religion? The very Life, and Soul of all Religi∣on, is Sincerity. And therefore the good ground; in which alone, The Immortal Seed of the Word, sprang up to Perfection, is said, in St. Luke 8.15. to have been those, That received it into an honest Heart, that is, a Plain, Clear, and Well-meaning Heart; an Heart not doubled, nor cast into the various Folds, and Windings of a dodging, shifting Hypo∣crisie. For, the Truth is, the more spi∣ritual and refined any Sin is, the more hardly is the Soul cured of it; because, the more difficultly convinced. And, in all our spiritual Maladies, Conviction must still begin the Cure. Such Sins, indeed, as are acted by the Body, do quickly shew, and proclaim themselves; and, it is no such hard mat∣ter
to convince, or run down a Drun∣kard, or an unclean Person, and to stop their Mouths, and to answer any Pre∣tences, that they can alledge for their Sin. But, Deceit is such a Sin, as a Pharisee may be guilty of, and yet, stand fair for the Reputation of Zeal, and Strictness, and a more than Ordinary Exactness in Re∣ligion. And, though some have been apt to account none sinfull, or vicious, but such as wallow in the Mire, and Dirt of gross Sensuality; yet, no doubt, Deceit, Falshood and Hypocrisie, are more di∣rectly contrary to the very Essence, and Design of Religion, and carry in them more of the express Image, and Super∣scription of the Devil, than any bodily Sins whatsoever. How did that false, fast∣ing, imperious, self-admiring, or rather, self-adoring, Hypocrite, in St. Luke 18.11. Crow and Insult over the poor Publican! God, I thank thee, says he, that I am not like other Men; and God forbid (say I) that there should be many others like
him, for a glistering Out-side, and a noysome Inside, for Tything Mint and Cummin; and for devouring Widows Houses; that is, for taking ten Parts from his Neighbour, and putting God off with One. After all which, had this Man of Merit, and Mortification, been called to Account for his Ungodly swallow, in gorging down the Estates of helpless Wi∣dows, and Orphans, it is odds, but he would have told you, that it was all for Chari∣table Uses, and to afford Pensions for Spies,☞ and Proselytes. It being no ordi∣nary Piece of spiritual good Husbandry, to be Charitable at other Men's Cost. But, such Sons of Abraham, how highly soever they may have the Luck to be thought of, are far from being Israelites indeed; for the Character that our Savi∣our gives us of such, in the Person of Nathanael, in Iohn 1.47. is, That they are without Guile. To be so, I confess, is ge∣nerally reckoned (of late Times especi∣ally) a poor, mean, sneaking Thing,
and the contrary reputed Wit, and Parts, and Fitness for Business (as the Word is:) Though I doubt not, but it will be one Day found, that only Honesty, and In∣tegrity can fit a Man for the main Busi∣ness, that he was sent into the World for; and that he certainly is the greatest Wit, who is wise to Salvation. And thus much for the Second General Thing propos'd, which was, to shew the pernicious Effects of Lying, and Falshood. Come we now to the Third and Last; which is, to lay before you the Rewards, or Punishments, that will assured∣ly attend; or, at least, follow this base Practice. I shall mention Three: As, 1. An utter Loss of all Credit, and Belief with sober and discreet Persons; and, con∣sequently, of all Capacity of being usefull in the Prime, and Noblest Concerns of Life. For, there cannot be imagined in Nature, a more forlorn, useless, and contemptible Tool, or more unfit for a∣ny thing, than a discovered Cheat. And,
let Men rest assured of this, That there will be always some as able to discover, and find out deceitfull Tricks, as others can be to contrive them. For, God for∣bid, that all the Wit, and Cunning of the World, should still run on the Decei∣ver's side; and, when such little Shifts, and shuffling Arts, come once to be rip∣ped up, and laid open, how poorly and wretchedly must that Man needs sneak, who finds himself both guilty and baffled too! A Knave without Luck, is certain∣ly the worst Trade in the World. But, Truth makes the Face of that Person shine, who speaks and owns it: While a Lye is like a Vizard, that may cover the Face, indeed, but can never become it; nor yet does it cover it so, but that it leaves it open enough for Shame. It brands a Man with a lasting, indelible Character of Ignominy and Reproach, and that indeed, so foul and odious, that those usurping Hectors, who pretend to Honour without Religion, think the
Charge of a Lye, a Blot upon them not to be washed out, but by the Blood of him that gives it. For what Place can that Man fill in a Common-wealth, whom no Body will either believe or employ? And no Man can be considerable in himself, who has not made himself usefull to others: Nor can any Man be so, who is uncapable of a Trust. He is neither fit for Counsel, or Friendship, for Service, or Command, to be in Office, or in Honour; but like Salt that has lost its Savour, fit only to rot, and perish upon a Dunghill. For no man can rely upon such an One, either with safety to his Affairs, or without a slur to his Reputation; since He that trusts a Knave, has no other Re∣compence, but to be accounted a Fool for his Pains. And if he trusts himself into Ruine and Beggary, he falls unpitied, a Sacrifice to his own Folly, and Credulity; for He that suffers himself to be imposed upon, by a known Deceiver, goes partner
in the Cheat, and deceives himself. He is despised, and laugh'd at as a soft, and easie Person, and as unfit to be relyed up∣on for his Weakness, as the other can be for his Falseness. It is really a great Misery not to know whom to Trust, but a much greater to be∣have ones self so, as not to be Trusted. But this is the Lyar's Lot: He is accounted a Pest, and a Nusance: A Person marked out for Infamy and Scorn; and aban∣don'd by all Men of Sense, and Worth, and such as will not abandon themselves. 2dly. The second Reward, or Punish∣ment, that attends the lying, and deceitfull Person, is the Hatred of all those, whom he either has, or would have, Deceived. I do not say, that a Christian can lawfully hate any One; and yet I affirm, That some may very worthily deserve to be hated; and of all men living, who may, or doe, the Deceiver certainly deserves it most. To which I shall add this one Remark further; That though Men's Persons
ought not to be hated, yet without all Peradventure, their Practices justly may, and particularly that detestable One, which we are now speaking of. For whosoever deceives a Man, does not only do all that he can to ruine him, but which is yet worse, to make him ruine himself; and by causing an Errour in the great Guide of all his Actions, his Iudgment, to cause an Errour in his Choice too; the Misguidance of which, must naturally engage him in those Courses, that directly tend to his Destruction. Loss of Sight is the Misery of Life, and usually the Fore-runner of Death; when the Malefactour comes once to be muf∣fled, and the fatal Cloth drawn over his Eyes, we know, that he is not far from his Execution. And this is so true, That whosoever sees a Man, who would have beguiled, and imposed upon him, by making him believe a Lye, he may truly say of that Person, That's the Man who would have
ruined me, who would have stripped me of the Dignity of my Nature, and put out the Eyes of my Reason, to make himself sport with my Calamity, my Folly, and my Dishonour. For so the Phi∣listines used Sampson, and every Man in this sad Case, has enough of Sampson to be his own Executioner. Accordingly, if ever it comes to this, That a man can say of his Confident, He would have decei∣ved me, he has said enough to annihilate, and abolish all Pretences of Friendship. And it is really an intolerable Impudence, for any one to offer at the Name of Friend, after such an Attempt. For can there be any thing of Friendship, in Snares, Hooks, and Trapans? And there∣fore, whosoever breaks with his Friend upon such Terms, has enough to war∣rant him, in so doing, both before God, and Man; and that without incurring, either the Guilt of Unfaithfulness, before the One, or the Blemish of Inconstancy, before the Other. For this is not pro∣perly
to break with a Friend, but to disco∣ver an Enemy, and timely to shake the Viper off from ones Hand. What says the most wise Authour of that Excellent Book of Ecclesiasticus, Ec∣clus. 22.21, 22? Though thou drewest a Sword at thy Friend, yet despair not, for there may be a Returning to Favour. If thou hast opened thy Mouth against thy Friend, fear not, for there may be a Recon∣ciliation. That is, an hasty Word, or an indiscreet Action, does not presently dis∣solve the Bond, or root out a well-setled Habit, but that Friendship may be still sound at Heart; and so outgrow, and wear off these little Distempers. But what follows? Except for Upbraiding, or Disclosing of Secrets, or a Treacherous Wound (mark that) For, for these things (says he) every Friend will depart; and surely, it is high Time for him to go, when such a Devil drives him away. Passion, Anger, and Unkindness, may give a Wound, that shall bleed, and smart,
but it is Treachery only that makes it fester. And the Reason of the Difference is manifest; for hasty Words, or Blows, may be only the Effects of a suddain Passion, during which, a Man is not perfectly himself: But no man goes about to de∣ceive, or ensnare, or circumvent another in a Passion; to lay Trains, and set Traps, and give secret Blows in a present Huff. No; this is always done with Forecast, and Design; with a steady Aiming, and a long projecting Malice, assisted with all the Skill, and Art of an expert, and well managed Hypocrisie; and, perhaps, not without the Pharisaical feigned Guise of something like Self-denial and Mortifica∣tion; which are Things, in which the whole Man, and the whole Devil too, are employed; and all the Powers, and Fa∣culties of the Mind are exerted, and made use of. But for all these Masks, and Vizards, nothing certainly can be thought of, or
imagined more base, unhumane, or dia∣bolical, than for one to abuse the gene∣rous Confidence, and hearty Freedom of his Friend, and to undermine and ruine him in those very Concerns, which no∣thing but too great a Respect to, and too good an Opinion of the Traitour, made the poor man deposite in his hollow and fallacious Breast. Such an one, perhaps, thinks to find some support, and shelter in my Friendship, and I take that Op∣portunity to betray him to his mortal Enemies. He comes to me for Counsel, and I shew him a Trick. He opens his Bosom to me, and I stab him to the Heart. These are the Practices of the World we live in; especially since the Year sixty, the grand Epoch of Falshood, as well as Debauchery. But God, who is the great Guaranty for the Peace, Order, and good Behaviour of Mankind, where Laws can∣not secure it, may some time or other, think it the Concern of his Justice, and
Providence too, to revenge the Affronts put upon them, by such impudent Defy∣ers of Both, as neither believe a God, nor ought to be believ'd by Man. In the mean Time, let such perfidious Wretches know, that though they believe a Devil no more than they do a God, yet in all this Scene of refined Treachery, they are really doing the Devil's Journey-work, who was a Lyar, and a Murderer from the beginning, and therefore a Lyar, that he might be a Murderer: And the Truth is, such an one does all towards his Brothers Ruine, that the Devil him∣self could do. For the Devil can but Tempt and Deceive, and if he cannot destroy a Man that way, his Power is at an End. But I cannot dismiss this Head without one further Note, as very material in the Case now before us. Namely, That since this false, wily, doubling Disposi∣tion of mind, is so intolerably mischie∣vous to Society, God is sometimes plea∣sed,
in mere Pity, and Compassion to Men, to give them warning of it, by setting some odd Mark upon such Cains. So that, if a Man will be but so true to himself, as to observe such Persons ex∣actly, he shall generally spy such false Lines, and such a Sly, Treacherous Fleer upon their Face, that he shall be sure to have a Cast of their Eye to warn him, be∣fore they give him a Cast of their Nature to betray him. And in such Cases, a Man may see more, and better by ano∣thers Eye, than he can by his own. Let this therefore be the second Re∣ward of the Lying, and Deceitfull Person, That he is the Object of a just Hatred and Abhorrence. For as the Devil, is both a Lyar himself, and the Father of Lyars, so I think, that the same Cause that has drawn the Hatred of God and Man upon the Father, may justly entail it upon his Off-spring too; and it is pity, that such an Entail should ever be cut off. But,
Thirdly and Lastly: The last, and utmost Reward, that shall infallibly reach the Fraudulent and Deceitfull, (as it will all other obstinate and impenitent Sinners) is a Final and Eternal Separa∣tion from God, who is Truth it self, and with whom no shadow of Falshood can dwell. He that telleth Lyes (says David, in Psalm 101.7.) shall not tarry in my Sight; and, if not in the Sight of a poor Mortal man, (who could sometimes lye himself) how much less in the Presence of the Infinite, and All-knowing God? A Wise, and Good Prince, or Governour, will not vouchsafe a Lyar the Counte∣nance of his Eye, and much less the Pri∣vilege of his Ear. The Spirit of God seems to write this upon the very Gates of Heaven, and to state the Condition of Men's Entrance into Glory, chiefly upon their Veracity. In Psalm 15.1. Who shall ascend into thy Holy Hill? (says the Psalmist.) To which it is answered in vers. 2. He that worketh Righteous∣ness,
and that speaketh the Truth from his Heart. And, on the other side, how Emphatical∣ly is Hell described in the Two last Chapters of the Revelation; by being the great Recep∣tacle and Mansion-house of Lyars; whom we shall find there ranged with the vilest, and most detestable of all Sinners, ap∣pointed to have their Portion in that Horrid place, Revel. 21.8. The Unbe∣lieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Ido∣laters, and all Lyars, shall have their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone: And, in Revel. 22.15. With∣out are Dogs and Sorcerers, &c. and who∣soever loveth, and maketh a Lye. Now, let those consider this, whose Tongue and Heart hold no Correspon∣dence. Who look upon it as a Piece of Art, and Wisdom, and the Master-piece of Conversation, to over-reach and de∣ceive, and make a Prey of a credulous and well-meaning Honesty. What do
such Persons think? Are Dogs, Whore∣mongers, and Sorcerers; such desirable Company to take up with for ever? Will the Burning Lake be found so tole∣rable? Or, will there be any one to drop Refreshment upon the false Tongue, when it shall be tormented in those Flames? Or do they think that God is a Lyar like themselves, and that no such Things shall ever come to pass; but that all these fiery Threatnings shall vanish into Smoak, and this dreadfull Sentence blow off without Execution? Few certainly can lye to their own Hearts so far, as to imagine this. But Hell is, and must be granted to be the Deceiver's Portion, not only by the Judgment of God, but of his own Con∣science too. And, comparing the Ma∣lignity of his Sin, with the Nature of the Punishment allotted for him, all that can be said of a Lyar lodged in the ve∣ry Nethermost Hell, is this; That if the Vengeance of God could prepare any Place or Condition worse than Hell for
Sinners, Hell it self would be too good for him. And now to summ up all, in short; I have shewn, what a Lye is, and wherein the Nature of Falshood does consist; that it is a Thing absolutely, and intrinse∣cally Evil; that it is an Act of Inju∣stice, and a Violation of our Neighbour's Right. And that the Vileness of its Nature, is equalled by the Malignity of its Effects. It being this, That first brought Sin into the World, and is since the Cause of all those Miseries, and Calamities, that di∣sturb it; and further, that it tends utter∣ly to dissolve, and overthrow Society, which is the greatest Temporal Blessing, and Support of Mankind; and which is yet worst of all, that it has a strange, and particular Efficacy, above all other Sins, to indispose the Heart to Religi∣on. And lastly, That it is as dreadfull in its Punishments, as it has been pernicious
in its Effects. For as much as it deprives a Man of all Credit, and Belief, and con∣sequently of all Capacity of being usefull in any Station, or Condition of Life whatsoever; and next, that it draws up∣on him the Just and Universal Hatred, and Abhorrence of all Men here; and finally, subjects him to the Wrath of God, and Eternal Damnation hereafter. And now, if none of all these Con∣siderations can recommend, and endear Truth to the Words and Practices of Men, and work upon their Double Hearts, so far as to convince and make them sensible of the Baseness of the Sin, and Greatness of the Guilt, that Fraud and Falshood leaves upon the Soul; Let them Lye and Cheat on, till they re∣ceive a fuller and more effectual Con∣viction of all these Things, in that Place of Torment and Confusion, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and all his Lying Retinue, by the Decree and Sen∣tence of that God, who, in his Threat∣nings,
as well as in his Promises, will be True to his Word, and cannot Lye. To whom be rendred and ascribed, as is most due, all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
BOOKS Newly printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. AThenae Oxonienses: or, an Exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who have had their Educa∣tion in the Ancient and Famous University of Oxford; from 1500, to the End of the Year 1690; Representing the Birth, Fortune, Preferments and Death of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives; the Fate and Character of their Writings: The Work being so compleat, that no Writer of Note of this Nation, for near Two hundred years past, is omitted, fol. 2 Vol. Dr. Pocock on Ioel. (With the rest of his Commentaries) A Critical History of the Text and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is firmly Establish'd the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian Religion is laid: By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with a Refutation of such Passages as seem contrary to the Do∣ctrine and Practice of the Church of England. Memoirs of the Court of France: by the late famous French Lady. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Ro∣man Emperor: Translated out of Greek into English, with Notes: by Dr. Casaubon. To this Edition is added, the Life of the said Emperor: with an Account of Stoick Philoso∣phy: As also Remarks on the Meditations: All newly written by the famous Monsieur and Madam Dacier. The Works of the Learned, or an Historical Account, and Impartial Judgment, of the Books newly Printed, both Foreign and Domestick; together with the State of Learn∣ing in the World. Published Monthly, by I. de la Crose, a late Author of the Universal Bibliotheque. This first Volume beginning in August last, is compleated this present April; with Indexes to the whole. The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy at his Primary Visitation, May 5. 1691. Five Sermons before the King and Queen: by Dr. Meg∣got, Dean of Winchestor. Mr. Atterbury's Sermon before the Queen, May 29. 1692.
