s5440 99833253 37728
THE Second Service, OR Office of the Faithful ENLARGED, According to Ancient Forms. For a Private Vse. GLory be to God on High, on Earth Peace, Good Will towards Men. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath vi∣sited and redeemed his People; &c. to And thou, O Child. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and shew us the Light of his Countenance, and be merciful unto us. Prevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings with thy most Gracious Favour, and further us with thy continual Help, that [as by thy 'special Grace preventing us, thou dost put into our Minds Good Desires, so by thy continual Help we may bring the same to good Effect, and in all our Works begun, continued, and ended in Thee,] we may glorifie thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy [may] obtain everlasting Life, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. Almighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, &c.
Then the Offertory, and Prayers for the whole State of Christs Church, Invitatory, Ye that do truly and ear∣nestly Repent, &c. the Confession, Absolution, and Sen∣tences following. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God the Father, and the Communication of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen. R. And with thy Spirit. Lift up your Hearts. R. We lift them up unto the Lord. Let us give Thanks unto our Lord God. R. It is meet and right so to do. It is very meet, right, and our bounden Duty, that we should [adore, worship, and glorifie Thee, and] at all Times, and in all Places, give [Praise and] Thanks unto Thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty Everlasting God. Eternal Independent, Self-sufficient Being, of In∣finite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; who hast pre∣pared thy Throne in the Heavens, and dwellest in the High and Holy Place; yet the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, cannot contain Thee; for thou fillest Hea∣ven and Earth: Thou coverest thy Self with Light, as with a Garment, dwelling in the Light, which no Man can approach unto; whose Judgments are unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out. Thou, O most Glorious Majesty, thou art LORD alone: For thou hast made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their Host; the Earth, and all things therein; the Seas, and all that is therein; and thou preservest them all; and thy Do∣minion ruleth over all. R. The Heavens are Thine, the Earth also is Thine: Thou hast founded the whole World, and all that therein is. The Host of Heaven worshipeth Thee: A thousand thousand minister unto Thee; and ten thousand times ten thousand attend upon Thee.
R. And we, poor Mortals, adore thy most Excellent Ma∣jesty; and recognize and revere thy most just and absolute Dominion. When we consider the Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou hast or∣dained, Lord, what is Man, that Thou art mindful of Him! and the Son of Man, that Thou visitest Him! All Nations (in respect of Thee) are but as a Drop of a Bucket, and as the small Dust of the Ballance; as nothing, yea less than Nothing and Vanity. What then are we, a little handful of thy poor Creatures, among so many Millions of our own Kind, besides so many Myriades of thy more excellent Creatures, which con∣tinually attend upon Thee, and with profound Reve∣rence cover their Faces before Thee, that thou shoul∣dest have any regard unto us. R. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who hath his Dwelling so high, and yet humbleth himself to behold the things, which are in Heaven and Earth! But such is thy Providence, which extends to All thy Creatures, even to the Sparrow upon the House top; and so boundless thy Love and Goodness, that though the Glory of thy Majesty might justly deterr the Purest of Mortals from any Address to Thee, thou dost not only graciously invite us, but by thy most Gracious Commands, hast made that (or rather reinforced it as) our Duty, which otherwise, of it self, were a most desireable Favour: And though the Holiness of thy Majesty might make such sinful Wretches tremble to approach thy Presence; yet such is thy Clemency, that, for our Encouragement, thou hast provided for us, both a Propitiation for our Sins, and a Mediatour for our Infirmities, in Christ Jesus thy beloved Son, and our blessed Lord and Saviour; in whom, and through whom, thou hast most admirably demonstrated, in thy
infinite Wisdom, at once, both thy Justice and Severity against Sin, and thy Mercy and Clemency to thy poor Creatures, to the Admiration even of thy blessed Angels. R. Great and Marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Al∣mighty: Just and True are thy Ways, thou King of Saints: Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and Glorifie thy Name. In his Name therefore in Grateful Obedience to thy Gracious Commands, and thankful Acceptance of those thy Gracious Encouragements, we humbly, as we can present our selves before: Oh that we could do it with that Reverence and Devotion that is meet! and with all those thy Glorious Creatures in Heaven, and all thy faithful and devote Servants upon Earth, Adore and Worship thy Supream most Glorious Majesty, Acknow∣ledging and Recognizing thy most just and absolute Do∣minion over us all. R. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is the Magnificence, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in Heaven and in Earth is thine: thine is the King∣dom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head over all. We are all thine by right of Creation: R. The Heavens are Thine, the Earth also is Thine: Thou hast founded the whole World, and all that therein is. By right of Sustentation, and Preservation: * * In Thee we live, and move, and have our Being. And we the Sinful Sons of Men all thine, also by right of Redemption. R. Ʋnto Him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, to Him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen. And we here present with all the Members of thy visible Church Thine, also by special Dedication and Consecration; which we for our part do each here a∣gain Ratify and Confirm:
R. We confirm, O Lord, we ratify and confirm it with all our Souls for ever. Humbly beseeching Thee, in the Name, and for the Sake and Merits of the same our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Beloved Son, our Blessed Redeemer, whom thou hast proposed to be a Propitiation for us in his Blood, to Pardon all our Sins, and make us perfectly and compleatly Thine by thy Holy Spirit of Sanctification; that He may be in us, and abide with us for ever; may illuminate our Minds to know Thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent; and to apprehend the Excellence of those Glories, which thou hast designed us for, and proposed unto us, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart of Man conceived, and the Excellence of these Means and Ordinances, which thou hast appointed for us for the Attainment thereof, which thou hast hid from the Wise and Prudent (of the World) but revealest unto Babes, And therefore with Angels, &c. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and Ho∣nour, and Power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were Created. Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to reeive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honour, and Glory, and Blessing: For thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us unto God by thy Blood out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. Blessing, Honour, Glory and Power, be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Almighty God, who hast given, &c. The Collect for the Second Sunday after Easter. Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, &c. The Pray∣er of Consecration.
Wherefore, Holy Father, according to his Holy Insti∣tution Commemorating that his bitter, but most precious Death and Passion, and solemnly Representing the same before thy Divine Majesty, as the great, most Holy, and Only Propitiation for all our Sins, and the Sins of the whole World; and being mindful also of his Powerful Resurrection, Glorious Ascension into Heaven, and Bles∣sed Session at thy right Hand to intercede for us, till he shall come again with great Power and Glory to judge both the Living and the Dead, and to distri∣bute to every one according to their Works done in the Flesh; we offer and render unto thee, by him, our most humble Adoration, highest Praises, and most hearty Thanks, for thy inestimable Clemency, Goodness and Benignity to us therein; and thereby demonstrated to Men and Angels: and most humbly and earnestly Sup∣plicate and Beseech thee, that this our Unbloody, Rea∣sonable, and Spiritual Sacrifice may be acceptable and well Pleasing unto thee, most Mighty God, by our Anoin∣ted Jesus, who gave himself for us, an Offering, and a Sacrifice, to thee, for a sweet smelling Savour; that thou will be pleased graciously to behold the same, and look upon this Token and Memorial of the Covenant, from thy Glorious Throne in Heaven, and be Propitious to us in the free, and full Pardon of all our Sins, in a Liberal and Bountiful Collation of thy Rich Treasure of the In∣estimable Graces of thy Holy Spirit upon us, and in a gracious Audience of the Prayers, which we here offer unto thee: and send down thy Holy Spirit upon these Proposited Elements, to Sanctify and Bless them, that to us who partake thereof, this Bread may be made the Precious Body of thy Christ, and this Wine the Precious Blood of thy Christ, to the Remission of all our Sins, and to the mighty Confirmation of us in all Grace, and to Eternal Life.
And here we offer and present unto Thee, O Lord, our selves, our Souls, and Bodies,, &c. as in that which immediately follows the Lord's Prayer, beginning, O Lord and Heavenly Father. And we humbly beseech thee, O Father, the great Creator, and Supream Lord and Governour of the whole Universe, and of all therein, to behold with thy Favour this great Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and be Propitious to the Ʋniversal Church diffu∣sed over all the Earth, which thy Beloved Son our Sa∣viour hath purchased with his own precious Blood; and to the whole Race of Mankind: Behold with Mercy and Pity all our Misery and Sufferings, through the Envy, Malice, and Subtility of those Rebels against thee, the Apostate Spirits of the Kingdom of Darkness: Behold the great Havock they have made, and Confusions they have wrought in the World, and even in thy Church, and among thy People, who are called by thy Name: And let all our Sufferings be united to the Sufferings of our Saviour, and being sanctified by them be accepted by thee; and all the Malice and Mischiefs of those thine and our inveterate Enemies be computed, to the filling up of their Measure, that they may be cast out, and the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour thy Son be set up in full Power and Glory throughout the whole World. R. How long, O Lord, Holy and True, dost thou not judge and avenge the Sufferings of thy poor Creatures, upon those Spiritual Wickednesses, thine and our Enemies, who vex us with their Wiles? O Lord, raise and restore thy Ʋniversal Church to its primitive Purity, Holiness, Zeal, and Fruitfulness in Good Works; and let the light of thy Countenance so shine upon it, that from thence it may be reflected into
the Eyes and Hearts of all those who sit in Darkness, that so they may be brought out of their Darkness into Thy Light, unto Thee the God of Light and Life. And we humbly beseech Thee, most Gracious and Merciful Father, to look down and behold in much Mercy and Pity the deplorable State and Condition of this Church and Nation, [who have hitherto withstood all the gracious Methods of thy Holy and manifest Provi∣dence, for our Correction and Reformation, without any Works meet for Repentance, or any due sence of thy Hand and Gracious Designs therein, or of the Day of our Visita∣tions; but say, We are Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that we are wretched and miserable, and poor, (in true Treasure) and blind, and naked, overspread with Pharisaism, Formality, and Carnal Security, and tainted with the leaven, not only of the Pharisees, but even of the Sadduces; and in the very State of thy ancient People the Jews, in the Day of their Visitation: so that we have great Reason to fear that we have filled up our Measure, and that the Day of our Calamity, and of thy just Vengeance is near approaching. But thou art God, and not Man; thou knowest our Frame, and that we are but Dust; a God ready to pardon, Gracious and Merciful, slow to anger, and of great Kindness: yet can we not expect to be wholly unpunished: but we beseech Thee, correct us in measure; with Judgment, not in thine Anger, least thou bring us to nothing: And remember, O Lord, that our Sins are in Truth our greatest Misery; and how much we suffer therein through the secret Energy of our invisible Enemies: Pour out therefore thy Fury upon them; for they have devoured and consumed us: but help us O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name,] and deliver us, and purge away our Sins for thy Name's Sake. Send forth a powerful Spirit of Reformation
amongst us; and stir up the Hearts and Spirits of thy faithful Servants to be industrious for the Promotion thereof, strengthen them thereunto, and bless them therein. And we humbly beseech thee, O Lord, [who knowest how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the Ʋnrighteous unto the Day of Judgment to be punished; if thou after all art provoked to bring a Flood of Calamities and Destruction upon the World of the Ʋngodly, and to leave the Outward Worshippers and Formal Christians to be tordden down by the Gentiles, that thou wilt remem∣ber all the True Worshippers within the Temple, and be∣fore the Altar, who indeed worship Thee in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made thy Temples, who honour and adore Thee in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and sacrifice their Lusts, and vile Affections, and their own Wills to Thee, whose Faith and Devotion is certainly known unto Thee; that thou wilt hide them in the hollow of thy Hand, and under the Shadow of thy Wings; and preserve them, as a Seed, to partake of that Glory, which shall im∣mediately follow, and come upon the Church, as soon as the Storm shall be over: and] that thou wilt be graciously pleased effectually to make every one of us, and of this Society, to be, and continue, of that blessed Company, [who worship Thee in Spirit, and in Truth,] and confirm it, and increase it daily, both in Grace and Number, to the Honour and Praise of thy Great Name, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Saviour. And we humbly beseech Thee, that thou wilt remem∣ber, and be gracious to, those of us, who are now absent, by reason of any Infirmity, Sickness, or other just Impe∣diment, and supply their involuntary corporal Absence from us, by the Presence of thy Spirit with them, and
make them Partakers with us of the Spiritual Benefits of this Holy Ordinance. And we humbly beseech Thee for our Relations in Blood and Affinity; that thou wilt be pleased to work and perfect that Holy Work of Regeneration in them, that we may be all bejoyned and united in that more excellent Relation, in Spirit, and so become indeed thy Children, and Brethren and Sisters one to another. Give us all Grace to be vigilant and resolute against the Tem∣ptations and Counsels of Flesh and Blood, and to be fruit∣ful our selves, and mutually assistant one to another in the Production of the Fruits of the Spirit; and to un∣derstand, observe, and follow the Conduct thereof saith∣fully and fully. We beseech Thee also for all our Friends and Bene∣factors, [and all those who have sent hither their Obla∣tions to Thee] that thou wilt reward all their Kindness to us, or any of us, into their own Bosoms: and as thou makest them Instruments of thy Providence, for our Re∣lief, Benefit, or Comfort; so make us Instruments of thy Grace and Blessing unto them. And we beseech Thee, O Lord, to remember all those, who have desired to be remembred in our Prayers, or for whom our Prayers have been desired, or who do remember us in theirs. Thou knowest all the Circumstances of their several Cases better than either we or they them∣selves: We beseech thee be Propitious and favourable to them all, and dispose of all, (both them and their Concerns,) as may be most for the Honour and Glory of thy Name, the Promotion of thy Service, and the Weal and Comfort of every one of them.
These things, O most Gracious and Bountiful Lord, and what ever else in thy Infinite Wisdom thou seest any way requisite or necessary for us, or for any whom we have or ought to have prayed for, we humbly beg and Implore through this Holy Propitiation now com∣memorated before thee, in the Name, and for the Sake and Merits of thy dearly Beloved Son, our Blessed Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, who hath commanded and en∣couraged us, when we pray, to say unto Thee, Our Father, who art in Heaven, &c. We do not presume to come to this thy Table, &c. After the Communion. Almighty and Everlasting God, &c. Glory be to God on high, &c. May, God arise, and his Enemies be scattered, and all that hate him fly before him: As Smoak is dissipated in the Air, may they vanish; and as Wax is dissolved at the Fire, may the Wicked Perish at the Presence of God: But may the Righteous always be Glad, rejoice in God, yea exceedingly rejoyce. Glory be to the Father, &c. * To God who did, &c. Accept us graciously, O Lord, in these our Suppli∣cations, Prayers, and Thanksgivings, and dispose, &c. O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, &c. Lord of all Power and Might, &c. Collect for the 7th. after Trinity. Almighty God, who hast Promised to hear, &c. In∣cline thy Favour, &c. The Peace of God, &c.
HYMN I. RISE, O my Soul, with thy Desires to Heaven, And with Divinest Contemplation use Thy Time, where Time's Eternity is given, And let vain Thoughts, no more thy Thoughts abuse, But down in silent Darkness let them lie: So live thy better, let thy worse Thoughts Die. And thou, my Soul, inspir'd with Holy Flame, View, and Review with most regardful Eye That Holy Cross, whence thy Salvation came, On which thy Saviour and thy Sin did Die: For in that Sacred Object is much Pleasure; And in that Saviour is my Joy, my Treasure. To Thee, O JESU, I direct mine Eyes, To Thee my Hands, to thee my Humble Knees, To Thee my Heart shall offer Sacrifice, To Thee my Thoughts, who my Thoughts only sees; To Thee my Life, my Self, and all I give, To Thee I die, to Thee alone I live. O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord most High, Coequal, Coeternal DEITY, Who mad'st us, did'st redeem, and dost Inspire Our Souls faln Heat with new Caelestial Fire; We Bless thee now, and shall eternally, O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord most High.
HYMN. II. O Tast, O tast, O tast and see, How good, how sweet, thy Lords to thee. Blessed, O Blessed is the Man, That firmly holds his Trust in Him: O Fear the Lord all ye his Saints, For they who Fear him nothing want: The Lyons lack, and Hunger bear, But nought want they who do Him Fear: The Lyons lack, and pine for Food; But who fear Him can want no Good. HYMN III. TO God, who did create the World's great Frame; To God, by whom lost Man's Redemption came; To God, who Graces sends, God the Holy-Ghost; We now give Praise with all the Heavenly-Host. Thy early Praises i'th' Beginning were, When all the Morning Stars made up the Quire; Thee, all thy Works, Angels and Men adore, As we do now, and shall do evermore. All Glory to the Majesty on high, The ever Blessed Blessing Trinity. As in th' Beginning was, is now, shall be, When Time shall pass into Eternity. FINIS.
