s6338 12738636 93060
BENE AGERE AC LAETARI FRANCISCUS DE LE BOE SYLVIUS Medicinae Practicae in Academia Lugdun Batava Professor R: White sculp
NEW IDEA OF THE Practice of Physic; Written by that Famous FRANCISCUS DE LE BOE, SYLVIUS; Late Chief Professor of Physic in the University of Leiden. THE FIRST BOOK; Of the Diseases either constituting, producing or following the Natural Functions of Man not in Health. Wherein is containd, beside a New Method in general, a Vindication of the Spleen and Mother from Fits attributed to them. As also a new Discovery of Intermitting Fevers, the Yellow Jaundice, and other Diseases, never before discoverd. All cleard by Anatomical Experiments, and Chymical Demonstrations; As also by their Cures. Whereto is prefixed a Preface written by Dr. Mar. Nedham. Translated faithfully by RICHARD GOWER, formerly Student under the Author. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1675.
To all the Supreme Powers in Christian Europe, FRAN∣CISCUS DE LE BOE, SYLVIUS, Physician, wish∣eth perfect Health of Body, and Mind, and also faith∣ful and quiet Peace, from God the giver of every good Gift. THe toilsom labour which I have undertaken to endure for the common Good of all Men in the adorning of Physick, Part wherof such as it is, be∣ing brought forth and publisht as occasion was offerd, I thought fit to De∣dicate, not to one Prince only, but to You
all, as being the High Lords of Earthly things in this part of the Universal Orb, wherin I am born and live, to whom I doubt not but that Your Own, and Your Subjects Prosperity is Your desire and care. Beseech∣ing the Good and Great God with my whole Heart, to inspire You with an ardent desire, and constant will, that Physic should be per∣fected (as yet deficient in many things) by the pains of excellent Physicians, who live under Your Power in many places, it being useful and necessary that our Course should be happily finisht upon Earth. Hitherto I have endeavoured to do som∣thing, to the measure of my Ability, for the good of the Common-Wealth: But who can expect so great a Work of one Man, and that privat, and therfore destitute of infinit neces∣sary Helps to perform so immens and hard a Matter? But so much me thinks I have profi∣ted in the Art of Physic, by a continu'd pain∣ful Labour almost forty years, that I now dare boldly affirm, the Structure of a more perfect Edifice of Physic may be erected, the Authority and Munificence of Princes being employ'd with many industrious and judicious Physicians, so much the more de∣sirable
and to be wisht, as by how much Princes no less then Subjects do need its help, being afflicted unto Death with so many, so grievous, and those not as yet enough known Diseases, and therfore so often e∣steemd insuperable. Neither doubt I, but in a short space a rational and certain way of Physic may be found out by the propos'd Method, if not in all, yet in the most Diseases. For which end I here offer publicly my weak Pains, if acceptable, to You, by Divine Authority set over the Government of others, out of sin∣cere love of farther deserving well of the Common-Wealth, seeing that it pleas'd the Clemency and Wisdom of God, of mere Grace, not only to free me beyond my ex∣pectation a year agoe from a most grievous Disease, and in a manner from the Jaws of Death, and to restore not only former strength of Body and Mind to me, but farther to il∣luminat my Mind more, and hence so boun∣tifully to consent to my Wishes, that en∣trance hath been made daily to me more easie, and farther, to the dark and deepest re∣tirements of natural things.
Now, the same God for his unspeakable Mercy and Goodness towards Mankind, di∣rect your Thoughts and Counsels to the eter∣nal Glory of his Holy Name, as also to Your own, and Your Subjects Health both Temporal and Eternal. Amen. Which is my hearty Prayer. Leiden,April 14. 1671.
To the Reader who is studi∣ous of Truth and Public Good, Franciscus De Le Boe, Sylvius, wisheth Health. AS often as any Men do endeavour, in any kind, to afford any thing that conduceth to the benefit of of the Publick, they have in all Times been thought worthy of the favour and benevolence of Great Men; but when they do indeed promote the Publick Good, they deserve moreover to be re∣warded in a well-order'd Common-Wealth: wherein, as Cicero saith, Rewards are by the Laws proposed to Vertue, and Punish∣ments to Vice: Therefore if at any time their excellent Performances are not only envied by Men idle and malicious, but perverted by pra∣ting Cavillers, accused by Parasites that have little else to do, and traduced by slanderous Ca∣lumniators; so often those who are in Govern∣ment have taken care, that they should be nei∣ther neglected nor despised.
That I may apply these things, though but in part, to my Concerns, there are so many ridicu∣lous and unjust censures of my Enemies, often∣times pretended Friends in the United Pro∣vinces, especially through a false Prejudice, or Envy, or Hatred of my Words and Writings, that I scarce know whence to take a sit beginning for my Preface. For, I so much esteem my own peace, that un∣less I had already venturd, and somthing were already publisht by me; which nevertheless se∣veral good Men favouring the Common welfare do approve here and elswhere beyond my expecta∣tion, though my Adversaries chafe at it; per∣haps I should have prevented by silence the ma∣nifold Cavilings and Calumnies of Ill-minded People, which have hitherto befallen me, and were foreseen by me. Wherfore I intend to publish some of mine Endeavours and Labours, lest many should think I am brought to a perpetual Silence, by the vain Threats and injurious Calumniations of malig∣nant Men, because this Book, such as it is, hath been slowly finisht, and now also publisht. For, after that I being mov'd with love to the Common-Wealth, took in hand the Professor∣ship of Physic above thirteen years since, which was more then once offerd to me in this Academy (although with a great deal of dammage to my
private Concerns) thought this Business was gi∣ven me, that I should teach mine Auditors not a few things observd, by me for many years privatly, amongst my Patients, and otherwise; but even those things which were daily further to be observ'd, as also thence solicitously conclu∣ded, and deduc'd by a continued reasoning, and so both profitable and useful to Mankind. Wherfore, that I might rightly do my Duty, I spent Days and Nights both in calling slowly back into my Memory what I had for a long time considerd, and had accuratly examin'd and noted, and also in conferring the past with following Experiments, daily made at my own Cost for common Good, as well in drawing thence Conclusions and most solid Determinations to cure the Sick, as in informing the studious Youth (that came hither in a great number to hear me) faithfully about those things, which I judg'd were both true and good, and also in a right forming of them, according to Art, for the Practice of Physick. Nor was success through God's assistance wan∣ting to mine Endeavours undertaken in the fear of God, and love: whilst Letters came from my Scholars daily, thanking me for the benefit re∣ceiv'd, who practis'd happily at home and els∣where. But, as in Mans Concerns nothing is wholly blest, I have not been free from Envy,
Cavilling, evil speaking of malign Men, or such as hated me, and whatsoever the Devil, that perpetual disturber of Mans Tranquillity and Happiness, uses to suggest to his Servants. I will not farther enlarge with words upon the manifold ill-will and evil-speaking of mine Adversaries for some serious Causes, being con∣tent at present to mention in a few words the detriment which is brought upon the Common-Wealth by the Cavils and false Accusations of some. Whatsoever singular Gift of Mind, Body, or Fortune, every one hath receivd of God, (And I pray you what has any Man, which he hath not receivd from Above?) he is bound to em∣ploy it, acknowledging the Giver with an hum∣ble heart, to the common Good and benefit of Men, never to any ones loss or detriment. Which common good is promoted, both by searching out the Truth obscur'd as yet in sun∣dry things, or by illustrating it more or less hid, and by manifesting it to others; and by searching out any Profitableness coming or likely to come from things known to Mankind, and by calling into use what is invented, and communicating it to others. He that doth this, is wholly to be estem'd for an excellent Citizen, whose Vertue the Parent of Roman Eloquence judg'd worthy of Imitati∣on
and not Envy. And indeed they are to be praisd who emulate, and not at all to be blam'd who endeavour to overcome the Vertues and good Deeds of others; on the contrary they are to be abhord, who maliciously cavil, or contumeliously slander the profitable Words or Deeds of others, as oft as they cannot equal or excede them. It is moreover the property of these truly mi∣serable People, that they first envy good Peo∣ple, and strait-way become evil-speakers, being before ill-will'd. As many therfore as are perswaded, or think that they can excel others in Wit, Judgment, Memory, Dexterity, or pains about any things whatsoever that are to be done, and are de∣sirous of Splendor and Glory, (seeing that so many things are as yet obscure in Nature, and coverd in thick darkness) they have an oppor∣tunity to wax renown'd with the celebration of their Name, if they would discover with an in∣cessant labour, and continual industry, and bring to public light many of these things as yet co∣verd, and so serve the Common-Wealth. But they who have not sown with much la∣bour and expect a great Ha est, for the most part are fed with va hope; whence they grieve and sorrow by degrees, whilst they see others in the me time enjoy the deservd Glory, which they being Pretenders would have conferd
upon themselvs, or at least remov'd from those they envy. Wherfore the Study which they ought to take in acquiring Glory about honest Arts, they almost wholly spend in Carping, Biting, Corrupting, Confuting, and Desaming other Mens Words, Writings, or Actions profitable for the Common-Wealth, wherby they deprive them of due, and somtimes attributed Praises, or at least extenuate and diminish them. For this same reason, though they oft enough harm good Men, (for it is the custom of most Men to give heed to the Publishers, and more to the defamers of other Mens Praises) yet for that reason there redounds none to them, or Pro∣fit to the Common-Wealth. For although many joy in Cavils and Ca∣lumnies tending to the dishonour of Good Men; yet ought they also to bate Cavillers & Reproach∣ers, (were they prudent) because they likewise know that they are in danger of them: as great Ones are said to love the Treason, though they hate the Traitor. It is so far unlikely, that any profit should befal the Common-Wealth by Cavils or Calum∣nies whatsoever, that contrarily many are a∣frighted by them from propagating their Inven∣tions or Observations with a notable loss hereof, which otherwise might serve the Public; and being made more cautious by others or their own
danger, they had rather that those things should perish with them, (as I have experienc'd it often done to my grief in several cases) then be un∣justly traduc'd by mocking Censurers, as being ignorant of those things, or be scurrilously toss'd upon the Tongues of Vain and Evil Men by means of these Bablers: which will be, as long as it shall be lawful that any injurious Man may impudently rail at good Men, and find fa∣vour with his flattering Tale among Rulers, in that not very wise nor prudent. Hence it coms, that God out of his unsearch∣able Wisdom, would not that many things, which as yet are hid from us, should be found out and brought to light always at once, but by degrees, and at times, not by one, but by many. And as all good Men deservedly praise Anci∣ent and Modern Authors, who have only in part seen many things, and have not throughly seen every thing, much less all; yet because they have left to Posterity as much as was known to them, so they think (because it is easier to add to what is invented, then to invent what is un∣known) that all do what is worth the while, who but a little promote the Bounds of Sciences and of Arts; and therfore it seems not only unwor∣thy of any that desires the Name of a Learned and Honest Man, but unjust also, and ini. Good Men and the Common-Wealth,
to taunt or defame those wickedly, who even now, according to their power, do at least endeavour to make or show a way to discover more things coverd, or to illustrate Obscure Things, or find out Profitable Things and bring them forth to the common use of Men; and much more those, who actually do this, and liberally commu∣nicate their useful Observations to others: see∣ing it should be the Good of the Common-Wealth for which all should by any means be stird up to do more and greater things, yea others should be joind to them, who also would put to their help∣ing hand, and share with those both in Pains and Praise, who already have and do deserve well. But because it is irksom and grievous to deli∣cate or otherwise lazy Men, to stoop to handy∣work, it is on the contrary more pleasant and easie to prate with a voluble Tongue, most Men being vain-glorious and seeking a little praise, though in a trivial Matter, whereby they do di∣sturb and by their importunate talking daily more obscure those things, which they know not, nor will illustrate by assiduous labour. For as they are not accustomd to great Labour, so neither are they given to it. Therfore they do worst employ their Pains, to be able to babble about every thing problematically on either side as they list, and not to excel in endowments of Mind or Bo∣dy,
to perfect any difficult Work, or to unfold, explain, or determine doubtful and intricate Matters. Mean while large Gifts are often bestowd on such Great Pratlers, and Annual Stipends for their vain and flattery-Talk; which the Inven∣tors of good things do for the most part want, being more studious in searching out the obscure and hard things themselvs, then to propose them with handsome words, or in a servile manner to curry savour. What I have before said, will be more mani∣fest by an Example. It is wonderfully now con∣troverted in our Art of Physic, about the Man∣ner, Motion, and Use of Choler in Mans Bo∣dy. Where I freely acknowledg, as I have te∣stifi'd often both in public and privat, that I cannot fully satisfie my self hitherto in this Matter, and indeed partly by the defect of cer∣tain Experiments requisite as yet to resolve some Doubts even now urging me; partly be∣cause of sundry Experiments not having the like success in all, nor at all times, but as it were somtimes repugnant one to the other. Wherfore it were to be wish'd that they, who have more leasure then I, would take necessary ans both in finding out, and in making accu∣ratly manifold Experiments, that so they might
take away all Difficulties that may molest any, and so presering the true and plain way of pre∣paring it for Motion and Use in Man to their own Honour, and the Common-Wealths pro∣sit. Whoever will try to effect this, shall have my praise; but who-ever performs it, shall more∣ever have me to be his faithful and certain Fol∣lower. I have endeavourd, with a great adventure to set forth a New Idea of Physic by mine own manifold Observations; which I have be∣gun to communicate candidly in the simplicity of my Heart, first to mine Auditory, then to all, seeing my study of deserving well of the Common-Wealth, has pleasd many Famous and Illustrious Men in our Art. And when I observd that for this cause the Malign Cavillers, and Reproachers, waxed hot and rose up against me, I was necessitated to pro∣cede cautiously, least any thing should fall from  by imprudence, or hasting, which ill speaking M might deservedly carp and slander. And among other Causes, this also hinderd the composing and publishing of this Book; by which  the Public gets more Profit. For I at∣  as my Business, and continual
Distractions permitted me) to every thing more diligently, and weighed them more accuratly and longer, and have confirmd the most things more clearly by manifold Experience, which be∣fore in part at least were evident to me only by wonted reasoning; so that now I appear in pub∣lic so much the more secure and heedfully with my Meditations and Observations. I could indeed have brought out of my Store both more, and perhaps more perfect; as also greater, and more abstruse, and therfore better and more profitable things, if God had given me desired leasure to do those things, which is scarce at any time to be expected of Men. Nor did I judg it equal, that I in these Belgian Provinces wisely addicted to frugality, should be too much and perpetually negligent of my pri∣vat Estate, and give for nothing almost all that I have brought forth by incredible Labour, least new Curators should be chosen to over-see me against my desire for the Good I have newly done so freely, as though I had been a Prodi∣gal and carri'd my Matters ill. Mean while I testifie before God, the only Searcher of Hearts, that I have not Written or Taught any other thing here or elsewhere, than what seem'd to me true, or most like to Truth, and chiefly profitable to the Sick. For upon
these accounts I have never with-held or shund any, yea not the most troublesom Labour; I spar'd no Cost, often great enough for my Con∣dition. The which Charity of mine, the most Mercisul God bountifully favouring, has more then once graciously requited, and without doubt will yet farther recompence in his own time, what all sorts of ungrateful Men, though from them due, have often deni'd or turnd from my Merits. God grant that, as I have written these Things to serve Young Beginners of the Art of Physic, and (hence by their help) the Sick them∣selvs, all these things may tend to the good of them both. Leiden, April 14. 1671.
To the Gentle Readers and Printers, the Ad∣monition of Franciscus de le Boe, Sylvius. ALthough I do not much esteem my Works, yet would I not that they should be publisht any way corrupted by any Body whilst I live and without my pri∣vity. Wherfore, that I may consult with mine own Honour, and the Profit of the Common-Wealth, I would have all admonisht, that I in no wise acknowledg that Edition for mine own, which Thomas Matthias Gotzius pub∣lisht in the year 1664. under my Name, and of the Colledg of Practical Physicians: nor that which I hear Frideric Leonardus hath pub∣lisht this Year 1671. at Paris under theWhich how deficient it is from Chap. 40. Sect. 47. to the end of the first Book, let any that have that Co∣py cmpare, this being no further publisht at that time by the Author. Title of my Practice: Much less that infamous and soul Book, which some ill-imploy'd busie-Bo∣dy wrote and publisht, out of his own wicked Store and impure manners, a few years since, under the Title of The Second Part of Physi∣cal Disputations concerning the Circulation of Seed, and the Generation of Man, imitating my stile whereby he might fasten it upon me, and therby injure my Reputation.
To the truly Honourable ROBERT BOYLEEsq. SIR, YOur most profound and singular Learn∣ing, together with your sincere love to all Persons and Things that any way tend to improve or promote the Interest of it in the World, especially those kinds thereof which tend most to Practice, and are most useful and profitable for Mankind; As also your great Candor and Ingenuity in pardoning or excusing the Lapses and Inadvertencies of Hu∣mane Infirmity, induces me to make this bold but humble Dedication of my Labour in this Translation of this Praxis of Sylvius, Chief Professor of Physic in Leiden my Quondam Tu∣tour. Not imagining you are unacquainted with the Contents, much less that it can add any thing to your Stature; But your Noble Patronage may be both needful and useful to me, who cannot be so much a Stranger to the Epidemical Distemper of the present Age, as to think my self secure from some carping Zoilus, or the calumny of some strait-laced Physicians, that would rather the whole Science were ingrossed to the hurt and
injury of the World, than that the Power and Virtue of the Art of Medicine should be pro∣moted and divulged, and thereby flourish in a publique Benefit; whereas common Good should be the prime intention of every Man, and will certainly be so of all Spirits truly generous. The worthiness of the Author, and high esteem he hath very deservedly acquired, by not only his Learning, but also great industry and Indfati∣gable Pains, rendring himself Eminent among Judicious and Industrious Spirits; Being con∣scious also of my own design to do him right in the Translation, and acknowledg my high respects to your Honour in the Dedication, and in both to serve my Countrey, makes me the more presumptuous to offer it to you, as the fit∣test Person, craving your Pardon and Accep∣tance; Which will be a perpetual Obligation to Your Honours most humble Servant, RICHARD GOWER.
TO THE READER. THe Translator of this Book, when the Tran∣slation was even quite finisht at the Press, was sent to me by a Gentleman, one of the most Learned in this Isle of Great Britain; with a desire, that if I liked the design of Publicati∣on, I would own it so far, as to give my Opinion about it to the World. Should I name that Learned Person, there is none of the most stiff Philosophers of the Time, but would perhaps bow the Head at the bare mention of his Name; and therefore it will be Apo∣logie enough for me in what I do, that I thus pay Obedience to his Desires, which I ought to entertain as Commands upon me, in this Declaration of my Opinion. The Truth is, nothing could have been offer'd more welcome to me, in regard of the worthiness of the Author, and of the Work it self, wherein he hath done the World more Service, towards the pro∣motion of the Art of Physick, than ever any Man did before him in the Ʋnited Provinces; And in such a manner, that he doth not, as some here in England, trifle away all time and patience in labour'd Dis∣courses, more fit to tickle the fine Ears of a Specula∣tive Auditory, out of the Chair of an University, than to edifie Men engaged in Practice: But like a wise Practitioner, so orders the Matter, that his Sheets may smell as little as may be of an Academick Professor; for, the infection of those places is so strong, that
Men used to Philosophizing there with Niceties, and conjectural Probabilities, are wont, when they come abroad, to smell rank of it ever after in all their Wri∣tings and Discourses; and so doth Sylvius in some Particulars. Their manner is to abound with Noti∣on; for which having been admired by the Men of Letters in the Academy, they all believe they may set up for Authors of Science; though (when they come into the World) they generally prove mere Slow-Men at Business; yet they pass as great Men among some Learned, and the better sort of Men Unlearned: for, the World will still be for Learning (so reputed) in Men of Physick, not being able to judg, whether that which is acquired in the usual way of Education be learning to the purpose. To give you a more particular Account of Sylvi∣us the Author, take what I have received from the Ingenious Translator, who had the happiness to be a Scholar of his. He was by Birth a German, who through industry arrived to such degree of merit by working and practice at Amsterdam, that his Fame spreading about the Low Countries, the States of Hland cast an eye of great regard upon him, and paced him (though a Stranger) in the Professors Chair in the University of Leiden; which he after∣wards adorned for almost thirteen years, by forming many useful Doctrines (not mere formal Points of Literature) for the Institution of young Beginners in Physick, of whom a multitude were by his Reputa∣tion drawn thither from all parts of Europe, to be his Disciples: such Doctrines as have not had their Rise from the Ancients, and the Academies, but most of them from Laboratories of his own and others, wrought out of the Fire for near forty years toge∣ther, and confirmed by constant Practice among the
Sick; in which Work of Curing he excelled all his Fellows, in the most difficult Cases: Yet because he had recourse mostly to Chymical Remedies (of whose safety and excellency the World is now convinced) the more lazie Tribe of Doctors made it their busi∣ness most maliciously to calumniate and traduce him, as you will find him miserably complaining in many parts of his Book; of whom he saith in 40th Chap∣ter, that they be ignorant of most Natural Things, yet are a prating Crew, that strut about and swell inani Doctorum Titulo, with the vain Title of Doctors: they are his own words of them, and the World hath too many of them, though they and their Cre∣dit wear off apace. So that now in this discerning Age, seeing the Pedantry of their Breeding, the Lei∣gerdemain of their Philosophy, the Theatrical Moun∣tebankerie of needless Niceties in Anatomy (about which they perpetually quarrel, and puzzle one ano∣ther) are like to prevail no longer, to gain admira∣tion among the great Vulgar, or the little; and it being found, that to Industry in operating one grain of Prudence being added (such a Prudence I mean, as is in an Apprenticeship improved under a Practi∣ser, and by an in-sight into Practice from ones youth) will weigh down all the Schools in a sick Mans Cham∣ber; therefore they are constrained to have recourse to other Arts, to uphold that Tottering Domini∣on which they have long held over the Phansies of the People. To say nothing of their Flatteries among the Great and the Rich, besides the Calumnies that they sow against other Practitioners, the frequentation of Clubs and Tipple to gain Acquaintance, the glosing Collu∣sions and fine Tales with Nurses, Midwives, Wo∣men and weak People; the Confederacies to cry up
one another with Doctissimo and Clarissimo in Prints, the creating & canvasing of Interests in Families, and the common chequenerie of Consultations only with Men of their own Tribe; the most remarkable Trick of all is, that they have an Oar in the Boat of every Party round the Town and Nation, having listed themselves accordingly. Some are for the Church of England; some for the Church of Rome; some for the Presbyterian; some for the Independent; some among the Baptised; some for the Fifth-Monarchists; some for the Quakers; every Man for himself, and God for all: And so the World is very luckily divid∣ed; every Party taking its own Proselyte to be the Ablest, and the most Conscientious Doctor. Is not this a short Cut (think ye) to get Custom? This and Scholastick Twattle will do the Work, according to the general Mode of their Second Commence∣ment: after which, the few Men of no Party, what∣ever their Industry and Art be, are left to be turn'd to grass upon the cold Common of Integrity. But in this latter Age, the great Pranks they play now are by mounting the Stage of Anatomy, (for that pass 'tis now come to) where many of them are wont ever and anon, to make wondrous Ostentation of pretended new Discoveries in the little World of Man; with which they have a Mint always going, for coining new Hypotheses, out of which they start up their various Dogmaticisms, to amaze their Admi∣rers, and amuse the World; so that the very Neigh∣bours Dogs are in as much danger of their Shambles, as they are of the Falconers. And though it be ri∣diculous enough to prudent Men, yet when the part is acted it gains upon many gentle Spectators, be it in Print, or in open Lectures; so that they come within the reach of that Motto in the Duke's Thea∣tre,
Ʋniversus Mundus exercet Histrioniam. And be∣sides this, it serves for divers purposes more: Con∣cerning which give me leave, because it may be of use, to make publick here what I not long since privately wrote upon an eminent occasion, thus. 'Tis a common trick among the Tribe of Disse∣ctors, to open Bodies of their own or other Mens Patients, in pretence to satisfie themselves, and the deceased's Kindred touching the cause of Death; and thence they always pick out enough before the admi∣ring By-standers, to justifie themselves and their own mistakes, by reasons to prove that the Patient was in∣curable: or else they will be sure to collect dirty mat∣ter enough, to cast upon any Physician whom they envy, whose hap it may have been to have given Physick before them to the same Patient; especially if he be not of their Honorary number: hundreds of able Practitioners and Learned, have been thus ar∣tificially blasted: So that it were well if this famous City of London, would take Notice of such crafty Abuses for the future. For, though somtimes, when upon opening of Bodies, the internal parts appear decayed or corrupted in their Tone and Substance, 'tis manifest then what brought on Death; yet not so at other times, seeing most Diseases lying in the va∣riations of Blood and Humors, Spirits and Ferments of the Parts, are in their Causes remote from such o∣cular inspection, let none in these Matters be gull'd hereafter. For, that nothing certain can be concluded from the stagnation of Blood, or other Humors found in any place or passage of the Body after Death, is evident in this, that Nature upon Death's approaches, being driven to most violent motions, doth extrava∣sate, intravasate, throw Blood and Humors in and out, here and there and every-where, Cap-a-pe,
through the most abstruse and unperceivable Passages. So that if stagnant or coagulated Blood or other Hu∣mour, be found in any part by Anatomizing, it can∣not be concluded it was so before death. For it was well said of old by Celsus, the most prudent of all Physicians, in his Preface, Neque quicquam esse stul∣tius, quàm quale quid vivo homine est, tale existimare esse moriente, intò jam mortuo: which is in plain English; That nothing is more foolish than to imagine, that things within a Man should be in the same state when he is dying, as they were when he was living, much more when he is actually dead. From hence also observe, what mistakes Physicians may be led into by blind supposals and conjectures of Blood or other matter lodged in this, that, or other secret Passage of the Vessels, or Bowels, to be causes of Diseases; when they proceed thereupon to raise fanciful Doctrines whereby to manage practice in After-time, and order Cures by Calculations, se∣cundùm ductus & Hypotheses Anatomicos. No Man can be against a due enquiry into Anatomy, so far as concerns a being acquainted with the Structure, Fi∣gure, Scituation and Connexion of the Parts of the Body, especially in Cases of Chirurgery, wherein its greatest use doth lie; and of this also it becomes a Physician not to be ignorant, who ought also to be a Chirurgian; though the sine-finger'd Academick Education of Physicians in England hath here un∣happily divided the two Faculties, the Professors of the one being brought up to Talk, the other to Work; the one in their youth to speculative Philo∣sophy; the other from their very first youth in pra∣ctice Drudgery, if I may so call it in comparison with the other: from whence 'tis observable, we are always furnished with far more able Chirurgians
than Physicians. Consider what greater Men ever had we in the World, for the old way of Physick formerly, than those that were bred up Chirurgians? Galen himself was bred a Chirurgian. And where now will you find among the Galenists of our Nati∣on, Men for Physick to be named after those famous Persons bred Chirurgians; such as were Pareus, Chalmetaeus, Pigraeus, Guillemeau, Ingrassias, Felix Wurtzius, Fallopius, Vesalius, Carcanus, Severinus, Marchetti, Spigelius, and the two Fabricii, one an Italian, the other a Swisse, viz. Hildanus and ab A∣quapendente? whose Judicious Works and great Performances, made them renowned through the world. But now forsooth a Chirurgian with us is made so little a thing by our Doctoral Confederates, that when he hath a Patient, they expect he should not presume to prescribe any thing of Internal Physick for the promoting his Cure; though none can judg so well what is fit to be done as himself: so that if he gives way, he remains liable to the possibility of ha∣ving his Work spoiled, either, by the ignorance, or sometimes the malice of another Person that knows little or nothing of the management of a Chirurgi∣cal Curation. Besides if our Chirurgians were ex∣cluded (as that's the desire and aim of the others) from the Practice of Physick, I wonder where his Majesty for his Fleets, and the Merchants for theirs, n which the Wealth and Glory of this Kingdom doth depend, would be supplyed with Able Practiti∣oners for the Sick at Sea, the greatest sicknesses, both Acute and Chronick, being there predominant. Not from the fine breed of the Scholastick Family, whose Learning (so much as it is, and that is in but a very sw of them lies quite beside the way that leads to the more noble ally of Physicians; insomuch that
when they first come to Town with the Learned Cushion-Cap and Scarlet, the very Apothecaries Boys are able to tutor them in Town-practice, laugh at them, and tell Tales behind their backs. Where∣fore, seeing the Juniors are not fit to be trusted a∣board with the Seamen, and the Seniors never did serve nor mean to do it, and nothing but another great Plague can send them out of London, Which way can the Sea, or, our Armies be served with Phy∣sick and Chirurgery, if Surgeons-Hall be not to be lookt on as a Colledge of Physicians? and for which of their good Services to the Crown, Kingdom, and City, will the other Society ever have the confi∣dence to seek an Authority, to tuck the Necks of all other Physicians, Chirurgians, and Apothecaries, under the Girdle of their Jurisdiction? But 'tis to be hoped the Nation will ere long be convinced, that the Laboratory, the Work-house is the way to be traced before we enter the Library; an Apprenticeship from our Youth to work and study under a Practiser, is that only which can make one a Doctor: all the rest is but flocci nauci nihili pili, &c. Whereupon 'tis to be hoped also, we shall one day think it high time that a Reformation be thought of, that the present formal way (which none of the Antients knew) will be left, and our Youth for Physick, instead of being Academians, be bred up more Mechanico, instituted in the Operative, before the bend themselves upon the Contemplative and Philosophizing part of Phy∣sick. For Aristotle said well, Nihil in intellectu quod non priù in sensu, Nothing lies right in the under∣standing, that is not first collected by sense: that is, by sensible operation. And Celsus saith, Non post ratio∣nem inventam esse Medicinam, sed post inventam Medi∣cinam rationem esse quaesitam; That Remedies Medi∣cinal
were not found out by reasoning; but reasoning came in play being sought out after Remedies had been found. From whence 'tis conclusive, That the sure Notions of Curing are those which Men form un∣to themselves: First, Not by Tradition of Authors, but by reasoning upon their own and others Experi∣ments, whose operations and Effects they have seen. But for Physicians bred the fine way, he saith, Etiam sapientiae studiosos maximos esse Medicos si ratiocinatio hoc faceret; nunc illis verba superesse, deesse medendi scientiam; to wit, That your Students of Philosophy (meaning the old way of Philosophy) were the great∣est Physicians, if reasoning could make them so; now that sort of Men abound with words, but want the Sci∣ence of Curing. Yet they (he saith a little after) do bear away the Bell in the World, Ingenium & facun∣diam vincere, morbos autem non Eloquentiâ, sed Reme∣diis curari: that is, They that have a witty knack of talk, prevail above others in the Opinion of the People, though Diseases are not to be cured by fine words but by Remedies. And therefore 'tis hoped the Magistrates, Nobility and Gentry of the Land, will accordingly steer their Judgment in the choice of Physicians, and one time or other give a helping hand towards a re∣forming of the Education of Men for the practice of this Faculty. This may serve also for an Item to our young Students in the Universities how to prevent the less of time. 'Tis not a formal degree in Phy∣sick that will make amends for it, or give them satis∣faction at last, if Men of Conscience and Ingenuity. And as for Anatomy, I do not declaim against it. A competent knowledg therein is most commendable and necessary in many cases, though a just Treatise may shortly evince to the World how little use it is of, in managing the Cur of most Internal Diseases,
a Capite ad Calcem: and how little advance (as Mr. Boyle long since observed) the practice of Physick hath received by the pretended novel Discoveries: eve∣ry Anatomist boasting like a School-boy, that he hath found out more Birds-Nests than his Fellows; and then be struts in Print with Disquisitions thereupon, though the Issue be, that none of them all there be, from  time of Galen to this day, but contradict one an : So that controverted Curiosities and mere Toys must needs be a sweet uncertain ground to take aim upon, in so serious a Work as the hitting of the Nature of Diseases, and their Remedies. And 'tis most ridiculous to observe what a clatter is made a∣mong us with Dogs, Cats, and other Creatures about the trivial Enquiries. Not that such Niceties are to be discommended in Gentlemen, who may spend their time that way, or in those who have little else to do but Dissect, and then to discourse for re∣creation. But Hic est fundus calamitatis nostrae, the Bane of the profession of Physick, that it attains so little Improvement in the World, is this; That while there is a manifest Faction driven among Professors to mag∣nifie one another in these Matters, as if they were able to make a Man a Physician above others, and to establish the main ground for Students to build a Re∣putation upon, it proves an occasion of three sore Evils under the Sun. 1. That as all Men affect Repute in the World, so the young Seminary of Physicians thinking this the way to render them great and considerable in the Fa∣culty, are inclined to follow that Tract, and in the mean time neglect courses more advantageous for themselves and Mankind. 2. Whereas many of the present Pactisers, who make most noise with their Anatomical Rattles, being
Men otherwise of pregnant Wit and Literature, might do great service to their Generation, if their Wits and Industry were set the right way, The con∣trary falls out. 3. Others growing up being perverted by their ex∣ample, the Materia Medica lies too much neglected: the Improvement whereof is the one thing necessary. They ought rather to imploy themselves in the Ana∣tomizing of all Natural Subjects, in order to the knowledg of their various Virtues, by resolving and educing the several Parts and Principles of which they are composed, and in searching out their use∣fulness by reasoning upon the manner of those Ope∣rations by which they are prepared, and from thence calculating what uses they may be put to. Alas, what a world of ground lies waste in the Field of Nature! how comly would it be, to see them spend their time in making further enquiries into Herbs and Roots which contain innumerable other Virtues than yet are known. Had we not been more beholden to Women and Rusticks, than to the Men of Literature, very little more had been known of them now, than was a thousand years agoe. What shall I say of those wonderful numerous Treasures lockt up in the Bodies of Stones, Earths, Minerals, Metals, and Salts, which require the Hands of all Mankind to unlock? It were to be wished they would but bestow part of their time and ingeny in reforming the old Doctrines and Notions in Physick, not in substituting new ones drawn from mere Hypotheses Anatomical, but from the good old real Principles of Acre, Acidum, Salsum, Dulce, Amarium, Penticum, Acerhum, & insipidum; where∣in our Sylius here hath pointed out part of the way, those things being by experience found to be the real
principal disturbers of Humane Bodies. The ac∣commodating of Physical Preparations to the quali∣fying of those, when either of them is peccant, is the only way. And all the long Methods and Do∣ctrines of Physick grounded upon other Notions, he that would be a Practitioner ought to lay aside, till he can find spare time to read them, as a Man would do to read Romances; which, if never so Scholar∣like, serve only for prattle among such as having spent time the same way are wont to admire them. And truly, had Sylvius kept himself in his Expe∣riments and Contemplations, only to that way of Re∣forming, he had been much more honourable and fortunate in the improvement of our Faculty. But what shall I say to excuse his raising some of his Do∣ctrines by Anatomy? I have no more to say for him but this; That being made a Publick Professor in an University, he was obliged to play Prizes according to the custom of Men in such places; whose Le∣ctures are fitted for Pomp and Ceremony more than Use, wherewith the expectations of the Young and the Injudicious must be gratified, or else they will not be∣lieve themselves in the way to be well Instructed: Besides, of so great force is prejudicate Opinion in the minds even of the Rulers and great Men in some Countries, touching the value of Anatomy for Inter∣nal Cures, that they will hardly believe a Publick Professor merits his place, unless he render himself famous by Pretences of advancing Physick with some new Anatomick well-fancied Inventions, though no∣thing hath more confounded the Science: And how can it be otherwise, seeing 'tis so rare to find any of them agree about any one matter of this Nature, as I could most amply demonstrate, if I should fall to coursing them in their Books. Which 'tis like I may
do ere long, that there may be a correcting of Men's Judgments about them, and some end also be put to the estimation of this endless Butchery and Foolery; seeing one twelve-month well-spent is enough to ac∣quaint a Man with what is necessary to learn by Dis∣section, for the Practice of Physick, either Internal or External; though it be but of little use, save only in this ltter, viz. the most worthy Art of Chirurge∣ry: which as it is the most Antient of all the Parts of Medicin, so, next after the Accomplishments of a Grammar-School, it ought to be the first thing that he who aims to be a Physician, should propose unto himself, and accordingly serve seven years therein to some Master, that is able to tutor him in the daily practice of it, and of Chymical Operations, and of Curing Diseases, as the only Method of Education, out of the common Road of an University, to bring a Man to be indeed a Doctor. Which Parents and Gadians may do well to observe, when they dis∣pose their Sons or Relations, that their Brains may not be addled and hurt with the pride of Disputing, till the time comes that the Higher Powers have lei∣sure to resom the Institutions of this noble Profes∣sion. It were easie, were it proper in this place, to in  evident the necessity of my Advice, by taking a sary of Ʋniversity-Statutes and Customs, as in  there be occasion, I may hereafter. And truly,  be a most laudable Design in the Worshipful  birurgecy, o fi and accommodate them∣slv hr, and in the mean while not to un∣  themselves, but to take into their own  Anny-Lectures, that only what is ne∣cessry may be shewn there; which may be done as  bms Men of Reputation, by electing Persons of their own number to be their Readers. If the
Discipline of Physick were order'd as 'tis here inti∣mated, how might they in a short time be able to furnish his Majesty for his Flects-Royal, and his Ar∣mies by Land, with Learned Men both in Churge∣ry and Physick! But to return to Sylvius; had he been content to lay aside the Professorian vanity, he might have esca∣ped with as good success in his Fame as any Man ever did; because he raised most of his Doctrines from Chymick Experiments, the great things that enligh∣ten us in the Art of Curing, and verified them with pleasant and speedy Cures, by joining the use of Plants and Minerals together, both Chymically pre∣pared, which hath rendred him worthy the reading and imitating: but he would needs follow the Fai∣on too, and erect a Fencing School for Anatomy; and what did he get by it, even many a broken Pate from his own Scholars, as well as others, as he pittifully complains in his 44th Chapter) of all which, none endevour'd to help their Master, except Regnerus de Graef, who applyed a Plaster to little other purpose, than to get many a Knock also for his pains; for not only in other parts of Europe, but in England also the Fencers have had many a Bout with them, and bastled to beat them and their Triumvirate quite off the Stage. And thus they all serve one another round, as 'tis most easie to do, for, there will never want cross-Instances in Anatomy for new Conjectures, and for mutual Confutation till Doons-day. By which means, a marvelous seandal and dishonour is brought upon our Faculty, as if we had nothing certain among us: so that this only Consideration hath rendied mo¦thus sharp, for redargation, that this kind of serious Fooling may be lest off, lest it groy so ridiculous, but publick Authority shall at leugth be convinced, it
de∣serves no other countenance for scuffling, than such a Toleration as is given to the like Schools at the Bank∣side and Bear-Garden. I should here make an end, but that I would, be∣ing now unexpectedly in Print, beg leave to give a Reason, why I have been silent so long since the pub∣lication of my Book entituled Medela Medicinae, which is now ten years ago compleat; for a little after the Publication of it, having heard some small Men or Note, and of Letters, were set on by their Frternity to prepare Discourses against me, I thought  to give notice then, in an Epistle before another Man's Book, that they must not expect any Reply fom  to incompetent Adversaries; and so they ap∣peared to be at last, to the number of no less than Four, who came forth after each other with several Books of prtended Answer; yet therein did not offer to undrmine or touch so much as one of the Pillars uon which the main Structure of my Discourse was supported; which ought first to have been removed, if it could have been done, before the reputation of it could be ruined. But that being not to be effected, as their Leaders very well knew, because I had said little in my own Sence or Language, but chose rather to cloth my self with Quotations from Head to Foot, borrowed out of the Writings of the most Learned Men in the World, to render my self as invincible as might be; and in regard they saw they could not invalidate me without condemning my Authors, therfore it was warily done of them to decline an endeavour of solid Answer themselves, and to put the Task upon their Whifling Novices, who being Men scarce known, nor ever like to be to any purpose, could lose no repute though they pub∣lished nothing worth the name of an Answer; while
the other, standing behind the Curtain, reckoned it enough for them, to cry up in private every-where, that I had four Answers given which confuted me. And to this they added their crafty Insinuations in Discourses among the weaker sort of People, that I had printed all Men to have the French Pox: than which nothing could be more dissonant to my Dis∣course, which only shew'd what a wonderful altera∣tion had been wrought in the whole Frame of Hu∣mane Nature by divers Accidents; and among the rest, by the gradual spreading and propagation of the effects of that Disease, by the several Ways and Occasions there mentiond, for almost these 200 years past: which I justified by the Testimonies of the most eminent Authors, who had found it to be so by manifold Observations in their long Practice. And as I had found it so in my own for above twenty years before that time, so after ten years time more spent since in Practising, I am so confirm'd in every Parti∣cular which I printed in that Book, that in the future Flux of Time and Experience, when Envy against me will be laid to sleep, those Men that may hap to read it will assent to its Truth. But as for the Four Champions, I say no more than this, I shall let their Names die with themselves; Two of them are gone already; the third (I hear) is often buried in Ale at a place called The Hole in the Wall; and the Fourth hath asked me pardon before Company, confessing that he was set on by the Brotherhood of the Confede∣racy. Nor was this All; but the Design was followed up and down, by slandering, that I used dangerous Medicins, in regard I had in that Book magnifid the good Effects of Remedies Chymically prepared, and their safety if well made, and their force above
all other, in Curation of the most pertinacious deplo∣rable Diseases; of which I have lived to see the World, for the most part, so abundantly convinced, that the more ingenious sort of Mankind have con∣cluded, that he who is not well-skill'd in the use of those Remedies, is not worth the name of a Physici∣an. Insomuch that the wiser Sort of the Opposite Party, when some years ago they saw the great Men of the Kingdom disposed, and had set their hands to an Instrument, for erecting a new Society of Physici∣ans upon the Chymical account, they judged it their only Plea to be made use of, to divert that hopeful and most necessary Intent, to alledge in defence of their Diana, that Themselves were Chymists, and used Chymical Remedies as much as others; arguing thence, that it was needless to set up any other Soci∣ety beside their own. Whereupon, we may take notice, that being then in a fright, their allegation implies, they were glad to confess the usefulness of that Way which their Predecessors were wont, in the time of my Youth when I first came to Practice, exceedingly to decry, and noted with a black Coal all those that used such Medicins; not sparing even the Learned and most Meritorious Men of the Faculty; such as Sir Theodore de Mayerne, who was Martyr'd once before for a Quack by the Colledge of Paris; and here also in England I have known some would then allow him no better a Title; to whom I may add that most worthy Man old Doctor Rugeley, and might name divers of like worth; who did no other than what Greg. Horstius, Sennertus, Riverius, and all Men tru∣ly Learned and Wise have done, and do; that is, join the Chymick and Galenick Matter of Medicin both together, in their Practice, as they see occasion require: But as for the Doctrine of Galen, and his
Way of enquiring into the Vertues of Plants and A∣nimals, merely by ponderation and preponderation of First and Second Qualities, 'tis vain, in compari∣son of the more excellent way; which is the exa∣mining of their Natures by the Principles, and Ope∣rations of the Chymists: in which number though I be the least of a thousand, yet I have a purpose to publish some Essays of my own, to discover what may be done by more able Men, towards an advance∣ment of Knowledg in the Powers of Plants, in the forementiond way: for, though I have (as I said) been vilely calumniated, yet I think no Man hath at all times, made more constant use of Animals and Vegetables in his Practice than I have done, as my Bills at the Apothecaries will shew. Some years ago, there was a more ready Opportunity to scan∣dalise me, when my Matter of Medicine being pre∣pared in my own House, was kept private to my self, and so my Adversaries might maliciously say of it what they would: Therefore, as soon as I found the Company of Apothecaries had erected a Laboratory at their Hall, for supply of their Shops with Medicins of all sorts, of the Chymical Preparation: so that a Man might be sure, upon the Publick Stock and Cre∣dit of the Company, to be served with them faithful∣ly prepared, my Heart rose with pleasure to congra∣tulate them in an Undertaking so necessary for the Kingdom, it being the Main Matter wherein their Trade was deficient; because what Chymick Medi∣cins were used before to make up the Physicians Pre∣script, were for the most part bought of private Ope∣rators; of whom we could have no Considence for due Preparation, in comparison of what in reason we ought now to have; seeing the Security is groun∣ded upon the Reputation of a Worthy Company of
this Honourable City; who cannot well be supposed to prevaricate for Profit, seeing what is done this way is by Common Consent, which being well ma∣naged, will conduce much more to Profit, Reputa∣tion, and Interest, to each particular Man in his Shop, through the satisfaction which will arise to every Patient, by the benefit which is like to answer the expectation of each Family, from those Medi∣cins rightly prepared. And so, from the time that I observed this, being to form divers Treatises for Publick View, I have cased my self of the Toil I had taken upon me, and wholly referred Patients with Bills, to receive Medicins dispensed by the Apotheca∣ries Hands. And if I have any thing of worth that is my own Peculiar, or that I have learnt by rolling about to observe all sorts of Practitioners, I freely contribute it in the open way of Practice daily, to stop the mouths of lazy, proud, and malicious Men; the greatest part of which are, in plain Terms, ig∣norant even of Literature, or but Smatterers in it, though stiff Pretenders, till they hap to be sifted by a compleat Man of Letters. So farewel. Octob. 13. 1674. Marchamont Nedham.
An Index of the Chapters, Comprehending all the Diseases of this Book. Chap. 1. OF Thirst deprav'd. Page 3 Chap. 2. Of Hunger deprav'd. Page 7 Chap. 3. Of Loathing Victuals. Page 19 Chap. 4. Of the taking in of Food hindred. Page 22 Chap. 5. Of swallowing Food hindred. Page 24 Chap. 6. Of the Retention of Food in the Stomach hindred. Page 25 Chap. 7. Of the Fermentation of Food in the Ventri∣cle hindred. Page 28 Chap. 8. Of the Expulsion of Food to the Guts de∣prav'd. Page 40 Chap. 9. Of Loathing, Belching, and Vomiting. Page 44 Chap. 10. Of the Separation of Chyle from the Ex∣crements deprav'd. Page 50 Chap. 11. Of the Vitious Effervescency of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, together with Phlegm continually raisd in the small Gut. Page 58 Chap. 12. Of the Propulsion and Expulsion through the Guts, of what is containd in them de∣prav'd, and in particular of a Costiv Body. Page 65 Chap. 13. Of a Loosness. Page 67 Chap. 14. Of various Pains of the Guts.Page 78 Chap. 15. Of the Vomiting of what is containd in the Guts, and namely of the Disease Cholera and Ileos. Page 93 Chap. 16. Of the Straining Chyle through the fleshy Crust of the Guts deprav'd. Page 105 Chap. 17. Of the Motion of Chyle through the Lacteal or Milkie Veins deprav'd, and the Drop∣sie
Ascites oft following it. Page 106 Chap. 18. Of the Sanguification of Chyle in the right Ventricle of the Heart deprav'd. Page 110 Chap. 19. Of the Continual and Vital Effervescency of Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart deprav'd. Page 118 Chap. 20. Of the Motion of Blood through the Lungs deprav'd. Page 146 Chap. 21. Of the Alteration of Blood by Air Inspir'd, and Expir'd, deprav'd. Page 154 Chap. 22. Of the Inspiration of Air deprav'd. Page 158 Chap. 23. Of the Expiration of Air deprav'd. Page 169 Chap. 24. Of the Nourishment of the Lungs deprav'd. Page 182 Chap. 25. Of the Perfection of Blood in the Left Ven∣tricle of the Heart deprav'd. Page 189 Chap. 26. Of the Motion of the Heart and Arteries, or the Pulse deprav'd. Page 191 Chap. 27. Of Fevers in General. Page 197 Chap. 28. Of a Fever of One Day. Page 206 Chap. 29. Of Synochal, commonly call'd Containing Fevers. Page 217 Chap. 30. Of Intermitting Fevers. Page 240 Chap. 31. Of Synechal, or Continual Fevers so espe∣cially call'd. Page 287 Chap. 32. Of an Hectie Fever. Page 290 Chap. 33. Of Malign Fevers. Page 297 Chap. 34. Of a Ʋniversal Languishing, as also of Swenning and the Syncope. Page 300 Chap. 35. Of the Palpitation of the Heart. Page 333 Chap. 36. Of the Flowing of Blood out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart through the great Artery to all the Part's of the Body de∣prav'd. Page 338 Chap. 37. Of the Nurishment of all the Parts de∣prav'd,
and in special of an Atrophia, or Pining. Page 342 Chap. 38. Of an over-Fleshy and Fat Constitution of the Body. Page 346 Chap. 39. Of a Cachxie, and in special Anasarca, and Lucophlegmatia. Page 348 Chap. 40. Of the Reslux of Blood through the Veins from all the Parts to the Right Ventricle of the Heart deprav'd, and in special of an Inflammation. Page 354 Chap. 41. Of the Generation and Separation of the Animal Spirits in the Brain and Cerebel∣lum deprav'd. Page 369 Chap. 42. Of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs deprav'd. Page 382 Chap. 43. Of the over-perfecting of Blood in the Spleen deprav'd. Page 392 Chap. 44. Of the Generation of Choler deprav'd. Page 396 Chap. 45. Of the Retention or Excretion of Choler in its Pag deprav'd. Page 407 Chap. 46. Of the Motion of Choler to the Gut hin∣dred, and in especial of the Jaudice. Page 412 Chap. 47. Of the Mtion of Choler to the Blood through the Liver deprav'd. Page 43 Chap. 48. Of the Mixing of Choler with the Blood in the Liver deprav'd. Page 432 Chap. 49. Of the Preparation of Lympha of the Glan∣dul's in the Conglobated or great Glan∣dul's deprav'd. Page 435 Chap. 50. Of the Motion of Glandulous Lympha through the Lymphatic Vssits and Thr∣cie Passage to the left Juguler, or Ail∣lr Vein: As also the Dropsie of the Br. Page 450
Chap. 51. Of the Preparation of Spittle in the Con∣glomerated or Clusterd, as well upper as lower Glandul's of the Jaws deprav'd. Page 456 Chap. 52. Of the Motion of Spittle into the Mouth, and Gullet deprav'd. Page 464 Chap. 53. Of the Generation of the Juice of the Pan∣creas deprav'd. Page 466 Chap. 54. Of the Motion of the Juice of the Pancre∣as to the small Gut, and its Effervescency with Choler deprav'd. Page 474 Chap. 55. Of the Separation of Ʋrin in the Kidneys deprav'd. Page 477 Chap. 56. Of the Descent of Ʋrin from the Kidneys through the Ureters, and its Passage into the Bladder deprav'd. Page 498 Chap. 57. Of the Retention of Ʋrin in the Bladder, and its Excretion through the Ʋrethra deprav'd. Page 500 Chap. 58. Of the Excretion of Sweat deprav'd. Page 506
The Author and my Worthy Friend having both largely Epistoliz'd to this Work, I think it needless to add farther, save to let the Reader know, that where he meets with ℥. it signifies an Ounce. ʒ. it signifies a Dram. ℈. it signifies a Scruple. semis;. — Half. M. — an Handful, when plac'd in a Receipt. M. — Mix them, when at the end of a Receipt. Sp. — Spirit. Syr. — Syrup. The Authors Cholagogue Electuary. Chap. 2 Sect. 46 Hydragogue Electuary. Chap. 7 Sect. 55 Carminative Spirit. Chap.9 Sect. 29 Plaster Discussing Wind. Chap. 14 Sect. 58 Egregious Preservative Water. Chap. 28 Sect. 31 Diascordium. Chap. 58 Sect. 22 Of Oily Volatil Salt, being so frequently com∣mended in the most Chapters of this Book, and kept as a Secret by the Author, see my Advertisement at the end of the Book.
ERRATA. PAge 8. Sect. 4. line 8. for there, read thence. P. 10. S. 16. l. 2. those things which. P. 46. S. 10. Vomiting, and its contracting Motion is turnd only in it self; As, P. 48. S. 22. Matter, seeing it usually follows. P. 126. S. 39. blot out Chap. 29, &c. P. 144. S. 123. manifest them to. P. 154. S. 3. read as Nitrous. P. 163. S. 24. hence to the Right. P. 187. S. 23. Inflamable. The other small ones the Reader is desired to correct.
A New Idea of the Practice of PHYSICK. The Distribution of the Work. 1. IN our delivering a Practice of Physick for our Auditor's sake and profit compendiously, and indeed not much unlike the Platerian Method we will first propose those Diseases, which are more single, seeing the knowledg of Compound and Complicated Ones is easilier opened if the former be known. 2. And seeing Man's Health is manifted by the perfection of all his Functions, and his Sickness by the hurt and deficiency threof; we judg it fit to treat of the Diseases in order that are obvious to Physicians in practice according to the diversity of the Functions in Man that are hurt, because they either constitute, produce or follow them. 3. All which serve either to preserve the Indivi∣dual, or to propagate our Kind. 4. The Functions which are to preserve the Indi∣vidual, are well-divided into the Natural Fun∣ctions, srving to the various change of Food, and the Animal Functions in the knowledg of any Things by the External and Internal Senses, and
hence consisting of the various motion of the Mind and Body. 5. So we will distribute our Practice into three Books, which shall treat of the Diseases belonging to, I. The Natural. II. The Animal Functions. III. Those pertaining to Generation de∣prav'd. 6. For rarely is one Function only hurt in the Sick, but for the most part there are more hurt toge∣ther. Which if they depend one of another, or of the same cause only, the Sick shall be said to be troubled with only one Disease, which has its denomination from the chief and most grievous, or most notable Symptom: but if they do not depend one of another, and arise from divers causes, then shall the Sick be said to be afflicted with divers Diseases, and those of a differing Name. 7. Those things which are received into Man to preserve Natural Life▪ are either Meat to be swallow∣ed, or Air to be sucked in. 8. Although there be the greatest necessity for such as Breath to suck in Air, and Man cannot want Air so long as Food; yet because breathing of Air seems to be ordained to alter Food in the right Ventricle of the Heart, in some only, nt in every living Crea∣ture, we will rather begin at the taking of Food ba∣ing vitiaed, and then handle the wayes how brea∣thing is hurt, where Food carried out of the right Ventricle of the Heart in and by the Lungs, hath need thereof.
The First Book of the Practice of PHYSICK. OF Diseases either constituting, or producing, or follow∣ing the Natural Functi∣ons hurt. CHAP. I. Of Thirst Deprav'd. 1. WE therefore assign the first place among Natural Functions to Thirst, because the first Natural Passion of Man newly bor is to Thirst, and by sucking Milk out of the Breast asswages his Thirst.
2. This Thirst is vitiated chiefly, when it is either augmented or depraved; for seldom is it lessened or taken away with loss to Man; neither can we believe that Thirst, or its Cause, is truly taken away in certain raving People, with driness of Mouth, and burning heat of Body, because they are insensible and do not observ it. 3. I take Thirst augmented to be deduced for the most part from too sharp Choler, carried down in∣to the small Gut, and there so raising an effer∣vescency with the Juice of the Pancreas, (or Sweet-Breads▪ flowing thither, that thence are elevated Salt Vapors, but not bitter to the Ventricle (or Scomach) and Gullet, and there produce a sense of Drought. 4. This Choler being too sharp, or its Salt Vapors, if they pierce through the Lacteal Vessels to the Heart, (the like may be said of the same Choler carried thither by its passage through the Liver) and infect the Blood too much with its salt∣ness, nothing hinders but that the Spittle then should turn more or less salt or sharp, which will less temper Thirst, and rather augment it. 5. Another cause also of Thirst augmented, is, a Salt Humor distilling from the Head to the Gul∣let and there producing a perceivance of Drought and Thirst▪ and then either falling thence also down to the Venicle, or drawing forth Matter for Salt Vapours in the small Gut, by which in like manner a greater Thirst is stirred up. 6. Besides the now-reited Internal Causes, more External Causes of augmented Thirst may car And 1. indeed the Aer heated by the Fire or S. . Food salted, or aromatically sharp and dry.
7. In like manner the Exercise of Body, and vehement motion do encrease Thirst; and among the Passions of the Mind, Anger chiefly, or a great terror, and also prolong'd Watches; and the Body both too costive, and too loose; much Sweating▪ Ʋrine voided plentifully; a notable evacuation of Blood, Milk, or Seed, &c. 8. And in like manner as the Lixivial Salt ei∣ther abounding or too sharp in Choler, augmmnts Thirst; so the other parts in Choler being vitiated, seem to deprave it; which seeing it may be mani∣fold, both on the account of the manifold parts of which Choler is composed, wherein every one may be faulty; it is difficult exactly and distinct∣ly to prosecute, and accurately to describe every one of those Kinds, and the causes of its depra∣vedness. 9. Add that both the Juice of the Panereas, and Phlegm of the Guts can not a little deprave Thirst, by waxing vitiously fervent with Choler, by a vi∣tiousness peculiar to it self. 10. The Cause of depraved Thirst can be at∣tributed to none particularly of the six non-natu∣ral Things, so called, yet to a vitious effect, of more things concurring togther with them, by us as yet not to be explain'd. 11. Thirst augmented is Cured, chiesly with wa∣try Liquors, which dilute the lixiviat Salt of Cho∣ler, and deduce it to the Bladder; and with sowr things, which potently destroy and change its Acrimony; and with Oily Liquors, asswaging its sharpness, as Milk and Emulsions prepar'd of o∣ly Seeds. 12. So Watry, Acid, (or Sowr) and oily ∣quors
may fitly be om d and then they will effect more. For Example sake take this follow∣ing Form; ℞. Barley-water, ℥ xxx. Flowers of Rd Roses ℥ ss. Spicit of Vitrol▪ what suffices to make a gratefu s we taste; Let hese stand in warm Water of and for three hours, or till the Water be reddish, called, Tincur, of Rses; to which when strain'd, add Syrup of Jjubs ℥ iii. M. and let it be a most grateful Julep. 13. If any cannot take Acids, let him use this following; ℞. Barley-water ℥ xx. Cinamon-water ℥ i. Sy∣rup of Violets ℥ ii. ss Lapis Prunellae, or Ni∣tre urified by Solution and Coagulation ʒ i. M. 14. The party thirsting may use either of these Juleps by spaces, taking a moderate Draught thereof, till Thirst be restrain'd. 15. If a milky Emulsion do please better, take this following Form; ℞. Barly clearsd and boiled till it burst ℥ i. Sweet Almnds cleansed ʒ ii. with Barly-water make an Emusin to ℥ xii. adding Julep of Roses ℥ i. M. 16. To make this Emulsion more grateful, and to strngthe the Sick and Wk add sme Ci∣na-water; or to discuss W, a little Fe∣nel-water, and use it by turns. 17. But where Rest cannot be obtain'd, and is d,  t  of White-Poppy Seds, with the other things, d make an Emul∣si of these; so two things are done by one la∣our.
18. Sometimes to deceive Thirst, especially where the Sick are not pleas'd with much Water, some of the aforesaid Lapis Prunellae, or Niter pu∣rified may be kept in the Mouth; in which case also, grateful Pellets of Sugar, and Juice of Citrons or Barberies are proper. 19. Mutton or Veal-Broth also asswage Thirst, being boiled with much Water and without Salt. 20. As often as a Salt Catarrh, or the like Spit∣tle is the cause of Thirst augmented; so often ad∣minister such Physick for it, as will temperate that saltness by Pills of Hounds-Tongue, and such like; and then if Salt serous Matter abound in the Blood, purge it by Stool or Ʋrine; of which here∣after. 21. Depraved Thirst is cured, by those things which correct the Constitution of Vitious Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and Phlegm in the Guts, or of other Humours; which because they are not now so manifest, all universal Things which do amend any Humors what-ever, may with profit be us'd, and chiefly volatil oily Salts, but some∣what moderate ones, and indeed joyn'd to watry Liquors, and by turns given in Wine not too strong. CHAP. II. Of Hunger dprav'd. 1. HƲnger is call'd the Appetite of Mats, as Thirst is of Drins. 2. The chief kinds of Hanger vitiated, are
when it is Augmented, Diminish'd, Abolish'd, and many wayes Deprav'd. 3. I judg the chief Cause of Natural Hunger to be the remainders of Food fermented in the Ven∣tricle, and there staying, and still more and more fermented by part of the Spittle adhering to them, being continually swallow'd down, and at length raising a some-what sowr and grateful Vapour, which pleasingly affects the upper Orifice of the Ventricle, and so produces Hunger. 4. This Natural Hunger, (especially where Food is with-held somwhat longer than ordina∣ry) is encreas'd even in healthy People by the Juice of the Pancreas carri'd down to the small Gut, and after the separation and farther descend∣ing of Food is finish'd, only by being oppos'd by Choler and Phlegm of the Guts thither flowing, there also in like manner sends unto the Ventricle sowr and grateful Vapours; which seems to be manifest even by Hunger proceeding to fainting its, by reason of Food seldom taken. 5. But in the Sick I take the cause of Hunger augmented, to be ftch'd from the over-sowrness of this Juice abounding in the Body, and chiefly carri'd out of the Pancreas to the Gut, and thence sending Vapour more sowr than usual to the Ven∣trice, which increases the Sense of Hunger; and aftr the Food is thrust down, they presently re∣new the same, and urge if more potently. 6. This Acid Juice i encreas'd in the whole Body; 1. B Acid Food, or things season'd with Acds; By t Acid iurs, and Wine, as Rhe∣nih and of the Muse, especially exprest out of Gps unripe. 2. By cold Air, but clear. 3. By moderate Srrow, if long continu'd, whose
strength will be encreas'd. 4. By a more vehe∣ment Motion of Body. 5. By too long Watches; And 6. by the Bodies being too costive. 7. The most frequent and grievous Cause of Hunger diminished, although it proceed slowly, I judg is the Spittle too viscous and too fat, and so unfit to promote the fermentation of Food and their Remainders; yet breeding Phlegm in the small Gut like to it, whereby the moderate acidi∣ty of the Juice of the Pancreas is dull'd, and at length all the acidity in the Body becoms less sharp and dull. 8. I likewise judg, the Choler being too fat, causes seldomr, lighter, and often suddenly the same Hunger to be diminish'd, arising from the small Gut to the Ventricle, and then corrupting both the remainders of Food and Spittle, and pro∣strating their grateful acidity by dulling the Ap∣petite. 9. Of the six Non-natural Things, so call'd. 1. Too much Food taken, and especially fat and tough, will diminish Hunger. And, 2. hot and rainy Weather. 3. Too much Sleep. 4. Rest and slothfulness of Body. 5. Extream Cares. 6. Losnesses. 10. The Causes of Hunger diminish'd, if they be most grievous, will quite take away and abolish Hunger. 11. Hunger deprav'd, or Longing, generally call'd Pica, in Women with Child, Malacia; is wont to vex men rarely, but Women more fre∣quently; and chiefly either before their Monthly Courses, or when they are stop'd; whence they become almost together Cachectic, or of ill habit of Body.
12. In Pica, unwonted and unfit Food is de∣sir'd, or things that are not Food, as Chalk, Coals, Ashes, Pitch, Clay, Turfs, ragg'd Linnen, Lea∣ther, and I know not what. 13. Hither we refer Spices, which are indeed Medicins or Seasoners, but not Food it self. 14. Most commonly the Cause of Hunger de∣prav'd, that rages among Women, is to be drawn from the suppression of their Monthly Courses: for these standing about the Womb, and so more or less corrupted; and then after being mixt with the whole Mass of Blood, and infecting it, all the Mass thereof is vitiated and deprav'd. From which as the Cachexy is produc'd, so both Spittle, the Juice of the Pancreas, and the other Humors in the Body are bred vitious, and together with the most, and sometimes all the Functions Hun∣ger is also deprav'd. 15. We altogether judg, that the like corrup∣tion and depravation of the Blood, and the rest of the Humors, let it arise whence it will, som∣times has place in Men as well as Women, as of∣ten as they are troubled with a Longing; As in like manner the same Men suffer both the Sense and Disease of Suffocation; to Women indeed more familiar, and which is thought to arise from the Womb, and therefore called an Ʋterine Disease, yea, and is cur'd with the same Medi∣cins that Women are cured with; wherfore for Reasons following in Chap. 22. we judg this Suf∣focation is not to be call'd Hyderical, but Hypo∣chondriacal. 16. Hunger Encreas'd is to be cur'd, by giving those which temperate, destroy and amend the A∣cid Juice in the Body, and do prevent its increase.
17. Lixiviat Salts both fix'd and volatil, do destroy most powerfully this Acid Juice; as also other things abounding with either of them, Co∣ral, Pearls, Crabs-Eyes, Chalk, Blood-Stone, Amber, the filings of Steel, and such like. 18. All fat and oily things do dull this same Acid Juice. 19. A Volatil Spirit also made of Wine, or other things, as well more pure, as divers wayes aromatiz'd, temperates this Acid Juice. 20. Lastly, Any watry things also plentifully taken, do dilute and enervate the sowr Juice. 21. Which if more things were join'd toge∣ther, as the Disease calls for, they will perform more. For Example, take these following; where first be advis'd, That the augmentation and rising of the Acid juice, is to be prevented chiefly by abstain∣ing from the use of Acids. 22. If the form of a Pouder before others be desir'd; to please such; ℞. Red Coral prepar'd, Pearl prepar'd, of each ℈ i. while Chalk ℈ ss. whi e Sugar ʒ iii. M. to be a Poudr, diidd into 6 Doses, and twice a day, at least three or fur hours after Meals, to b taken in a spoonfl of strong Wine. 23. Where a Liquid Form is more acceptable, let a spoonful of this folowing mixture be taken. ℞. Mint water ℥ ii. Surygrass Water, Tin∣cture of Cinamn, mde with Spirit of Wine rectid by Iusin, of each ℥ ss. Syrup of Wrwod ℥ i. M. 24. Or, ℞. Ditill'd Oil of Mace, and of Ju∣nipr B ri, of each ℈ i. M. in a Glass Let the Sick tk smetis in a day, 2 or 3 drops of this Oil in a spoonful of Malago, or any
other Spiritous Wine, or in the aforesaid mix∣ture. 25. Or when Hunger encreas'd does oppress, use Broths, both fat, and also such as come near to the consistency of a Gelly, and not sason'd with any sowr thing. 26. I prescribe no Purgers in Hunger encreas'd, because hitherto I know none, which will kindly purge sowr Humours; and furthermore I am taught by large Experience, that the sowr Hu∣mors in the Body may be stirr'd up indeed, but not purg'd, unless with very great Gripes, and more hurt than good, and chiefly by the Physicians that are little solicitous of the grief or trouble of their Sick, or are blockish, or at least ignorant of this thing. 27. Hunger gradually Diminish'd or Abolish'd, will be cur'd by Medicins that correct and carry out the Viscous Phlegmatic Humor. 28. Both sowr Things, and all that have a lix∣ivial Salt, either fix'd or volatil, and all Aroma∣ties do correct, and by cutting amend the Viscous Phlegmatic Humors. 29. Which Phlegmatic Viscous Humor also abounding, when corrected, after a manner is evacuated by Colocynthis, Turpith, Hermodactyls, Mercury as well precipitated as sublim'd, both cor∣rosive and sweet, &c. 30. Let these following Forms serve Students for an Example. ℞. Mint-water ℥ ii. Cinamon-water ℥ ss. Syrup of Fnl ℥ i. Spirit of Salt, what suffices to a gratful sowness▪ M. Or, ℞. Salt of Tartar vitriolated ʒ ss. Cream of Tartar ʒ i. white Sugar-Candy ʒ ii. M.
pouder it, to be divided into three Doses. Take it once or twice a day in Rhemish-Wine, or in the preceding mixture. If any will, they may take of Elixir Proprie∣tatis ʒ ss. instead of Spirit of Salt, and use it by spoonfuls at several times. 31. They who are offended with Acids, may use the following mixture at times, and that by spoonfuls. ℞. Mint, Fenel-water, of each ℥ i. ss. Mat∣thiolus his Aqua Vitae, or any other Aroma∣tiz'd ʒ vi. distill'd Oil of Mace iii drops, Syr. of Mint ℥ i. M. 32. They who delight in a Medicinal Wine, may use this Form following, or one like it. ℞. Alicampane, Acorus Root, of each ʒ ii. Sage, Marjoran, Garden Rue-Leaves, of each an handful; sweet Fenel-Seeds ʒ ii. dried O∣range-Peel ʒ i. Cut and beat them grosly, then few them in a Bag; which being put into a Tankard, pour upon it 20 ounces of White-Wine. After it has stood a night in a Cellar, it may be given to ℥ iii, iv, or v. either in the Morning fsting, or at Dinner, or Supper, as it may best please any, and is obsrv'd to conduce. New Wine also may be pour'd in place of the former, so long as the Aromatic strength comes out of the Bag. 33. When there is need to purge, then ℞. Fae∣tid Pills ʒ ss. Pills of Cochia ℈ i. Catholic Extract ℈ ss. Oil of Cloves ii drops, M. Make them into fifteen Pills to be guilded, or done over with Pouder of Licorh or Ci∣namon.
Let the Sick take five, or more of these Pills, as he is observ'd to be easie or hard to be purg'd. 34. If any would have Chymical Preparations also to be added, and in the form of Pills, then ℞. Gum-Ammoniac, or Opoponax, &c. cleansed with Vinegar, and thickned ʒ ss. Troches of Albandal, Sublim'd Mercury dulcifi'd, of each ℈ i. Make them into fifteen Pills to be guilded. Order the Sick to take five or more. 35. Which if a Decoction be more acceptable to the Sick, and he can take bitter things, this following will be convenient enough. ℞. Liquorish slic'd ℥ ss. Smallage Root ℥ i. the shavings of Lignum Guaiaci ℥ iii. Laurel-Berries, Anise-Seeds, of each ʒ ii. the Pulp of Coloquintida ʒ ss. Boil them, according to Art, in Rain-water; in 30 ounces hereof strained, dissolve the Solutive Syrup of Roses with Sena, that call'd Dicnicum, of each ℥ i. ss. Salt of Tartar vitriolated ℈ ii. Tincture of Cinamen ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take iii, iv, or v. ounces of this Decoction, once or twice a day, whereby the Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors may both be corrected, and also evacuted gently by degrees. 36. Mean while let the Sick abstain from the use of fat and viscous Food. Let him use clear, and also more warm Air, and drier, at least so made by Art. Let him increase wakings. if sleep were longer or sounder. Let the Mind be com∣pos'd to chearfulness. Let the Motion and Exercise of the Body be moderate. Let Stool and Ʋrine, if it may conveniently be, daily answer what is eaten and drunk.
37. Hunger suddenly diminish'd by Choler over∣fat, will be cur'd by amending that Choler; or if it also abound in plenty by educing it either up∣ward or downward. 38. Elixir Proprietatis conduces before all others to amend this Choler, taking v or vi. drops thereof in Wine, or in a convenient mixture, and chiefly a little before Meat. 39. They who can bear Acids, may instead of it use Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd, prepar'd with seve∣ral Cohobations upon Spirit of Wine rectifi'd. 40. Wormwood and Wormwood-Wine, thence call'd, amends this Choler. Instead of which other Aromatic Plants may likewise be infus'd in Wine, and profitably taken at Dinner or Supper in a small quantity, such as Mountain Calamint, Marjoran, Rosemary, Garden-Rue, Hyssp, Time, Sage, &c. 41. Choler is evacuated by Vomit most commo∣diously by several Medicines prepar'd of Antimo∣ny, call'd Crocus Metalorum, Glass, and Sapa Vo∣mitoria prepar'd of it; a Vomiting Syrup of Sugar and Vinegar, or of Honey and Vinegar, Mercury of Life, &c. 42. The sme Choler is evacuated by Stool, with Rhubarb Scmmoie, Tamarinds, &c. 43. Scammonie is suddenly and best prepar'd, if in a convenient Dose, to xii or xv Grains, ac∣cording to the Age of the Sick, or to a greater or lesser fitnss to continue a Purge; if, I say, Scam∣mony be baten in a Mortar, and a little of a con∣venient Water as of Balm, Succory, Sorrel, or such like be poured upon it, and the Liquor which is made milky by rubbing be gently pour'd out, and the rest of its strength be had also with new
Water, the blackish dregs remaining in the bottom; then to this fore-nam'd Liquor, add ʒ ii. of Ci∣namon or Fenel-Water, or any other Aromatic, and also ʒ ii or iii of the solutive Syrup of Roses, or such like, and so it will be a most grateful Daught for the Sick. Which that it may work the better, it will be convenient that half an hour after the Draught is taken, the Sick should drink in Broth ℈ i. or ʒ ss of Cream of Tartar. 44. Also these most grateful Tablets of Scam∣mony may be prepar'd and kept against need, which, ℞. Crystals of Tartar ℥ i. ss. Diagridium ʒ iii. Oil of Cinamon vi drops, white Sugar dis∣solved in Rose-Water ℥ viii. Make them in∣to Tablets according to Art. These Tablets may be given most conveniently to Infants, Children, and to such as are delicate; seeing their highest Dose is from ʒ iii. to ℥ ss. to Infants ʒ ss, or ʒ i. and to Youths ʒ ii. may be given with careful governing. 45. They who being smitten with a vain and preposterous terror, do abhor from the use of Scammony and Scammoniats most gentle and safest, though potent, or fear their Patients here∣in, let them use Rhubarb in this following man∣ner. ℞. Select slic'd Rhubarb ʒ ii. Crude and the best Tartar ʒ ss. Succory-water what suffises; In∣fuse them all night in a warm Bath of Ashes, or Fresh-water; to what is gently strain'd, add the solutive Syrup of Roses or of Succory with Rhubarb ℥ ss. Cinamon water ʒ ii. or Oil of Anise ii or iii drops; which does most power∣fully and happily correct and take away the
squeamish smell of Rhubarb, and discuss Wind. M. for a Draught. 46. They who had rather use an Electuary to purge Choler abounding, to them we commend our Cholagogue or Diaprunum, prescribed for the use of the Academic Hospital by Us some years ago, and commonly used to the profit of the Sick, both there and else-where, by other Physicians as well as by Us; which even therefore is the more commendable, be∣cause though it be used in a small quantity, it works powerfully and gently enough. The Form whereof we here communicate to all. The Cholagogue Electuary, or Diaprunum of Sylvius. ℞. The Pulp of Prunes sowrish-sweet ℥ x. Cream of Tartar, best Scammony, of each ℥ ii. Select Rhubarb ʒ x. sharp Cinamon ℥ ss. Yellow San∣ders ʒ ii. Refin'd Sugar ℥ xvi. Make it an Ele∣ctuary according to Art. The Dose is from ʒ iii. to ℥ ss. It may be dissolved in a sufficient quantity of con∣venient Water, and so be given. 47. Seeing that Depraved Hunger is most various according to the diversity of the thing desired; Its Cure will only be proposed here by Us generally, which consists in the purifying and amending of the Blood, and other Humours; which being done, Long∣ing will of its own accord vanish away. 48. And in this Disease, I have found hitherto that Volatil Salts do avail before all other Medicines; which seeing there are many, they are to be selected, which by accurate Observation, we shall note do most profit the Sick. Wherefore Medicines are to be
chang'd often-times, and chiefly where we see they profit little by them. 49. And so much the more are Volatil Salts pro∣fitable, because they gently and kindly move the Monthly Courses, the suppression whereof is known most frequently to produce the Longing. 50. The best way of using Volatil Salts, is, if more or fwer Drops of them be taken twice, thrice, or oftner a day in Wine, or another conve∣nient Liquor, and chiefly at Dinner and Supper∣time, whereby being joyned to the Victuals they hinder their corruption that might be expected from the vitious Spittle, and by degrees amend the Spittle, and so by little and little restore the Fermentation of Food also deprav'd. 51. In this Disease also it is good sometimes to move Swets gently; and beware lest the Sick be stifled with Cloths; for it is safer that no Sweat should breth ut, rather than one forc't; seeing that Sudorifics do amend and correct the vitious Hmors, though they do not expel them. And I always prfr those that are liquid and spiritous, be∣fore them that are thicker, although Antimonials, though ver so dry, are here the best, as Diaphore∣tle Antimony, and Mineral Bezoard. &c. 52. And according to the diversity of the vitious Humors somtimes abounding together, you may profitably institute a Vmit or a Purge, which we hav in part handled, and intnd more hereafter.
CHAP. III. Of Loathing of Victuals. 1. THe Sick do not only desire little or nothing or too much, or what is strange and absurd; but somtimes loath and are averse to the most, or some at least, and certain kinds of Food. 2. This Loathing both of some Mat and Drink, does not only overtake the Sick, but somtimes those that are otherwise Well. 3. Where this is to be noted, that almost All do more loath what is actually hot or warm, and which do more powerfully affect also the Smell than cold things, and therfore less moving the Smell. 4. All Loathing is either natural or adventitious. 5. The Natural for the most part, if not always, follows as the Mind of the Mother carrying in her Womb the young one is affected; and such-like either present, and mourring upon the outward Snses, or absent, and often call'd to mind, and somtimes by the vitious Humors in the Body; other-times by prejudices whencesoever taken, loathing and being avers from things judg'd ungrateful. 6. The Adventitious Loathing is stirr'd up after Birth in healthy People, either by Prjudice, esteem∣ing Food unclean, ungrateful, or hurtful; or by the same Food, or such-like us'd over-plentifully, espcially to nauseousness or vmiting, or by the same t cleanly enough prepar'd, or presented: whih if they were taken in Hunger, or any other necessity n pelling, they breed a loathing of them, and leav
a great prejudice against such-like; which somtimes indeed is again at length taken away, somtimes con∣tinues to the end of Life. 7. In like manner and more frequently is stir'd up in the Sick, a Loathing of certain or the most Food, and chiefly as often as they are given hot or warm; for by their smell, easily ungrateful to the Sick, a quea∣siness almost together rais'd, promotes and encreases their loathing. 8. Neither are many Sick wont to loath Food of one kind, but somtimes of every kind and tast, and those accustom'd and otherwise desir'd; but not Meat only, but also often all Drinks, Wine, Beer, and often Water. 9. This Loathing of Food is so frequent a Symp∣tom to the Sick, that somtimes it is a manifest sign of unhealthiness, and especially in Boy's, testifying a Sickness beginning or begun by that loathing. 10. It is worthy consideration, that not only Flesh, and Broths, especially Fat, do loath the Sick, but so frequently all things, both sweet, and sowrish∣sweet; and very seldom those things that are more Acid. 11. And somtimes Loathing of certain Meats and Drinks, rises to that height, and takes away the strength of the Sick, that though the Disease be ta∣ken away for a while, and somtimes long, yea, som∣times wholly, yet it continues; whilst in others quickly, at least in a short while it is taken away or vanishes. 12. But for the most part, the Loathing of the Sick depends, 1. of the vitious Vapors produc't in the small Gat by a vitious Effervency by Choler, Phlegm, and the Juice of the Pancreas vitiated together or a∣part, and rising up to the Ventricle and the Mouth,
notably diminishing Hunger, but more or less depra∣ving Thirst, and moving chiefly the Smell, or Tast, commonly also Loathing, when mention is made, or at sight of Victuals. 13. The same also do depend, 2. of the trouble that follows the taking of such-like Food, once or ofter, and hence of the wilful prejudice bent of the same trouble returning, if they be again taken; whence a Loathing, and hence a Vomiting is wont to be stirr'd up in some by the memory only of un∣pleasing or hurtful Victuals. 14. This Loathing of the Sick is deservedly a∣scrib'd to Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and Phlegm flowing together in the small Gut, and viti∣ated, and therefore vitiously raising an effervescency; seeing when they are amended and evacuated, it is taken away and cured forth-with in the most. 15. And as somtimes this, somtimes that Humor is peccant, so also the Sick do loath Food of this or that Tast before others: which when more are nota∣bly peccant together, they are avers to Food of every kind. 16. And what Humor, and how it is peccant, the conjoin'd Symptoms to be fetch't from the follow∣ing Treatise of other Diseases will shew. 17. The Loathing of Healthy People will be Cur'd, by freeing the Mind from every prejudice, or by degrees accustoming to the use of Food loath'd: which is tri'd somtimes in vain, other times with success. 18. After the same manner is the Loathing of the Sick to be Cur'd, which arises from a Prejudice. 19. But where the Prejudice has its rise from the present vitiousness of the Humors the Cr l fol∣low, if the peccant humors be corrected or pud ut.
20. The Humours Peccant are to be corrected by Medicins, partly now propos'd before, and partly to be propos'd yet in what follows. 21. The Humors whether fluid, or of their own accord, inclining upward, may be carried out by a Vomit, and indeed with Vomits already mention'd, or to be here and there mention'd. 22. The same Humors, seeking no way upward, and very viscous, may be carri'd out by Stool, both by Medicins already prescrib'd, and to be prescrib'd here∣after. CHAP. IV. Of the Taking in of Food hindred. 1. IT suffices not Man to desire Meat and Drink, un∣less he take the same in at his Mouth, and lessen the more solid parts by chewing, and thence swallow it through the Gullet into the Stomach. 2. These Functions are hindred many ways; and 1. when the taking of Liquid Things usually per∣form'd by Sucking, is deficient more or less. 3. It happens, when the Sick cannot either open or shut the Mouth; at least conveniently either conjoin or disjoin the Lips; or put enough out, or wry about the Tongue. 4. The Sick cannot open the Mouth, when it re∣mains shut in the Convulsion of the Muscles of the Temples. 5. The same cannot shut the Mouth, when it per∣petually gapes when the lower Jaw is out of joint, or in the Palsie of the Musels of the Temples, or a cross Wound.
6. The Sick cannot conveniently and sufficiently join together their Lips, when they are wanting, or have the Palsie, or gape with a great Wound. 7. The same cannot decently open their Lips, when they in like manner are wanting, or are kept in Con∣vulsion by the wriness of the Mouth, called Cynicus Spasmus. 8. Both happens imperfectly, when the Palsie or Convulsion is in either side; whence in the side affect∣ed there is no contraction, or too much of, both vi∣tious and hurtful, in the wrying of the Mouth. 9. The same Sucking is hurt in the closing of the Lips, stopping the way of the Food. 10. The chewing of solid Victuals is Hurt, when the under-Jaw cannot be drawn from the upper, or drawn to the same. 11. The first happens by the Convulsion of the Muscle of the Temples, in the Spasinus Trismus call'd; the latter by the Palsie of the same, or the Continuation loosned cross-ways; both in the dis∣joining of the Jaw. 12. The same Chewing is Hurt by the fault of the Teeth deficient up and down, or otherwise not enough fitted to themselves above and beneath, or troubled with Ʋnsensibleness, Pain, Rottenness, or any other Corruption. 13. The Tongue cannot conveniently be put forth or wried about, as often as it is troubled with the Palsie, or Convulsion, or a Wound, or a shorter siring of the Tongue. 14. In the Second Bank we intend to Treat of the Palsie, Convulsion, Pain, and such-like; whence may be requir'd, those things which are necessary to clear up more, and Cure the present Dseases.
CHAP. V. Of Swallowing Food hindred. 1. THe Sick cannot somtimes at all, other times not, unless with difficulty swallow Meat, or Drink, or both. 2. Both the Tongue serves naturally to Swallow, especially by thrusting Meat to the Jaws, and the Gullet by thrusting down the same, and Drink re∣ceiv'd. 3. To this end is required both a movable Tongue, and the Gullet able to be displai'd and folded up, as also its Chanel, as well as the upper Orifice of the Ventricle open, and not hindred. 4. The thrusting of Food forward to the Jaws, is hindred, as often as the Tongue is troubled with the Palsie, or Convulsion, or Wound, or Ʋlcer, or Pain, concerning all which we intend to Treat elswhere. 5. The thrusting down of Food through the Gullet, or swallowing is hindred and abolish'd; when either 1. the Throat is obstructed by a solid thing filling its Chanel, to wit, somtimes Flesh growing out in that part affected; other times by gluttony, or by some Gristle, Bone, or Kernel, hastily swallow'd, and firm∣ly sticking in it. Or, 2. it is prest by a Tumor near it, as is wont to be in the Quincie. Or, 3. it is grown together, after its excoriation. 6. The Sick Swallow with difficulty; 1. When the newly mention'd hindrances are only Light, and not great, and do only in part shut the Chanel of the Throat. 2. When the Throat is troubled with
the Palsie, an Excoriation or Exulceration. 3. When Vapors, or bitter, and tart, or many Belches ri∣sing up out of the Stomach, do stop and somtimes re∣pel Food that is to be swallow'd. 7. Somtimes the Swallowing down of Food is hin∣dred, and not performed without difficulty and pain, when the upper Orifice of the Stomach is either In∣flam'd, or Excoriated, or Ʋlcerated, or is more or less beset with a fleshy Excrescency. 8. Of the most Diseases before mention'd, and those that hinder Swallowing down, we intend to speak anon, whence they may be requir'd, which are here desir'd both to a farther Knowledg and Cure of them. CHAP. VI. Of the Retention of Food hindred in the Stomach. 1. IT suffices not that Food is taken into the Mouth, and swallowed down through the Throat, un∣less the same stay and be retain'd in the Stomach a con∣venient space, and so long, till it be sufficiently fer∣mented there. 2. This required Stay and Retention of Food in the Stomach is hindred, when it is expell'd, either suddenly after it is taken, or at least sooner than ought to be, and that either upward by the Mouth when Vo∣mited, or downward through the Guts by Stool, in the Disease call'd Lienteria. 3. Either of these disturbances of Food made down or up, happens usually by the faultiness of the Sto∣mach, or its Food, or a vitious Humor provoking the
Stomach continually, or at least after Victuals. 4. By fault of the Stomach this evil happens, as often as it being inflam'd, or exulcerated, or excori∣ated, cn recciv nothing into it, but presently after is stirr'd up to contract it self violently, and unload it self of what is in it. 5. The same falls out by fault of the Food, or other things Taken together with it, if they be sharp and provoke the Stomach by biting to unload it self. 6. The same happens by fault of other Humors that were before in the Body, if they incite the Stomach by their Acrimony to a perpetual Loathing, and Vomiting, or to a Contraction tending downward, and there∣fore a driving down of all things receiv'd in. 7. Such Humors are often Cholrie Salt, and som∣times Pancreatical over-Acid, which being endu'd with a Volatil Acrimony, and rising one against ano∣ther, do come up to the Stomach, at least send thi∣ther sharp Vapors, fretting and gnawing it. 8. Somtimes Humors sowrish salt and sharp slide down from the Head to the Jaws, and hence to the Stomach, and compel it to contract it self, and expel what was taken in. 9. Of an Inflammation, and any Exulceration, we intend to speak in their proper place. 10. If this evil happen by sharp Food, more gen∣tle and also asswaging things ought to be us'd; or at least Acrimony is first to be temper'd and corrected. 11. To this end many oily things conduce, Oil it self, any Milk, Cows Sheeps, Goats, &c. Flesh-Broths, especially Fat; Emulsions prepar'd of several Seeds, especially Sweet-Almonds. 12. A sowr sharpness may be temper'd, besides with sweet things, Sugar, Hony, Raisins of the Sun; and
somtimes with spiritous Things, or others, which concentrate sowrness, and yet hurt not food; such as are Coral, Pearl, &c. And also by much the longer concoction, do by little and little wax sweet, and more or less lose its acidity. 13. A Lixivial and Aromatic Acrimony, such as is in Peper, Cloves, Rocket, and such-like, is temper'd by the aforesaid oily and sweet things; and then it's safer to abstain from them things wholly, or for the most part. 14. The salt sharpness, such as is in Sea and digg'd Salt, and most salted things, is wonderfully corrected with unslak't-Lime made of burnt Flints or Shells, not to be fear'd any more by any prudent Physician, and to be most happily us'd in most Dis∣cases in the form of a Lie. 15. As Meat and Sauces, so the vitious and sharp Humors may be corrected with oily and spirituous things; and that with their contraries, but first temper'd, al∣ready mention'd, and hereafter still to be menti∣on'd. 16. The same Humors too sharp, but first more or less corrected and temper'd, as often as they also abound, or are more slow or difficult to be corrected and restor'd, are to be empti'd by Medicins prescrib'd be∣fore, and hereafter to be prescrib'd. 17. Chiefly then to temper the urgent Acrimony of Humors, and to dull the sense of the Stomach, and to settle its troublesom contraction; Opium avails, and any Medicin nam'd of Opium, Treacle, Mithridate, Discordium, Roman Philonium, Laudanum, &c. if us'd often in a small quantity, other Medicins being added which kindly temper the most peccant Hu∣mors, whose Forms are extant in several places of this Treatise.
18. We intend to Treat distinctly of Vomiting, and the Lientery, in which the Excretion or Expul∣sion of the Stomach, and somtimes and perhaps al∣ways of the Guts is withal hurt. CHAP. VII. Of the Fermentation of Food in the Ventricle hindred. 1. THat change which happens according to nature to Food taken into the Stomach, commonly call'd, turning of Food into Chyle, we incline to call Fermen∣tation. 2. The chief kinds of this Fermentation of Food hindred, are, 1. when it is abolish't or diminish't; 2. when Increas'd; 3. Deprav'd: which being known, both that which is too slowly, and that which is too speedily perform'd, may easily be de∣duc't. 3. Fermentation of Food is thought to be Abo∣lish't, when, though it be retain'd a sufficient time in the Stomach, yet is cast out again raw and unal∣tred, either upward or downward, as it is Dimi∣nish't, when it comes forth a little, or less chang'd than should be: Whence the Sick get none, or little nou∣rishment and strength from what they eat. 4. The Fermentation of Food is said to be In∣creast, when it's done quicker than ought, whence if Food stay longer than its natural and wonted time, it is too much chang'd; that neither so can it afford convenient matter to nourish the Body; as dough when too much, or too long fermented makes the
Bread too sowr, and therefore less laudable. For all good consists in a Mediocrity, evil in extreams. 5. Where it is to be noted, that the Fermentation of Food Encreast is not very hurtful to Man, unless it persist too long, because most commonly Food sufficiently Fermented, makes no long stay in the Stomach, but is forthwith driven forward to the Guts, and there is sever'd into profitable Chyle and Excrements, &c. 6. But where Fermentation encreast persists for a space, there is too much Food desir'd, and when all succeeds well, gradually there follows a Plethoric, and hence an Athletic Habit, which, except it be loos'd in time, it's known out of Hippocrates, to whom Experience subscribes, into how great danger it casts Men. 7. The Fermentation of Food is Deprav'd, when it is so chang'd in the Stomach, that it affords not a convenient, but hurtful nourishment for the Body as well containing as contain'd; whence arise infinite evils; seeing that the Faults of the first Concoction are not corrected easily in the second; which is al∣ways true of a Deprav'd Concoction. 8. Among the divers kinds of Deprav'd Fermen∣tation of Food, two are commonly reckoned the chief, known by the name of Loathsom and Sowr Crudity. 9. The Fermentation of Food is Abolish't or Di∣minish't, somtimes by the fault of Food, othertimes of that which Ferments, or because of the vitious Humors brought to the Stomach. 10. It happens by fault of Food, when it is taken in either in too great a quantity, or does more or less hinder or stay the Fermentation by its own vitious quality.
11. The vitious quality of Food consists frequent∣ly in its Fatness abounding; somtimes in a Volatil Spirit preposterously, and too much taken, somtimes in a lixiviat Salt, either fixt, or volatil too plentiful∣ly also us'd; in one word in those things, which po∣tently break the Acid Spirit, and its Operation: whence the thicker parts of Food cannot be suffici∣ently cut and separated from one another; so much can a certain proportion and harmony of many things every-where requisite concurring, do to pro∣duce the same effect. Any Beer also, especially wa∣try, does this if swill'd too plentifully, and then it dilutes and washes away the Ferment, and over∣whelms the Meat, hindring it in its Fermentation. 12. The Fermentation of Food is Diminish't or Abolish't by fault of the Ferment, both because of its Defect, and also Slowness. 13. The Ferment of the Stomach is Deficient, when there is not enough of it in the defect of Spittle, or in a continual spitting; or it's carri'd another way, by a con∣tinual drinking, whereby it is driven forward to the Guts. 14. This Ferment is sluggish, because it is pro∣duc't Fatter, more viscous, or more watry than it ought, because of such-like Spittle, arising from such-like Food too long us'd; and somtimes to be de∣duc't from the heat of external Air, or from a vehe∣ment exercise of Body or Mind spending the Animal Spirits; and chiefly where the Animal Spirits are not refresh't with Food abounding with volatil Spirit, or repair'd being consum'd and deficient in the Body, seeing they are very useful to promote the Fermenta∣tion of Food. 15. Where more Causes do concur, the aforesaid Fermentation or Food is hindred, and on the con∣trary.
16. Some things may Diminish, and somtimes A∣bolish the same Fermentation when they are us'd ill, either for Food or Medicins, and because they wea∣ken the Ferment, or render the Food unfit for Fer∣mentation, are to be esteem'd Poison; such as are all, which are endued with an excelling power of fix∣ing. 17. The Fermentation of Food may be Diminish't, and after that Abolish't, by the vitious and especially Choleric Humors over-oily, rising up to the Ventricle, and either corrupting or weakning the Ferment, or mixing themselves with the Food, do trouble, hinder, or stop their Fermentation. 18. On the contrary, the Fermentation of Food is Encreast; either, 1. by the fault of Ferment being more acid and volatil than is wont. Or, 2. by the fault of Food long continu'd, which according to the natural Constitution of the Eater, is easily fermen∣ted. Or, 3. because of the Humors having a volatil acidity, and sliding down from the Head, or rising up from the Pancreas to the Stomach. 19. The Ferment and Spittle, as also the Juice of the Pancreas, and Humors falling down from the Head, owe their encreas'd volatil Acidity chiefly to Food that have in them a volatil acidity, over-plenteously & long taken, and such-like Sauces, and Wine, or other de∣licate and spiritous Drink, but somwhat acid, as is Mense and Rhenish-Wine, us'd for some space, though not in too much plenty. 20. A careful sorrow may in part promote the same, but not too grievous; as also clear and subtil Air, but not very hot or cold, but a little inclining to the nature of the Northern. 21. The Fermentation of Food is Deprav'd into a noisom Crudity by Choler over-fat and too volatil rising
to the Stomach, and not only hindring Fermentation, but moreover altering and corrupting it. Whence are Belches rais'd and lifted up, which distend the Stomach, or gnaw it, somtimes smelling of fri'd Eggs, other-times stinking Fish, or other things. 22. But as often as the Distension of the Stomach concurs, or those Belches come up with difficulty, so often it is certain that viscous Phlegm is also pec∣cant. 23. Sowr Humors produce the Acid Crudity, and chi the Juice of the Pancreas peccant in abound∣in or height of acidity, and carried to the Sto∣mach; whence the Solution and Fermentation of Food is not only too much hastned, but moreover vitiated and corrupted, Acid Vapors somtimes very troublesom, being elevated by the same Work. 24. Neither is it a wonder or new thing, that the same Cause, according as if is more or less in quanti∣ty, or more intense or remiss in quality, doth more or less alter and change, yea, hurt some Function, som∣times according to quantity, other-times according to quality. 25. The Fermentation of Food Abolish't or Diminish't, because of too much of it taken in, may be Cur'd of∣ten with Hunger only, or Food sparingly taken for a space. 26. The same may be sooner obtain'd by using Medicins that promote Fermentation, such chiefly are Sowr and lixiviat Salt things alter'd, and more or less volatis'd by a volatil Spirit. Hereto belongs Spi∣rit of Salt dulcii'd by iterated cohobation with Spi∣rit of Wine; also Salt of Tartar made volatil with Spirit of Wine; Salt of Amber, of Urine, Harts-Horn; and Salt Amoniac, its Spirit, or volatil Salt, &c.
27. For all these things do cut Meat, as well as thick and viscous Humors found in the Body, and carry down those that are Crade to the Fermentati∣on, and so make them useful for the Body. 28. All these things are most commodiously us'd, if taken in a convenient quantity, for the Constitu∣tion and Age of the Party, in Wine, or any other convenient Liquor, at Dinner and Supper. They may also be us'd not incommodiously at another time, and chiefly when the Body abounds with vis∣cous Phlegm. 29. Fat things may be corrected by an acid dulci∣fi'd Spirit powerfully, but more weakly and slowly by a volatil Salt. 30. Where the Appetite is prostrated, not only by the over-use, and so the abuse of Spirit of Wine, but moreover is Diminish't, and somtimes Abolish't, the dulcifi'd acid Spirit doth much conduce, being taken in a small quantity, and often; as also Elixir Proprietatis rightly prepar'd. 31. This Medicin will do the same, where any has us'd long, Food too much abounding with volatil or fixt Salt; whence the Acid Spirit that is in many Humors, and altogether necessary, is too much bro∣ken and made sluggish. 32. Fermentation of Food Abolish't or Diminish't, by devouring much Drink, and chiefly watry, to wit, small Beer, or such like, may be Cur'd, by daily di∣minishing the quantity of such Beer, and instead therof using a little Wine strong enough, or any other Drink potent enough, and abounding with a volatil Spirit. 33. Where the said Fermentation is Diminish't or Abolish't for want of Ferment, the same is to be en∣creasd together with Spittle wanting, by preparing,
and then using a mixture of a little volatil-Salt, and more of an acid dulcifi'd Spirit join'd together. 34. So continual Spitting is to be disaccustom'd by degrees. For this commonly follows the ill manner and custom. And it is good to contain the Tongue quiet in the Mouth▪ seeing by its often moving the sion of too plentiful Spittle is promoted. 35. And moreover a perpetual and unseasonable Drinking is to be bstain'd from; for it cannot be, that a Physician should make Men healthy that con∣tinually err in Diet. 36. The Ferment sluggish, and too fat, and vis∣cous, and watry, because of such-like Spittle, may be renew'd by the newly mentioned mixture, seeing it is sufficient for all these Indications. Which may sooner be obtain'd, if the Sick abstain from such-like Food, and use in their stead, those things which are of good and plenteous nourishment, and of easie Fermentation, if he sun the cloudy or hot Air; if he be moderate in the Exercise of Body and Mind, and get moderate Sleep. 37. Where Fermentation is Diminish't or Abo∣lish't, by things that fix the Ferment, and concenter its Acidity, or make Food taken in unfit for Fermen∣tation, as Chalk, Ashes, Lime, Coral, &c. ill us'd, in Loathing, Acids ought to be us'd, and such as are more kindly and temperate, and to persist for a  in the use of them, and especially a little be∣fore ; and often vltil Salts may conduce, it talen of  Supper, in a modrat quanti∣ty in Wine no very spirituous, seeing  do not  tation of Food, ut by de∣  the nature of fixing and . Mn while ware of any further .
38. I said that kindly and temper'd Acids ought to be us'd; which Rule ought always and every-where to be observ'd in rightly exercising Physick, and be∣cause all the Humors in our Body are by nature tem∣perat, and also because when they are less temper'd, they continually raise up an effervescency too vehe∣ment, and so too hot in us; for it can scarce be, but that then both sharp and gnawing Vapors are rais'd, from which no good, but much harm may be ex∣pected. Therfore i 's better to proceed more slow∣ly and safely, than to cast the Sick into the danger of any harm by hasting too mch. 39. As often as the Fermentation of Food is Dimi∣nish't or Abolish't by over-fat Choler rising to the Sto∣mach, so often it is to be corrected by Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd; or, if it be judg'd to be peccant also in quantity, it is to be evacuated by gentle Cholagogues, or light Vomits, especially such as are prepar'd of Antimony, such as we have toucht above. 40. Fermentation of Food Encreast, because the Ferment is over-acid and volatil, may be Cur'd by ex∣hibiting those things, which break and kindly fix that Acidity, Coral, Pearl, Crabs Eyes, Filings of S, Chalk, and such-like. 41. Where it is to be noted, that the fam'd and wonderfully prais'd Magisteries of Coral, Pearl, and such-like, especially prepar'd by the Oil of Tartar, answers not the Promises of their Authors, because that by such Preparation, their power of tempering, fixing and concentrating sowrness is broken, if not wholly abolish t: It is better therefore only to re∣duce them into fine Pouder, than to use them cor∣rupted rather than prepar'd. 42. Their Fermentation Encreast, by reason of Fod over-easie to be fermented, may be Cur'd, by ex∣hibiting
Food thicker, more viscous, and of a more dif∣ficult fermentation, as Bread made of Meal and Bran, and not leaven'd; Beef salted or hardned with smoak, &c. 43. A Plethora, that is, an abundance of good Blood, and an Athletick habit of Body following it, which arises after Fermentation of Food Encreast pessists for a space, is Cur'd soon and safely by letting Blood, once, or oftner, as the matter requires: which if it be neglected, or deferr'd too long, the Sick are often cast into present danger of Suffocation; from which they are not sooner freed, till by Blood let out of a Vein cut, this breathing is made freer, and so Death otherwise at hand is turn'd away. 44. Fermentation of Food Encreast, by the fault of Humors sowr, and endu'd with a volatil Acrimony, either descending from the Head gradually through the Gullet, or rising up from the Guts to the Sto∣mach, is to be Cur'd, by exhibiting at times, as is al∣ready said, Medicins that do temper, break, and kind∣ly fix all acidity in the Body by degrees; by abstain∣ing from Drink and Meat, that is over-sharp, or sauc'd with sowr things; by inclining to chearfulness, by shunning the very clear and over-sharp Air. 45. A isom Crudity is to be Cur'd, by amending Chler by the often commended Spirit of Salt dulci∣fi'd, or any other so prepar'd, or, if it be peccant also in encreast plenty, by educing it either by the Mouth with a Vmit, or by Stoel, with purging Cho∣lags above-mention'd. 46. Where observe that those Evacuations are to be us'd in the beinning in a small Dose, lest Choler being of it s very t xil, or after a certain man∣ner urnt bcome fur, and cause the Disease call'd Chra or at least a sore Diarrhea, and therfore dangerous.
47. For except it appear that Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors do also abound in the Body, it is al∣ways safer when you purge Choler, to use Cholagogues in a lesser Dose, for fear of over-purging. 48. Add that, although perhaps Purgers evacuate nothing when given in a small Dose, they may be repeted, and the Operation of what preceded, will be promoted by others taken some hours after in a small quantity also; which, where there is no need, may be done only on the next day, because Purging Medicins have power, not only to evacuate the vitious Humors, but also to alter and amend the same, and to prepare them to be commodiously educ't. 49. And this Precept we willingly commend to younger Physicians and Students, because by so do∣ing they will not only do their Patients no harm, but by such prudence they will become more commenda∣ble to every one; which is only to be done by any that seeks honest profit by doing well. 50. But where viscous Phlegm is join'd to Choler, begetting the Loathing Crudity, Purging Phlegma∣gogues are to adjoin'd, beside Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd, which conduces to its alteration and incision, and then both of them in a somwhat greater Dose; because the Operation of any Purgers is retarded, and hindred by too viscous Phlegm, which therefore ought to be promoted by encreasing their quantity. 51. To this end Purgers may be prescrib'd most conveniently in form of a Pill, because the Gums are most apt above all other Medicins to loosen and cut viscous Phlegm, neither can they be easily dis∣solv'd in any Liquor, and with one and the same la∣bour both empty, and carry out the Humors pee∣cant.
52. To this purpose may the following, or such a like orm of Pills serve, which ℞. Gum Ammoniae, or Galbanum, &c. prepar'd with Vinegar ʒ ss. Select Mastich ℈ i. Troches of Albandal, Rosin of Scammony, of each 25 Grains, M. Make it into 25 Pills and guild them. Let the Sick take 5 or 7 in the morning fasting, and an hour after drink Broth. 53. The Acid Crudity is to be Cur'd by exhibiting Medicins often above-cited, which temper or concen∣trate the Acid Spirit; diligently shuming Purgers be∣fore the Acid Humrs are temper'd and brought to a serous Nature, which if they then abound, nothing hinders but that they may be carried out by Hydra∣gogues. 54. The Serous and A id Humors being both tem∣per'd, are carri'd out by Mechoacan, and Jalapp Root, the most parts of Elder, and Dwarf-Elder, Gum-Gotte, Haterium, &c. 55. Among the Compounds, I dare commend an Electuarie some years since invented by Me for the us of he Ademie Hospital, and often us'd to the profit of the St the Description whereof I here set for young Physi sake. The H gogue Elecarie of Sylvius. ℞. Juer-Brri il'd in Wtter, exprest and re∣duct to the c nsenie of a Pulp, the Pulp of Tamariads, of ach ℥ iv. Jalapp-Root ℥ i. ss. Relect Smunnie, ℥. i. Sharp Cinamon, Sweet Fenl Ss, of each, ℥ ii. Clarifi'd Sugar ℥ x. Make it an Electie according to Art.
The Dose also of this is from ʒ iii. to ℥ ss. to Peo∣ple of Age. It is a gentle, effectual, and no un∣grateful Medicin. It may be dissolv'd in a conveni∣ent Water, as of Parsley, Fenel, or any other, and exhibited in form of a Potion, or taken by it self and swallow'd down. 56. To correct a slow Ferment, and also to amend Phlegmatic viscous Humors, a Medicinal Wine may be prepar'd in this following Form. ℞. Elecampane, Galingal-Root, of each ʒ ii. The Leaves of Water-Mints, Mountain-Calamint, of each M. ss. Anise-Seeds, sharp Cinamon, of each ʒ ii. Nutmegs ʒ i. Cut and Beat them grosly, and put them into a Bag, which being put in a Glass or Stone, or any other Vessel, pour upon them White-French, or Rhenish Wine, (as the Sick likes this or that better) as much as yu please, or for Example, three pints. Let it stand twelve hours or more in a cold place, that the Aromatical strength of the Plants may get into the Wine: Whereof let the Sick drink a Draught as well at Dinner as Supper, adding in every draught, either Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd, 10 drops, or Elixir Propritatis 5 drops. When the Wine is almost consum'd, more may be poured on, till it cease to be Aromatical. If Wormwood-Wine please any, half an handful of the tps of Woormwood may be added, and us'd, as is directed.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Expulsion of Food to the Guts deprav'd. 1. THe Food that is taken in at the Mouth, and kept a sufficient time in the Stomach, and Fermented, is usually thrust forward to the Guts by degrees through the Pylorus; that is, the lower Ori∣fice of the Stomach. 2. To this end the Stomach is wont to press its Cavity, by contracting it self by its circular Fibres, and expel downwards what is in it. 3. This Expulsion of Food is either Abolish't, at least Diminish't and is over-slow & dull beyond Nature; or is hastned and perform a sooner than ought to be; or is finish't a preposterous and inconvenient way. 4. That expulsion is only thought to be Abolish't, or rather Diminish't, when it is too slow and imper∣fect, whence a good part of Food stays too long in the Stomach, and presses it with heaviness. 5. For I think not that this Expulsion can be Ablish't, but shortly after the Sick dies; seeing that these Mtions of Contraction, call'd by me Natural, of the Prts forming a Cavity, and carrying certain things contain'd, have been observ'd by Me, and other accura Sarchers of the Works of Nature, to be notable, and so remaining several hours to Ex∣tern l nse, th ugh all the Mtion of the Muscles, call'd Animal and Volantaie, were Abolish't and whlly css nt, yea, even after the Man or Beast was already dad.
6. The Expulsion of Food out of the Stomach is perfected, and hastned sooner than ought, if the Expulsion begin, and be absolv'd quickly or soon af∣ter it is taken, or at least be not retain'd in the Sto∣mach, as long as it ought, and is requir'd to be du∣ly and sufficiently alter'd and fermented. 7. That Expulsion is tri'd and finish't in a prepo∣sterous way, and so is deprav'd, when Food is again expell'd out of the Stomach, not downward to the Guts through the Pylorus, but upward to the Mouth through the Gullet, and a Vomiting is rais'd. 8. The Expulsion of Food out of the Stomach, is Abolish't, or rather Diminish't, both by fault of the Food it self, and also of the Stomach. 9. It happens by the fault of the Food suddenly, as often as it is taken in too great plenty, whence the Stomach being stretch't very big, returns over-slowly and difficultly to its folding together, and in the mean while suffers a grievous sense of weight and heaviness. 10. This Diminish't Expulsion happens by fault of the Ventricle slowly and constantly, when the Sto∣mach is either lank, according to its membranous substance, by the too much and daily use of watry things, clean Water, especially cold Beer, very moi∣stening and cooling Decoctions, &c. or becoms weak in its Fibres, by reason of very cold Drink, or stu∣pifying Medicins, stopping the passage of the Animal Spirits to the Venricle, or thickning them there, or coagulating them, or otherwise making them sluggish and uprofitable. 11. The Expulsion of the Food out of the Stomach is sooner than it ought, because it is stirred up by the fault of the Stomach it self, or of Food, or of other Humors carri'd to the Stomach.
12. This Irritation (or stirring up) is by the fault of the Stomach, when it is either Inflam'd, or Exco∣riated, or Exulcerated, whence it is forth-with pro∣vok'd to contract it self, and expel what is in it by any Food, though most temperat and friendly, and taken in a moderat or little quantity. 13. This same Irritation is by the fault of the Food, when it is either sharp, or at least sauc'd with sharp things. 14. Last of all, the Irritation of the Stomach coms by the fault of other Humors, when Humors or at least sharp Vapors slide down from the Head, and are swallow'd, or rise up from the Guts (even while the Food is Fermenting) to the Stomach, and gnaw it with their Acrimonie, and stir it up to fold toge∣ther, and to expel the Food contain'd either up or down. 15. We intend to treat of Vomiting, or the De∣prav'd Expulsion of what is in the Stomach upward by the Mouth, seeing more things are to be consider'd about it in the next Chapter. 16. The Expulsion of Food to the Guts Abolish't or Diminish't, is to be Cur'd, 1. By promoting the thrusting forward and descent of what is in the Sto∣mach, using somtimes by spoonfuls the Oil of sweet Almonds or Olives, wherby the Food becoms more Fluid, and the Pylorus is easier and more open'd to give it way to go out. 17. 2. If it much press and trouble the Stomach, and that the strength of him so affected be sufficient, by stirring him up somtimes to Vomit, with the Fin∣ger put into the Throat, or a Feather moistned with Oil, and also compressing the Belly, that so what is eaten may th more easily be sent back, and driven up, especially things that are liquid and to be Drunk:
It will be better, 3. to hasten the Solution and Fer∣mentation of what is Eaten, (seeing it is not easily vomited up alone) with such things as are spiritous, and abound with volatil Salt, or with Aromatics, by which afterward they may be sent down, or up as the matter requires. 18. 4. Diligently bewaring from any farther cramming in of much Food. 19. 5. By strengthning the weak Stomach with Aromatics mixt with lively Wine, or its Spirit. 20. 6. By abstaining from things that are very watry, chiefly actually cold or chill; and instead here∣of using spiritous and little Drink, as Spanish, Canary, or any other strong Wine. 21. 7. By restoring the sluggish and stupefi'd Ani∣mal Spirits, by a Medicinal Wine, or its Spirit in∣fus'd in Aromatic Plants, and often us'd in a small quantity. 22. The Cure of the Inflammation and Excoriation of the Stomach, may be known by the general Trea∣tise of those Diseases hereafter to be given. 23. Over-sharp Food is to be shun'd, at least tem∣per'd; and instead thereof, sweet and mild things are to be us'd. 24. The Cure of sharp Humors is partly given alrea∣dy, and shall be more known anon.
CHAP. IX. Of Loathing, Belching, and Vomiting. 1. IN perfect Health, and a natural State, nothing at all is wont to be driven forward out of the Stomach by the Gullet; so that whatsoever rises that way, gives us a certain sign of Health weakned, whether it be Food, or any other thing ascends in the form of a Rifting, Wind, Vapor, or a more fluid or thick Liquor, and is expell'd by the Mouth. 2. Where any thing breaks up in the kind of a Rift, or a Vapor, with noise, it is properly call'd a Belch and that avoided Belching; as, where Food or any Humors are driven forward up out of the Sto∣mach, a Vomit. 3. A Loathing is wont to precede a Vomiting al∣ways, and often a Belching, or an inclination less or less to a vomiting, although that endeavouring to Vomit be somtimes in vain. 4. Rifts, because of the toughness of their Mat∣ter, do cleave more to the Ventricle, and are more hardly excluded, whence often a swelling of the Sto∣mach, and troublesom distension accompanies them; which ceases, or is eas'd after the Wind is belch't. But Vapors and Rifts do more easily break out of the Stomach, and but seldom give a notable sound, but only an hissing, whilst Belches are often loud enough, and make a sound more or less strong, according to the more or less viscidity of their Matter. 5. Belches have their rise, either, 1. from Food it self, or other windy things taken, as Chesnuts, Pease,
Beans, Turneps, Radishes, &c. Or, 2. from a Phlegmatic and Viscous Humor, both cleaving in the Stomach, and rarefi'd into Wind by Aromatics taken, and also found in the small Gut, and in like manner turn'd into Wind by Choler, and driven forward to the Stomach. 6. That Choler, as consisting of a volatil and oily Salt, is the internal efficient Cause of Wind, both every volatil Salt, and especially oily, and also every part of Plants fit for discussing Wind, Seeds chiefly us'd by any that has viscous Phlegm in the Stomach or Guts, and in the beginning raising or encreasing Wind, and at length dissipating them, do confirm. 7. That the material Cause of the same Vapors, is a Phlegmatic and indeed Viscous Humor, is manifest both by their Antecedent Causes, such like Food, Sweet Milk, Fishes, and especially Sea-Fish; the ex∣treme parts of Creatures, as their Feet, which con∣tain a viscous Jelly, &c. And also by their Cure, by only correcting and educing the Phlegmatic and Viscous Humor, which is wont to be perform'd safe∣ly and happily. 8. As in a Belch Wind only, so in Vomiting either Food, and that somtimes Crude, other-times more or less fermented; or manifold Humors, as Watry, Serous, Phlegmatic, Melancholic, &c. Thin or Thick, White, Yellow, Green, Ceruleous, Black, &c. Insi∣pid, Bitter, Sowr, Sharp, Sweet, somtimes mixt; Stinking, or without smll; Acrimonious, or mild: Son times Blood, or also Matter; and somtimes Ex∣crements returning to the Stomach, are cast out som∣times casilier, other-times more difficultly by the Gullet and Mouth. 9. All Vomiting follows the Stomach, either pri∣marily
or secondarily affected, with its contracting Motion turn'd upward from its lower part. 10. The Stomach is affected primarily, when the Cause of Vomiting is only in it, and by its contra∣cting Motion turn'd; As, secondarily, when the Stomach is drawn by consent of other parts first affe∣cted, and is provok'd to turn its contracting Moti∣on; whether this be by the contracting motion of the Guts also either wholly or in part chang'd; whether this happen by the Midrif, together with the Mus∣cles of the Belly vehemently shak'd, and that upward in a grievous Cough. 11. The Stomach is primarily affected to Vomit; 1. when it is Iflam'd, Excoriated, or Exulcerated; for then it's easily stirr'd up by any Food to any sort of its violent Contraction, and so to turning of its Motion. 2. When Food is taken in plenty, and chiefly troublesom and grievous to the Stomach in its quality, and therefore urging it to its preternatural contraction, and so to the casting out of what is in it. 3. When sharp Humors slide down from the Head into the Stomach, and stir it up, and even com∣pel it to contract it self perversly, by corroding and gnawing it about its lower Orifice. 12. The Stomach is drawn to consent, and com∣pell'd to Vomit, by the contracting Motion of the Guts wholly chang'd, in that most grievous Disease call'd Ileos, in which somtimes also Clysters given are again cast forth by the Mouth. 13. Vomiting is often rais'd by the same Motion only in part chang'd, both in the Disease call'd Cho∣lera; and also in any other vitious thrusting upward the Humors, raising an Effervescency in the small Gut; and also what the Excrements descent is hindred, and in the regress and ascent thereof following.
14. It is most certainly known, that Vomiting of∣ten rises in a vehement Cough, and strong shaking of the Midrif, a patent contraction of the Muscles of the Belly happening; which we think is by a conjoin'd compression then of all the Bowels containd in the Belly made upward toward the Breast, and exceedingly vex∣ing the Stomach it self with what is in it, and urging it to change its natural Motion. 15. The Breeding and Cure of the Inflammation, Excoriation, and Exulceration of the Stomach, is to be requir'd of the General Treatise of those Diseases to be given in their proper place. 16. A Vomiting rais'd by what is Taken in, is for the most part quieted of its own accord, when it is cast out, and represt by the use of a few Aromatics and Opiats, and so Cur'd. For Example; ℞. Mint-Water ℥ ii. Tincture of Cinamon ʒ ii. Laudanum Gr. ii. Syr. of Mint ℥ ss. M. Let the Sick take one Spoonful in short spaces be∣tween, and the Vomiting will soon cease. 17. Sharp Humors sliding from the Head into the Stomach, are thence to be remov'd with Purgers, often mention'd; or to be corrected with things that alter and temper the hurtful Acrimonie. 18. The same standing in the Head, are either to be temper'd there, or purg'd out by the Nostrils, or other most convenient ways, even universal, with Me∣dicins often nam'd. 19. Of the other Diseases drawing the Stomach in∣to Consent, we intend to speak here after. 20. A bloody Vomiting rising by Blood flowing out of the Vessels of the Stomach, or Guts broken, or corroded may be Cur'd, the Vessels being again clos'd) by the following Mixture, profitable also in other exeretions of Blood.
℞. Plantane-Water ℥ ii. Cinamon-water ʒ vi. di∣still'd Vinegar ℥ ss. Red Coral prepar'd ʒ ss. Dragon's-Blood ℈ ss. Laudanum ii. Gr. Syr. of Mirtle ℥ i. M. This Mixture often taken by Spoonfuls, will cure the most ruptions of Vessels, and will soon stop the flux of Blood, beyond the expectation of many. 21. Blood gathered together in the Stomach, is al∣most of its own accord sent down by Stool, when its Efflux and Vomiting is supprest. Which if there be any fear of Blood coagulated too much, add to the aforesaid Mixture of Crabs-Eys ʒ ss. as also Dia∣phonetic Antimonie ℈ i. and use it as aforesaid. 22. The Vomiting of Matter, when it almost fol∣lows the Inflammation of the Pancreas, or any Part near it, or a notable Ʋlcer, whencesoever it rises, will wholly be Cur'd, if the Primary Disease be first Cur'd, which is to be requir'd from what follows; and in the mean while often use the Mixture con∣taining Diaphoretic Antimonie, and Crabs-Eys; it will morover be commodious to take a drop of the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil in any Liquor, and then to temper Matter, then to fence, yea, heal the Part primarily affected against any other harm. 23. The Breeding and Belching of Wind may be Cur'd; 1. by shunning Phlegmatic and windy Food, so call'd. 2. By cutting, and after that, by carrying out the vscous Phlegm in the Body. 3. By tempering Choler, if it be over-sharp. 4. By Discussing Wind al∣ready bred and troublesom. 24. Acids, and all Aromatics, and such as are en∣du'd with a Volatil Salt, often mention'd, do cut viscous Phlegm. 25. Phlegmagogues describ'd in several places of this Work emptie the same.
26. In this case, Spirit of Salt Nitre taken to two or three drops in a convenient mixture, or ordinary Drink, before all others doth best temper Choler too sharp. 27. Most Aromatics discuss Wind, from which Oils may be distill'd from Seeds, especially Flowers and Rinds. Spirit of Nitre bears the praise before all, every way useful, seeing it corrects both Phlegm and Choler, and hinders Wind in its rise, and disipates it when it is bred. 28. To curb and discuss Wind remaining as well in the Stomach as Guts, the following exemplary Mixture may conduce and serve for Students-sake. ℞. Mint, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Spirit of Wine rectifi'd, or Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or our Carminative Spirit ℥ i. best Spirit of Nitre 20 drops, Laudanum 3 Gr. distill'd Oil of Mace 6 drops, Syr. of Mint ℥ i. ss. M. Let this Mixture be taken by Spoonfuls often, or more slowly, as Pains or Stretchings do more or less urge. 29. Because we have here mention'd our Carmi∣native Spirit, we not unwillingly communicate its Description to Younger Physicians, seeing we have often experienc'd its great Vertues with much pro to our Patients this many years. The Carminative Spirit of Sylvius. ℞. Angelica-Root ʒ i. Masterwort, Galangal-Root, of each ʒ i. ss. Rosmarie, Sweet-Marjoran, Gar∣den-Rue, Basil-Leavs, the tops of Centaurie the lest, of each M. ss. Bay-Berries ʒ iii. Ange∣lica, Lovage, Anise-Seeds, of each ℥ ss. Ginger, Nutmegs, Mace, of each ʒ i. ss. Cinamon ʒ vi.
Cloves, Orange-peel, of each ʒ i. These being cut and grosly beaten, pour thereon Spirit of Malaga, or Spanish-Wine ℥ XL. Digest them two days in M. B. and Still them dry. Whatsoever ascends let be poured upon the Mass, di∣gest it two days, and then Still three parts of four. Keep the Spirit distill'd for your use. 30. If any will, he may pour upon what remains common Spirit of Wine, but rectifi'd ℥ xx. and distil it after two dayes digestion, as long as a strong Spirit comes away, which may be kept a-part, as weaker than the former, but of much vertue to discuss Wind; if, as is here done, it be join'd to convenient Mixtures, or sweetned with Sugar dissolv'd in Rose or Fenel-Water, and us'd more pure and potent. CHAP. X. Of the Separation of Chyle from the Excrements deprav'd. 1. AS all Food needs not to be finisht with usual Fermentation in the Stomach, to wit, Drink either Watry or Spiritous, or enough fermented before, but chiefly that which is viscous, and hath its parts e∣ver-closly connext; such as are most Meats, especially solid, and among them Bread a little or nothing lea∣ven'd; so the Parts of Food which are profitable to nourish the Body somtimes of their own accord, at least more easily, other-times more difficultly, and not with∣out thy help of another, do they separate from the rest of the Parts, being many, rising most commonly from Meat, which are again sent out by Stool, as un∣fit
to refresh the Body, after some stay in the thick Guts. 2. The Food therefore being Fermented in the Stomach, and sent into the Guts, Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle also constantly swallow'd, are mixt there for the most part four sin∣gers breadth below the Pylorus, which Spittle stays but a little while in an healthy Stomach, and void of Food, and hastens suddenly to the Guts, and together with the aforesaid Humors, if I may speak safely in Helmont's terms, exercises a very notable Triumvirate, or three-fold sway in the oeconomie of Man's Body. 3. These three being rightly constituted, it's ob∣serv'd that the separation of the liquid and whitish Part from the thicker Part follows this mingling, and gets a divers colour and consistency, according to the diversity of Food, or Medicins us'd toge∣ther. 4. The tender, fluid, and whitish Part we call, by way of excellency, Chyle, which goes forward through the spungy Crust of the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and Thoracic Passage to the Heart, to get the Form of Blood; whilst the thick, solid and diversly colour'd part of Food is thrust down to the great Guts, in which it gets the name and form of Excre∣ments. 5. We give the priority to Choler in the promotion of this Separation, in as much as it mildly cuts the viscous parts of Food by its volatil and oily Salt, and frees the Fluid parts from them, and makes these more fluid, yea flowing. 6. To Spittle we ascribe, that by its promoting the Fermentation of Food more and more, and by diminishing the viscidity thereof, it makes it all more fit for its desir'd Separation.
7. Lastly, We judg that the Juice of the Pancreas, by its somwhat acid Spirit, does more potently loosen the same obstinate Viscidity of Food, and gives occa∣sion also by compelling its most viscous parts of flowing together with the more fluid parts, and presently to flow through. 8. These three-fold Humors are requir'd to per∣form such a benefit to Man's Food being temper'd according to their convenient manner, and degree for this Work. 9. The chief part of which Choler consists, is thought by me to be a lixivial Salt, temper'd as well by a volatil Spirit, as Oil. 10. And the chief Part constituting the Juice of the Pancreas, seems to me to be an Acid Spirit tem∣per'd, especially with a volatil Spirit. 11. Although the most part of Spittle be de∣servedly judg'd Water, yet is it not that which chiefly promotes the Separation of Chyle, but both the Acid Spirit, and Lixivial Salt temper'd together in it by a volatil Spirit. 12. Although I think that more do concur in the making of all these afore-nam'd Liquors, yet do I judg that the parts newly mention'd are the chief in performing this present Separation. 13. As often therefore as one, or two, or all of these three Humors are ill-order'd, so often the Sepa∣ration of Chyle from the Excrements will be vitious; which also may follow the fault of Food ill-fermen∣ted. 14. The same Separation is accounted to be de∣prav'd; 1. when there is none, and although the Food be fermented, and brought to the consistency and form of a Pultis, it is by degrees driven forward whitish through the Guts, not colour'd with any
yellowness of Choler, the Leanness of the Universal Body concurring, and a notable decay of all the strength, which is in the first kind of the Disease call'd Caeliac, which for distinction-sake we call the Jaundice-like Flux in the thirteenth Chapter of this Book. 15. The same Separation is deprav'd. 2. when it is more sparingly and Diminisht, at least different in de∣gree from the now-mention'd kind; wherein the Excrements do indeed keep the consistency of a Pul∣tis, and come forth more or less colour'd, the Body also pining slowly, and its strength languishing. 16. The same Separation is deprav'd, 3. when that which is unfit, and therefore hurtful, being sepa∣rated from the dreggish part of the Food, goes forward together with Chyle to the Blood; which whether any call it Encreast or Deprav'd, I think there is no matter, if it be clear about the thing it self, so that thence a convenient Cure may be instituted. 17. The Separation of Chyle from the Excrements is Abolisht, either by the fault of Food not agreeing with the peculiar Constitution of him that takes it in, or otherwise vitiously fermented, or of the Hu∣mors mention'd Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, or Spittle. 18. Food that is incongruous or much loath'd, as it will not easily be fermented, so neither will it suffer it self to be separated afterward into useful and un∣useful parts. 19. The best Food also, and that which agrees and is most grateful to every one, if upon any account whatsoever it remain crude, and be not prepar'd to the separation of its parts that ought to be in the Fermentation, then the Separation of Chyle from its Excrements will be expected in vain.
20. Although the most volatil and spiritous, toge∣ther with the watry Parts, do perhaps separate of their own accord, from the rest of the Food fermented as it ought, and may be strain'd through into the Lacte∣al (or Milkie) Veins, yet the Oily, Saltish, Acid, Earthy, and other parts also useful and necessary to nourish the Body, need a farther and new preparation before they can leave the over-viscous, tart, and other parts less fit to nourish the Body well. 21. This Separation will be wanting as often as the volatil Salt of Choler is sluggish, or Choler is not carri'd down to the Guts; either of which has place in the Jaundice, wherein the Excrements use to come away whitish and not colour'd. 22. The Volatil Salt of Choler is sluggish, by reason of very viscous Food and also fat, yea somtimes spiri∣tous, and also Spirit of Wine; the abuse whereof the Jaundice, as well as the Ascites Dropsie common∣ly follows. Which will be sooner and more potent∣ly, if Medicins, or rather Poison that breaks the vo∣latil Salt of Choler, were taken in or receiv'd from without. 23. Choler is not carri'd down to the Guts, either when it is obstructed, by turning into Stones, or a stony Crust, or by viscous Phlegm in the passage thereof in∣to the Guts. 24. That Viscous Phlegm may be mixt with Choler, and cleaving by degrees more and more to the Pas∣sage, may at length obstruct it wholly; or being carri'd together with the Juice of the Pancreas in the concourse of the Passage of both Choler and the Pan∣creas, and stop the Out-let of Choler especially, be∣ing less potent to cut it; or being in the small Gut, stops the same Orifice, denying passage to Choler. 25. I cannot think this Separation of Chyle can
be destroi'd by the Juice of the Pancreas alone, or Spit∣tle vitiated; although I may judg that defect may be promoted by their viscidity and sluggishness, and that Separation somtimes be Diminisht. 26. The toughness and sluggishness of the Juice of the Pancreas, as also of Spittle is to be requir'd from the over-much and prolong'd use of Viscous Food, and chiefly Sea-Fish, and Bread not enough bak'd, or leaven'd, or boild, as in Puddings, and other things very fat, &c. 27. The common cause of Separation of the Use∣ful, from the unuseful Parts of Food Diminisht, is Choler descending over-slowly or sparingly to the small Gut, for the Causes newly mention'd, or lighter. 28. If any say those contrary to the aforesaid are the Causes of Separation Deprav'd or Encreas'd, he will not easily be deceiv'd. For, 1. Food that most agrees with the Constitution of every one, and is more greedily desir'd before others, will be fermen∣ted easilier, sooner, and more, and therefore will afford more of its Chyle than is wont. 29. The same, if they be of a wholly laudable Juice, will scarce harm the Body, unless a Plethora and an Athletic Habit be thence fear'd. 30. The same, if they be of a less laudable Juice, will easily bring on a Cachexy; neither will the contain∣ing Body then be nourisht conveniently, or the Strength refresht, which we think consists for the most part in the things contain'd. Hence we judg it is, that somtimes many both desire and digest much, and less laudable Food, and in the mean time by degrees grow lean and defective, or are Ca∣chectic. 31. 2. Food that is of an indifferent Nature,
that is, not less containing excrementitious, than nou∣rishing Parts, and either taken in a less quantity, or more sparingly, or fermented more potently by the help of some Sauce or Medicin us'd, will yield its Li∣quid, and also Excrementitious Parts easier, and also more plentifully, to be strein'd and carri'd through towards the Heart together with Chyle, and hence gives occasion to vitiate Nourishment any way. 32. 3. Choler sharper than natural, will loosen and receive more of the Food than ought, though well fermented; whence any may see that the Chyle will also be less laudable. 33. 4. I judg the Spittle, or Phlegm that rises from it, or the Juice of the Pancreas can produce this evil so far, as they abounding with a Volatil Spirit, do more, and so too much ferment the Food suffici∣ently fermented in the Stomach, whil'st it is carri'd through the Guts; and so give occasion to separate useful and also hurtful parts together with laudable Chyle, and to be carri'd into the Lacteal Veins. 34. But here is a greater Hurt to be expected, when Choler, or Spittle, or the Juice of the Pancreas only are peccant; and a lesser when they are all peccant, because then they almost mutually temper them∣selves. 35. The Abolisht Separation of Chyle may be Cur'd, that rises by fault of Food it self, or Fermentation, in their Amendment, of which before. 36. The same arising from the sluggishness of Cha∣ler may be Cur'd, by often using a sharp Volatil Salt, prepar'd of whatsoever, as the sharp Aromatic Plants, Scurvie Grass, Cresses, Mustard, Horse-Radish, &c. whereby both the viscidity of Choler is corrected, and its Acrimonie restor'd to the Salt. 37. The same arising from Choler not carri'd down to
the Guts may be Cur'd; 1. By Dissolving Choler turn'd into Stones, by the Juice of Grass, and especially by the Spirit of Nitre that dissolves any Stones, &c. 2. By cutting Phlegm, obstructing the passage of Cho∣ler into the Gut, by what is already mention'd, and any thing else before commended, both Acids, and also such things as have a Fixt or Volatil Salt, whe∣ther alone or mixt; such as are the vitriolated Salt of Tartar, Salt Armoniac, &c. 38. The farther use of Viscous Food is to be desisted from, and instead of Sauce, use often the newly mention'd Aromaties, Mustard, Horse-Radish, and such like, whereby the over-viscous Phlegm, where∣ever it be, may by degrees be corrected. 39. Volatil Salts taken for a space at Dinner, or Supper, in Wine, or other Drink, will do the same no less succesfully, as we have often said. 40. The Separation of Chyle Diminisht may be Cur'd the same way, and by the same means, and that easier. 41. Lastly, The Separation of Food Encreast or Deprav'd may be Cur'd; 1. By taking Food more diffi∣cult to Ferment; at least in a more than usual plenty, if it be of easie Fermentation; and then abstaining carefully from Sauces that promote Fermentation, and rather using certain things that hinder it, Coral, Chalk, &c. 42. Over-sharp Choler may be potently temper'd with any sowr, and chiefly tart thing, as Verjuice, the Juice of Barberies, Pomegranats, &c. As also viscous things, both Food, Fishes, especially Sea-Fish; and also Medicins, Sweet-Almonds, and also their Emulsion, &c. 43. Spittle, or the Juice of the Pancreas, abounding with Volatil Spirit, if here peccant, may be amend∣ed
by abstaining from the plentiful use of strong Drink, and abounding with a Volatil Spirit, and substituting in its place more watry and somwhat tart, unless any thing else hinder. CHAP. XI. Of the Vitious Effervescency of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas; together with Phlegm continually rais'd in the small or thin Gut. 1. CHoler and the Juice of the Panereas do not on∣ly, flow together into the small Gut, when the Food fermented is driven forward out of the Sto∣mach to the Guts; but continually, and so also at that time are they carri'd thither, when no Food is taken in or carri'd down to the Guts, and of necessity they stir up an Effervescency in their Concourse there, for the somwhat contrary dispsition of their Parts, mild and friendly to Nature in Halth, that is, as long as both is well dispos'd and temper'd; but vitious and hurtful where either, or both of them is intempe∣rate and over-sharp. 2. Because that Phlegm is always observ'd accord∣ing to Nature to reside in the small Gut, and to rise from Spittle continually swallow'd down, upon which account the aforesaid Effervescency is somwhat chang'd: I take it, that in that Conflux of these two Humors the more fluid part of Phlegm adhering to the sides of the small Gut is dissolv'd, and that the same being join'd with the most part of Choler, and
the Juice of the Pancreas encreasing, pierces into the Lacteal Veins to the Heart, whilst the tougher and more viscous part of the same Phlegm, with some part of the other Humors also viscous, goes by degrees to the thick Gut; and being there mixt with the Excre∣ments, makes them more viscous and yellow. 3. This Three-fold Humor rising from Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and the Phlegm of Spittle, and hasting with the Lympha to the Heart, seems to me to give the natural Consistency and Coagulation to the Blood; as I judg the natural consistency of Blood, how∣soever vitiated, for the most part to be attributed to the same three-fold Humor variously vitiated. 4. Therefore I am perswaded that the Effervescen∣cy is rais'd up by this Conflux of these three Hu∣mors, because I do not only judg it may be con∣cluded, that the Juice of the Pancreas is sowr, by di∣vers Diseases befalling Man unnaturally, but that same is most abundantly evinc'd by the industry of the most ingenious Anatomist, (Regnerus de Graaf) my most Beloved Scholar; as is manifest by his Dissertation of the Nature and Ʋse of the Juice of the Pancreas, a year since in this University publickly disputed, I being President. 5. It is impossible that such Juice of the Pancreas, which is, any manner or degree sowr should mix with Choler, abounding with a bitter and volatil Salt, but presently an Effervescency should be rais'd thence, which may be confirm'd with infinite Examples to be had from Chymistry and elsewhere. 6. That this Effervescency in time of Health is very mild, is even manifest, because it is not per∣ceiv'd in healthy People; which notwithstanding is often so manifest and hainous in Sick People, that it bewrays it self by Gnawings, Distensions, Gripes,
Coldness, Heat, Belchings, &c. both in the Region of the Loins, and in the left Hypochondrium, and also somtimes in all the Belly. 7. Which aforesaid Effervescency is many ways vi∣tious; 1. Because of over-sharp and saltish-Choler; whence I am perswaded that Thirst for the most part is Encreast, and the Diarrhea most commonly takes its rise. 8. 2. Because of Choler fatter than natural, whence I take it, that the Heat in the Region of the Loins on∣ly, or besides in the whole Body is produc'd. 9. 3. Because of the over-Acidity and Acrimony of the Juice of the Pancreas; whence other things being alike, I judg that coldness is stirr'd up most commonly in the mention'd Region of the Loins, and afterward distributed into the whole Body; which is manifest in the beginning of almost every Intermitting Feaver. 10. 4. Because of the Juice of the Pancreas Tart and harsh, to which I ascribe the rising of such-like Vapors, producing the Hypochondriac Suffocation, and also of Pains wonderfully racking and contorting the Guts. 11. 5. Because of over-viscous Phlegm, from which such-like Wind is wont to be bred, distending the Guts and Ventricle, or more-over other parts, chiefly when Choler is over-sharp; or otherwise the Blood is made tough and viscous, known by the name of Melancholic. 12. Where Choler and the Juice of the Pancre∣as are both peccant in their proper Acrimonie, most grievous pains are stirr'd up in the small Gut, and the Disease Cholera or Dysenterie, &c. do often couple them, and almost always an inordinate Feaver; about all which we intend to speak in their proper place.
13. Where moreover Phlegm is very viscous, or otherwise vitious, there the rise of the Diseases, Suffocation, or Hypochondriac Melancholy, the Scurvy, Cholic, and other such-like Diseases more grievous, daily manifests it self now in this or that, and commonly in a changable form. 14. Of the almost innumerable Diseases that rise from the vitious Effervescency of these three Humors flowing together in the small Gut, we may Treat al∣most through the whole Practice of Physick, seeing the most depend on it. 15. For by this vitiated mingling, not only hurt∣ful Humors are produc'd, but often Wind, Vapors, or ill-Rifts, causing much hurt to Man. 16. Therefore it concerns, that every Physician should search out and inquire diligently as, the Mat∣ter concerns, the Nature and Qualities (both Natu∣ral, and Temperate, and also Preternatural, and changing from its proper temper, which causes infi∣nite harm to Man) of these three Humors. 17. The Effects and Diseases proceeding from this vitious Effervescency are most moted and daily, although the reason and rise of them for the most part is unknown to us. 18. Over-sharp Choler follows; 1. Over-sharp Food, at least sauc'd with sharp and very aromatical things. 2. Summer-Air, or hot, by any other Cause. 3. An over-vehement Motion of the Body. 4. Over∣long Watches. 5. Frequent Anger and Cares. 6. Over∣costivness. 19. Choler over-fat is chiefly caus'd by such-like Food plentifully us'd, Oil, Butter, &c. as also by Medicins Aromatical, very oily too often, and long us'd, distil'd Oils, as also by the Spirit of Wine, espe∣cially prepar'd with oily things, as that with Anise-Seeds, &c.
20. The exceeding Acidity of the Juice of t Pan∣creas, arises, 1. by such-like Food, Sauces or Medi∣cins us'd too much, too often, or too long. 2. By Winter-Air too cold, or at least too sharp. 3. By Fear and any Sorrow, or grievous Solicitude of Mind. 4. By continuing Watches, which consume the Ani∣mal Spirits, and by consequence increase the Acri∣mony of any Humors. 5. By a continu'd and vehe∣ment Motion of Body, exhausting those Spirits. 6. By Costivness. 21. The tartness of the Juice of the Pancreas arises especially from such-like Food, or rather Sauces, or Medicins, and unripe Fruits ill us'd, Apples, Pears, Medlars, Chesnuts, Olives, Verjuice, &c. as also from grievous Sorrow continuing long, chiefly join'd with Solicitude. 22. Phlegm over-viscous ows it rise, 1. to such-like Food, especially Sea-Fish. 2. To moist, cloudy, soaking Air. 3. To an idle Life, and without cares, with much Sleep. 4. To rest and sluggishness of Body. 5. To a fearful and sluggish Mind. 6. To the slow voiding of most Excrements. 23. Every mention'd vitious Effervescency of the three-fold Humors may be Cur'd, by correcting or purging out its Internal Cause, and shunning or amending the External Cause; diligently considering whether one only, or more together be peccant. 24. Those things which correct over-sharp Choler, are propos'd in Chap. 1. Sect. 11, &c. Those things that evacuate it, Chap. 2. Sect. 41, &c. 25. Choler fatter than ought is Corrected, both by abstaining from the use of Fat things, and by often using Acids, but more temperate, chiefly to season Food, to wit, the Juice of Citrons, Oranges, sowr Pomegranates, Barberies, Currans, Verjuice; or by
mixing some of them with Ordinary Drink, and especially the Spirit of Salt, or Nitre dulcifi'd, &c. 26. Those things that diminish and temper the over-acid Juice of the Pancreas, may be requir'd from Chap. 2. Sect. 17, &c. of this Book. 27. I have found hitherto, that when it is too tart, it is Corrected with Spirit of Salt Armoniac, and any other Volatil Salt, especially if Oily, be∣fore any other things, often us'd at any time in Wine, or any other convenient Liquor. 28. The same being Corrected and Temper'd, is Evacuated commodiously with Hydragogues, of which we have spoken Chap. 7. Sect. 53, &c. 29. Several things do amend viscous Phlegm, of which we have spoken Chap. 2. Sect. 28, &c. 30. Phlegmagogues educe the same, which we have noted there, Sect. 29, 33, &c. 31. The Physician sooner forbids, than the Sick shuns the External Causes; and is to be admonisht of the Physician, that he blame not him afterward for the continuance of the Disease. 32. Those Non-natural Things not naturally e∣nough occurring, which cannot be shun'd wholly, ought to be Corrected as much as can be, Food espe∣cially by convenient Sauces, and such as do amend its Hurt, often mention'd here and else-where. 33. The Air, if it be hot, should be temper'd with clean Water, cooling Plants, so call'd, or their Decoctions, Vinegar, and such-like; if moist and cloudy, it should be Corrected with a clear Fire, and Aromatic Plants. 34. Let Watches be moderate, according to every one's Constitution. 35. So let the Motion of the Body be mean.
36. Let the Mind be free from all grievous Passi∣ons, at least let it be freed from it, as much as can be; which is never obtain'd by Medicins, always by the power and weight of Reasons whencesoever drawn; for which therfore, a prudent and skilful Physician is no less us'd than a Divine, a Counsellor of Law, or an Orator, as the Instruments not only useful, but even necessary to restore the lost Health of Man. 37. The Body, as much as can conveniently be, should be kept or made Lax, both by Food agreeing most to every one's peculiar Constitution, and also somtimes by Medicins that are call'd Looseners, Prunes, Currans, Creme of Tartar, the solutive Sirup of Roses, and such like. 38. The Body also may be kept open, both by so∣liciting it by a Suppositorie of boild Hony, and Sea-Salt, or Salt-Gem, or of a piece of Roch-Alume, being out into a long piece, and anointed with some Oil; also by an Emollient Clyster given, which more-over discusses Wind; The form whereof let this or such like be. ℞. Marsh-mallow Root ʒ ii. Mallow-Leaves, Meli∣lot-Tops, of each M. i. Boil them in Barley-Water, strain ℥ viii. in which dissolve the Catholic-Ele∣ctuary, or solutive Diaprunus, or Laxative Be∣nedictus ℥ i. Oil of Roses, or of white Lilies ℥ ss. M. for a Clyster, to be given at any time, and kept in the Body half an hour or thereabout.
CHAP. XII. Of the Propulsion and Expulsion through the Guts, of what is contain'd in them deprav'd, and in particular of a Costive-Body. 1. BOth Food prepar'd in the Stomach, and Spittle continually swallow'd down, and hence car∣ri'd through the Stomach to the Guts, and Choler out of its Bag by its passage into the Gut, and the Juice of the Pancreas through its proper Passage, hasting to the Gut, and the Mixture made of all these, are to be driven forward yet through the long Fistula of the Guts, till the useful Parts being sent all over through the Lacteal Vessels to nourish each Body, the unuseful Parts, known by the name of Excrements, are at length Expell'd and Voided by Stool. 2. This Propulsion and Expulsion of the various things contain'd in the Guts, as well according to as against Nature, is deprav'd many ways; whilst 1. it happens too slowly or sparingly; or, 2. when it is too quick, often, or plentiful; or, 3. when it is finisht with Pain or Vexings; or, 4. done an unusual way. 3. It haps too slowly or sparingly, when the Body is more or less Costive. 4. It happens too quickly, often, or plentifully in any Loosness. 5. It is done with Pain in Gripes of the Belly, the Colie, Dysenterie, Tenesinus, &c. 6. It is perform'd by an unusual way in the Disease
Cholera, Ileos, and other Vomitings caus'd by the Guts, as also in Wounds and Ʋlcers piercing through the Tunicles of the Guts. 7. We reduce as well an over-slow Propulsion of what is contain'd, as the too seldom and sparing Ex∣pulsion thereof through the Fundament, to an over-costive Body, of which we intend to speak in this Chapter. 8. The Propulsion of what is contain'd, proceeds too slwly, and hence is their Expulsion through the Guts too seldom, when the Excrements are voided in the second, third, or fourth day, or slower, which should be daily at least once. 9. Which falls out, because what is contain'd and driven forward, is too viscous, or too much hardned or dry'd. 10. The things contain'd, owe their viscousness t the Non natural Things mention'd in the former Chapter. 11. But their hardness, both to such-like Food, Bone-like, and Grslish, and also too tart Wind, yielding a firmer Consistency to what is contain'd. 12. They have their driness because of Chyle over-plentifully made, and somtimes by reason of too little Drink us'd with much Bread. 13. The Excrements move too sparingly, because some part of them is separated and driven forward into the Lacteal Veins, together with Chyle, of which fault we spoke in Chap. 10. or they are excluded by another and undecent way, as well in a Vomiting pre∣ternatural, having its rise from the Guts, as in a W und or notable Ʋlcer of the Guts. 14. The most things that conduce to cure this Dis∣ease are propos'd before, especially such things as a∣gree to nd the visusnss of Humors and Vapors.
15. Besides a Clyster of warm Cows Milk, and a little Honey, given and retain'd for some space con∣duces much to soften the hard Excrements, and to dis∣solve those that are too viscous; for so the Excrements that are softned, are not only carri'd out, but Wind also is invited to an easie Out-let, or at least dispos'd to cease. 16. The Clyster also prescrib'd in the former Chap∣ter, may be given to loosen the Body; or a conve∣nient Suppositorie given, as we have noted there of Alume, which I prefer before all others. CHAP. XIII. Of a Loosness. 1. AS often as the Propulsion of what is contain'd in the Guts, and their Expulsion happens quicker, and especially oft'ner, or more plentifully than is wont and ought, so often one is said to be troubled with a Loosness. 2. A Loosness is distinguisht into divers sorts, and specially by reason of the different thing voided. For, 1. somtimes Food it self is voided, Meat and Drink, crude, and unchang'd, and as they were, if not when taken in at the Mouth, then as swallow'd down the Gullet, in the Disease call'd Lienteria. 3. 2. Somtimes the same Food is sent out, fer∣mented and duly chang'd in the Stomach, but not Separated in the Guts into Chyle, and Excrements, but are Pultis-like and whitish, such as those that have the Jaundice do often void; whence I may say, and not foolishly, that this Loosness may be call'd,
a Loosness belonging to the Jaundice, to wit, one kind of the Disease call'd Caeliaca. 4. 3. Somtimes Food both fermented, and se∣ver'd into Chyle and Excrements, though as yet con∣fus'd together are voided, in the other kind of the Disease Caeliaca; which, for distinction-sake, we name the Chyle-like Loosness. 5. 4. Somtimes not the Food only, but watrish and choleric Humors are often or plentifully voided in a Diarrhea or Choleric Leosness thence call'd. 6. 5. Somtimes Phlegmatic Humors, thick and viscous are frequently and plentifully voided in a Phlegmatic Diarrhea thence call'd; other-times small and serous, milder or sharper in the Serous Loosness thence call'd. 7. 6. Somtimes fat and oily Excrements are voided, in the fat or unctious Loosness thence to be nam'd. 8. 7. Somtimes more pure Blood is voided in a Bloody Purging, to which I think I may refer the Plux of the Haemorrhoids; other-times a Liquor like the washing of Flesh, in the Flux call'd of the Li∣ver. 9. 8. Somtimes Matter and Purulent, or corrup∣ted Stuff is voided, in any Purulent Dejection, so call'd, familiar to a Dysenterie; to which a Tenesmus seems partly to be refer'd, and partly to a Phlegmatic Dejection; seeing that it is a perpetual endeavour to sit down, and void with a little both fro∣thy and purulent voided. 10. Because in the Lienterie Food is usually void∣ed both unchang'd; and a little after it is taken in, it is apparent it comes by the Fault of the Stomach pre∣sently rising up to expel what was received in; con∣cerning
which Disease, its Causes and Cure, we have spoken before in Chap. 6. 11. Seeing that in the Jaundice-like Flux the Food is voided enough Fermented, it is manifest that it proceeds from the defect of the Separation of Chyle, and Excrements, by reason of either the Absence or Sluggishness of Choler; of which we have spoken in Chap. 10. 12. Seeing that in the Chyle-like Flux, Chyle comes come or less with the Excrements, the Fermentation of Food, and Separation of Useful and Unuseful Parts being intire, the straining of Chyle through the Spongie Crust of the Guts into the Lacteal Veins will be Hurt; of which hereafter in Chap. 16. 13. Seeing that in a Choleric Diarrhea, Choleric and Watry Humors, or Serous, are effus'd, then that Choler upon the account of its Salt is too sharp and fluid, and the Phlegm of Spittle, or Juice of the Pancreas, is too watry and also fluid, is manifest as well by what is voided, as by Thirst accompany∣ing. 14. A Phlegmatic Diarrhea is caus'd primarily by Viscous Food, and such as do breed much Viscous Phlegm; and secondarily, by the cold and sharp Air, both encreasing and coagulating Phlegm in the Blood, and also Separating it in the Brain, or Glandules of the Brain against Nature; whence arise Phlegmatic Catarrhs, by which sliding down to the Jaws, and swallow'd down, this Diarrhaea is often bred. 15. Also much Sleep, a drowsie resting of Body, dall Wit, rainy, or else moist Air, &c. helps much to heap up Phlegm in the Body. 16. A Serous Diarrhaea arises most frequently from the Juice of the Pancreas Serous, and also such-like Spittle, seldom from watry and serous Humors, di∣stilling
and swallow'd down from the Brain toward the Jaws. 17. The Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle, be∣come more watry and mild, according to the plenty of watry Drink taken in; after that moist Air com∣ing; or the Excretion of Urine, or a wonted Sweat failing. 18. The same are serous and sharp, or saltish, by the use of both watry and salted Food, whereby they are not only over-thin and fluid, but over-sharp also, and Saltish. 19. Phlegm both viscous and watry, or Serous, is separated beside Nature in the Brain, or its Glan∣dules, perhaps alwayes the Heat of the Universal Body, and Head especially preceding whencesoever, and a Phlegmatic Humor carri'd plentifully to the Brain, being then in the Body or Blood, and pre∣sently the coldness of Air following, and piercing through the most open Pores with a subtile Air, coa∣gulating the aforesaid Humor in divers parts of the Brain; whence whether an Obstruction happen in the Lymphatic Vessels, and the breaking thereof after too much distension, and hence an Effusion of what is contain'd; or a Phlegmatic Humor depart other∣wise from the Blood, at least it uses to run under the name of a Catarrh, somtimes in the Nostrils, other∣times on the Jaws, and thence either into the rough Arterie, or into the Gullet; by which being carri'd into the Ventricle and Guts, it seems to afford Matter to this Serous Diarrhaea. 20. A fat and oily, or unctuous Loosness almost follows the use or abuse of too fat Food. 21. A bloody Flux always rises from some Vessel of a Vein or Arterie in the small or thick Gut, seldom in the Stomach, or any other part unnaturally burst, cut,
or open'd any other way, and sending the contain'd Blood to the Guts. 22. We intend to speak in its proper place of the manifold opening of any Vessels, their various Causes, and divers Cure. 23. The Flux of the Hemorrhoids, not very fami∣liar to certain Sick People, is either Critical, which uses to ease them; or Symptomatical, much weaken∣ing the Sick. 24. The Flux of the Liver, if ever seen by others, not by me, as I know, is to be deduc'd from much serous Matter mixt with the Blood, and also relaxing the Vessels. 25. The Blood becoms serous by too much use of watry Drink, Water, Beer, &c. and also of Spirit of Wine it self, whereby at length the firmness of all Parts is weaken'd, and the Tone almost gone. 25. Seeing that both Matter and Slime rises from the corruption of the Blood, and that after an Inflam∣mation in an Aposteme, or an Ulcer either deep or su∣perficiarie, or an Exulceration whence soever arising; such a thing ought to have place, as often as the De∣jection is observ'd Purulent or Slimy. But of these Diseases we intend to speak anon. 27. A Tenesmus consisting of a Mucous and Puru∣lent Dejection, owns a Phlegmatie, viscous, and also a sharp acid Humor adjoining about the Siege, and there stirring up a troublesom Ʋleer by fretting. 28. A Choleric Diarrhaea may be Cur'd; 1. By correcting the saltish Acrimonie of Choler by Medi∣cins, in Chap. 1. Sect. 11, &c. And they are to be selected, (because of its fluidity also encreas'd) which have a mild Tartness, Quinces, Apples or Pears, according to the Palate of the Sick, prepar'd either in the form of a Syrup, or Miva, or Preserve, or
any other form. To these belong Pomegranats, Bar∣brries, unripe Grapes, or Verjuice, Plantane, Pur∣slan, &c. Boles and fat Earths, and all that are seal'd. 29. 2. By correcting the over-watriness of the Phlegm of Spittle, or the Juice of the Pancreas, both by solid and no-wise watry Food, and also by Medi∣cins imbibing or evacuating the same. 30. Chalk, Harts-Horn, or any other burnt Bone, and reduc'd to Pouder by it self, before many other things do imbibe watry moisture, us'd in a small quan∣tity, &c. 31. Hydragogues empty this watry Moisture by Stool; and Sudorifics and Diuretics by Sweat or U∣rine, among which I much commend Decoctions made of the Roots of China, Sarsaparilla, Butter∣bur, Contrayerva, &c. the Woods Gujacum, Sassa∣fras, Juniper, Oak, Box, &c. 32. Toasted Rhubarb satisfies to many Indications, and given to ʒ i. or there-about, seeing that it doth not only evacuate Water here abounding together with Choler, but soon corrects the over-loose Body by its mild tartness. 33. After Choler is corrected, and also too much abounding is gently purg'd together with watry Se∣rous Liquor, Diascordium, Treacle, Confection of Ja∣ciuth, and such-like may be us'd, whereby Choler may be reduc'd to its natural Temper, and the Guts weakned by frequent Dejection, may be recreated and strengthned. 34. For the sake of Students we will add these following Forms. ℞ Rhubarb tosted ℈ ii. Nutmegs ℈ ss. M. for a Pouder.
Which the Sick may take in the morning in a spoonful of Wine or Broth. 35. When the Blood also abounds with much Se∣rous Liquor. ℞. Rhubarb tosted, Jalapp-Root, of each ℈ i. acute Cinamon 6 Gr. M. for a Pouder, or with as much Conserve of Damask-Roses as suffices. Make it a Bole to be taken in the Morning. 36. After such an Evacuation, let the Sick use about the Evening by times, one spoonful of this following Mixture, which ℞. Diascordium ʒ i. ss. Confection of Jacinth ʒ i. Syr. of Myrtle ℥ i. Cinamon-Water ℥ ss. Plan∣tane-Water ℥ ii. ss. M. 37. As often as all the Blood abounds with serous Liquor, than will the following, or such a-like De∣coction be convenient to educe and diminish it by Ʋrine or Sweat. ℞. Smallage, Butter-bur Root, of each ℥ i. the sha∣vings of Juniper-Wood, Millet-Seeds, of each ℥ iii. Boil them according to Art in clean Water, in ℥ xxx. Of what is strain'd, dissolve Syr. of the five Opening Roots ℥ iv. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ i. M. Let the Sick take a Draught twice or thrice a day, if he loath it not, warm'd, and especially betimes in the Morning in Bed, whence a Sweat will easilier come forth; but if not, Urine will come more plen∣tiful, and so the serous Liquor of Blood will be con∣sum'd by little and little, and all the Humors will be more pure and better. 38. In the Cure of a Phlegmatic Diarrhaea, the vi∣tious Diet is not only to be chang'd into laudable and somwhat contrary; but also over-viscous Phlegm is to be corrected by Medicins propos'd in Chap. 2. And
after that by Sweats and Diuretics before-mention'd and describ'd, or such-like, to be expell'd out by the Pores of the Skin or the Bladder, and to be turn'd in part from the Stomach and Guts. 39. A serous Diarrhaea may be Cur'd, by abstaining from farther drinking too much of watry Liquors; and by taking those things which imbibe Waters, Harts-Horn burnt, Chalk, &c. or by Sweats, or Ʋrine ex∣pel the aforesaid things. 40. If nothing else hinder, an Hydragogue may somtimes be taken to empty a great part of Serous Li∣quor redounding by Stool. 41. As often as in a serous Diarrhaea, whenceso∣ever arising, the serous Liquor is Salt and fretting, so often it is to be corrected with Pills of Hounds-Tongue, of Styrax, or such-like. 42. As often as a serous Diarrhaea arises from a preceding stoppage in the Head, so often Medicins must be us'd to the Brain, by strengthning and resto∣ring the Glandules or Kernels always then ill-affected to their wonted intireness; which is soon, safely, and not unpleasantly done by fuming only of Amber, often and by degrees receiv'd in at open Mouth and the Nostrils; by which often at once I have cur'd in the beginning such a Stoppage grievous enough, that it continu'd not above a Night. More things may be added to this Amber, if compositions please bet∣ter, to wit, to make a shew, Mastich, Frankincense, Belzoin, Styrax, &c. and thence a Pouder may be prepar'd for fuming, and by degrees strow'd upon Live-Coals, and be receiv'd in at the Mouth and No∣strils, as was already said, the Head being cover'd with a Cloak, or any other large Covering, that the less of its Smoak should be wasted. 43. An oily and fat Loosness will cease of its own
accord by degrees, if the use of Fat things whatso∣ever be abstain'd from: although those things also may be us'd, which drink up or correct over-much Fatness, Harts-Horn burnt, Chalk, Coral, the Ashes of Carduus Benedictus, of Wormwood, and Broom, or their Lye made with Wine, or the fixed Salt boil'd and made out of those Ashes. 44. A bloody Looseness may be Cur'd, if it arises from a sharp Humor corroding the Vessels, by correct∣ing and tempering the sharp Humor, and consolidating the Vessel fretted. 45. Those things that correct a sharp Humor, and perhaps always Acid, are to be sought in Chap. 2. but the Mixture which consolidates Corroded Vessels, and wonderfully hinders all efflux of Blood, is in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. which I having often experienc'd with good success, do commend to Younger Physi∣cians. 46. The Flux of the Haemorrhoids, as often as it is with ease to the Sick, and is Critical, is so long to be observ'd and not stopt; But where it is too much, and Symptomatical, and weakens the Sick, is then to be hindred slowly by the former Mixture, or such another Medicin. 47. If much serous Liquor can so dilute the Blood, as to carry some part of it together to the Guts, out of the Vessels relax'd by it, and produce a Flux like the washing of Flesh, commonly call'd that of the Li∣ver, it may be Cur'd both by Sudorifics and Diure∣tics, driving forward the serous Liquor out of the Body another way; and also by strengthning tart things that repair the Hurt of the Loosned Vessels; of which we have spoken in this Chapter already: And before all things, bewaring for the future from too much drinking of watry Drinks.
48. The Tone and natural strength of the Parts be∣ing defective, by the abuse of Spirit of Wine, is hardly Restor'd, and not easily, unless by somwhat tart spiritous Liquors us'd with an exact Diet, scarce∣ly to be expected again of Drunkards, such as (a∣mong Natural Things) are strong Wines, and som∣what tart, together with a grateful blackness; (among Artificial Things) more prepar'd of Spiritous Wine and Quinces, or Pomegranats, or Myrtle-Berries, or such-like others. 49. A purulent or slimy Loosness may be Cur'd, by curing the Aposteme or Ulcer whatsoever, where-ever it be, if it cause it. 50. Beside those things which we intend hereafter to speak in general of an Inflammation, and Aposteme following it, and an Ʋlcer, we intend to write a few things here, which conduce in special against the Diseases in the Guts. 51. When therefore there is an Ʋlcer in the Thick Guts, and Clysters can come to the place Diseased, then I much commend this following, which should be kept very long in the Body, and a new one, if the Matter require, should be often injected. ℞. New Cows Milk, and if you please, first steal'd ℥ viii. Venice-Turpintine, dissolv'd in the Yolk of an Egg ℥ ss. Hony of Roses ℥ i. M. for a Clyster. By such a Clyster given, and only one, about the beginning, and so betimes, I have often Cur'd a Dysenterie join'd with a voiding of Matter. 52. When the Ʋlcer is in the Small Guts, this fol∣lowing Vulnerary Decoction will conduce, if some ounces be often taken in a day. ℞. Sarracens Comfrey-Root ℥ ss. the Leaves of Pyrole, Ladies Mantle, of each M. i. Ground-Ivie
M. ii. Male Sanicle, Tops of St. John's Wort, of each M. ss. shavings of Harts-Horn ʒ iii. Boil them according to Art in Smiths-water, in ℥ xxv. Of what is strain'd, dissolve the Syr. of Marsh-Mallows, of Oak of Jerusalem, of each ℥ i. ss. Tincture of Cinamon extracted with Spirit of Wine rectifi'd ℥ ss. M. 53. The following Mixture will be useful in the same Case, often taken by Spoonfuls. ℞. Plantane-Water ℥ ii. Cinamon-Water, Distill'd Vinegar, of each ℥ ss. Diascordium ʒ ii. Crabs-Eyes pouder'd ʒ ss. Diaphoretic Antimonie ℈ i. Syr. of Red-Roses ℥ i. M. 54. They who like a Conserve better, may use this, or one like it, which ℞. Conserve of Red-Roses ℥ ii. Diascordium ʒ ii. Confection of Jacinth ʒ i. Harts-Horn burnt and pouder'd ʒ ss. Syr. of Myrtle, what suffices, M. for a Conserve. Let the Sick take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Conserve often in a day. 55. The Balsam of Sulphur, prepar'd either with Oil of Anise which is more grateful, or with Oil of Amber which is more potent, taken often in a day to two or three drops, with the aforesaid Mixture or Decoction, will serve perhaps before all other things, as well to cleanse the Ʋlcer, as to consoli∣date it. 56. In a Dysenterie, where there is much plenty of sharp Humors in the Body; in the beginning Rhubarb tosted, and a Grain of Laudanum given will conduce; and if need require iterate it. Also Treacle, or Dias∣cordium may be added, when any abhor by prejudice, or fear their Sick in using Laudanum, so often a com∣mended Medicin by us for its praise-worthy Effects.
57. Nor will it be unseasonable to take the Clyster prepar'd with Cows Milk, and other things the same day wherein Rhubarb was taken, by the help whereof both the Ʋlcer will be cleans'd, and Gripes asswag'd, and the consolidation of the part Ulcerated promoted. 58. A Tenesmus in the Fundament may be Cur'd, especially by applying, and injecting into the Funda∣ment Medicins which Correct both the sowrish-sharp and viscous Humor, and therby cleansing the Ʋlcer, and lastly consolidating it: To which end there is scarce a Remedy equal to Balsam of Sulphur, if right∣ly prepar'd with the oily Spirit of Venice Turpintine, or the Oil of Amber, or Anise, and appli'd to the Fun∣dament by it self alone, or mixt with other things. CHAP. XIV. Of various Pains of the Guts. 1. ALthough we intend to Treat of Pains in ge∣neral in the Second Book among the Deprava∣tions of Animal Functions, yet could we not omit the particular mentioning of them here, because the Guts before all the other containing parts of Man's body are usually afflicted, not only with the most hainous, but perhaps with Pains of all Kinds, so that no other∣where can all their Kinds be more opportunely ob∣serv'd, and therefore explain'd than here. 2. All these Pains are Distinguish'd. 1. By the Guts affected, whilst one while the Small, other∣whiles the Thick Guts are griev'd. 2. By the Man∣ner whereby various Pains afflict and affect the Sick; for somtimes it comes with the Sense of Heat, other∣times
of Coldness; again, the Pains are fixt in the same place, and, as it were, piercing through the part affected, anon they wander, and with a kind of Tearing, prick between whiles for the most part, whether they then affect the same part over and over, or go to others; again they distend and expand the Guts alone, or the Abdomen also; at other-times they vex the Sick with the molesting Sense of Rending, Contorting, Contusion, Heaviness, Pulsation, or in som other manner. 3. As often as the upper part of the Small Gut nearest the Stomach laid over the right Region of the Loins, and under the Mesenterie is Pain'd, it's nam'd a Pain in the Loins from the place affected. 4. The Sick use commonly to endure all kinds of Pains, one while burning with a great Heat, another time Chill with a grievous Coldness; again fixt, and as it were, boring the Loins, or moreover pricking with wandring Thrust: repeting; anon distending or beating the Loins, or only pressing them with the Sense of Weight, or Burning, Corroding, Tearing, or troublesom either with a continual or interrupted Pul∣sation, and afterward again returning, or wonder∣fully writhing and contorting any other way, scarce to be explain'd by the Sick, or by Physicians. 5. The part of the small Gut next to this, and in the left Hypochondrium, rising out and up more freely from the Loins and Mesenterie, is afflicted often with Rendings and Distensions, with a notable and somtimes permanent hardness; although then commonly, though wrongfully, that Evil and Pain is attributed to the Spleen; and the same Opinion is even now held by certain Physicians blinded with inveterate or malign prejudice obstinately without any solid Reason, against daily and manifest Experience, taken from
the manifold dissections of divers Bodies. I desire not in any wise to note the Physicians that judg and say the same in Conscience, though never so erring, but the obstinate and malicious only. 6. If the name of that Pain should be impos'd upon me by any void of prejudice, I would call it Hypochondriacal from the place affected, adding the name of the urging kind, and surnaming it either Tearing or Distending, and so forward. 7. The Pain which siezes on the rest of the small Gut, is wont to be nam'd Iliac from the Gut call'd Ileum, which is also observ'd various. 8. In the latter part of the Thick Gut, known by the name of the Right Gut, there is very often stirr'd up an hot and pulsing Pain, and also somtimes tear∣ing in the blind Hemorrhoids, so call'd, inflam'd; as in the Tenesmus a corroding pain perpetually provok∣ing to Siege; of which in the former Chapter: som∣times very troublesom gnawing, with more or less itching. 9. In all the other part of the Thick Gut, call'd Colon, whatsoever Pain is rais'd, it's call'd the Colic. 10. The Iliac Passion and the Colic are distinguisht from one another, chiesly by the situation of either Gut. 11. For the Gut Colon, beginning from the right Groin, rises toward the Liver about the right Kid∣ney, and is thence for the most part carri'd cross∣ways to the left Hypochondrium, under the Gristles of the short Ribs, a great part whereof it possesses, and presently being writh'd to the left Kindney, and the left Groin, where being writh'd in the mannner of an S, it is roll'd down to the Os Sacrum, that it may go and end in the Right Gut: Whence the Pain
rising in the circuit and circumference of the Belly new∣ly describ'd, is truly to be call'd Colical; although some only vouchsafe it the name, which vexes and molests the upper and fore-part of the Belly like a Girdle, being ignorant and unmindful, how often the Colon is roll'd to the Navil, and somtimes to the Bladder, with a remarkable winding through the middle of the Belly 12. But the small Gut gives back more and more from the Centre of the Msenterie (under which we said it lay hid in the Region of the Loins) where ap∣pearing again in the left Hypchndre, although jin'd unto the Mesenterie, is contorted up and down about the Region of the Navel; and so is ing for the most par gathered together in the middle of the Boly, su∣stains there the ie Passion very variously. 13. The Guts are affected in all Pains, either in their Tunicles, or Internal Membrans, according to their Cavity or in the External Membrans, according to their Superficies. 14. The Internal Causes of Internal Pains icting any Guts, are to be drawn from what is con in'd in them, one while rmaining as yet in their. Form yet sistent, other-times chang'd fir into Vaps and Wind. 15. The External and also Immediate or next Causes of Pains ariling to the Guts, as a Ndle Swrd, &c. we do not here mind, but only thoe which b ing admitted into the Body▪ may and ought to be esm∣ned Internal, in as much as they mix themselves with things contain'd therein and together with them for the most part being more or ls corrupt, brd Pains and other things. 16. That we may assign to every kind their Causes  Pains, We judg, 1. that a Burning Pain for the
most part rises from Choler too fat, powerfully and vitiously raising an Effervescency with the Juice of the Pancreas too Acid; as it is known that Spirit of Vitriol pour'd to Oil of Turpentine, raises an Effer∣vescency join'd with a notable Heat and Burning. 17. Somtimes we judg this same burning Pain is produc'd by the Blood, either standing still in the Ca∣pillary Vessels of the Guts, or by the same burst after a great distension, Blood being Essus'd, and breeding an Instammation, there happening a manifest pulsa∣tion about the part affected; by reason of which it is distinguish'd from the former kind. 18. 2. We take it that a Chill Pain, troublesom with grievous Coldness, takes its Original from the Juice of the Pancreas very acid and sharp, raising an Effervscency with Chler less fat or little, or also over∣whelm'd with Phlegmatic Humors, as we observe that Spirit of Vitriol mixt with any Volatil Salt, but not oily, raises an Effervescency coupled with a notable chilness and coldness only sensible. 19. That the Operation of the Acid Spirit in pr∣ducing Cold, is much promoted by Phlegm, Experience the Mistress both of Learned and Unskilful People reachth. 20. ea depending of the aforesaid vitious Effer∣vescency, is chiefly and commonly only felt in the Region of the Lins, where there is a conflux of Cho∣ler, and the Juce of the Pancreas; and coldness com∣monly urgeth only in a place remote from thence, chiefly; to wit, when the upper part of the Gut is stopt with much viscous Phlegm; which defends the part that it touches, against the feeling of trouble∣som coldness, but doth not break or hinder the acti∣on of the Joice of the Pancreas of it self breeding cldnss, although it enervats and blunts the oiliness
and Acrimonie of Choler, to which Heat is indebted as to its Primary Cause, as often as this Phlegm meets Choler in its Out-let plentifully or viscously. 21. As therefore the small Gut is more or less stopt with plentiful or viscous Phlegm, so Heat or Cld that rises from their vitious Effervescency is felt in a place more remote, or nearer the Conflux of the a∣foresaid Humors, Choler, and the Juice of the Pan∣creas. 22. 3. The Pain that does, as it were, Bare and is Fixt, I ascribe to the Juice of the Pancreas, mixt with much sharp and viscous Phlegm, then known by the name of Vitreous or Glassie Phlegm: And farther, I assign its Boring to an Acid Acrimony, and its Fixtness to viscousness accompanying. 23. 4. Where the Juice of the Pancreas hath not only a very sharp Acidity, but also Harshness, then there is a wonderful sse of Contortion in the part af∣fected, such as often urges and writhes in the Colic. 24. 5. A Pain with the sense of Weight, is wnt to be rais'd by plentiful and viscous Phlegm peccant before other Humors. 25. 6. From the same Phlegm, viscous and rari into Wind, distending the Guts alone or also the Belly, arises a Ditending Pain. 26. From this same Wind arises a Tympanie one while remaining and shut up in the Cvity of the Guts, at another time piercing ot  them into the Cavity of the Belly, and there expanding the Inner sim of the Belly. 27. The material cause of Wind is visous Phlegm, but the Efficint Choler peccant both in its saltish A∣immie, and its volatil oiliness: which an Aroma∣e Oils do prove prepar'd especially of Seds; a sw
drops thereof being taken, resolvs viscous Phlegm that is in the Stomach or Guts into Wind, and far∣ther discusses the same. 28. 7. The charp Vapors stirr'd up by the over-Acid Juice of the Pancrea over-ruling in its vitious Effrvescency with Choler pricking the Guts here and there, do produce Griping and Wandring Pains therein. 29. 8. From Chler peccant in its saltish Acrimo∣nie, and constiting with the Juice of the Pancreas a Salt corroding Humor, I dare say, the Pain obscurely burning▪ and corroding is bred, which a Snuffling in the Head conms, wherein a sowrly salt Humor distil∣ling from the Brain by the Nostrils, uses to make the  corroding Pain. 30. From the same Choler too sharp, constituting a Salt Humor, and at length carri'd down to the Fun∣dament, and Itching Pain is rais'd, very troublesom to many sick People; such as Worms there, call'd As∣carides▪ somtimes sticking in the Seige do produce. 31. 9. A Beating Pain seems to me to arise from much Phlegm join'd to a little Acid Juice. 32. 10. A Fain Tearing and Corroding the affected P without Heat, is caus'd by a more pure Sowr Juice, neither temper'd nor broken by Choler or Phlegm. 33. As the now mention'd Causes are more pure and litarty, or join'd to others variously, and more  by them, so th breed some diver∣  abve sid Pains, scarce explnable with . 34. 1.  lain may be Cur'd, by temper∣  with is, and chiefy Spirit f  and Spirius, and more∣  eilly Opias, using
them in a various Form. For example let these fol∣lowing Forms be. ℞ Succorie, Sorrel-water, of each ℥ iii. Syr. of Diacodium, or White-Poppies ℥ i. Sp. of Nitre 8 drops. M. Let the Sick take this Mixture at three or four times after some hours space. 35. If any like an Emulsion better, let them use the following or one like it. ℞ Barley cleans'd and boil'd till it crack ℥ i. ss. White Poppy-Seeds ʒ iii. Cucumer, Mlon-Seeds, of each ʒ ii. With the Decoction of the same Bar∣ley. Make an Emulsion of ℥ xv. adding Jup of Roses ℥ i. M. You may add ʒ ss. of Lapis Prunclae; and let t-Sick use two or three ounces of this by spaces. 36. Where Pain is more urgent, or yields not to these mild ones, prepare the following Mixture. ℞ Fumitorie-Water ℥ ii. Fenel or Cinmon-Water ℥ ss. distill'd Vinegar ʒ vi. Sp. of Nitre 6 drop▪ Laudanum 3 Gr. simple Syr. of Vi, ℥ i. . M. Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture, till both the Heat and Pain be diminish'd, or Sleep by degrees come on. 37. If Choler be also observ'd to be peccant in Plenty, nothing hinders but that it may be du'd with a mild Purge, to which end the following ∣serve very grateful, and also altering may vil. ℞ Pulp of Tamarinds ℥ ii. Cnr  ʒ x. Elecluarie of the Juice of  ℥ i. Salt of Tartar vitriolated ʒ i. M.  Cns. Let the Sick take the quantity  a Ng, or some more, for the divele constitution of the Sick, ither at bed-time, and hour ter a moderate Suppr,
or in the morning fasting. It may also be dissolv'd in a convenient Liquor, and us'd in the form of a Draught. Our Cholagogue Electuarie also describ'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 46. as is there taught, may be us'd. 38. We intend largely to prosecute the Generation and Cure of an Inslammation in Chap. 40. 39. 2. A Pain Chill and urging with troublesom cldass, may b Cur'd, by tempering the over-sharp Ai lity of the Juice of the Pancreas, with a Lixivial Salt as well fit as volatil, and so with a volatil Spi∣rit it slf, as also oily and wtry Liquors: Which if mre were mixt, they would perform more. 40. Therefore any Aromatical Spirit of Wine may conduce, as having a volatil and oily Salt; more∣over any Treacle-water prepar'd with Spirit of Wine, as receiving much power from Opium of tempering the viious Juice. Hither may Coral, Pearl, Crabs-Eys, Diaphocetic Animtie, &c. be reduc'd. All which will perform more, if the Body be compos'd to swt; and mor yet, if an actual Sweat be mild∣ly hven forward. 41. To this end the following Form may be pre∣sd. ℞ el, simple Treacle-water, of each ℥ ss. Salt of Wormwood ℈ i. Crabs-Eyes ℈ ss. Syr.  Carduus Bendicus ℥ ss. M. for a Draught, to be taken at once. To which, it pain urge much, may be added um i Cr. and when it is taken, let the Sick either fit by the Fire, or let him be fitly covered in Bd waiting for a Sweat. 42. If to Sweat be troublesom, let him often take a spoonful of the following Mixture, till as well Pain as Coldness do remit or cease.
℞ Mint-water ℥ ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or Tincture of Cinamon ℥ ss. Laudanum ii. Gr. Oil of Cloves 3 drops. Syr. of the five Roots ℥ i. M. 43. Among emptying Medicins, none are proper here while Pain molests, unless Sudorifies already commended, or Diureties; and to abstain from Vo∣mits, unless vomiting come of its own accord and easie enough, and then always add these things which temper sowrness, as fat Broths and such-like. Neither are Purgers to be given, unless first the Acid Humor be temper'd, or Choler and much Phlegm al∣so concur, but not very viscous. 44. The Medicins which then conduce, are partly noted above, Chap. 7. Sect. 54, 55. 45.3. A Boaring and Fixt Pain may be Cur'd, by correcting and tempering both the Acid Acrimonie of the Juice of the Pancreas, and also the viscousness of Phlegm accompanying; which is chiefly performed by Aro∣matic Gums, Galbanum, Sagapen, Bdellium, Ammo∣niac, Opoponax, Mastich, Myrrh, &c. as also by any volatil Salt, and chiefly oily. Yea, how much the more any thing abounds with Volatil Salt, Oily, so much the more potently and effectually will it cor∣rect glassy Phlegm, so call'd, the worst Humor. Whence the Oil of Harts-Horn is no less potent than ungrateful Remedy in this Discase. 46. Also the Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil f Anise, Amber, or Juniper, or any other Aromatic Oil, may be convenient in vanquishing this rbll as and redoubl'd Humor. 47. In finishing this Work also, any Aromatic. Sp. of Wine, more or less compounded, ading, if  please, an Aromatic Oil, and smtimes Opium it , r Laudanum, and others will condace.
48. The following Mixture taken often by spoon∣ful will much profit. ℞. Mit, Fnl water, of each ℥ i. Scurvygrass-Wter. Aqu Vitae of Matthiolus, or any Aroma∣ti Sp. f each ℥ ss. distilld Oil of Mace 4 drops, Laudanum 3 Gr. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. M. 49. If the form of a Dcin please any better, the fllwing may be prepar'd, and three or more ounces tken sommes in a day. ℞ The Bark of Lovage Root ʒ ii. of the Wood Gua∣um ℥ ss. The shavings of the same Wood ℥ iii. of Sassafras ℥ i. By-berries ℥ ss. the Seeds of Mane Silr, of sweet Fenel, of each ʒ iii. il them according to Art in clean Water, in ℥ XL Of what is strain'd▪ disslve Syr. of Bizaium ℥ iv. Sp, of Wne rec d; i. M. I any will have is Dcoction also to Purge mildly the Hmr irst corrceted in part, bol in it the Pulp of is ʒ i. 50. se following Pills will be useful to correct more, and milly ce the sme glassy Phlegm in pcorrected. ℞  Gth um prepar'd with Vinegar of Squills ℈ ii. V f Mars lin'd white, slowly in a  ik, f ach ℈ i. best Ca∣ Red Myth, of ach 15 Gr. Oriental Saf∣ ℈  Trches Alhdal ʒ i. Rosin of Ja∣p▪ f Smm y of each ℈ i. Oil of the Rind . M. t  . Pills, to be guid∣  dred r with ouder of Licoish. Sick take  or more of these Pills after Supper at Bd-time, or v, or so many as may be covenint in th Moing asting, that the vitious Hmors may be expelld slowly and kindly. 51. 4. Pain jin'd with the sense of Contorsion,
and rising from the tartness of the Juice of the Pan∣creas coupled together with its Acidiy, may be cur'd by often taking the Sp. of Salt Armoniac, as an ap∣prov'd Remedy by frequent use in correcting Sowr∣ness to 3, 4. or more drops, in Wine, or rather in a convenient Mixture, often prescrib'd in this Book. 52. Hre also the Tincture of Castor ma conduce, in like manner using a few drops of it in Wine, or rather to be added to a Mixture, and so take it by Spoonfuls: For Example, ℞ Penyroyal-Water ℥ ii. Fenel Water ℥ i. Tincture of Castor ʒ iii. Laudanum 2 Gr. Syr. of Mint ʒ vi. M. 53. 5. Troublesom Pain with a sense of Weight rising from plentiful and viscous Phlegm, may be Cur'd by Medicius both correcting and cutting it, and gradually emptying it, mention'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, &c. 54. 6. A Distending Pain, stirr'd up by Wind, may be cur'd, both by correcting viscous Phlegm, and over-sharp Choler; and also mildly and succellively by emptying both peccant in plenty; and also by discus∣sing Wind, or hindring and stopping their Encrease. 55. Beside these things which are all over in this and other formr Chapters mention'd to correct and educe both Humors peccant, here we will subjoin cer∣tain external things commodiously to be us'd in this Disease. 56. Therefore to disslve viss Phlegm, and to discuss Wind then riling, the Ointment Martiatum, and  compua f Marsh-malws, &c. adding Oil of Chamil, white Lis, Bys, &c. will fitly conde, if the Bey, and pecially us upper part anointed therewith. For Exampl; ℞ The Compound Ʋngunt of Marsh-malows, or
Martiatum, Oil of White-Lilies, of each ℥ ss. Oil of Bricks ʒ i. M. for an Ointment. If all the Belly of Infants were anointed for a time when they go to bed, it is wonderful how happily Phlegm contain'd in their Belly will be dissolv'd, and Wind bred from thence, distending all the Belly will be discuss'd, and the leanness of the Universal Body, as also for the most part too great loosness following, may by little and little be Cur'd, as I have experi∣enc'd it very many times. 57. Twenty years since I prescrib'd the following Ʋnguent and Plaister to be appli'd to the upper Regi∣on of the Belly of a Man at Amsterdam (about fifty years old that had a great, unequal and hard Tumor in the left Hypochondrium, the bigness of an Arm, reaching forward toward the right side according to the most frequent situation of the olon, ascrib'd to the Spleen by other Physicians, together with other Symptoms of the Hypochordriac Disease beside Pills made of Gums, often describ'd in this Book: By the help whereof the same Tumor was softned, and the most part of it taken away. ℞ The Compound Ʋnguent of Marsh-malows, or Martiatum, Oil of Capers, of each ʒ i. Oil of Bricks ʒ ii. M. 58. The Plaister which the same Man us'd succes∣fully, because I have found it often effectual in dis∣cussing Wind and Tumors thence arising; I here set it down for younger Physicians sake. The Plaister of Sylvius discussing Wind. ℞ Gum Galbanum, Bdellium, Ammoniac, of each ℥ ss. Male-Frankincense, Red-Myrrh, of each ʒ ii. Opium of Thebes ʒ i. Dissolve them in Vinegar f
Squills; and when they are again thickned, add Yellow-Wax, Colophonie, of each ʒ iii. Natural Balsam, Oil of Bricks, of each ʒ i. Oil of Earth ʒ ss. Distill'd Oil of Caruas ℈ ss. Venice-Turpen∣tine, what suffices. M. According to Art make it a Plaister. This Plaister is to be spread upon soft Leather, first form'd according to the greatness and shape of the Tumor to be observ'd, a Paper being laid upon it and cut. 59. Volatil oily Salts do potently and also mildly discuss Wind before many others. In the Use where∣of I have observ'd somthing worth note, to wit, that Wind is produc'd by them, as often as viscous Phlegm sticks in the Ventricle or Guts, but such Wind as is soon by their force dissipated or breaking forth, or otherwise ceasing; whence we argue, that the Wind rising from vitious Humors in the Body, more or less viscous may by degrees be discust and abolisht by the afore-said Salts, which Experience also confirms. 60. In the Use of which Oily Salts, this is al∣so notable, that viscous Phlegm is gradually cut and amended by them; so that whatsoever for the most part, both Wind, and the Matter thereof requir'd to their Cure, these Oily Salts can perform it all. 61. To correct the Acrimonie of Choler always more or less peccant, the Sp. of Nitre conduceth be∣fore all other things, which also discusses Wind, at least makes it cease, hindring its farther rise: Of which, and other things belonging hither, we have already spoken in Chap. 9. Sect. 26, &c. 62. 7. A Piercing and Wandring Pain rising from acid and sharp Vapors, may be Cur'd, by tempering that sharp Acidity with Aromatic Medicins, that have a volatil oily Salt, and especially with Opiats also ad∣ded,
often here and there describ'd in this Book; and by expelling mildly out the Humors and Vapors pec∣cant by Sudorifics, which also temper the same; but seldom using Purges, unless the vitious Humors be first corrected and temper'd. Of all which we have often treated in this Book. 63. 8. A Corroding & Burning Pain caus'd by sharp Choler, may be Cur'd with Medicins sowrly-tart or harsh, Verjuice, Pomegranate Juice, &c. and also with several ily things, Emulsions especially made of Barly, Sweet-Almonds White Poppy Seeds, and such like; also with viscous Food▪ as Sea-Fish, and the Extreme parts of any living Creature, out of which much Jelie may be drawn, the Feet, Heads, &c. 64. The same Choler, when it also is peccant in too much quantity, is to be diminish'd and carri'd out by mild and somwhat sowr Cholagogues, especially Tamarinds, Cassia, and such like. 65. The Ascarides causing a corroding Pain in the Fundament, are thence to be taken out alive or dead, and their farther encrease to be hinder'd. 66. Bitter things join'd to sweet things kill these Worms, Suppositories of Aloes, Wormwood, &c, made with Hony and put up, which promoted both their removal and exclusion. 67. The Medicins hinder the rise of these Worms, that both correct and expel any vitious and especially Phleg∣matic Humors in the Body often mention'd. 68. 9. A Contusing Pain arising from much Phlegm and little Acidass, may be Cur'd, by diminishing Phlegm by Phlegm igogues often recited; and tem∣pering srness by spiritous, ly, and saltish things both fixt and voll, often noted. 69. 10. A Rending and Corroding Pain, without
heat, not to be ascrib'd to a pure Acidity, not dimi∣nish'd by other things, may be cur'd by Medicins that potently concentrate and mitigate sowrness; among which the first is Opium. Hither may all Aromatics b reduc'd, whether Spiritous or Oily often com∣mended. 70. And now it will not be difficult, from what we have said about the Rise and Cure of several Pains, to find the true Cause and Manner of Curing of others, as yet more obscure or complicated, and perhaps not explain'd here. CHAP. XV. Of the Vomiting of what is contain'd in the Guts, and namely of the Disease Cholera, and Ileos. 1. THat which is contain'd in the Guts according to Nature, is either driven forward into the Lacteal Veins, in as much as it is useful to nourish the Body; or is expell'd by Stool, in as much as it is unuseful to nourish it: But against Nature the same is either too much excluded b Stool with the Humors flowing together in a loosness thence call'd, of which we spoke in Chap. 13. or in the contracted motion of the Guts inverted, it is repell'd upward into the Ventricle, and thence vomited out in a consistent form, or exhal'd or belch'd in the form of a Vapor, or Wind; somtimes it is voided either into the Cavity of the Belly, or out of the Body by Wounds or Ʋleers of the Guts; of which elsewhere.
2. Wind therefore breaks out in Belches; and Va∣pors in Yawning, and the Hypochondriac Suffocation, wherein oftentimes Wind also is rais'd; of which we have in part spoken Chap. 9. there is no Disease comes to my mind in which Vapors are observ'd to rise. 3. A Vomiting proceeding from the Guts, differs according to the diversity of what is voided; for somtimes Food is repell'd, being first driven down to the Guts, other-times Humors carri'd down to the Guts, and voided either single, and pure, Choleric, Phlegmatic, Serous; or Bitter, Sowr, Harsh, Salt, Sweet, Insipid, &c. or Yellow, Green, Ceruleous, Black, White, Watry, & Clear, &c. or variously mix'd; one while Excrements, other whiles Blood, or more∣over Matter, or other things rising from the Guts. 4. The primary Cause of all this manifold Vo∣miting, is the contracted Motion of the Guts inverted, and drawing, yea compelling the Stomach to a con∣sent thereto, and like change of motion. 5. This change of Motion begins frequently from the place where the Passage both of Choler and the Pancreas is inserted; seldom from the Seige; often from this or that part of the small Gut, troubled with a Gangrene, or any other grievous Disease. 6. From the place of the Insertion of this double Passage, the motion of the Guts haps to be inverted, by reason of the potent and violent effervescency of sharp Humors, then in the Body, or corrupted, or irritated by what is newly taken in. 7. The sharp Humors that are in the Body, are Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, gone from their natural state, as somtimes also Spittle swal∣low'd, either Acid or Salt, and carri'd down to the Guts.
8. The things taken in, that corrupt the afore∣nam'd Humors, and provoke them to raise a vitious effervescency, are either Summer-Fruits, Cheries, Plums, Melons, Peaches, Grapes, &c. also new Wine, or any sharp Medicins, making either of the menti∣on'd Humors sharper, as also Vomits; or certain Poi∣sons, Arsenic, Orpiment, &c. whither corrosive sub∣lim'd Mercury may, yea, ought to be referr'd, see∣ing that if it be taken pure, uncorrected, though in the least quantity, it disturbs and corrupts all. 9. As often as Choleric Humors are voided out, as well upward as downward, with great force and plen∣tifully, together with the troublesom anxieties of the Midrif accompanying, either of their own ac∣cord by Humors before in the Body, or because of an external error committed in Diet; this Disease is wont to be call'd Cholera. 10. In the Hypochondriac Disease, and Suffocation, and the Scurvy it self, there are somtimes rais'd, freely Vomitings of various Humors, thinner or thicker; too Viscous, or Fluid; Bitter, or Acid, or Salt, or Harsh, or Sweet, or Insipid; Yellow, or Green, or Ceruleous, or Black, or White, or Watry, or Cry∣stal-like, or of divers Colours: so that all the diffe∣rences occurring in several, or the same Sick People are very difficult to be numbred or reduc'd into a cer∣tain order. 11. Somtimes Blood also is by force poured out by Vomit; Which I suspect, if not always, at least most commonly, comes out of the Pancreas, by reason of some Vessel open'd by its over-sharp Juice; and it is driven up to the Stomach, to be vomited out, there being then also a vitious Effervescency with Choler; whilst for the most part some of it descends down∣ward to be voided by Stool.
12. I Cur'd the Widow of a Mariner about 20 years since at Cullen, fallen through great grief of Mind, contracted by her Husbands Death, if my memory fail me not, into a grievous and daily Pain of the Loins, and hence into a spontaneous Vomiting, and Dejection of Matter, left for incurable by Physici∣ans call'd to see her, yet restor'd by degrees with the help of Sugar'd Wine, warm'd and taken by turns: And seven years after by a grievous sorrow of Mind brought into such a like vehement Pain of the Loins. I therefore guessing, by the relation of her former Disease, that Matter lay hid in the part griev'd by a former Inflammation produc'd and collected, gave her twice an Antimonial Vomit, and, if I remember right, my Sapa Vomitoria; by the help whereof she vomited the first day more than a pint, or ℥ xx. of Matter well ripen'd, and by Stool a good quantity of the same; also by the benefit of the Vomit iterated, one or two days being interpos'd, she empti'd again some Matter upward and downward, though less than before, and was restor'd to perfect health, in a short while, some few Cordial Medicins, and such as resist Putrefaction being given. 13. I judg that Matter therefore procedes out of the Pancreas, because the place affected answer'd its Situation; and because I have often found Matter collected in greater or less plenty in the Pancreas af∣ter Death, but not in any other part, from which there was a way to the Guts. 14. The sne reason makes me conjecture and think, that the Viting of Blood is not to be deduc'd from the Spleen, of Liver, nor yet the Mensenterie, but from the Pancreas alone, saving the judgment or observation of others. 15. When the contracted Metion of the Guts begins
to be inverted from the Siege, then I judg an exceed∣ing sharp Humor adhers to it, seeing it is wont to be Cur'd with such as only asswage and temper sharp things. For I never had such a Patient to Cure, that I could make an exact examination of all his Symptoms, and hence give a solid Judgment of every one. 16. Often its contracted Motion begins to be inver∣ted in this or that part of the small Gut, with the Vomiting up of the Excrements following, from the Gut affected, call'd by Physicians Ileos, and Ileos by Practitioners. 17. I have observ'd in Dissecting dead Bodies, a two∣fold Cause of this Evil, the one was a Gangrene of the Gut, such a wrinkling and pressure together of the corrupted Gut accompanying it, that all passage downward was deni'd the Excrements, and were forc'd to a miserable return upward, and so an egress by Vomiting. 18. The other Cause of this evil noted after Death in the Dead by me, was the entrance of the small Gut, in any part straitned, into the next part, which was more opened by wonted Wind: Whence likewise all passage through, for the Excrements by Siege was stopt, and anon their regress and ascent to the Stomach follow'd, with a miserable Vomiting of them. 19. I judg'd that Ingress of the small Gut into the next part, happen'd after the aforesaid manner, and indeed one while of the upper part into the next inferiour, other-whiles of the inferior into the upper part; because I had often observ'd, 1. That the small Gut was in many places distended with Wind, and most narrowly contracted for a notable length in the next parts, as well upper as lower. 2. That the same Sick being press'd with Gripes, wonderful∣ly
mov'd their Body, and often bow'd it on a sud∣den. And by that bowing often repeated, it might hap, that Wind prest farther by reason of the Gut relaxed in either end, should yield to the opposite ex∣treme part of the Gut as yet straitned, to insinuate it self into the Cavity of the Gut sufficiently enough displai'd, a straitness presently succeeding of the same Gut freed by Wind, driven forward violent enough about the next part insinuated. 20. As often as the under part of the Gut enters into the upper, so often there is hope of Cure, either of its own accord by Food taken in, or by Art, by Lead or Golden Pills swallow'd; but not so, when the upper part of the Gut enters into the under, be∣cause the part included goes on by degrees farther, whence the narrowness is more and more encreas'd, and all descent of what is contain'd is stopt; where∣fore of necessity, and surely Death is thence to be expected. 21. There is also frequent mention among Practi∣tioners of the Gut writh'd and wrap'd together, no Example whereof, after diligent search, I could find, and now scarce think it can be, that the small Guts should be so intricately complicated, as it were, with a Knot. 22. The Rupture of the Guts is a frequent Cause in Practice, of the voiding Excrements by Vomit, yet not every one, but such and so great ones, that the small and also thick Guts falling out through a narrow hole, either by reason of their proper weight, or for what is contain'd therein perpetually approaching, and remaining there, cannot be put back through the same Hole, nor afford a passage downward, to what is contain'd sliding thither; whence the things contain'd being more and more hardned, and such as somtimes
cannot be dissolv'd, breed an hard and unsuperable Tumor; and moreover hindring also the reflux of Blood, give occasion to an Inflammation and Gan∣grene of the Guts soon following, and hence to vomit th Excrements out at the Mouth. 23. All these Evils are often encreas'd or bred by Fomentations evilly and too hot appli'd; as also by a preposterous and strong rubbing of the swell'd part: Lastly, By Violence us'd to the swell'd Guts to repel them. 24. The Cure of this manifold Vomiting may be perform d diversly, according to the variety of each Cause. 25. As often therefore as the Irritation of the Guts depends on the vitious Effervescency of sharp Hu∣mors flowing together, to the inversion of their con∣tracted Motion, so often these over-sharp Humors are to be corrected and temper'd, yea, stupefi'd together with their Effervescency. 26. The Medicins that temper both Choleric Hu∣mors, and those of the Pancreas too sharp, are often pro∣pos'd before; to which Opiats also often nam'd are always to be added to asswage the vitious Effervescency, and stupefie the sense of the Guts at least in part. 27. The following Mxture to be ken by Spoon∣fuls in little spaces, may conduce in the faultiness of the Acrimony of any Humors, whether Salt or Sowr. ℞. Diascordium ʒ ii. Confection of Jacinth ʒ i. Syr. of white Poppies ℥ i. Plantane-Water ℥ ii. Fenel-Water ℥ i. M. 28. When this Vomiting is stai'd, if the aforesaid Humors seem to abound, after they are sufficiently temper'd, they may be empti'd out and diminisht by
Stool, giving Purging Cholagogues, or Hydragogues often mention'd. 29. If the Vomiting cannot be staid by reason of plentiful Humors in the Body, endeavouring an Out-let upward strongly, nothing hinders but that a gentle Vomit may be given; moreover adding those things which also temper, allay, and vanquish their too great Effervescency after a certain manner, and so necessity urging, Opiats themselves in a small quantity. For Example; ℞. The Vomitive Vinegar and Sugar ʒ ii. Lauda∣num, half, or a whole Gr. Mint-Water what suf∣fices M. for a Draught. 30. This Vomit being taken, if a Loathing or Vomiting still continue, after a good part of the Hu∣mors peccant is voided upward or downward, use the Mixture before prescrib'd, or others alike, ac∣cording to the diversitie of the Humor that is most pecant. 31. For if the Acid Juice abound, then ℞. Mint, Fend Water, of each ℥ i. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus ℥ ss. Old Treacle ʒ ii. or Laudanum 2 Gr. Syr. of Myrtle ℥ i. M. 32. If Choler abound in Acrimonie, then ℞. Plantane, Purslan-Water, of each ℥ i. Sp. of Salt duleisi'd ℈ ss. Diascordium ʒ i. ss. or Lau∣danum 2 Gr. Syr. of Purslan ℥ i. M. 33. As the Juice of the Pancreas, so also Spittle, and the other over-sharp Humors sliding down from the Head are to be Corrected, Temper'd, and Empti'd out. 34. When the Disease Cholera is rais'd by Summer-Fruit, and usually soon corrupted, then the too much Effervescency that's rais'd in the small Gut is
to be asswag'd with the best Opiats; to which end one of the three newly prescrib'd Mixtures may be us'd as the Matter requires, till that fierce Motion of the troubled Humors somtimes troubling all things in the Body to Death, be stai'd and asswag'd. 35. Vomiting Medicins wrong taken, or in too much quantity, causing a cruel Vomiting, are as∣swag'd and overcome with Opiats only. Whence I here again commend the former approv'd Mixtures, or others like them, seeing it is easie to form more such. 36. Among Poisons producing enormous Vomits, and for the most part deadly, we mention'd Arsenie, and Orpiment, as also sublim'd corrosive Mercury. All which because of their Latent or manifest Acrimony, are most happily temper'd and prepar'd for a more mild voiding, by oily things, as fat Broths, any ex∣prest Oil, Milk, Butter, and such-like; among which Milk uses to be curded by them, and then voided; wherefore thus far it is profitable, that Poisons curd∣ing it, do more readily joyn themselves to it, and thereby lose their strength. Fat things are so long to be us'd, as Pain, Loathing or Vomiting remain. 37. Opiats also often mention'd and approv'd, may besides be profitably us'd; as being such that do no less temper all Acrimonie, and asswage the following Effervescency, than stupefie the outward Sense. 38. The Treatise and Cure of the Hypochondriac Disease, and Suffocation, as also of the Scurvie, see∣ing they are Diseases complicated of several and most others, will be more commodiously deliver'd be∣neath. 39. Whencesoever the Blood comes which is voidd by Vomit, because it always indicates and follows a
Vessel broken and open'd, it requires a ready Consoli∣dan of the Vessel Hurt, without which so hurtful an Efflux of Blood cannot be asswag'd. For which the Mixture prescrib'd in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. or an other like it may conduce. 40. If Blood be thought or fear'd to be Clotter'd in the Cavity of the Gts, to Dissolve it, add to the same Mixture Crabs-Eyes, Diaphoretic Antimonie, Spermaeti, and such-like; as is there noted Sect. 21. for it will not be hurtful to use such also, al∣though there be no Blood standing in the Fistula of the Gut. 41. For this Golden Rule is continually to be ob∣served by Prudent Practitioners, That in dubious and uncertain Cases those Medicins may be us'd, which can only profit, and  ways hurt the Sick, whether troubled or not troubled with the Disases conjectur'd. 42. The voiding of Mater by Vomit and Stool, is not to be slai'd, but mildly promoted, seeing it is a Humor wholly unnatural, and in every part hurtful to Man; Its new rise also is to be hindred as much as may be, seeing it is bred of Blood, which is the Fuel of our Vital Fire, and the Sustenance of all parts of the Body, as well containing as contain'd. 43. Among all the things that more or promote the Voiding of Matter, I prefer and commend Antimo∣nial Mdirias, as those that I have observ'd more∣over to have power to correct the Harms befalling the Body by Matter, and hinder the new producing of Mat∣ter, seeing that Antimonie, as well rightly prepar'd as administred, serves no less to purifie Man's Body than Gold. 44. The continual breeding of Matter out of corrupt Blood, is staid also by Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil, and any other, taken somtimes in a day to two
or three Drops, whereby besides a certain cleansing and consolidation of the Ʋleer is to be expected, and perhaps more certain than by any other Medicin. 45. To this end also conduces Diaphoretic Anti∣monie and any other altering Medicin prepar'd of An∣timonie, and especially a Balsam made Artificially of its Flowers. 46. The contracted Motion being inverted along all the Fistula of the Gut, fat Broths are to be us'd, as well taken in at the Mouth, as appli'd and injected into the Fundament, whereby any Acrimonie of any Humors, where-ever it be or occur, will be asswag'd, and the troublesom Irritation of the Guts appeas'd. 47. To this fame end both Fomentations, and Emol∣lient Clysters, so call'd, may be prepar'd, and often us'd. For Example; ℞. Marsh-malow-Root ℥ ii. its Leaves, Malows, Mulleyn, of each M. i. Line, Fengree Seeds, of each ℥ i. ss. Boil them in clean Water; bathe the Fundament with what is strain'd warm; and of ℥ viii. of the same, adding Oil of Whte-Lilies ℥ i. new Butter ℥ ss. or Hens-fat, or any other that is convenient ʒ iii. Make a Clyster, and give it often. 48. To allay the same Irritation, and temper Sharp Humors, both with External and Internal Medicins, Anodyns, yea, Narcoties may be added, and Emulsi∣ons, or Opiat Mixtures be us'd, and many such like. For Example; ℞. Cleans'd Barley boil'd till it crack ℥ i. ss. cleans'd sweet Almonds, white Poppie-Seeds, of each ʒ iii. With Water wherein the Barley was boil'd, make an Emulsion of ℥ xv. adding Sr. of Diacodium ℥ i. ss. Fenel or Rs Water ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take a Draught by short Spaces.
49. If any judg a more potent Mixture to be ta∣ken in less quantity, will be better accepted, or more useful, let them use this following often by Spoon∣fuls. ℞. Plantane-Water ℥ ii. Fenel-Water ℥ i. Confe∣ction of Jacinth, of Alkermes, of each ʒ ss. Lau∣danum 3 Gr. Syr. of white Poppies ℥ i. M. 50. If any desire a Medicin in a more solid Form, let him use this following. ℞. Piascordium, or New Treacle ℥ ss. Confection of Jacinth ʒ i. M. for a Bole; Half or a whole Dram whereof may be taken by spaces. 51. They who can take nothing beside Pills, for them prescribe these following. ℞. Laudanum 4 Gr. Make them into 8 Pills, to be Guilded. Or. ℞. Pills of Hounds-tonge seruple; i. Laudanum 3 Gr. M. Make it into ten Pills. Let the Sick take often one of either of these Pills, till the Vomiting be a little asswag'd, and some sleep comes on, which is to be observ'd; not neglecting those things that are outwardly to be administred al∣ready mention'd. 52. The most things that are necessary to Cure an Inflammation and Gangrene of the Guts, may be re∣quir'd from the general Treatise of both to be deli∣ver'd in their proper place: Although I judg a Gan∣grene of the Guts incurable. 53. The Ʋpper Part of the Gut thrust into the Ʋn∣der Part, will never (at least in my judgment) re∣turn; but the Ʋnder being thrust into the Ʋpper, will not be so difficultly repell'd by Golden or Lead Bullets, swallow'd down with Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Olivs, or one or two ounces of Quick-Silver ta∣ken.
54. Seeing that the Breeding, and Cure of the manifold Rupture cannot be absolv'd in a few words, we intend (God willing) to treat of it now, or else∣where in a particular Chapter. CHAP. XVI. Of the Straining Chyle through the fleshy Crust of the Guts hurt. 1. CHyle sever'd from the Excrements, is not only driven on downward by the contracted Motion of the Guts, but is also by the same force prest and strain'd through their Fleshy and Spongie Crust into the Lacteal Veins. 2. This Straining through the Chyle is deprav'd, and more or less hinder'd or diminisht in the Chyle∣like Loosness, of which in Chap. 13. Sect. 4. and 12. When either, 1. the Orifices of this Fleshly Covering are over-laid, or stopt with a Viscous Phlegmatic Hu∣mor: Or, 2. the same Fleshy Crust is fretted up and down, and the part of the Gut clos'd up with a Skar, the Pores also tending to the Lacteal Veins being stopt, as it somtimes happens after grievous Dysente∣ric Loosnesses rais'd especially in the small Gut: As I have often observ'd in the Dissection of Dead Bo∣dies. 3. And this Evil is wont to be follow'd with some, and somtimes a notable Pining and Leanness of Bo∣dy continuing till Life be ended, which also spares not fat Bellies. 4. The former Kind may be Cur'd by Medicins that both Cut and Attenuate Viscous Phlegm, and so
by degrees Correct it, and when it is more or less al∣ter'd, especially if it abound also, by such as Empty it out, often mention'd. 5. The latter Kind is Incurable together with Lean∣ness, whatsoever following it. For as yet there are no Medicins known, which can dissolve a Skarmade in the Small Gut, or repair a new Crust, and such an one, as will give the Chyle a passage through to the Lacteal Veins. CHAP. XVII. Of the Motion of Chyle through the Lacteal Veins deprav'd, and the Dropsie Ascites of∣ten following it. 1. CHyle strain'd through the Fleshy Crust of the Guts, and admitted into the Lacteal Veins, ought to be transferr'd and driven forward through the same to the Cistern, or common Receptacle or Pas∣sage of the Thorax situated about the Loins. 2. This Motion is deprav'd, when it is hindred in one or more places; and Chyle moves too slowly for∣ward, or is quite Stopt, and Stands still. 3. Chyle is hindred in its Motion through the Lacteal Veins, when being too Thick and Tough, it is driven forward too slowly. 4. Chyle is made over-viscous, because of such-like Food taken too plentifully, or too long. 5. Chyle is stopt in its Motion, and stands still in the Lacteal Vessels, when they are Obstructed, somtimes by the foremention'd Chyle over-viscous Coagulated in them; other-times by the Phlegm of the Guts Dri∣ven
forward into them and there Coagulated. 6. Phlegm of the Guts is Driven forward into the Lactel Veins, as often as it is Dissolv'd by the Motion of the Body, or vehement Exercise, or Heat of the Air, w sort soever, of the Sun, Fire, Bath, &c. as al∣so somtimes by a Feaverish Burning, and other things then also concurring in the Body; especially Dissolv'd upon taking hot or warm Drink, and so becoms fluxil and fluid. 7. The same Phlegm is Coagulated, as also over-Viscous Chyle in the Lacteal Veins rarely by Coldness of the Air suddenly following Heat; to wit, when the Body is carried out of an hot place into a cold, out of a Bath into a Cellar, or open Northern Air; and the Belly being less cover'd than ought, admits sharp coldness through the open Pores; but more fre∣quently by Drink too cold taken in abundance, soon hasting to the Guts, and not only powerfully cooling both the Guts themselves, with all parts near them, and so the Lacteal Veins, but thickning and coagula∣ting what is Contain'd in them. 8. The over-Viscous Chyle, or Phlegm of the Guts being thus Coagulated in the Lacteal Veins; and an Obstruction made in more or fewer of their Branches, is stopt, and settles presently in the same whatsoever is driven into them out of the Guts, ei∣ther of Liquor rising from the continual conflux of Choler, the Juice of the Panereas, and the Phlegm of Spittle, or of Chyle, or Drink only drunk plen∣tifully; and it does by degrees more and more distend the same so far, that at length they burst, and con∣sequently either first this manifld Misture receiv'd into them, and intercepted in its Motion, is pour'd out between the Membranes of the Mensenterie, or presently after into the Cavity of the Belly.
9. I take this often to be the Breeding of the Dropsie Ascites, and chiefly when it is produc'd sud∣denly by much Drink, as in a Burning Feaver: with an urgent and permanent Thirst join'd, I remember has been done within three days time. 10. This Obstruction may be Prevented, 1. By tak∣ing heed of using over Viscous Food, and especially from Ravening any. 11. 2. By Ʋsing Medicins that Correct and Educe Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors, often mention'd. 12. An Obstruction made, or prudently conjuctur'd to be in the Lacteal Veins by the aforesaid Contrary Causes, mutually may be Cur'd by Medicins that do powerfully Cut, especially Sudorific Aromatics, rather taken often, than together and at once only. For so I have observ'd, that Obstructions are more happily, easily, quickly, and safely Open'd. 13. To this end therefore the following Mixture, taken at short spaces by Spoonfuls to break forth the Sweat, may be us'd, and afterward to be given when it comes forth, though not so often then. ℞ Parsley-Water ℥ ii. Fenel, simple Treacle-Water, of each ℥ i. Sp. of Salt Armoniac 20 drops. Syr. of Carduus Benedictus ℥ i. M. Or, ℞ Fematory-Water ℥ iii. Scurvy-grass Water Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, of each ℥ i. distill'd Vinegar ℥ ss. Crabs-Eyes pouder'd ʒ ss. Salt of Wormwood, Diaphoretic Antimonie, of each ℥ i. Syr. of the five Roots ℥ i. M. 14. The Lacteal Veins will of their own accord Close again after their Obstruction is taken away, as happens to a Vein open'd. 15. The Waters Collected in the Cavity of the Blly, by various Humors flowing out through the Vessels Burst, and producing the Dropsie Ascites, being
peccant in Place, will be remov'd out of that place, both by strong Hydragogues, and also Sudorifics, and a Paracenthesis or boring the Belly. 16. The Hydragogues are often propos'd in this Work, among which the best are prepar'd of Elder, or Dwarf-Elder, Jalap-Root, Elaterium, and Gum-Gotte; not neglecting Crystals of Silver. 17. Sweats to this end may be given usefully, both by what is taken in often, and newly mention'd, and especially by a moist or dry Bath join'd together. 18. And if these profit not in a short time, you must hasten to a Paracenthesis, not that common one so very dangerous; but a new one that is so very safe, by a Silver hollow Needle gently thrust into the Belly, about four fingers breadth below the Navel, and so many at its Sides, and drawn out again after a suffi∣cient effusion of Water; and again at another time or day thrust into the same Hole, except it be judg'd fit to make a new Hole elsewhere. 19. This Chirurgical Operation is void of dan∣ger, because the Needle being drawn out, there will no more Liquor run, but apply the Plaister Diapal∣ma, or the White one boil'd, or any like it, whereby the bored Place is not only fenc'd against all the in∣juries of External Air, but its Consolidation pro∣moted. 20. But this Paracenthesis must not be delay'd, lest whilst it is too long delay'd, the Humor collected in the Belly get an hurtful Acrimonie, and by degrees corrode and corrupt the Membranes, and hence the Substance of all the parts contain'd, and so make the Disease incurable.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sanguification of Chyle in the Right Ventricle of the Heart deprav'd. 1. CHyle carri'd continually to the Passage of the Thorax out of the Lacteal Veins, and there confus'd with the Lympha, whencesoever flowing, goes forward with it into the Jugular, or Left Ax∣illar, and hence the Cava or hollow Vein, where it is mix'd with the Blood, with which it is driven for∣ward into the Right Auricle, and then Right Ventri∣cle of the Heart to be chang'd into Blood. 2. We think that this Change of Chyle into Blood, begins in the Jugular, or Left Axillar Vein, but chiefly in the Trunk of the Hollow Vein connex'd to them; and absolv'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and perfected partly in the Lungs, partly in the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and Great Arterie. 3. The Chyle has its Rudiment of Blood (if I may be Judg) from the Blood Descending to the Heart, with which it is confus'd in the aforesaid Vessels. 4. The Chyle also receives its Form of Blood from the Choleric Blood Ascending to the Heart, and as well flowing together in the Right Ear of the Heart, as especially in its Right Ventricle with the Lymphatic Blood, with which we said Chyle was mixt, and rai∣sing an Effervescency of great Moment, because of its different, yea somwhat contrary disposition of both in certain parts of it. 5. The same Chyle obtains its Last Perfection of Blood, by the continu'd and contemper'd Effervescency
newly mention'd, more accurately to be explain'd in certain Circumstances in the next following Chap∣ters, because of the Breathing Air in the Lungs, the Left Ear, and Ventricle of the Heart, and the greatest Branches of the Great Arterie. 6. By the power and benefit of this Effervescency, we conceive the Vital Fire breaks out and rises, which no less changes the fat of Chyle coming, than of Blood returning from what place soever, and by rare∣fying the Oily Parts, and also loosly uniting all the other, reduces it into one Mass Heterogeneally-Homo∣geneal, and so Chyle it self into true Blood by the same labour. 7. This Sanguification of Chyle is deprav'd especi∣ally, when the Blood is bred least laudable and vitious by it, Serous, Phlegmatic, or peccant in any other Proper or Common Sensible Quality; which somtimes manifests it self with a Cachexie, other-times Ana∣sarca, or Leucophlegmatia; or else with Leanness, or any other apparent fault in Nourishment. 8. Every Cause of Sanguification Vitiated, is either in Chyle it self, or in the Choleric Blood Ascending, or in the Descending Lymphatic Blood, or in some Exter∣nal Cause, or in more concurring together. 9. The Cause of Sanguification Deprav'd, is to be sought in Chyle it self, and to be found as often as it is produc'd Vitious, because either Food or Spittle, &c. is Vitious; of which formerly. 10. The Cause of Sanguification deprav'd, is in the Choleric Blood Ascending to the Heart, (which a∣bounds with Choler) as often as vitious Choler is mixt in the Liver in a greater or less quantity, or otherwise. 11. Choler is mixt with the Blood in a greater quan∣tity, when it is bred more plenteously in its Bag, by
Aromatic Food, plenteously us'd and abounding with a Volatil Salt; or it is over-plentifully effus'd out of its Bag, because of the greater fluidity given it, ei∣ther by Heat of Air, or Food both too Sharp, and also Spiritous, or by a strong Motion of Body, or by vehement Anger, or by Watchings, and such-like. 12. Choler is mixt in less quantity with the Blood, when it is bred more sparingly by Food destitute of an Aromatic strength, which is wont to produce Phlegm, such as is Sea-Fish, and such-like, continually us'd; or it is more slowly effus'd out of its Bag, because of its fluidity diminish'd, and thickness encreas'd one while by cold and sharp Air, other-times by Food newly mention'd, and Cold Drink too frequently us'd, other-whiles by a grievous Sorrow of Mind, or Great Terrors coming unexpectedly; as also by much and long continu'd Sleep, and daily Rest of Body, &c. 13. Choler is mixt with the Blood, not only in too great or too little quantity, but somtimes over-Sharp or over-Fat; and so far also it vitiates it. 14. Choler is made too Sharp by the Heat of Air, the abounding Acrimonie of Food, or rather of its Sauces, such as is in Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, Ma∣stard, &c. by Watchings, too much and protracted Ex∣ercise of Body, continu'd Anger, especially when join'd with Solicitude. 15. Choler becoms Fatter, especially by too much Use of fat Food, at least drest with much Fatness, Butter, Oil, &c. whither may be referr'd distill'd Oils often us'd. 16. The Cause of Sanguification Deprav'd, is in the Blood descending to the Heart, (and because the Lympha is mixt with it, it's call'd Lymphatic Blood) as often as the Lympha is found either over-Acid, or Salt, or Phlegmatic, or Watry.
17. The Lympha becoms over-Acid, because of Food both Sowr, and season'd with very Acid things us'd too plenteously, and long, or because of Nor∣thern Air, and Solicitude of Mind, Sorrow or Terror, somtimes by Waking, and too much Wearying the Body, &c. happening. 18. The Lympha is made over-Salt, easily and as frequently by cold and sharp Air piercing the Ʋniver∣sal Body, and especially the Head warm'd, and run∣ning down with a Sweat, begetting the Stuffing of the Head, that is, a troublesom Sense of Heaviness, not only in the Head, but in the Joints also; whence as a Salt Liquor distills afterward through the No∣strils in a following Snuffle of the Nose; so likewise then it seems even consentaneous not only to Reason, but also to the Affliction of the Sick then oft urging, and so to daily Experience, that there is produc'd all over a Salt Humor in the Conglobated Glandules, and after that effus'd into the Habit of the Body, and the Muscles, as also driven forward through the Lym∣hatic Vessels toward the Heart. 19. The Lympha is over-Phlegmatic, by reason of he prolong'd Use of over-moist and cold Air, the too uch eating of such-like Food, especially Fishes, ulse, Potherbs, &c. Beer not enough boil'd or fer∣mented, Well-Water, &c. an heavy Life, and Void of Care; much and long Sleep, and many such-like things. 20. The Lympha becoms over-Watry by the over∣se of Rain-Water, or any other too thin, and over∣oist Air, mean while neglecting as well Spiritous as ucculent and Acid Food. 21. Sanguification is immediately vitiated by an ex∣rnal Cause, when there is an Error committed in e or more Non-natural things (so call'd) in that
time, when laudable Chyle and Blood is carri'd to the Heart, by the Air first hot, and suddenly cold; by Drink very piercing Spiritous or mixt with Ice, especially abundantly Us'd; by vehement Agitation of the Body; by a grievous Passion of Mind, Wrath, Sorrow, Fear, Amazement or Solicitude vexing, &c. whence either over-sharp Choler, or the Juice of the Pancreas over-Acid, or over-Sharp, or the Phlegm of the Guts over-Viscous, is carri'd all over, and especi∣ally towards the Heart, in which it so corrupts either the Chyle, or the Blood before well constituted, that the Blood cannot but be bred bad of the Chyle flow∣ing to it. 22. The Sanguification of Chyle deprav'd, accord∣ing to the diversity of the Cause, may be diversly Cur'd. For, 1. as often as it depends of Choler too Plentiful, mixt with the Ascending Blood, it ought to be diminisht by Cholagogues often mention'd. 23. The new Rise of the same Choler is to be stopt by shunning, or at least moderating the Non-natural Things, so call'd, that produce it, which were new∣ly mention'd; as also by using more liberally those things which we said bred less Choler. 24. 2. When Sanguification is deprav'd, by too little Choler tending to the Heart, it ought to be en∣creas'd, by using somwhat more plentifully those things, which we have asserted, do breed Choler more plentifully; and also by Shunning those things which we have taught, according to Experience, to be con∣trary to its breeding. 25. 3. As often as Choler too Sharp depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, so often it is to be Temper'd by Medicins often propos'd before, and especially in Chap. 1. Sect. 11, &c. and in Chap. 10. Sect. 42.
besides by shunning all things in Sect. 14. of this Chapter, which make it too sharp. 26. 4. If over-Fat Choler deprave the Sanguifi∣cation of Chyle, it ought to be Corrected with Acid Medicins, but the more temperate ones, such as are prescrib'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 38, &c. and in Chap. 11. Sect. 25. farther Bewaring of the abuse of Oily and Fat things, of which in Sect. 15. of this Chapter. 27. 5. If the over-Acid Lympha deprave the San∣guification of Chyle, it is to be corrected and amended by Medicins prescrib'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 17, &c. and else-where. 28. Mean while diligently Abstain from farther use of Acids, and the other things mention'd in Sect. 17. of this Chapter. 29. 6. When over-Salt Lympha depraves the San∣guification of Chyle, then Medicins approv'd in Chap. 13. Sect. 41, & 42. may be convenient; as also Aromatic, mild Sweats, by the help whereof the Saltness of the Lympha is by degrees corrected. 30. In this case Hydragogues also conduce, often us'd, in a small Dose, after some contemperation of the Salt Acrimonie. 31. 7. When over-Phlegmatic Lympha depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, then are Medicins to be given that Cut and Correct Phlegmatic Humors in the Body, prescrib'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, &c. and such as Purge them so prepar'd for being Empti'd, therein Sect. 33, &c. also shunning those things that we have said here and else-where do breed Phlegm. 32. 8. As often as over-Watry Lympha depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, so often abstain from the over-Use of any Water; and if it abound in the Body, it is to be expell'd both by Exercises enough Potent, and by the Bath, &c. with Sweats, not very
great, but often repeted; to which end Spiritous and Aromatic Sudorifics may also be us'd, whereby the Animal Spirits almost deficient may be repair'd, and the Animal Strength preserv'd, yea, encreas'd by the same means. 33.9. As often as the Sanguification of the same is deprav'd (all the Humors, and so Chyle it self being rightly constituted in an Healthy Body) in the time of the Distribution of Chyle by one, or more External Causes, either inevitable or unexpected, numbred in Sect. 21. so often those things that can∣not be shun'd, ought to be, as much as may be, cor∣rected and temper'd, at least the Harms that come by them to every one should speedily be amended and ta∣ken away. 34. So if any have been in the cold Air, as soon as may be, let them come to a clear Fire, or go into a warm'd Bed; at least let them cover their Bodies well with Bed clothes, whereby they again expel out of the Body the cold receiv'd. 35. So, if any have abus'd piercing and spiritous Drink, if good part of it yet remain in the Sto∣mach, let them send it out again by a Vomit rais'd, by putting one Finger into the Jaws, or a Feather moistned with Oil, unless they can of their own ac∣cord promote it, which is easie, yea, familiar to ma∣ny. 36. But if the Drink be already gone more into the Body, like a Surfet, its breathing out is to be pati∣ently expected, if then Thirst still urge, by using Sowr Drink no way Spiritous or Watry, such as is Mineral Wells, always taking heed of any excess. 37. But if Drink with Ice or otherwise very cold shall have been taken, Aromattes and such as abound with a Volatil Oily Salt us'd by tums may conduce,
which naturally are fit to overcome the harm of drinking with Ice, soonest, safest, and most plea∣santly. They will perform this the more happily, if by their help a Sweat be also mov'd or promoted. 38. So, as many as vehemently move their Body, either by Running, Leaping, or otherwise, whence Sweat also came forth; they should carefully take heed of the cold Air, and rather betake themselves to a Warm'd Bed, to compose themselves to Rest, and that they may shun a greater harm. 39. So, as many as have been mov'd with a Ve∣hement Passion of Mind, should endeavour to asswage t by themselves, or others, and to reduce the Mind to former tranquillity; which Reason and Discourse can do by mildly composing the Rational Soul with so∣id Reasons, whencesoever taken; yea, by confirm∣ng and hardning it against any things that can∣not be chang'd, to bear them patiently and stout∣y. 40. The manifold Harms following those Vitious xternal Causes, ought to be Corrected variously, and as soon as can be, seeing that by the Functions urt, or other proper Signs, they are known to the hysician; of which all over in this Treatise.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Continual and Vital Effervescency of Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart hurt. 1. CHyle is not only carri'd to the Right Ventri∣cle of the Heart, some hours after the Food is taken in, whereby it may be chang'd into Blood, but continually by the Blood returning from every Part; and that partly being furnish'd with bitter Gall, part∣ly by having Acid Lympha, there is rais'd in the same place a mild, yea, Vital Effervescency. 2. We call it a Lively Effervescency that is rais'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, because the natu∣ral Preservation of our Life depends upon it. 3. For by the Conflux of the Volatil Oily Salt ruling in the Gall, and constituting the chief part of the Sowrish Sweet Spirit; of these, I say, being som∣what contrary, there is rais'd a gentle, and to Nature friendly Fight, describ'd by Us with the Name of an Effervesceney, in and by which the Fiery Parts lying hid, and shut up in both are loos'd from their Fetters, and being free'd, infinuate themselves into the Oily and Fat obvious Parts, both of the Blood, and also of Chyle, as the proper Subject of their Action, ra∣refying the same; and moreover do so change and alter the other parts more or less mixt with them, that Life may be continu'd, and Blood mov'd any whither; and the necessary Reparation of all the containing and
contain'd Parts, perpetually more or less Consum'd, may be perfected and absolv'd. 4. It haps that this Effervescency, very necessary for Life and Nourishment, is Hurt; 1. When it is either wholly Abolisht, or Ceases at least for a time. 2. When it is Diminisht, and is Lesser or Weaker. 3. When it is Encreas'd, and is Greater or more Potent. 4. When it is Hastned, and is too Swift. 5. When it is Retarded and perform'd too Slowly. 6. When it is Deprav'd and observ'd to be Unequal or Inordinate. 5. I. Where this Vital Effervescency is wholly Abolisht, Death is at hand; because the Vital Fire of the Heart, or rather of the Blood, which by its help us'd to be continu'd in the Heart, is presently extinguish'd by the same. 6. This Vital Effervescency is Abolisht. 1. By the fault of the Choleric Blood Ascending, and that either for Want of Choler: as oft as it is effus'd with great force into the Small Gut, and hence Choler is excluded out of the Body, as well upward by Vomit, as downward by Stool, in the Disease Cholera; whence no wonder if the Sick perish somtimes then in a few hours. 7. Or because of the high Volatility and Acrimony of Choler, whence the Blood is not only more Dis∣solv'd, but the Lympha also more sluggish; as we judg it happens in the Pest, and all Malign Feavers, in which the Sick so oft are suddenly and unexpect∣edly extinguish'd. 8. The same Vital Esservescency is Abolisht, 2. By the fault of the Lymphatic Blood Descending, which is by reason of the over Acidity of Lympha, where∣by Choler is not only opprest and, as it were, suffoca∣ted in the Heart, and together with Choler the Vestal
and Vital Fire; or the Blood it self extreamly coagu∣lated, is made unfit for its naturally following Rare∣faction. 9. We scarce ever think that such a Defect can be thought of Lympha, for which the Vital Effervescen∣cy may be Abolisht, unless perhaps the Passage of the Thorax be somwhat Prest, Wounded, or Burst, and therefore the greatest part Standing still, or Run out another way. Neither seems it probable that all the Conglobated Glandules, from which we judg the Acidity of the Lympha procedes, can be so affected alone, that therefore the Acid Lympha should be defi∣cient in the Heart. For as often as the Body is congeal'd with Cold, the extreme Parts are not less, but more seiz'd on by it, than the internal Glandules that lie hid; in which besides the Lympha is not so much di∣minish'd, as corrupted by Cold, although then its Mo∣tion be both alter'd and disturb'd; as we observe it falls out in the Stuffing of the Head, in which all Motion of a Humor both to the Nostrils, and also to the Jaws, is Stopt first with an Heaviness of the Head; (whence the name Gravedo) afterward the Humor Distills more plenteously, and often thinner and sharp∣er than is wont; to wit, Sowrish Salt, and then this Disease is properly call'd either Coryza, whilst it runs out by the Nostrils, or Bronchos, whilst it is carri'd down to the Jaws and begets an Hoarsness; as a Cough, when it slides down farther into the Sharp Arterie of the Lungs, and provokes and compels them to a more mov'd and violent Expiration. 10. The same Vital Effervescency is Abolish'd; 3. By too many Vapors rais'd in the most vehement Effer∣vescency, and so employing all the space in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and hence in the Vessels of the Lungs, that the Fire then also breaking out, is
choak'd by them, and extinguish'd, otherwise it had been Vital; neither is there further place granted to the new Effervescency presently following. 11. The Vital Effervescency is Abolish'd by too many Vapors in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, not only in as much as the space in the Vessels of the Lungs is deni'd to new Blood that should raise an Effervescency, and consequently undergo a Rare∣faction; but also in as much as the Lungs being ex∣tremely distended by the aforesaid Vapors, can nei∣ther be farther unfolded, nor reciprocally complica∣ted, nor yet Respiration very necessary to temper the Heat of Blood can be perfected. 12. But the same is yet abolish'd. 4. By too much Blood filling all the Vessels, Veins and Arteries, in the Plethora, call'd at or in the Vessels, and Athletic Ha∣bit, and that for want of Space to receive the Blood, although meanly to be Rarefi'd, after a due Effer∣vescency. 13. The same Vital Effervescency is Abolish'd. 5. By the over-potent Vital Fire rais'd in the Heart, ra∣refying the Blood more than enough, and to an Height; whence by the defect either of a Space large enough, in which it may be receiv'd, or sufficient Cooling, whereby the hot Blood might be temper'd, our Vital Fire is often Suffocated in the most Burning Fevers by its own fault. 14. The Effervescency of Blood somtimes Ceases in the Right Ventricle of the Heart for a time, not only short, but often very notable; to wit, for one or two days, the Pulse and Respiration to be conclud∣ed, taken away to outward Sense, as is always in the most grievous kind of Hypochondriac Suffocation, and the Syncope, and also somtimes in a lighter kind of the aforesaid Suffocation, and Swouning Fits, join'd
with the Pulse stopt to Sense, such as is frequently ob∣serv'd in these Regions. 15. For we must not pass it by, that the Pulse and Respiration are not always taken away to Sense in every Hypochondriac Suffocation, or lighter Swouning Fits; although they be perpetually more or less hinder'd or di∣minish'd, seeing the Voice it self and Speech som∣times are more or less hinder'd. 16. The chief Cause of this Effervescency, Ceasing for a notable time, is viscous and also Acid Phlegm, not too much exceeding in plenty (otherwise it would be Abolish'd with Death following) join'd to the Lym∣pha, and hence to the Descending Blood, and carri'd to the Heart. 17. The Cause of the same Effervescency Ceasing a short while, about a quarter, half, or a whole hour is judg'd by me to be a Viscous also and Acid Vapor, or Wind-piercing out of the Small Gut through the La∣cteal Veins and Passage of the Thorax to the Heart. 18. For as this Viscously-Acid Phlegm is more plenteous or solid, or more consistent, or less in quantity, or more Vaporous; so it will hinder our Vital Effervescency more, or longer, or less, or shor∣ter while, and seem to take it away at least to Exter∣nal Sense; seeing it may deservedly be doubted, whe∣ther indeed and actually it be taken, or may be taken away without the Patient's Death: the solution and determination of which Doubt, will depend on the Prejudice or Opinion of every one given about the following Question; to wit, Whether Life can re∣main without a continual and new Sustentation and Ge∣neration of the Vital Fire? Or whether the same could be extinguish'd for a while, and again be kindled and restor'd in the Heart of its own accord, or by help of Medicins, before that a deadly Corruption possess the Blood, and the other Humors.
19. Our Vital Fire may be said to be kindled and restor'd in the Heart of its own accord, when Acid and Viscous Phlegm being join'd in too much plenty with the Descending Blood, doth so oppress Choler coming with the Ascending Blood, that for a space there is no power of it observ'd, till by the help of this same Choler, the aforesaid Phlegm being reduc'd and brought back by degrees to some mediocrity, a new Fire rises up and restores Life to the Body, perhaps taken away for a time. 20. By the help of Medicins, our Vital Fire may be said to be kindled and restor'd, when in the afore∣nam'd Diseases, one or two Drops of some very A∣romatic Oil, with a little Aromatic Spirit of Wine, or any other convenient Liquor, once or often pour'd into the Mouth of the Sick, who is in the Agonie of Death, pierce to the Blood infected, and worst affect∣ed with the aforesaid Viscously-Acid Phlegm, may raise, or stir up suddenly, or by degrees, the Vital Fire it self, languishing or extinct, by correcting or amend∣ing Phlegm, and also strengthning and relieving Cho∣ler. 21. But an ingenious Searcher of Truth may que∣stion, Whether such an Aromatic Oil, fitly call'd Balsam of Life, or any other like it, (whose stupen∣dious force in such a case is not unknown, as well to them that are Expert in the Art of Chymistry, as Skilful in the Practice of Physick) be join'd to the Blood, almost condenst to Death by Phlegm Viscously-Acid in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, or else∣where? 22. As much as I am able to attain by the best of my Understanding, that I may study to satisfie this Question, saving to every Man his particular Judg∣ment, I judg it no wise absurd, to think that this
Conjunction of the Aromatic, and then truly Vital Oil with Phlegm, Viscously-Acid, too much thickning Blood happens in the Vessels of the Lungs; seeing that nothing offers to hinder, that some part of the over∣thick Blood may be driven forward into the Arterie of the Lungs, before either the Pulse or Respiration be taken away to Sense. This being asserted, it will not be difficult to explain, how the strength of the Aromatic and Vital Oil should pierce easily to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, as I conjectur'd, then more or less open'd, and also by the Blood it self not less coagulated in the Arterie of the Lungs, then too much in the aforesaid Ventricle, and therefore less fluid. 23. These things being inserted, as it were, by a Parenthesis to incite Wits; note, that the wonted Effervescency, and hence the Rarefaction of both sorts of Blood flowing together to the right Ear of the Heart, and therefore both the reciprocal Expan∣sion and Contraction of the Heart, and the Pulse it self is more or less hindred and stopt by both the mention'd Causes, to wit, Phlegm, and a Vapor Viscously Acid; which is observ'd therefore not to be in the Syncope, and certain kinds of Hypochon∣driac Suffocation, hitherto to be reduc'd altogether to Swounings. 24. Among the six Non-natural Things, an Ʋn∣expected grievous Sorrow of Mind, or Terror, and somtimes the biting Cold of Air or Water, makes that Cessation of the Vital Effervescency somtimes, and oftner in Persons dispos'd to it, because of the Vis∣cous and Flatulent also, and Acid Humors now al∣ready in the Body, in Women especially, and others of a more fearful Nature. 25. II. This Effervescency of the Blood Descend∣ing
and Ascending to the Heart, is Diminish'd, and so becoms Less or Weaker, by the fault of either the Choleric or Lymphatic Blood. 26. Of the Choleric, when Choler is not sharp enough, or is too little in the Ascending Blood. 27. Choler is produced in the Body not sharp e∣nough; 1. Because of the over-cold and moist Air. 2. Because of Phlegmatic, Watry, Oily, Acid (but not Sharp and Aromatic) Food and Sauces over-long us'd. 3. Because of much and deep Sleep. 4. Be∣cause of Rest and sluggishness of Body. 5. Because of the Mind void of Care, fearful and sad. 6. Be∣cause of the Monthly Courses, or wonted Sweats sup∣prest. 28. Choler is found too little in the Ascending Blood for the same Causes newly mention'd, and chiefly by a Choleric Loosness, or over-great emptyings of Choler wrong done, whence the natural quantity of Choler is diminish'd. 29. By the fault of the Lymphatic Blood the afore∣said Effervescency is Diminish'd, when the Lympha of the Glandules in the Blood is not Sowr enough, or too Little, or over-Viscous. 30. This Lympha is found in the Blood not Sowr enough. 1. Because of Hot or Rainy Air. 2. Be∣cause of Phlegmatic, Watry, Oily, or Aromatic, but not Acid Food and Sauces. 3. Because of much and deep Sleep. 4. Because of sluggishness and too much Rest of Body. 5. Because of the Mind void of Care, or Angry. 6. Because of the Monthly Courses, or a wonted Loosness supprest. 31. The Lympha comes too Little to the Blood for the same Causes newly recited, and especially because the Lympha stands still, or is carri'd another way, by reason of the Glandules ill affected, in the Stuffing
of the Head, and other such-like Diseases. 32. The Lympha is too Viscous in the Blood. 1. By such-like Food long us'd. 2. By the Cold and Sharp Air. 3. By a grievous and long-continuing Sorrow of Mind. 33. III. The same Effervescency of both sorts of Blood flowing together in the Heart is Encreas'd, and becoms Greater or more Potent by the fault of either, or of both 34. Of the Choleric, when Choler is too Sharp or Plenteous in the Blood Ascending. 35. We nam'd the Causes of over-Sharp Choler, in Chap. 1. Sect. 6, & 7. And Chap. 11. Sect. 18. And Chap. 18. Sect. 14. 36. Choler is too Plenteous in that Blood, both when it is found more than naturally Plenteous in its Bag; and when its Descent to the Gut is hindred; and also when it abounds, that is, is provok'd by an External or Internal Cause, to Pour it self out any way, as is wont to be in the Disease Cholera, and se∣veral Burning Fevers. 37. The Gall is too plenteous in its Bag, chiefly by the frequent use of Bitter, especially Aromatic and Sharp Sauces and Medicins. 38. The Descent of Choler to the Gut is hindred, by reason of any Narrowness whatsoever that is in its Passage to the Gut. 39. Summer-Fruits frequently stir up the Disease Cholera, of which in Chap. 15. Sect. 8. Chap. 29, &c. 40. We intend to give you the Causes and Man∣ner of the rise of Burning Fevers, below in Chap. 29, &c. 41. Let it suffice that we have here noted Choler may abound by an inward Cause; that is, be provok'd and compell'd to pour it self out of its Bag, as of∣ten
as some of a Volatil Acid Liquor pierces thither to∣gether with the Blood, and forces Choler to raise an Ef∣fervescency; whence no wonder, if it runs out at any Passage given, and now being carri'd to the Guts, stirs up Vomitings, or Choleric Loosnesses, or being carri'd to the Liver, and thence rushing to the Heart, breeds Burning Fevers. 42. The Vital Effervescency in the Heart is en∣creas'd by the fault of the Lymphatic Blood, when the Lympha is not so Plenteous, as Volatil and Sharp, though too Little flowing to the Heart with the De∣scending Blood. 43. And such is the Lympha, by the abuse of Sau∣ces, or such like Medicins, such as are Wine of the Maise and Rhenish, a little Sowr, and also Spiritous, strong Wine Vinegar▪ Citron Juice us'd with Spiri∣tous Wine, Spirit of Nitre, &c. 44. But if Choler, together with Lympha, be pec∣cant after the aforesaid manner, who sees not that this Effervescency of both sorts of Blood must yet be hurt and encreast of necessity. 45. IV. The same Effervescency is perfected more Quickly, because of too little Phlegm in the Blood, and Choler, and Lympha therefore too sharp, and less temperd. 46. Phlegm is too Little in the Blood; 1. Because of Summer, and subtil hot Air. 2. Because of Food, or Sauces, and Medicins very sharp and Aromatic too plenteously us'd, and others neglected, which are wont to breed Phlegm. 3. Because of a vehement long continu'd motion of the Body. 4. By prolong'd Wakings. 5. By grievous and persevering Cares and Solicitudes of Mind 6. By a Phlegmatic Diar∣rhaea, or any other preternatural Defluxion or Flux of a Phlegmatic Humor, in a Distillation of Rheum, Cough, Dropsie, &c.
47. V. On the contrary, the same Effervescency proceeds over-slowly, by reason of the abundance of Viscous Phlegm especially in the Blood, and some kind of sluggishness of Choler and Lympha following it. 48. We related the Causes of over-Viscous Phlegm, in Chap. 2. Sect. 7, and 9. 49. VI. The self-same Effervescency is Deprav'd, and becoms Vitious several ways, when it is observ'd either Ʋnequal, somtimes Greater, again presently Lesser; one while too Quick, presently over-slow: or is Inordinate, and again ceases a little or is in∣terrupted; again presently repetes and becoms more Potent, no order being observ'd, as it happens somtimes in several kinds of Hypochondriac Suffocati∣on, in which the Pulse is felt somtimes weak, rare, little, comprest, yea, somtimes none at all; again it is perceiv'd strong, frequent, great or wonderfully troubled with a notable Palpitation of the Heart. 50. The Cause of this Unequal Effervescency, is the Unequal Quantity of Choler, or Lympha, or the Liquor arising from the foremention'd three-fold pre∣vailence in the Guts, or of other Humors (that as yet perhaps are wont to be mixt with the Blood, and not as yet enough perceiv'd by any) join'd to either Blood. 51. For where More of Choler enters into the Heart with the Ascending Blood, the Effervescency will be Greater, and Quicker, whence also a Greater and more Frequent Pulse; where on the contrary Less of it comes, there will be a Lesser and also Slower Effervescency rais'd, and also the Pulse Lesser and more Rare. 52. But where more of Lympha shall come with the Descending Blood to the Heart, there will pro∣cede
a Less and Slower Effervescency, together with a Less and more Rare Pulse; contrarily where Less of it shall flow out, there will be a Greater and Quicker Effervescency produc'd, and a Greater and more Frequent Pulse. 53. When the Nature and Strength of the Liquor rising out of the Three-fold Humors that Flow together to the Small Gut, shall be more clearly discern'd by us, we can more solidly and certainly determine of the Harms that follow their vitious Constitution. Which also is to be understood of other Humors, if, as we suspect, there may yet be more, which are mixt either immediately or mediatly, with the Blood flowing back to the Heart. 54. We therefore note this here, that so we may stir up others to search the Truth with us, that as yet lies hid to Physicians in many things, intending to rejoice and congratulate (as we have done to o∣thers already) their greater felicity perhaps in search∣ing out the same thing before us, and always to re∣turn due thanks to God, the Giver of all Good, for the benefit bestowed on Man-kind by any; not in∣tending to envy any ones pains, diligence, inventi∣on, and other things thereto appertaining, or to blame with Reproaches after the manner of certain sluggish, lazy Men and ill-employing their leisure. 55. We judg the Cause of the Inordinate Effer∣vescency of Blood to be the Ʋnequal Flowing to the Heart, not only either of Choler or Lympha, &c. only or together, but of both, or of more. Whence there is a greater Confusion and Disturbance in it, one while with a notable Palpitation of the Heart, pre∣sently with its Motion and Pulse taken away to Sense, in the Hypochondriac Suffocation so often observa∣ble.
56. Although the Palpitation of the Heart, and grievous Swouning arises somtimes from Humors carri'd with the Blood to the Heart, producing a vi∣tious Effervescency; yet we think that it is oftner pro∣duc'd by Sharp Vapors elevated from the Small Gut, because of a vitious Effervescency there also rais'd, and then carri'd to the upper Orifice of the Ventricle and Gullet, and also to the Heart through the Lacte∣al Veins, and Passage of the Thorax, disturbing the Effervescency of the Blood, and irritating the Heart. 57. I. Seeing the Effervescency of Blood wholly Abolisht is Incurable, diligent heed must be taken, that it (as often as may) should be Shund and Prevented in time; which will be, 1. where the Defect of Cho∣ler is to be feard by the Disease Cholera, after the hurt∣ful Effervescency of Choler then raging, and its too great Effusion into the Guts is ally'd, (of which see Chap. 15. Sect. 26, 29, and 34.) by Repairing and Renewing Choler, by the use of any Sharp and Oily Aromatics, as the Distill'd Oils of the Leaves and Flowers of Rosmary, Majoran, &c. of the Seeds of Anise, Fenel, Carua, &c. of the Rinds of Citron, Oranges, &c. of Cinamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, &c. 58. These Aromatic Oils, if they be united arti∣ficially with the Spirit of Wine, are call'd by some Balsams, or Elixirs of Life; whereof one or two drops being given in a convenient Liquor, especially Wine, do restore the Vital Strength Languishing for the defect of Choler, and seem to snatch those out of the Jaws of Death that otherwise were dying, do somtimes raise again those that were esteem'd for dead. 59. Hither also do appertain all Volatil Salts; though they that are Oily, are more effectual
than the rest, and therefore to be preferd. 60. The Abolisht Effervescency of Blood may be Prevented; 2. Where there is fear thereof both in the Pest, and also in Malign Feavers, by reason of the High Volatility and Acrimony of Choler then pec∣cant, by Fixing, and Coagulating, and Tempering it by very Tart Acids, Verjuice, crude Alum, Acacia, or in place thereof the thickned Juice of Hypocistis, or Wild Plums, &c. Among Chymical things, the Spirit of Nitre, Salt, Vitriol, Sulphur, Alum, and such-like are deservedly approv'd and commended, especially often distill'd, and made more mild with the rectifi'd Spirit of Wine. 61. By all these Choler will not only be corrected, but the diminisht consistency of the Blood will be re∣stor'd, and the sluggishness of the Lympha also amend∣ed, and so the Vital Effervescency of Blood for di∣verse Causes almost Abolisht, will be preserv'd and restor'd. 62. The same Abolishment of Blood vitally Effer∣vescent in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, where by reason of too much Acidity of Lympha, there is fear lest the Vital Fire be opprest and suffocated together with Choler, at least the Blood too much coagulated by it, cannot conveniently be rarefi'd, may 3. be pre∣vented by Correcting, and Breaking the faulty Acidity of Lympha by the foremention'd Oily Volatil Salts, and Aromatic Oils as well pure, as farther elaborated into the foremention'd Balsams of Life. Which see∣ing they hitherto conduce, may deservedly be us'd almost in all danger of Life, that happens without great heat, manifest both to the External Senses, and lying hid in Malign Fevers, and especially burn∣ing and vexing the Midrif. 63. Not only the excedeing Acidity of Lympha
may be diminish'd by the same Oily Volatil Salts, but Choler also prest, and almost opprest, may be strength∣ned, and the over-Coagulation of Blood it self be di∣minisht and reduc'd to its natural state. 64. The Abolishment of the same Bloody Effer∣vescency, where the necessary space for rarefying Blood is so employ'd, that the Extinction of the Vital Fire is nigh endangerd by too many Vapors, both in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and Vessels of the Lungs, may, 4. be Prevented by Dissipating the aforesaid Vapors already produc'd, and Hindring their new breeding. 65. The aforesaid Aromatic Oils, and any, but especially Oily Volatil Salts do dissipate and discuss Va∣pors; always selecting those things, which are pre∣par'd of the parts of Plants apt of themselvs to dis∣cuss Vapors, and such-like things found out by Ex∣perience. 66. A new production of Vapors may be hinderd by the same Aromatic Oils, and Volatil Salts, as also by any others that cut the Viscousness of the Phlegmatic Humors, as Acids, but chiefly by the Spirit of Nitre, whose Power in curing this Disease is singular and stupendious. 67. The same Abolishment of the Effervescency of Blood, may be prevented. 5. Where all the Vessels are fill'd with Blood in a Phlethoric and Athletic Habit, by Diminishing the Abundance of Blood, by a suffici∣ent Letting it out with opening the Vein once, or oftner, as the matter requires, and need urges. 68. The same Abolishment of the wonted Vital Effervescency in the Blood may be Prevented. 6. Where there is fear of a Suffocation by too potent a Fire arising in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, ra∣refying the Blood too much in the most Burning Fe∣vers,
by Tempering that Heat whencesoever arising, and especially by Acids taken together with Drink, and aforementiond in Sect. 60. farther, by changing and correcting the hot Air for colder, the close for more open, the still for more blown, the moist for drier. 69. Because we think that our Vital Fire for the most part arises from Choler, especially when it is too burning; therefore being guided by Reason, we judg that those Remedies are especially then to be us'd, which most conduce to correct Choler, such as also we have mentiond, Experience Accompanying. 70. The same Vital Effervescency ceasing for a longer or shorter Space both in the Syncope, and Hy∣pochondriac Suffocation may be Cur'd, by the so often prov'd Aromatic Oils, and any Volatil, but especially Oily Salts; always making variety of Mixtures, to∣gether with choice of Simples, according to the di∣versity of Symptoms Accompanying. 71. For as where the above-nam'd Suffocation urgeth, Castor, and its Tincture extracted with re∣ctifi'd Spirit of Wine, and the Spirit of Salt Armo∣niac are deservedly preferrd before many others; so where Cold much urgeth, as well Externally as In∣ternally in the Syncope, or other Diseases like it, I commend the Distilld Oil of Cloves, (before all others as yet found out by me) which is not ungrateful; nor do I disprove the Oil of Turpentine less grateful, seeing that with the Oil of Vitriol, it stirs up an Ef∣fervescency join'd with a great heat. 72. For Example take this following Mixture. ℞. Penyroyal-Waten ℥ ii. Simple Treacle-Water ʒ vi. Tincture of Castor ʒ ii. Distilld Oil of Mace, of Amber, of each three drops. Syr. of Fenel ℥ ss. M.
Let this be Us'd in the Hypochondriac Suffocation, taking it often by Spoonfuls. 73. To this Mixture may be added Sp. of Salt Armoniac ℈ i. whence it will be much stronger; or you may add 3, 4, or 5 drops of it to every Spoon∣ful; or apply to the Nostrils a Glass with a narrow neck, containing the aforesaid Spirit, in the most grievous kind of this Disease; for by its sharp smell, the Sick for the most part are wont to be rais'd, both from that Suffocation, and from the Epilepsie. 74. In fear of the Syncope, or other lighter Swounings, join'd with troublesom and formidable Cold, prepare the Mixture following, of Medicins commonly to be sold in the most Shops, in like man∣ner to be taken by Spoonfuls in short spaces. ℞ Mint-Water ℥ ii. Aq. Vitae Matthioli ℥ i. or Tincture of Cinamon ℥ ss. Oil of Cloves 6 drops. Syr. of Scurvy-grass ℥ i. M. 75. I commend the afore-nam'd Volatil Salts, and Aromatic Oils, not only because I am taught it by daily experience, but because Reason perswades the same: Reason, I say, drawn from the Analysis of those Salts and Oils, and of Swounings, and from the Efficient Cause of Hypochondriac Suffocation, Viscous and Acid Phlegm, or likewise Viscous and Sowr Vapors, or Tart ones also put together. For those Salts and Oils have power to dissolve and cut that which is Viscous, and to temper and correct that which is Sowr and Tart, and again to discuss and dissipate what is Vaporous and Windy. 76. Where the Sick, more like Dead than Alive, cannot open his Mouth nor shut it, much less duely swallow any thing, then it will be commodious, in∣stead of the prescrib'd Mixtures, to have 3, 4, or more drops of the approv'd Aromatic Oils, either Simple
or more Compounded, or only confus'd and a little shaken, or by greater Art and daily Circulation more intimately joind with the rectifi'd Sp. of Wine pourd into the Mouth of the Sick to the Jaws, by a Silver or Gold Funnel, whereby they may pierce both into the Ventricle and Guts (whence for the most part the Cause of so great an Evil is driven forward every where) and into the Sharp Arterie of the Lungs un∣to the Blood it self sticking in the Vessels of the Lungs, and every where correct and amend the urgent harm. 77. Among the Antecedent Causes, and Non-na∣tural Things, Sorrow of Mind may and ought to be prevented, both by Philosophical and Theological Reasons defending the Mind in time against every trouble; the Same now present and urging should be taken away and overcome with them, although for the most part it is slowly and by little and little. 78. The Mind also may be defended and prepar'd against the Fear to be expected and foreseen, to bear stoutly any Adversity; whence the Mind will then be less affected by the Terror given, whose harms will again presently vanish; as on the contrary a Ti∣merous Mind will be smitten more potently, and more grievously, esteeming every contrary thing, though the least, for the most grievous, being not fitted, or us'd to bear or endure any thing. 39. All are affected powerfully by an unexpected Terror; though the Fearful and Sluggish more pow∣erfully and longer; The Stout and Wise lightlier and shorter, for Reasons newly given. 80. When the Vital Effervescency of Blood ceases by the pinching Coldness of Air or Water, the Body of the Sick is not only to be carri'd into milder Air, but not hot, or the Parts affected to be remov'd out of
chillish Water, but moreover the Sense is to be stirrd up in the External Parts with stronger Frictions, yea, Medicins prepar'd of Aromatic Oils, and Vola∣til Salts, and especially such as also will move Sweats are to be given, or pourd in at the Mouth; whereby the Coldness and its Cause, together with the Blood, or Lympha that flows back piercing to the Heart and more inward Parts may be driven out. 81. By the benefit of these Medicins, the Harm of Viscous and also Acid Humors, and Wind that were before in the Body may be Amended: and for Preventions-sake the same may be taken, as often as the Body is to be expos'd to over-Cold Air, or to go into Water. 82. II. The Effervescency of Blood Diminisht in the Heart, because of Choler less sharp, may be Cur'd; 1. By Changing the Over-Cold, and Moist Air into Hotter and Dryer, at least prepar'd by Art with a clear Fire, and Aromatic Plants disperst in the Cham∣ber. 83. 2. By mixing Aromatic and Sharp Sauces with Meat, as also abstaining from very Phlegmatic, Watry, Oily, and Sowr Food. 84. 3. By detracting somthing from Sleep, and daily protracting Watchings. 85. 4. By exercising the Body more and more, even to a mean Weariness. 86. 5. By busying the Mind with Cares and Soli∣citudes, nor abhorring from Anger not too vehe∣ment; chiefly studying for Gladness, and driving a∣way Sorrow and Fear. 87. 6. By Rindly moving the wonted Monthly Courses, and Sweats, by Medicins describ'd and to be describ'd often, and especially in their proper place. 88. The aforesaid Effervescency Diminisht by too
little Choler containd in the Ascending Blood may be Cur'd, by the forementiond means, when it has the same Causes which Choler less sharp had; but when it follows a Choleric Loosness, or too great Evacuations of Choler evilly instituted by imprudent Persons, both by compressing and suppressing that over-great Efflux of Choler, if it still continue, by more gentle Trt things and Opiats, often already mention'd here and there; and also by repairing the Defect of Choler, by Sauces or Medicins both Aromatical and Sharp enough; also in several Chapters mentiond, as Mustard, Horse-Radish, Cresses, Scurvy-Grass, Pepper, Ginger, Cina∣mon, Cloves, Cardamoms, &c. For by the help of these Choler will not only become Sharper, but also more Plenteous in the Body, and consequently the Effervescency of Blood will be Encreas'd being before Diminisht. 89. The same Effervescency Diminisht, because of Lympha not Acid enough may be Cur'd; 1. By Chang∣ing the Air hot by the Sun, or any Fire with cold Air, and betaking himself into a place under-Ground, or otherwise cool; and by correcting the Moist or Rainy, chiefly by a clear Fire, especially pre∣par'd of odorous Woods kindled in a Chamber, or in any other Lodging-place. 90. 2. By often using Sowr Sauces and Medicins, the Juices of Citrons, Oranges, Currans, Barberies, Vinegar, Sorrel, Spirit of Salt, of Vitriol, of Sul∣phur, of Nitre, &c. by the help whereof the thence diminisht Effervescency of Blood will be Encreast by little and little, together with the deficient Acidity of Lympha. Which that it may be sooner, Phleg∣matic, Watry, Oily, and very Aromatic Food and Sauces are to be shund together, at least diminisht. 91. 3. By Diminishing Sleep, and daily Encrea∣sing Watches.
92. 4. By Exercising the Body more and more with moderate stirring. 93. 5. By Busying the Mind with Cares, and a sorrowful Solicitude. 94. 6. By Restoring the familiar Monthly Flux, or Loosness supprest. 95. The same Effervescency of Blood Diminisht by too little Lympha, may be Cur'd; 1. By Encreasing the same gradually by Sowr Sauces and Medicins be∣fore mentiond, daily us'd at any time in a small quan∣tity. 96. 2. By taking away every Obstruction of the Lymphatic Vessels, or any other Narrowness, and the Cause of the Stoppage, and also of the Bursting of those Vessels, and so of the Effusion of Lympha, by Medicins Dissolving and Cutting Phlegm Coagulated in the fore-nam'd Vessels, and chiefly Sudorifics often prescrib'd in this Treatise; always observing that those are us'd with greater success, when the Body is compos'd to Sweat kindly, and especially when the same is driven forth; for so that hurtful Obstruction is opend easier and quicker. 97. Lastly, The aforesaid Effervescency of Blood Diminisht by the Lympha too Viscous, may be Cur'd, by using the above-mentiond Cutting Medicins, both Acid and Salt, and especially Volatil, such as are the Spirit of Salt, either simple or dulcifi'd, and all Vo∣latil Salts, especially Oily, so often and deservedly recommended by us, daily and in less quantity taken, both without and with Food. 98. Mean while Viscous Food is to be shund; as al∣so the cold and sharp Air, and a grievous and conti∣nu'd sorrow of Mind: Instead whereof Food of easie digestion is to be us'd, Wheat-Bread rightly fermen∣ted, of Flesh, those Flying rather, then Watry ad∣ding
Aromatic Sauces; and so go into, or make by Art the Air warm and dry; and let the Mind be dispos'd to Chearfulness, and recreated with grateful Objects. 99. III. The Effervescency of Blood Encreast, may be Cur'd; 1. When over-sharp Gall is its Cause, by Correcting and Tempering it chiefly by the above-reci∣ted Acids, to be vari'd according to the peculiar Con∣stitution of every Sick Person, and more or less to be alterd by adding other things. 100. It may be Cur'd; 2. When the Gall being too plenteous in its Bag, goes in too great plenty to the Heart, by Diminishing and Emptying it with Cho∣lagogues already often describ'd by us, and chiefly in Chap. 2. Sect. 42, &c. but us'd in a lesser Dose: Lest otherwise an over-Purging or other grievous Symptoms be stirrd up. 101. They must also Abstain from farther use of Aromatic and Sharp, and especially Bitter Sauces or Medicins. 102. The same may be Cur'd; 3. When the De∣scent of Choler to the Gut is Hindred, by a Phlegmatic Obstruction that is in the Passage of Choler to the Gut; by Dissolving it with such as Cut, as before in Sect. 97. and in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, 30, &c. yea, every∣where describ'd. 103. And if the Obstruction of the Passage to the Gut be Gravelly, it may commodiously be Dissolv'd, both by the Decoction of Grass, or Water distilld af∣ter a previous Fermentation, and also by the best Spi∣rit of Nitre daily us'd with other things, and also by others more special for this Gravelly Coagulation. 104. The same may be Cur'd; 4. When Choler Swelling of its own accord, that is, by an Internal Cause, is provok'd to an Universal Effusion of it
self, by Thickening and Fixing both Choler, and the Volatil Acid raging in the Body, chiefly by Sulphurs of Minerals or Metals, call'd Narcotics, or rather Anodyns, as also the divers Boles, and Seald Earths, especially extracted about the Gold Mines; by which that dangerous, and often deadly Effusion of fierce Choler may also be Prevented. 105. We gave you the Cure of the Disease Cholera, in Chap. 15. Sect. 34. as we intend anon in Chap. 29, &c. to give the manner of curing Burning-Fevers. 106. The same Effervescency of Blood Encreasd, may be Cur'd; 5. When the Lympha, both Volatil and Sharp, though Less in quantity, is carri'd to the Heart, and is the Cause thereof, both by Abstaining from farther use of Sauces or Medicins, that have a Volatil and Sharp Acidity, and what is noted in Sect. 43. and by Tak∣ing by fits sowr Things more Tart, and diluted in a sufficient quantity of Water, 107. IV. This Effervescency of Blood perfected more speedily, because of over-Little Phlegm in it, and Choler and Lympha therefore over-sharp, and too little Temperd, may be Cur'd; 1. By Repairing and Encreasing the desir'd Phlegm with Food that breed much Phlegm, Broths prepar'd of the extreme parts of Living Creatures, the Heads and Feet of Calvs, Sheep, &c. Fishes, especially Sea-Fish, Cows and Goats Milk, &c. By Abstaining in the mean while, at least sparingly using very Sharp and Aromatic Sau∣ces, or Medicins. 108. 2. By changing the Air any way Hot or Subtil into Cold and Thicker. 109. 3. By composing the Body from vehement and persevering Motion to Rest.
110. 4. By changing prolongd Watches, with longer and deeper Sleep. 111. 5. By freeing the Mind from grievous and molesting Cares and Solicitudes. 112. 6. By stopping and curing a Phlegmatic Diarrhaea, or any other preternatural Deflux or Efflux of a Phlegmatic Humor, as is explaind in its proper place. 113. V. The Effervescency of Blood proceding too slowly by the Abundance of Phlegm, especially Viscous, and therefore the Sluggishness of Choler and Lympha, may be Cur'd with the Diet and Medicins propos'd both in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, &c. and also in this Chap. Sect. 96, &c. and elsewhere. 114. The Deprav'd and Ʋnequal, or Inordinate Ef∣fervescency of Blood, by the Ʋnequal Flux made to the Heart, either of Choler, or of Lympha, or of the Liquor arising from the Ternarie of Humors Flowing together to the Small Gut, or of any other Humor only as not enough observd, or of More to∣gether, whether in the form of a Liquor, or Vapor, may be Cur'd; both, 1. by Correcting the Fault of every Humor any way peccant: And, 2. by Re∣straining the vitious Effervescency of more flowing to∣gether: And, 3. by Amending or Discussing vitious Vapors, or Wind then raisd: And, 4. by Composing the Mind troubl'd with any grievous Passion, the most frequent and potent Cause of divers Humors con∣fusedly mov'd: And, 5. by Shunning or Tempering the Air or hurtful Food, the more rare, and lss po∣tent Cause of the aforesaid agitation of the Ha∣mors. 115. 1. How and by what means the au of every Humor in Mans Body hitherto known, oug e Corrected, is often said afore.
116. And because I made mention in Sect. 50 and 53, of this Chapter, of other Humors that (to my knowledg) as yet are not known and seen by any; which I said I suspected not without cause, were in Man, and also were mixt with the Blood returning to the Heart, either immediately or mediately, and being vitiated, did wonderfully somtimes disturb the Effervescency of the Blood, nor yet have I nam'd or shown them, this deservedly movd a famous Physici∣an, who was pleasd to peruse these precedent things being Printed, to advise me, that I would at least in a word or two explain what I had said, lest I should seem to have deceivd any one, and lay open some of those Humors that were conjectur'd by me: To whose acute and exact judgment, as I always attri∣buted much, so I judg'd his Counsel in this Matter to be follow'd by me. 117. Many things somtimes testifie, both in Heal∣thy and Sick Persons, that somthing from the Testi∣cles, or other parts ministring to the generation of Seed, especially in those that are vigorous, and produce much of potent Seed, goes through and passes into the Universal Body, which may much and strongly affect it. To which saying, not only Effeminate Gel∣ded Persons give assurance, but both Men and Wo∣men more chearful to Venery, and somtimes stirrd up by an unexplicable fury of natural Lust, and especi∣ally at meeting the Object potently moving the Sen∣ses, and wonderfully making commotion in the Fan∣cy; whence, when they cannot obtain their Wishes, or it is not convenient, the infinite Histories full of commiseration noted by Physicians, do teach and evince with how many Evils those miserable People are therefore thence vex'd and opprest. 118. This same is confirmd by sweet and grateful
Flesh of Gelded Brutes, Oxen, Weathers, Capons, &c. much differing from the Flesh of Ungelded Brutes, Bulls, Rams, Dunghil-Cocks, &c. rank and ungrateful in taste. 119. Add that Brutes no less than Men are wont very much to fatten after Gelding; and Men made Eunuchs, before ripeness of Years, do seldom send forth much of a manly Beard, or get a Man-like Voice. 120. That all these things are to be deduc'd from a Spermatic Vapor disperst through the parts of the Universal Body, as well containing as contain'd, ma∣ny things evince, which to set forth in many words cannot be done here. 121. Beside the Testicles, there are observd, up and down in Mans Body, Glandules more or less differing from the rest, as those of the Kidneys, and those other call'd Tracheales, in which that a Singular Humor is produc'd, and immediately or mediately to be communicated to the Blood, their singular Fa∣bric proves. 122. Among these deservedly may the Glandule Thymus be numbred, of the kind of those that are Conglomerated, whose proper Voiding Vessels, as they are hitherto unfound out by all Anatomists, at least to my knowledg, so the Liquor whatsoever carri'd through them, and so its true Ʋse is even now un∣known to all. 123. And because I being detaind perpetually with manifold Businesses, could not be at leisure hi∣therto to search according to my wish what I desir'd of these and other things, I have often exhorted many of mine Auditors, ingenious and industrious in Anatomy, to search these and such-like parts more diligently; whereby, if it may be, they might search
out these and many more things, that as yet lie hid from us, and manifest to the Studious with the praise and commendation of their name; which lastly I here make public again, and wish happy success to every one. 124. Therefore until the Mentiond Humors, or Vapors be seen by Us, we will be silent a while con∣cerning their various Vices and convenient Reme∣dies, whereby returning into the way we may teach, As often as more Humors together, and that divers ways are judg'd to be peccant, and therefore more intricatly to vitiate the Effervescency of Blood, so often those things are to be sought out by and premis'd before others, which do chiefly help the more urgent Humor, or distemperature, or else the general Remedies so to be temper'd, that they may together amend the Harms of every one, and cherish or encrease none. Where there is ed of an experienc'd Judgment by the long use hings, and of an accurate Observation of those ing's that Help and Hurt; which things being gcted, a Physician, very Careless, cannot but of∣h deceiv'd to the detriment of the Sick. 125. 2. Opiats restrain any Effervescency of Hu∣as before many others, and universally: to which ot hings may be added that also temper Them, as  er requires, and according to the diversi∣  rs most peccant, whose forms we have of . We have often prescrib'd in this Trea∣tis and pecially in Chap. 9. Sect. 23, &c. those thing  Amend and Discuss Vapors and Wind. Solid Reasons compose the Mind troubled , and diarbing all the Humors in the Body  o the Sick Min by Manly reasoning, and
by potently compelling its Assent both to former serenity, and also leading and confirming it pati∣ently and stoutly to bear the most troublesom things, when they cannot be alterd. 128. 5. By what means both hurtful Food, and vitions Air, ought to be shund or corrected, is often told before. 129. Seeing that the Ʋnequal Afflux to the Heart, one while of Choler, anon of Lympha, or of any other hurtful Humor which stirs up an Inordinate Efferves∣cency of Blood in the Heart, arises as well from di∣vers Passions of Mind, as the other Non-natural Things diversly, but suddenly and reciprocally in∣vading the Sick, it may be Cur'd, also by divers helps, as well Spiritual, consisting in a consequent reason∣ing, as Corporal known by the name of Medicins, often to be chang'd, or ingeniously to be mixt, ac∣cording to the diversity of accompanying Symp∣toms. 130. Seeing all these things may without difficul∣ty be had out of what is aforesaid, lest we should cause loathing by continually repeting them to the Reader, we will rather hasten to what follows, study∣ing brevity.
CHAP. XX. Of the Motion of Blood through the Lungs affected. 1. THe Blood raising an Effervescency, waxing Hot, and Rarefying in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, opens its Passage by degrees more and more, till by that displaying the provoked Heart contracts its musculous substance by the help of the Animal Spi∣rits, and also presses out the Blood containd into the Artery of the Lungs; out of which being pourd through the substance of the Lungs (which seems most probable to me) into the Vein of the Lungs, goes on unto the left Ear of the Heart, and its left Ventricle. 2. And whilst the Blood goes through the Lungs, it is mildly temperd in its Heat and warmness, and more or less condensd by the Air suck'd in, lest the newly kindled Vital Fire in the Heart and Blood should be Suffocated by over-plenteous Vapors raisd up by too much heat. 3. This Motion of Blood through the Lungs is Affected. 1. When there is None; 2. When it is too Slow; 3. When it procedes too Swiftly; 4. When the Blood is driven forward another way, than it ought. 4. I. There is No Motion of Blood through the Lungs. 1. Because of its Defect in the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, the Hollow Vein being greatly wounded, and almost all the Blood, that should otherwise flowd to the Heart, effusd within or with∣out the Body.
5. 2. Because of its Coagulation and Concretion, although I can scarce imagine a sudden exceeding great one, unless perhaps in the most grievous Syn∣cope, by a Sowr sharp Humor carri'd abundantly to the Heart; as we observ'd has often been done by sowr Spirits infus'd by a Syringe into some notable Vein of a Dog. 6. 3. Because of the Contraction of the Heart cea∣sing in a most vehement Apoplexie, by reason of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves to every part hinderd. 7. 4. Because of too much Filling again of the Vessels of the Lungs, both often in an extreme Ple∣thora, and seldom in any Obstruction of most of the Vessels of the Lungs. 8. When this Ʋniversal Motion of Blood through all the Vessels of the Lungs, is very much hindred, and ceases, or is Extinguisht by the defect of Blood; or Suffocated by its plenty, or standing still; they soon die, unless suddenly the Blood abounding be di∣minisht by breathing a Vein, or flowing more plen∣teously be turnd another way, as the Matter requires. 9. When the Blood ceasing to move only in some Vessels of the Lungs by reason of an Obstruction stands still there for some time, it breeds a Peripneumonia, that is, an Inflammation of the Lungs. 10. II. Blood is mov'd more slowly through the Lungs; either, 1. because of its Viscousness, pro∣duc'd by Phlegm alike Viscous, whencesoever ari∣sing. 11. Or, 2. because of the Narrowness of their Vessels, though not extreme. 12. Or, 3. because of the Scarcity of the Ani∣mal Spirits moving the Heart more weakly; whe∣ther they have been consum'd too much by Grief,
Watchings, solicitous Meditations, Cares, Weary∣ings of the Body, &c. Or if they have not been re∣pais'd by protracted Hunger, at least the defect▪ or neglect of Spiritous Food. 13. III. Blood is mov'd more speedily through the Lungs; Either, 1. because of its encreast Fluidity by any serous Humor abounding in it. 14. Or, 2. because of over-great Heat in the Heart stird up any way, together with a more potent and therefore swifter Rarefaction of Blood. 15. Or, 3. because of a Sharp Humor or Vapor carri'd together with the Blood to the Heart, and provoking it to a more frequent contraction of it self, and expulsion of the Blood contain'd. 16. IV. The Blood driven forward through the Lungs, is mov'd another way than should be; 1. When it breaks forth into the Sharp Arterie, out of its Vessels corroded or burst, and is anon cast out by the Mouth in the Haemoptoc, that is, Spitting of Blood. 17. 2. When it is essus'd into the Substance of the Lungs, out of its Vessels any way opend, and produ∣ces a Peripneumonie. 18. 3. When it falls out of its Vessels Wounded into the Cavity of the Brest, where being gatherd and chang'd into Matter, constitutes an Empyema, or Spitting of Matter. 19. The Vessels of the Lungs are often Corroded by sharp, and salt, or sowr Humors falling down out of the Head to the Lungs; seldom, if ever, by such-like carri'd together with Blood to the Lungs. 20. The same Vessels are Burst; 1. By a Cough, Crying aloud, Leaping, or any other over-vehement Mtin of Body. 21. 2. By Blood waxing too potently warm in the
Heart, and withal too much Distending the Vessels of the Lungs by waxing too thin. 22. The same Vessels are Wounded by any sharp Instrument, a Knife, Sword, or any other like it struck into the Lungs through the Brest or Midrif, piercing and cutting their Vessels. 23. I. The Motion of Blood in and through the Lungs Deficient, because of its defect in the Right Ventricle of the Heart cannot be Cur'd. 24. A strong and sudden Coagulation and Concre∣tion of Blood is to be esteemd Incurable; but that which comes by degrees, and is gradually encreasd, may be Cur'd by Medicins that break and temper the over∣sharp Acidity, and so such as are both Spiritous and Oily, and especially have a Lixiviat Salt; although volatil oily Salts do chiefly conduce to Man, as consist∣ing of all and every thing that is aforesaid, and are not only transfus'd, most speedily every way in the Body, but do potently enough, though mildly ef∣fect and perfect the desired amendment of the over∣sharp Sowr Humor, if diluted, and often us'd in a convenient Liquor. 25. Among the Medicins commonly known, Crabs-Eyes are deservedly mentiond, being dissolvd in Wine a little Sowr, or in a little distild Vinegar, (whereby they may the easier mix with the Acid Humor peccant in the Body). For Example; ℞. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. Matthio∣lus his Aqua Vitae ℥ i. distild Vinegar ʒ ii. Crabs-Eyes pouderd ʒ ss. Syr. of Scurvy-grass ℥ i. M. Or, ℞. Mint-Water ℥ ii. ss. Simple Treacle-Wa∣ter ʒ vi. Tincture of Castor ʒ ii. Sp. of Salt Ar∣moniac ℈ i. Oil of Orange-Peel 6 drops. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. M. The first Mixture will be less effectual, but more
grateful; the latter less grateful, but more efficaci∣ous; both us'd by Spoonfuls, will conduce to tem∣per the too sharp Acid Humor; although the latter is to be preferd, when any thing of Tartness shall be observd to concur, whose chief sign is any Straitness tending to the Hypochondriac Suffocation, whether it rise up to the Jaws, or stick about the Midrif, and beget inexplicable anxieties to the Sick, continually threatning a present Swouning. 26. The Contraction of the Heart ceasing in a vehe∣ment Apoplexie, will never be Cur'd, nor easily pre∣vented, unless by very Spiritous and Aromatic Li∣quors often us'd, Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae, Apoplectic Waters and such-like; mean while not neglecting other things that correct and educe the Antecedent Causes of the Apoplexie to be propos'd elsewhere. 27. A Plethora of Blood is soon and safely Cur'd, by a sufficient Emptying of it by opening a Vein; whether it be together and at once, or by repeted turns, according to the peculiar nature and strength of the Sick. For there are many who cannot bear to have much taken away together, but soon fall in∣to a Swouning; by which seeing none can at any time receive any good, I had rather that it should be prevented, as often as may be, and every Cure be done securely rather than rashly, seeing it often hap∣pens to those rash Blood-Letters, that they educe Life together with the Blood: Whereof there is no danger, if the Blood be taken in a smaller quantity by short spaces, to be stopt as soon as the least sign appears of a present Swouning; and after that, if the Disease still require, again to be taken away with more benefit to the Sick. 28. The Reason, Generation, and Cure of an Obstructi∣on and Inflammation following it, shall particularly be treated anon in Chap. 40.
29. II. The over-slow Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cur'd; 1. By Correcting its Phlegma∣tic Viscousness, by Medicins that Cut and Attenuate, whether Spiritous, or Salt, or Oily, or somtimes Acid, us'd either alone, or prudently mixt, often propos'd. 30. 2. By taking away the present Straitness of the Vessels diversly according to the diversity of the Causes peccant; but of these things elsewhere. 31. 3. By Repairing the want of the Animal Spi∣rits contracting the Heart too weakly, both by tak∣ing often Food very Spiritous, strong Wine, and espe∣cially its Spirit, as well simple, as many ways Aro∣matiz'd with the addition of divers things, seldom alone and pure, often broken and diluted with the mixture of grateful watry Liquors; and also by shunning, and moderating Cares, and Watchings, night Studies, prolongd Weariness of Body, &c. 32. III. The over-swift Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cur'd; 1. By diminishing its Flu∣idity by Thickning Food or Medicins. 33. Of Food use Feet, and other extreme parts of Brutes abounding with Gelie, and so Fishes, and especially Sea-Fish. 34. Let the Drink be Red Wine, and a little harsh, or Steeld Beer, or made Medicinal with any more grateful Astringents. 35. Among Medicins we mention Diascordium, new Treacle, and every kind of Sealed Earth, Harts-Horn, &c. 36. The Pills of Hounds-Tongue correct the Salt Serous Humor before all other things, taken daily once or twice to two or three Grains; instead where∣of these of Styrax following may be prepar'd and us'd in like quantity.
℞. Styrax Calamita, Juice of Licorice thickned or extracted, Olibanum, red Myrrh. Opium of The∣bes, of each ʒ ss. Oriental Saffron ℈ i. with Syr. of white Poppies as much as is sufficient. Make it a Mass of Pills. 37. If Troches please better, use the following form, or one like it. ℞ White Henbane, white Poppie-Seeds, of each ʒ ss. Male Frankincense, red Myrrh, of each ℈ i. best Saffron ℈ ss. Juice of Licorice thickend ʒ i. Su∣gar of Marsh-malows ℥ ss. Gum-Dragon dissolvd in Rose-Water ʒ i. M. to be small Troches accord∣ing to Art. Let the Sick keep one of these often in his Mouth, and swallow it by degrees. Also Opium of Thebes ʒ ss. may be mixt with Them, whence any Acri∣mony of Humors may more powerfully be corre∣cted. 38. 2. The over-quick Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cur'd, by tempering its Heat en∣creasd in the Heart by Sowr and Watry things, of which consists Sempervivum Majus, Plantane, Night∣shade, Sorrel, &c. that allay the heat of Blood more mildly or more potently. 39. 3. The same over-quick Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cur'd, by Tempering the sharp Humor (carri'd to the Heart) by those that are Spiritous, Oily, and especially Opiats, and others often mentiond; and also when it abounds, Educing it by Hydragogues often mentiond. 40. Sharp Vapors also carri'd to the Heart, are to be Temperd with the same, and Discussd by Spiritous Diaphoreties, having both a Simple and Oily Volatil Salt. Their new Production ought to he hindred espe∣cially by Opiats and Anodyns, most convenient to the
Constitution and Accompanying Symptoms. 41. IV. The Blood Essus'd through the Lungs Mov'd another way than whither it ought, may be Cur'd; 1. In the Spitting of Blood, the burst or corroded Ves∣sels being speedily Consolidated by the Mixture de∣scrib'd in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. or one like it, being oft taken by Spoonfuls: presently Turning the Blood from the Lungs that flowd too plenteously in a Plethora by a Vein opend in the Arm, or in either or both Feet; Lastly, The Sharp Salt, or Sowr Humors that de∣scend from the Head, being Corrected by those be∣fore mentiond in Sect. 35, &c. Opiats, and mild Aro∣matics. Also by Curing, or Shunning Coughing, Shouting, Leaping, or any other too vehement Motion of the Body. 42. When the Vessels of the Lungs are distended near breaking by the Blood Kindled, and waxing too thin, the Blood is to be let out speedily by Opening a Vein, and temperd, moreover taking cooling Julaps in a sufficient quantity, especially prepar'd of those that are Watry and Sowr. For Example; ℞ Barley-Water ℥ xx. Julap of Roses ℥ iii. Oil of Sulphur prepar'd by a Glass-Bell, as much as suf∣fices for an Acidity grateful to the Sick. M. Let the Sick often drink a moderat Draught, till the Heat be observd to be moderat. 43. The Cure of a Peripneumonie is to be seen in Chap. 40. 44. The most Wounds of the Great Vessels of the Lungs are wont to be deadly; but the Cure of the Lesser, and also of Spitting of Matter, shall be given elsewhere.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Alteration of Blood by Air Inspired, and Expired Deprav'd. 1. THe most do judg that Respiration was ordaind to temper the heat of Blood, over-heated by the Effervescency newly describ'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, because a more evident Heat is observd in the Universal Body, and especially in the Heart of those living Creatures that have Lungs, and there∣fore a double Ventricle in the Heart; which that it is allayd and temperd by the Air Inspired, is evident by inconveniences following the Air that is less fit to moderate it. 2. As I do not deny that this is, so I judg the Air inspired does chiefly conduce again to condense the Blood much rarefi d in the Right Ventricle of the Heart. 3. But how, or after what manner and way the Inspired Air alters the Blood to both these ends, is not so manifest. I think it is, in as much as the Ni∣trous and somwhat Acid parts are disperst in the Air, that are able to condense the hot and rarefi'd Blood, and mildly lay its heat. 4. I distinguish between the Somwhat-acid and Nitrous parts of the Air; seeing that the more or less Acid is more simple, and the Nitrous more com∣pounded, to wit, of Acids, but not any, but such as are also Oily, joind with a lixiviat Salt; which the artificial, that is, Chymical Solution and Com∣position of Nitre makes manifest.
5. That manifold parts flie in the Air, not only Watry, Fiery, and Earthy, but also Oily, Spiritous, Lixiviat and Acid Salts, divers ways more or less mixt with all of these, the many Experiments not unknown to sedulous Searchers of Chymical Chan∣ges do evince, although most abstruse to Lazy Coun∣terfeit Philosophers every-where, and pratling Ca∣villers; which somtimes, if the Matter require, we intend to publish, for their sakes who are good and addicted to one Truth, with many others out of our own Observations, as yet unpublished, by the blessing of God, plenteous enough, though our Adversaries snarle at it. 6. This Tempering to be made in the Lungs no less useful, than necessary by Air Inspired is Deprav'd, either when there is None, or too Little, or somtimes too Much. 7. There is no Tempering of the Blood, when very hot and quiet Air is the cause; whence a Man often fals into a grievous Swouning, or Death it self; The Blood being highly rarefi'd and fluid, and therefore overwhelming and suffocating its internal Fire, for want of the newly mentiond Nitrous or Acid parts. 8. The Blood is more sparingly temperd by the Air Inspired, with the same Cause but lighter, when the Sowr and Nitrous Parts are fewer or more sluggish; at least fewer are suckt in by Inspiration, than were desired to temper equally the present and urging heat, and rarefaction of Blood. 9. Fewer Parts of Acid or Nitrous Air are drawn in, because of Inspiration it self hindred, which is to be explaind in the next following Chapter. 10. The Nitrous or Acid parts are too Few or Slug∣gish in the Air by very great Heat or Moisture in it; a Sign whereof moreover, if not also a Cause, is usu∣ally a great Calm of Air.
11. The Oily parts of the Air rarefie potently, but the Salt and Sowr are allayd and become too sluggish by the Beams of the Sun, both Fiery and Spiritous, the most frequent cause of the hot Air; as being dissolvd by watry or rainy Moisture, they are weakned; whence no wonder if such being suckd in, are less fit to temper the heat of the Blood. 12. The use of Bellows so very useful in modera∣ting the heat of the Air by a mild agitation, evinceth the quiet Air to be less fit to temper the Blood, than when it is but a little mov'd. 13. As it is evident that Cold is produc'd by any Wind, or by the motion of the Bellows from the Sense of Cold in the external parts receiving the Air so mov'd; which I judg is partly by the discussion of the Fiery Parts collected about us, the heat of the Air urging, and therefore producing a greater heat in us; partly by the bringing together and gathering of the Nitrous and Acid Parts, first either broken, or driven away every whither and remov'd from each other by the fiery Parts; at least by more plenty and efficacy of those fiery less perceived by Sense. 14. The Blood carrid through the Lungs, is too much Temperd, that is, Condensd and Coold by the Air Inspir'd, when the Nitrous or Acid parts abound in the Air, by which often especially in the Winter-Season, the North Wind blowing, and in the Regi∣ons near the cold Zone, and chiefly when the Univer∣sal Body was first too hot, then Blood is so coagulated in the Lungs, that it begets an Obstruction in its Ves∣sels, or middle windings of the Lungs; whence fol∣lows always a Stoppage of Blood it self, and somtimes a Bursting of the Vessels by their Distension, and an Effusion of Blood, together with a Peripneumonie en∣creasd by the Blood continually flowing to it; and
after the Aposteme is opend, a Consumption of the Lungs call'd Phthisis, and afterward for the most part Death. 15. The Tempering of Blood in the Lungs Abolisht and Diminisht, may be Cur'd, by changing the very Hot Air with Cold, whether Natural or Artificial. For such Air Caves and Cellars under ground, not seldom Nitrous are wont to contain. Such do we make by Art by diluting Nitre, or Salt Armoniac in Water, and presently pouring it out on the Chamber-floor; or by sprinkling sharp Vinegar alone, or mixt in like manner with Water; or in like manner cast∣ing sowrish Plants, or their Leaves and Flowers in the Chambers, by the help of all which we encrease Sowr and Nitrous Parts in the Air. 16. The great Calm of Air by the Winds quite laid is artificially to be stird by Bellows, or any other way stirring up the Wind. 17. The moisture of Cloudy Air is corrected, by making a clear fire with Wood. 18. The following Chapter will teach how Re∣spiration hindred may be Cur'd. 19. The too great Condensation, and Cooling of Blood carri'd through the Lungs, may be Cur'd, by changing the over-sharp and cold Air, for hotter and more calm; and by kindling in a fit Chamber, Fires great enough; and by using Medicins that allay the Nitrous and Acid parts of Air admitted. 20. How to Cure the other harms following this chill Air Inspir'd, and before mention'd, shall be shown beneath in Chap. 40. where expresly shall be handled of an Inflammation.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Inspiration of Air Deprav'd. 1. WE said in the former Chapter, that the Air was both Inspir'd, and also Expir'd mildly to condense, and cool the Blood waxing hot out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and driven for∣ward through the Lungs to the Left Ventricle. 2. This Inspiration of Air happens, as often as at the expanding of the Midrif downward, and ele∣vating the Thorax upward, the Lungs adjoind to both are together dilated; as we judg we have pro∣ved it abundantly in many things in Our Eighth Physical Disputation. 3. The same Inspiration of Air is Deprav'd; 1. When it Ceases, or is Abolisht. 2. When it is not sufficient, and therefore is too Frequent. 3. When it is with pain and Difficulty. 4. I. The Inspiration of Air is said by me to Cease, when there is no need thereof; which happens both in the Syncope, and in some kinds of Hypochon∣driac Suffocation; in which a Man somtimes may want all Respiration, at least manifest to Sense for a notable time, (to wit, whole dayes without the change of Life with Death) of which only true Phy∣sicians are wont to speak, judging by what is ob∣servd by Sense, yielding the Imaginary Respiration to imagining Doctors. 5. But then there is no necessity of Inspired Air, because there is no notable Burning of Blood raisd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, there happening no notable Rarefaction of the same; wherefore the
Blood having no heat there needs no Tempering, its desired Rarefaction no condensing; but the Ventri∣cles of the Heart are not very much expanded, or otherwise provok'd to contract it self in such a Dis∣ease; whence the Pulse then is Deficient to Sense of necessity. Of which see also Chap. 19. Sect. 14, &c. 6. The same Inspiration of Air is said by me to be Abolisht; when its need of being inspir'd doth urge, there being a notable Effervescency and Rarefaction of Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Pulse remaining great and strong enough, though for a short space, yet the Inspiration it self Ceases, and is suddenly taken away, in the forementiond Suffocation or Strangulation. 7. The Inspiration of Air so necessary to Life be∣ing full of motion is Abolisht, either by the fault of the Thorax and Midrif, or of the Lungs and Waies. 8. I think that Inspiration cannot be Abolisht by the fault of the Breast, or Midrif alone, although when both are deficient together in their Motion, no∣thing hinders but that it may be. 9. They are Deficient together in their Motion, when all the parts are destitute of the Animal Spirits, and hence of Sense and Motion in the most grievous Apoplexie, whence Death succedes certainly and sud∣denly. 10. The Inspiration of Air may be Abolisht by the fault of the Lungs, when the sharp Arterie is strait∣ned after any extreme manner. 11. The Inspiration of Air may be Abolisht by the fault of the Waies tending to the Lungs, when either the Mouth and Nostrils together are quite stopt, or the Throat is obstructed or comprest excedingly, in the Suffocating Catarrh so call'd, the Squinsie, Strangu∣lation, &c.
12. The Inspiration of Air is not sufficient, and ther∣fore also Frequent; Both, 1. by the fault of the Blood carrid through the Lungs; and, 2. of the Brest; and 3. of the Midrif; and, 4. of the Lungs; and, 5. their Waies. 13. 1. This happens by the fault of Blood carrid through the Lungs, as often as it being too much Kind∣led and Rarefi'd in the Heart, cannot be enough tem∣perd by the Air, inspir'd in its wonted quantity and manner; but requires more of it than is usual; wherefore, the Expansion of the Brest and Midrif is both Greater, and especially more Frequent to help that defect, and that more Air may be inspired; see∣ing that it is more easily hastned then augmented; add that an often iterated Inspiration of a little ex∣ternal Air, is more convenient to temper continually the Blood too much raising an Effervescency, than too great plenty of it coming more seldom. 14. 2. The Inspiration of Air is not sufficient, and therefore too Frequent by the fault of the Brest▪ when it cannot be lifted up, and expanded enough, and as much as ought, both because of the Gristles of the Brest too much hardned, and especially because of a Pleurisie hindring the Dilatation of the Brest, by reason of the Pain accompanying. 15. 3. The Inspiration of Air is not Sufficient, and therefore too frequent by the fault of the Midrif, either when it cannot conveniently be stird up in its double and reciprocal Motion, because of its proper Disease, especially an Inflammation, or when it can∣not be enough expanded downward by want of spae in the Belly, and other Impediments there; as it usually falls out in a grievous Dropsie call'd Ascites, or when the Child lies high in the Womb, the Stomach or Guts di∣stended with Wind, &c.
16. 4. The Inspiration of Air is not Sufficient, and therefore too frequent by fault of the Lungs, when their Ʋniversal Substance, or at least the most part is too little spongie, and too small, or they are troubled with a Peripneumonie, or urg'd only with a mode∣rate Straitness of the notable Branches of the Sharp Ar∣terie. 17. The Substance of the Lungs is too little Spun∣gie, as often as it is too Fleshy and Solid, such as I have often found in the Dissecting of several after Death; or also wrinkled, such as have been somtime in like manner observd y me: although I think it very hard, if not impossible to render the adequate Cause of this Disease; yet I conjecture that the Substance of the Lungs becomes too Fleshy and Solid, as often as it is both lightly fretted, and again consolidated and nourished so, that by degrees its Flesh becomes more solid by the too sharp, together with the too viscous Blood in the middle part between the Arteries and Veins. 18. I refer the Wrinkling of its Substance to be ta∣ken from the over-Tart and Sharp Blood rather po∣ently contracting, than truly nourishing it there ightly fretted; unless perhaps it happen by Matter or Water likewise tart, gatherd in the Cavity of the Brest, and by degrees piercing and binding it. 19. 5. The Inspiration becomes more Frequent, be∣cause not Sufficient, by the fault of the Waies grant∣ng passage for the Air to the Lungs, when the N∣trils only are more or less stopt, both continually in an Hurt, or by Chance, &c. commonly inbred, or by an external Cause, often accidental, the harm be∣ng adventitious and permanent, and often by spacs n a Disease that troubles somtimes more, other∣imes less, as in the Stuffing of the Head, a Plypus, &c.
and somtimes by External Things put up the No∣strils, whence the Inspiration of Air is then to be made with open Mouth; which will therefore be more hindred, and so more frequent; and yet more, if the Sick be to speak or walk for a space; especially if he must hasten. 20. The same may hap, if the Entrance of the Throat be more or lss stpt with thick and viscous Phlegm, or the Tonsills be Inflamed, or otherwise Swelld, and stop up the way at least in part of the Air to be Inspired, in which Disease a more frequent Inspiration is observd, whether it procede from a Straitness of the Waies alone, or the Trouble come (which to me is most probable) by the over-cold Air too plenteously suckt in at once; to shun which, a more frequent and also less Inspiration may be or∣derd. 21. III. The Inspiration of Air which is with Dif∣ficulty, is generally call'd Dyspnaea; the chief kinds whereof are an Hard Breathing, Orthopnaea Asthma, Incubus, and Hypochondriac Suffocation, joind with the Fear or Sense of Strangling: To which we may add an Interrupted and Hindred Inspiration in the Hicket, Sighing, and pricking pains of the Pleu∣risie. 22. In a simple Hard Breathing, the Inspiration is wont to be little and also quick; but in an Orthop∣naea less quick and much greater, and indeed with the Neck streight, and stretcht forth; as in an Asth∣ma there is observd, besides a more difficult Inspiration proceding, with Labour, a Wheazing or Snoaring in the Brest, together with a Cough, in which often somthing is spitted out, often nothing; with the Night-Mare to them only that sleep, and especially on their Backs, a Dream of weight pressing the Midrif, and threatning
a Suffocation is join'd; whence Melancholic People are often wont to dote wonderful things to them∣selves, of a certain or uncertain Person hated. The Jaws are so streind in the Hypochondriac Suffocation depraving Inspiration, (more commonly befalling People awake than asleep) that the Sick think them∣selves in danger of Strangulation. 23. In an Hicket, Inspiration is interrupted by un∣certain and unequal Intervals, by reason of the Con∣vulsive Motion of the Midrif, somtimes more, other∣times less; which suffers a continued though lesser Interruption, joind with oftness whilst Sighs do urge; as in a Pleurisie it is chiefly interrupted, as often as the Feverish Heat urging more, there is an endeavour of more Breath. 24. Every Dyspnaea is stirrd up, both for the most part by Wind, or Vapors produc'd in the Small Gut by Phlegm rarefi'd by Choler, and rising up partly through the Stomach and Gullet to the Mouth, hence perhaps piercing farther into the Pipes of the Lungs, with the inspired Air; and partly, being carrid plenteously through the Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Thorax to the upper Hollow Vein, hence the Right Ventricle of the Heart; lastly, the Vessels of the Lungs, and their spungie Substance it self, stick there, and so hindring their explication no less requi∣site than complication, thence strangely and sorely vexing the Sick; and somtimes by viscous Phlegm falling down out of the Head, and seizing on the Pipes of the Lungs, and producing a divers narrow∣ness in them. Whence according to the simplicity or complication of these Causes, and so a greater or less harm, sundry kinds of the Dyspnaea do arise, and somtimes less, other-times greater. 25. In the Asthma and Orthopnaea for the most part
both Causes concur, although in the Asthma, which is call'd Hidden, Vapors or Wind only seems (in my thoughts) to molest; and that the same do effect all in the Hard Breathing, and Hypochondriac Strangula∣tion, whosoever attentivly examins, and weighs all the Symptoms then befalling the Sick will easily ac∣knowledg. 26. We intend to give you the Breeding, and Cure of the Hicket, Sighs, and the Pleurisie, in the next and 40th Chapter. 27. I. We have related somthing of the Cure of the Syncope, and the most grievous kinds of Hypochon∣driac Suffocation, in Chap. 19. Sect. 70, &c. which may there be seen. 28. The Inspiration of Air Abolisht, the Brest and Midrif being deficient together in their Motion, by the defect of the Animal Spirits in the most grievous Apoplexie, is Incurable, because any impediment can∣not be soon enough taken away, by which the rising of the Nerves is so comprest, that Passage for the Animal Spirits through Them to the lower parts is deni'd. 29. The Inspiration of Air Abolisht, because the Sharp Arterie is much straitned, may be estemed for Incurable, unless the Blood, Matter, Phlegm, or any other thing which fills it, be soon expelld with strong Expiration; or the Band that straitens it in its Strangulation be taken away. 30. The same Inspiration Abolisht, the Mouth, and Nostrils being both stopt, may be Cur'd, by taking away forth-with the Causes stopping, lest other∣wise Death follow in a short while. 31. So the Inspiration of Air Abolisht by an Ob∣struction of the Jaws, and chiefly of the Throat, may be Cur'd, by speedily removing any Cause of an Ob∣struction,
either by drawing it out, or by forcing it into the Gullet, and hence to the Stomach. 32. The same may be Cur'd, there being an ex∣treme Straitness of the Throat because of the Squin∣sie molesting, by curing the Squinsie any way, by letting of Blood in the Limbs to turn it away, and under the Tongue to draw it forth, and by Cata∣plasms and Gargarisms, both of a potently Cutting, Ripening Faculty, and such-like. 33. If the Inspiration of Air be Abolisht by the compression of the Throat by an Halter, it may be Cur'd if the Halter be loosd or cut in time. 34. II. The over-Frequent Inspiration of Air; 1. Because of the encreasd Kindling and Rarefacti∣on of Blood in the Heart may be Cur'd, that Heat being allaid, as well by Letting Blood, as by tem∣perat Acids, or Salt Nitre, either pure, or after it has been fir'd by the help of Sulphur into the Salt, or Stone call'd Prunellae. 35. 2. The Inspiration of Air not sufficient, and therefore ton Frequent, arising by the hindred due explication of the Brest, the Gristles being of a bo∣ny hardness, and so inflexible, cannot be Cur'd, un∣less by softning the Gristles; which what Medicins can perform, is known as yet but to a few; although there have been some, who have even softned any Bones, bow'd them variously, and again have hard∣ned them according to their pleasure, which is admi∣rable. 36. The Cure of an Hindred and over-Frequent Inspiration, because of the Pain of the Pleurisie fol∣lows the Cure of the Pleurisie, to be had in the ge∣neral Method of Curing any Inflammation, of which see Chap. 40. 37. 3. The Inspiration of Air two Frequent and
hindred, following an Inflammation of the Midrif, may be Cur'd, that being cur'd according to the fore∣cited general Method. 38. The same Inspiration hindred, because the Midrif is hindred in its expansion, may be Cur'd, in the Dropsie call'd Ascites, by emptying Water out of the Cavity of the Belly any way; when the Woman is with Child, by sending out the Birth; in the Tym∣panie, when the Stomach or Guts are distended with Wind, by thrusting them forth, or by their own cea∣sing. 39. 4. The Inspiration of Air not Sufficient and too frequent, following the Substance of the Lungs, either made too Fleshy and Solid, or Wrinkled, is by me esteem'd Incurable. 40. The same caus'd by a Peripneumonie, may be Cur'd, it being Cur'd after the manner of other In∣flammations. 41. The same when to be ascrib'd to a mean strait∣ness of the notable Branches of the Sharp Arterie, may be Cur'd, the Cause of that Straitness being taken away, somtimes Internal filling its Branches more or less, somtimes External, and sticking in the substance of the Lungs and compressing them; of which in general we must speak elsewhere. 42. Here you may observe, as often as the Sharp Arterie is stopt with Phlegm, whether fluid, or vis∣cous, or sharp, or mild, or with Blood clotterd or dissolvd, or with Putresi'd Matter thick or thin; or somtimes in those that are duckt in the Water, pier∣cing into the Lungs, so often the Cure may be begun and promoted, somtimes only by letting out the Wa∣ter receivd in, more oftn by a Cough stirrd up by what is containd in them; whose expulsion somtimes either those things that Cut, or Thicken may help,
being vari'd according to the variety of what is to be thrown forth, often to be taken in a mean quan∣tity. 43. You may also observe, that here a Vomit is somtimes commodiously enough ordaind, seeing Ex∣perience confirms that the Expelling of what is con∣taind in the Sharp Arterie, is also promoted by a ve∣hement endeavour of Vomiting; except in the Spit∣ting Blood, in which alwaies a Vomit is dangerous. 44. 5. An Inbred and stubborn harm, either at Birth, or after Birth, risen by chance possessing the Nostrils, and hindring Inspiration, a straitness being made there, compelling it to be more Frequent, is sel∣dom wont to be Cur'd, because it is an hard thing to take away an old Growing together, or Obstruction of those Parts. 45. The same Inspiration hindred because of a Stuffing in the Head, or a Polypus, is wont of its own accord to return to its perfectness after these are Cur'd. 46. As often as Inspiration is hindred by any kind of Things put up into the Nstrils and stopping them, so often it is again finisht, those being drawn forth. 47. Inspiration hindred by viscous Phlegm stopping the Entrance of the Throat, may be Cur'd by Gargari∣sing, the Phlegm being remov'd and spit out. 48. The Inflammations of the Tonsils, or Greater Tumors, are to be Cur'd, partly by the general Me∣thod, partly by Gargarisms, before that Inspiration thereby hindred can be restor'd. 49. III. A Dyspnaea arising from Wind or Vapors, produc'd by Chler, from Phlegm in the Small Gut, may be Cur'd; 1. By Amending Phlegm peccant in any Quality, and by Emptying it when too much in Quantity, by Remedies often forecited.
50. 2. In like manner by Correcting Choler, if peccant in any Quality, or by Evacuating it, if a∣bounding, by Medicins often propos'd. 51. 3. By Dissipating or carrying out Wind or Vapors by Stool, with the help of Carminative Cly∣sters so call d, or by excluding them upward in the form of Belches, before they pierce into the Lacteal Veins, by Remedies somtimes already prescrib'd. 52. 4. By Discussing the same more potently, and also driving them out together with a mild Sweat, as soon as ever they have pierc'd to the Lungs, and stick in them; and that by the often miond Aro∣matic Sudorifics. 53. A Dyspnaea coming from viscous Phlegm  down out of the Head into the Jaws, and pss the Pipes of the Lungs, may be Cur'd; 1. By H∣dring its coming into the Head by any Aromatic Me∣dicins, Rosmary, Sage, &c. so often minded before, and often to be us'd daily at any time in a little Dose. 54. 2. Both by Cutting, and Attenuating it ga∣therd in the Head, by the same Aromatics, and by Car∣rying it out, both by Stool by means of Phlegma∣gogues often propos'd; and also through the Nostrils, with the help of things that promote Sneezing; and also through the Mouth, by the means of Medicins to be Chew'd. 55. 3. By Cutting the same carri'd into the Lungs by the newly nam'd Aromatics, and if there be a Cough by spitting it out by Aromatic Bechics also containd in the Mouth, and exceding slowly swal∣lowd, whereby some part of them may pierce to the Lungs. 56. As those Medicins are to be alwaies preferrd before others of the same Kind and Nature, which
are noted by the long experience of many to be more special and useful for any Disease; so also here are they to be chosen before other Aromatics, which both others, and their own Observations have shewn to be more convenient for every kind of a Dyspnoea: Neither must we pass by the singular Constitution of every Sick Person; seeing that according to it, we may daily experience that there is choice to be had of Medicins otherwise excelling in the same Disease; which none that is well verst in Practice, and attent to those things, which daily happen diversly, will ever deny. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Expiration of Air Deprav'd. 1. THe Air attracted into the Lungs by Inspirati∣on, after it has done its Office, ought to be again put forth, whereby a place may be gotten for other succeding Air, and this exclusion of Air is call'd, Expiration. 2. This Expiration is chiefly Perfected by the Mus∣cles of the Belly, both drawing down the Thorax, and compressing all that was containd in the Belly, and dri∣ving them forward towards the Midrif, and so com∣pelling the Midrif upward, and consequently by mildy pressing out the Air containd in them by strait∣ning the Lungs; the proper Motion of the Midrif to∣gether concurring, making a greater straitness in the Brest. 3. This Expiration of Air is Deprav'd; 1. In Sneezing, wherein after some stay of Inspiration be∣gun,
gun, the Air is at once put forth suddenly, and with a great force, though suddenly ceasing, or by abrupt force chiefly through the Nostrils, and somtimes the Mouth also with a vehement Concussion of the Uni∣versal Body, and exclusion of those things that are in the way. 4. The same Expiration of Air is Deprav'd; 2. In a Cough; in which the sending forth of Air, and what is Containd in the Sharp Arterie, in and through the Mouth, (if any thing be there and fol∣low it) is not at once, but at many also and inter∣rupted times, with a different concussion of the Bo∣dy, one time mild, another time vehement. 5. Every Cough is either call'd Moist, when by its help the Humors containd in the Sharp Arterie, as Phlegm, Blood, Matter, &c. are afterward to be brought up into the Mouth, or are expelld out through the Mouth. 6. Or Dry, when nothing is spit out, though with great and much labour, but the Universal Body is weari'd in vain with endeavouring to Cough; whence there is somtimes raisd a vehement Pain both of the Head, and Hypochondries, and of other Parts, yea, somtimes a Rupture is bred by it, somtimes the Urine or Excrements are unvoluntarily extruded. 7. 3. The same Expiration is deprav'd in an Hicket, in which the Region of the Stomach is ob∣servd to be suddenly and violently driven forward, and outward, that Motion truly Convulsive, soon cea∣sing, and again often repeting, and so then the most troublesome and grievous Symptom to the Sick. 8. I judg the Midrif is affected in an Hicket in that part of its Motion, wherewith it serves for Ex∣piration; and in which it is perceivd (by Touching no less than Seeing in the opend Belly of Brutes
still living) to be contracted with a force great enough towards the Region of the Stomach. 9. Wherefore I judg the Hicket to be the proper Disease of the Midrif, and in no wise of the Sto∣mach, seeing that besides what is already said, it may be Voluntary, and can be stird up by Me, and others at any time as we please. 10. Yet will I not deny that the Midrif is for the most part drawn into consent to make an Hicket by the Stomach first affected, and especially by Sharp Vapors, or Wind, or Humors, whencesoever procede∣ing, and piercing what way soever to the Membra∣neous Centre of the Midrif, and provoking it by pricking, or corroding, to perform that Convulsive Motion. 11. Therefore I judg the true Cause of the Hicket to be, whatsoever is apt to compel the Midrif to a violent, but not continu'd, and presently interrup∣ted, or ceasing, and again often a repeating Contra∣ction of it self; whether it be found in the Stomach, (to which hurtful and sharp Medicins or Food, ra∣ther to be call'd Poison, are to be referrd) or the same rise up out of the small Gut by the Vitious Ef∣fervescency of the Humors meeting raisd in the form of an Humor, Vapor, or Wind, and so affect the upper Orifice of the Stomach, especially by corroding, that the Midrif encompassing it is also affected; or the same being shut up in the Cavity of the Thorax, or Belly immediately frets the Midrif, or is carri'd to it through its Vessels, and sticking in its Substance, corrodes its sensible parts, or compells it any other way, to that troublesome, and convulsive, solitary, and moreover continually repeating contraction of it self. 12. If any shall observe both the external and in∣ternal
evident Causes of Sneezing, he will find it is raisd, one while by the brightness of the Sun shining, either immediately, or from the Snow, Ice, Water, a Looking-Glass, &c. by means of reflection; other∣times by sharp things, to wit, Onions, Mustard, Ra∣dish, &c. or by things mov'd or drawn to the No∣strils, or taken in at the Mouth; other-times also by sharp Humors falling down from the Head to the No∣strils in a Stuffing of the Head, or Snuffle of the Nose; or from Vapors or Rifts, likewise sharp as∣cending out of the Stomach or Small Gut, and pro∣voking the Nostrils, so that there is always felt a pulling of the Nostrils of what kind soever: Whence all these divers Causes do deservedly seem so far to produce a Sneezing, in as much as they move the No∣strils, those parts ascrib'd to Expiration by provok∣ing, and pulling them to expel that trouble, the Air together being potently expir'd through the Nostrils; with which vehement Excussion of the Air, a vehe∣ment Shaking also of the Universal Body uses to con∣cur. 13. The Cause of a Cough is, whatsoever can pull the Sharp Arterie of the Lungs, or any way pro∣voke and molest it. 14. And indeed the Cause of a Moist Cough is ob∣servd to be manifold; for somtimes certain things coming from without, or taken in at the Mouth, and being wrong carri'd into the Sharp Arterie, do soon raise a troublesome Cough: At other-times the Hu∣mors (and for the most part Phlegmatic of several kinds, either Sharp, and Salt, or Sowr; or Mild, and Insipid; other-whiles thin and fluid, or thick and viscous; somtimes Blood pure, or mixt with other Humors; and somtimes Purulent Matter) fal∣ling down from the Head, and piercing into the same
Sharp Arterie, do compel the Lungs to Cough: Again, Humors likewise Various, (Blood, Purulent Matter, and perhaps Phlegm, or a Serous Humor) carri'd out of the Substance, or Vessels of the Lungs into the same Arterie, do breed a Cough. 15. As often as Blood coming out of the Lungs is sent forth with a Cough, so often this Disease is call'd a Spitting of Blood, and Haemoptoic Passion. 16. A Dry Cough has for its External Causes, both cold Air, and Drink receivd largely, and troubling the Sharp Arterie: but for Internals, somtimes a ve∣ry viscous or very thin and sharp Catarrh, scarce yield∣ing to the Air that is vehemently expir'd; somtimes Vapors or Wind elevated from the small Gut, and Ventricle, through the Gullet, and suckt into the Lungs together with the Air; or insinuating them∣selves from the same Gut, through the Lacteal Veins, into the Heart & Vessels of the Lungs; yea, their Sub∣stance, even to the Sharp Arterie, and provoking it continually to Cough without excluding it self. 17. The manifold Diseases noted in Expiration De∣prav'd, may be Cur'd; 1. By taking away, or correct∣ing their External Cause. 2. By curing any Internal Diseases of the Solid Parts. 3. By Amending any Harms of the Parts Containd; and also by diminish∣ing their Abundance, and by Correcting their vitious Qualities; and by removing out of place, or moving out those that are peccant in place, &c. 18. And that we may begin at the Hicket, as often as hurtful and sharp Food, or Medicins, or rather Poison are in the Stomach, unless they can be tem∣perd and corrected by those that Alter, they are to be Expelld, either by a Vomit upward the shorter way, or by a Purge downward the longer way; which is also to be understood of any Humors found in the Sto∣mach,
or Small Gut, and causing, the Hicket. 19. We have often before proposd Medicins that Alter and Correct the Humors, as also any thing ta∣ken in what way soever peccant, so that it seems not necessary to repete them here again; we only admo∣nish you this one thing, That Opiats do conduce be∣fore all other things in curing any Hicket; not only in as much as they temper any sharp Humors, but moreover in as much as they blunt the Sense of the Stomach, and perhaps also make the Animal Spirits more slow of Motion; if they be us'd by times in a small quantity, and so long, till the Hicket either cea∣ses, or is notably diminisht. 20. Among Vomits, I here prefer Antimonials be∣fore all others, both because they do most happily empty any Humors promiscuously, and because they are most friendly to Mans Nature, by degrees bring∣ing all the Humors in Man after a peculiar manner, to a most laudable state; which power I doubt whe∣ther it be in other things likewise, but know it is in Antimonie; whatsoever Men blinded with their Prejudices prate to the contrary, both otherwise Learned and Unlearned. 21. But beware lest they be together taken in too great quantity, seeing indeed every Excess is an Ene∣my to Nature; and it is always safer that they be gi∣ven in a less than in a greater Dose, for no harm will at any time follow the first, though often the latter: for (notwithstanding the Opinion of many Preten∣ders, as well as Unskilful Physicians) neither do other Purgers, and especially Antimonials rightly prepar'd, and us'd in a less quantity, and emptying no Humor upward or downward hurt any, which I having very many times experienc'd do testifie; but they always then are profitable, either by amending
the hurtful Humors in the Body, or by preparing them farther for the following Purge; which I would chiefly have noted by Younger Physicians, for whose sakes this my little Treatise is publishd, and not for the Elder, who are verst in the Works of Art, and therefore need not my Information; much less for the obstinate, rejecting any thing of an other Mans by Prejudice or Envy, and no less unskilfully, than wickedly carping at them. 22. When therefore after Narcoties are first conve∣niently us'd, a Vomit has been taken, and little or nothing is cast out upward or downward; and the Hicket still urges, and signs of the Humors remain∣ing in the Stomach, or next Gut, raising this Evil do remain, then you may safely give the Sick a new Vomit either the same day, and then in less quantity, or another in the next in a somwhat greater quantity, whereby the peccant Humors will be more corrected, or expelld upward or downward, or both ways: For so the truly Rational and Dogmatic Cure of the Hicket will be most safely, and no wise unpleasantly, and soon enough absolvd: chiefly leaning on Expe∣rience, and hence Sound Reason, not Weak or Com∣mentitious, and so false. 23. If the Vitious Humors be voided by the Vo∣mit taken, and the Sick be weari'd by vomiting, an Aromatical Mixture may conduce, as being most convenient to dissipate the molesting Vapors sticking about the Stomach, together with Opiats added in a small quantity, and the most apt to asswage the stirrd up too potent Effervescency of Choler, and and the Juice of the Pancreas by Vomiting, and to procure Sleep mildly, and to stay the Hicket more. For Example;
℞. Mint-Water ℥ ii. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae, or Simple Treacle-Water ℥ ss. Confection of Alker∣mes ʒ i. Laudanum 2 Grains. Syrup of Mint ℥ i. M. Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture, till he find his Body dispos'd to Sleep; which that he may the sooner take, let him lie down commodi∣ously. 24. To this Mixture may be added Sp. of Nitre six or eight drops, as often as Wind also molests, which often happens. 25. If the Sick do less incline to Vomit, and be not troubled with Loathing, it is better that the Hu∣mors peccant be Empti'd downward, and that accord∣ing to their Variety, somtimes with Cholagogues, other-times with Phlegmagogues, or Hydragogues on∣ly; or at other-times with several of these mixt to∣gether as the Matter requires, as is set down be∣fore. 26. And because all Obstinat Diseases have their rising from over-Viscous Humors, at least acknowledg them to be conjoind to their Cause, therefore in an Obstinat Hicket, the Medicins that both cut and educe viscous Humors are not to be neglected. To which end our Magisterial Pills, describ'd before in Chap. 14. Sect. 50. as also the Decoction propos'd in Chap. 2. Sect. 35. may conduce. But there is no need, that such should be daily us'd, unless they educe little; for where they cause many Dejections, it is safer, that they be taken only in the third or fourth day, and on∣ly such as cut and correct the Humors any way pec∣cant, and discuss Vapors and Wind, or otherwise such as are Corroborating, often mentiond, should be us'd in the days between. 27. When the Hicket is the Symptom of any
other grievous Diseases, an Acute Fever, Inflamma∣tion, &c. it is wont to remit of its own accord when they are cur'd; although then nothing hin∣ders that Opiats being added, and moreover taken with Sudorifics, or any kind of altering Medicins, and appropriated to correct the Primary Disease, or the vitious Humor, may be us'd together: By which if a mild Sweat should be promoted, and the other Symptoms together-with the Hicket be diminisht, we may hope well of restoring the Sick; but if not, then ill. 28. Sneezing, which takes its rising from Exter∣nal Causes, is soon wont to cease when those are ta∣ken away, or shund: But that which acknowledg∣eth Internal Causes, both sliding down from the Brain, and rising up from the nether parts, may be Cur'd, both by Correcting the Sowrly-Salt Humors in the Stuffing of the Head, and Viscous Phlegmatic Hu∣mors for the most part joind with them, both by Oily and Spiritous Aromatics; and by Educing them, part∣ly by Stool, by Hydragogues and Phlegmagogues; partly through the Nostrils or Mouth by mild Snee∣zers or Masticatories, and by Correcting the Humors that raise a vitious Effervescency in the Stomach, and chiefly in the small Gut, and driving sharp Vapors up∣ward to the Nostrils, by the forementiond Spiritous and Oily Medicins, not neglecting or omitting Opi∣ats; and by Educing the same down ward rather than upward if they abound, by Medicins often propos'd. Where Sudorifics use to avail very much, which not only thrust out, but together amend the Vitious Hu∣mors. 29. A Cough may be diversly Cur'd according to the diversity of its Cause. For when any thing is let in from without and carri'd into the Sharp Arterie
of the Lungs, and is either put forth again by Coughing only, or being mitigated with a little Beer Drunk upon it, the Cough soon ceases, or at least is by little and little allaid. 30. The Phlegmatic Humors falling down from the Head into the forenam'd Arterie, require for their Correction, if Sowr, Crabs-Eyes, Coral, Pearl, &c. If Salt, Gum Dragon and Arabic, the Roots of Marsh-Malows, and Sugar thereof, Licorice-Root, and its thickned Juice; the Pils of Hounds-Tongue, or of Styrax prescrib'd in Chap. 20. Sect. 36. or the Tro∣ches in Sect. 37. 31. Phlegmatic Humors in no wise Sharp but Insi∣pid, if they be both Thin and Watry, need the same Pills and Troches to Correct and Thicken them. 32. If they be Thick and Viscous, they require both Sowrish-Sweet things, and Aromatics, simple Oximel, and that of Squils, adding the Syrup of Hysop, of the two, and five opening Roots, and such-like to Attenuate and Cut them, whether they be swallowd slowly after the manner of a Loch, or they be us'd by Spoonfuls, diluted with Aromatic Waters. 33. The same manifold Phlegmatic Humors in the Blood, at least in the Head, when abounding, are to be Diminisht by Hydragogues and Phlegmagogues, and somtimes Diuretics and Sudorifics: yea, somtimes we must have recourse to Salivation it self, which may be stirrd up divers ways. 34. Blood carri'd down from the Head into the Lungs, and raising a Cough, is to be stopt in its Ef∣flux, by Opening a Vein, if a Plethora concur, or a notable Heat of Blood, or a Suppression of its wonted Emptying: Although its over-great Heat may also be allai'd with things Sowr, and especially a little
Tart. For Example, take this following Decocti∣on; ℞. Plantane-Leaves M. ii. Sempervive the Greater, Wood-Sorrel-Leaves, of each M i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is Straind, Syr. of Jujubs ℥ iii. Salt Nitre purifi'd ʒ i. or Lapis Prunellae ʒ ss. or Sp. of Nitre 20 drops. M. for a Decoction. Let the Sick take often a mean Draught of this to allay any over-great heat of Blood, and hence any bursting forth of Blood that may follow. 35. The same Blood is to be stopt in its Flux by Conglutinating the opend Vessels by the Mixture pre∣scrib'd in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. (or one like it) often mentiond before. 36. The Corruption of Blood into Purulent Matter, s to be prevented all manner of ways, and especially by the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil, or any other not ungrateful; as by the help of this, the turning of the Blood into Purulent Matter, and the farther arming of the Ulcerated Part is not only hindred, but moreover the total Cure hereof is promoted, especially if according to the vehemency of the Dis∣ease, or various largeness of the Ulcer, one or two drops of it be us'd thrie, four times, or oftner in a day, in a Spoonful of any Pectoral Decoction, or Mix∣ture, or at least Sugard Beer. 37. The same Blood carried whencesoever into the Sharp Arterie of the Lungs, lest it clotter there, and hence corrupt, is to be kept Dissolvd by convenient Medicins, or is to be Dissolvd again and Voided. To which purpose Crabs-Eyes, together with Diapho∣retic Antimony, are to be preferd before many others, being dissolvd in a little distild Vinegar and taken, some grateful things being added, seeing that they
do the main Work here. For Example, take the fol∣lowing Form by Spoonfuls; ℞. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae ʒ ii. Distilld Vinegar ℥ ss. Crabs-Eyes ʒ ss. Diaphoretic Antimony ℈ i. Syr. of Maiden-Hair ℥ i. M. 38. But in such Mixtures as have Crabs-Eyes dis∣solvd in Vinegar, beware lest Syrups made of Muci∣lages be added to them, such as are that of Marsh-Malows, Jujubs, Violets, and such-like; because presently, or soon after, they thence become thick like Mucilages and unfit for use; which will not easily be, if the Syrups us'd be prepar'd of Aroma∣tics, and especially fresh enough, seeing many become more viscous in length of time. 39. When by the proper Disease of the Lungs, Blood pure, or corrupted into Matter, is voided by Coughing, there is greater danger, wherefore we must hasten the more to its Cure, lest the opportuni∣ty here, if any where urgent, be lost by delay; for the singular Substance of the Lungs is easily infected and corrupted, but difficultly restor'd and repaird. 40. Therefore must we not cease from the use of Medicins that cure the efflux (and corruption) of Blood burst out of the Vessels of the Lungs, till the evil be wholly taken away: Yea, I advise, that a sparing use of mild Medicins should be continu'd for some time after the Disease is cur'd to sense, whereby the part once affected may be strengthned against the access of a new evil, and therefore easily again af∣fected. 41. As in other Cases always, so here you must diligently attend to the Medicins that most conduce to every particular Body, whereby they may be pre∣ferd before the rest, and as long as they profit, con∣tinue
in the use thereof: And as soon as ever they are observd to profit less, substitute others in their room; and so the Health of the Sick is to be promoted eve∣ry way. 42. A Dry Cough arising from cold Air or Drink, may be Cur'd, by often stopping Expiration, where∣by the Heat in the Lungs and Jaws being encreasd, the harm arising and molesting by external cold, may be corrected. 43. Let me therefore here admonish you in gene∣ral, that the Breath held as long as may be, and so also the Cough being hindred by force, will not a little conduce to allay and mitigate any Cough, and especially a Dry one; by which means I have often observd, both in my self and others, that a Cough otherwise troublesome enough, has been wholly taken away or diminisht; as in like manner I have often noted the Hicket also so Cur'd. 44. When very Viscous Humors are the Cause of a Dry Cough, they are wont to be amended and cor∣rected by those that potently Cut, being continually swallowd in a small quantity; for which use the Be∣chic White Troches, Alicampane-Root pouderd and reduc'd with Sugar into Tablets, or Pieces cut, &c. may serve, if they be held in the Mouth, and being dissolv'd with the Spittle, are continually car∣ri'd down together with it into the Sharp Artery. 45. Catarrhs that are Salt and Sharp, breeding a Dry Cough, may be corrected and temperd by the Pills of Hounds-Tongue, or Styrax, &c. so often mentiond by Me, not neglecting Hydragogue Pur∣ges. 46. Vapors or Wind rising up to the Lungs from the Small Gut through the Lacteal Veins, raising a Dry Cough, require for their Cure Medicins; 1. That
Temper or Educe Humors which are always Phlegmatic and Choleric, and somtimes also Acid. 2. Such as Discuss Vapors and Wind, or asswage them as well in their rising as after it: The most whereof are often before propos'd, and among others in Chap. 9. Sect. 29. my Carminative Spirit, of great power in curing this Disease happily. CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nourishment of the Lungs Deprav'd. 1. HItherto I have thought with others that own the Circular Motion of Blood, that the Blood is not only alterd by the Air Inspir'd, but moreover that it is driven forward out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs to be nourisht by it: Whence as the Lungs alone receive this Blood, so I thought they alone were nourisht by it, until last year an Ar∣tery arising from the Descending Trunc of the Great Artery, was discoverd by the Observation of the most diligent Anatomist, and famous Embalmer of Bodies, Dr. Frederic uysch, a Physician at the Hague, containing in a public Discourse, An Expla∣nation of the Valvul's in the Lymphatic and Lacteal Vessels, and some rare Anatomic Observations; and, because it accompanies the widenings of the Wind∣pipe, call'd by him Bronchialis; and, as it carries the Blood elaborated and perfected in the Left Ventricle of the Heart to the Lungs, it is assign'd by him for their Nourishment. 2. But although, when I came to Print this Chap∣ter, it happend opportunely that there was a Body
of a Youth who perisht with Cold, to be Cut in the public Hospital; and I sought diligently the Arte∣ry in it aforesaid by the mentiond Treatise, but with∣out success; yet would I not therefore herein mistrust so famous a Man, but rather lament, that a few days after I was hindred against all right by some through preposterous spite less addicted to the Common Good, and oft hurful, whereby I could not Dissect the Body of a Youth dead of Difficult Breathing, and search out the second time the forenam'd Artery, to demonstrate īt in public for the sake of many Stu∣dents earnestly desiring to know this thing by ocular Inspiction; especially seeing that the same Dr. Ruyseb had in one word shewn me the way to observe it more certainly, and had also told to others that the same thing had happend more than once which had happend to me. 3. Whether therefore the Lungs receive their nourishing Blood by this Bronchial Artery, or toge∣ther by that of the Lungs, as oft as by reason of the Effervescency of the Blood Ascending and Descend∣ing, vitiated in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Blood rising from both is vitious, the Nourishment of the Lungs will be deprav'd, and that sooner, more ea∣sily, and potently than any other part of the Body, if they be nourisht in part, at least by the Blood com∣ing out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, being less temperd than the other effus'd out of the left Bed of the Heart, and more or less temperd in them by the Air Inspir'd. 4. The Nourishment of the Lungs is Deprav'd; 1. When it is Diminisht or Abolisht, and they pine more or less. 2. When it is Ill-nourisht, and the Lungs get a Substance and Consistency harder, or more compact than is naturally, or on the contrary
softer, or more flaccid, or also unequal, &c. For 3. I scarce think, and that very seldom, that the Nourishment of the Lungs may be Encreasd, if we speak properly, as long as their Substance is lauda∣ble. 5. The Lungs Pine more or less, somtimes in both sides, somtimes in either, and in this or that Lobe, by the fault of either It self, or the Blood, or Mat∣ter. 6. By the fault of the Blood, when it is Purulent, especially in a Pleurisie, tending to an Aposteme, and communicating its Matter to the Lungs, either im∣mediatly, or by means of the Blood; whence Lean∣ness, not only of the Lungs, but of the Universal Body is wont to follow. 7. Leanness may hap by fault of the Lungs, when by an External or Internal Cause, they become unfit to assimilate to themselves the Blood duly flowing in; which I have oft observd happens Internally by an Ʋleer, Externally by a Suppuration; in both places by Matter Corrupting, not only the Blood of what sort soever carri'd to them, but also the very Sub∣stance of Them, so that they cannot longer be nou∣risht by any Blood. 8. In the Year 1662. we found in the Academic Hspital, the Right Lung wrinkled, wan and Lank, and in my judgment Consum'd, in a Watry Suppura∣tion of the right side, consisting of Matter and Serous Liquor Whitish, collected together: which evil I thought was to be ascrib'd to the Purulent Water a∣bout it. 9. In Tisical People for certain the Lungs are not only corrupted, and therefore also moreover pine, but besides the Ʋniversal Body consumes, because of Blood in like manner corrupted by Matter adjoind, and by
egrees so corrupting all the Parts, that they become nfit to perfect natural Nourishment. 10. The Nourishment of the Lungs is Deprav'd y either or both kinds of Blood vitious, at least ha∣ving Vitious Humors mixt with it; whence seldom the Lungs only, but also the other parts of the Body re together affected and ill-nourisht. 11. To these Causes depending sometimes on Cho∣er, somtimes on the Juice of the Pancreas, somtimes on Spittle, somtimes on the Liquor rising from this Ternarie, somtimes on Chyle, somtimes on Lympha ny way vitiated, somtimes on Serous Liquor not se∣arated in the Kidneys, but remaining in the Blood contrary to Nature; and if there be more things which may and are wont to vitiat the Blood, is ascribd the rising of Tubercl's oft observd here and there in the Lungs, and the change of their soft and spongie Substance into a Fleshy, Tumorous, and har∣der, and more solid many ways than is wont, or other∣wise declining from their Natural Consistency. 12. The Nourishment of the Lungs is to be be∣lievd Encreasd, when they keep their natural consi∣stency and manner of substance, and yet grow out too much, and do so fill the Cavity of the Brest, that thereby Inspiration is rather hindred than made dif∣ficult: An Example whereof I have several times had in Dissection after Death. 13. I judg the Cause of this encreasd Nourishment of the Lungs to be partly Their best Constitution; part∣ly the Ʋse of Food most apt to nourish the Lungs, and perhaps the Lungs taken out of younger Living Creatures. 14. The Signs of all these kinds of deprav'd Nou∣rishment of the Lungs may be sought out of other Functions together Deprav'd; and, 1. The Sign of it
more or less Deficient, must be enquir'd after from Re∣spiration, variously deprav'd together with some kind at least of Leanness of the rest of the Body coming up∣on it, and especially after a Suppuration, or Ʋlcer bred in the Lungs, and so a Tisic. 15. II. The Ill Nourishment of the Lungs may partly be known by Respiration Deprav'd, partly by any kind of a Cachexie of the rest of the Body, whose diversity will manifest one only Humor, or together with others peccant. 16. III. Respiration hindred without an evident Cause, there being a laudable Constitution of the rest of the Body, will signifie the Nourishment of the Lungs Encreasd. 17. By such Conjectures I think several Kinds hi∣therto noted by few, of Deprav'd Nourishment of the Lungs, may be distinguisht and manifest from one another. 18. The Nourishment of the Lungs Deficient because of Purulent Blood, or Matter it self in a Pleurisie, or other Inflammations degenerating into an Aposteme, carri'd to them any way, may be Cur'd, partly by con∣veniently Curing the foresaid Diseases, partly by free∣ing the Blood from Matter, partly by taking out of the Lungs the entred harm by Matter. 19. We will propose the Doctrine and Cure of a Pleurisie, and other Inflammations in Chap. 40. 20. Any Antimonial Medicins will free the Blood from Matter perhaps before all others, whether they be Diaphoretic, or Purgers, and Vomiters; which I have often observd, even in a Tisic, and an inveterat great Ulcer of the Lungs, have brought away a good quantity of Matter by Stool and Urine, so that then for many days no Matter was cast forth by a Cough. And that there had been a great Ulcer in the Lungs,
and moreover manifold the Dissection I made of the Body after Death did manifest. 21. The Harm ascrib'd to Matter may be taken out of the Lungs, whether it be a deep Ʋlcer, or only a superficiary Exulceration, both by Vulnerary Decocti∣ons so call'd, and also by any Balsam of Sulphur, and especially that of Anise-Oil more grateful. 22. Let this, or one like it, be a form of an ac∣comodated Vulnerary Decoction for the Lungs in this Case; which, ℞. The Root of Licorish slic'd ℥ i. of Aristolochie ℥ ss. The Leaves of Speedwel, Seabious, Saracens-Comfrey, Ladies-Mantle, Winter-Green, of each Man. i. Raisins of the Sun ston'd ℥ iv. Boil them in Barley-Water in ℥ xxx. of what is Straind, dissolve Syr. of Hyssop, of Oak of Je∣rusalem, of each ℥ i. M. Let the Sick drink ℥ i. or ii. of this Decoction oft in a day; to which one Drop of the mentiond Bal∣sam of Sulphur may be added, or us'd apart in ano∣ther grateful Liquor, twice or thrice daily. 23. I still account the Balsam prepar'd in like man∣ner of the truly Sulphureous and Infameable Flowers of Antimony to be the more excellent, whose great Vertues I have oft experienc'd. 24. The Harm of the Lungs that follows a Sup∣puration, may be Cur'd, either by carrying Matter out of the Cavity of the Brest by a Paracenthesis made in the Brest, or by emptying it out by Stool or Vomit, which I remember was some years since done by a Chirurgion and Empiric living in the Country, by a singular Decoction; by the help whereof, though the Sick being grievously affected in his Brest, and by degrees pining was esteem'd incurable by several Physicians, and famous Chirurgions, yet was he
cur'd most happily in a few weeks, and hitherto hath livd sound; Let none rashly carp or laugh at that (which is commonly done by many conceited) the reason whereof they know not. 25. The Ill Nourishment of the Lungs may be Cur'd divers ways, according to the diversity of the Hu∣mors then together peccant and producing that De∣pravation, always adding those call'd Pectorals, and friendly to the Lungs: We have often before handled every Depravation of the Humors. 26. I doubt how little Knobs arising in the Lungs, and not easily known, unless by conjecture very un∣certain, ought or may be Cur'd, unless perhaps the more fixt Antimonial Medicins can do it, being in∣dued with an universal force of purifying Mans Body from all Harm and Impurity. 27. If any would diminish the Encreasd Nourish∣ment of the Lungs, he ought to use Food somwh thicker, and less spongy, at least Sauces, or Medi∣cins that hinder, stop, or repress (if it be lawful to say so) the too great rarefying of food; such as I think Pearl, Coral, Lacca, Chalk, &c. are, if they be seldom taken in a small quantity.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Perfection of Blood in the Left Ven∣tricle of the Heart Deprav'd. 1. IT is known by the Circular Motion of Blood, that Blood is driven forward to the parts of the Universal Body, and so to the Lungs, (of which we have spoken in the preceding Chapter) out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart: Whence it is not undeservedly askt, Wherein differs each Blood effus'd out of each Ventricle of the Heart? To which I Answer, It differs in this, That, 1. the Blood of the Left Ventricle gets a new Alteration in the Lungs by the Air Inspir'd; And perhaps, 2. somthing may come to the same Blood, either from Spittle, or from another Glandulous Liquor moistning the sharp Arte∣ry, and mixing it self with the Blood together with the Air, and so far also after a certain manner Alter∣ing and Tempering it. 2. And I plainly doubt whether moreover any thing else happen to the Blood in the Left Ventricle of the Heart; nor hitherto do's any notable Sign of it come into my Mind whence I may conclude it. 3. Wherefore I can at present only assert this, That the Blood going through the Artery and Vein of the Lungs, and perhaps the middle substance of the Lungs comes out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart temperd, less hot and rarefi'd, and so more mild than out of the Right, both by the Inspired Air or Spit∣tle, or any other Glandulous Liquor; and that its Per∣fection seems to me to consist in this, That its mani∣fold
Particles first potently Effervescing, or Rarefi'd, and much sundred from each other, now being mild∣ly Temperd and Condensd, do again close more or less slackly, and so they become more apt, as well to Nourish the Containing Body, as to produce several Humors in the Body, and so to preserve Life. 4. Therefore this Perfection of Blood is Deprav'd, chiefly, when the same Blood is too little or too much Temperd, or also is too much Kindled, and Rarefi'd, or otherwise Corrupted by the Air Inspir'd, or the Humors of the Body communicated to it with the same: Of which see what is said in Chap. 21. 5. The Blood may be corrupted by the Inspir'd Air, when it is much defil'd by any Wind, or Exhalations whencesoever proceding and mixt with it, and com∣municates its harm to the Blood carri'd through the Lungs; whence the same harm divers ways infect∣ing the whole Mass, or its greater or less part by de∣grees is somtimes disperst every way, other-times ad∣heres to one part chiefly, and manifests the force of its malignity in it; as we have known it in the Pest, and other Epidemic Diseases for the most part depend∣ing on the Air ill-affected. 6. This Perfection of Blood is also deprav'd by the Humors mixt with it Ascending or Descending, either Choler, or Lympha, or the Liquor arising from that Three-fold Sway in the Guts, or also Chyle so far exceeding in an ill quality, that it cannot again be Temperd Conveniently or Sufficiently by the Inspird Air. 7. We related in Chap. 21. how the most Depra∣vations of Air Inspir'd are to be amended. 8. We intend to tell you how the same Air de∣fil'd and corrupted with a malign Quality ought to be corrected, where we intend to treat of the Pest, and Malign Fevers.
9. Lastly, By what way and means the Humors carri'd with the Blood to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so far corrupting it, that it cannot be e∣nough temperd by the Inspired Air, or other Hu∣mors mixt with it in the Lungs, ought to be restor'd to former integrity, is to be sought out of the Cure propos'd before of every kind of the nam'd Humors ill affected, and still to be propos'd all over. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Motion of the Heart and Arteries, or the Pulse Deprav'd. 1. THe sides of the Ventricles of the Heart are by little and little Distended, and Ʋnfolded by the Blood driven forward into them out of the Veins, and its Earlets, and that partly in Plenty, partly and chiefly by the Rarefaction filling them again because of the Effervescency of it, till the same Blood be pour'd out by their following Straitness into the Ar∣teries annext to them; which therefore are Laid open, as a little after Bound together, and that by a Motion somtimes manifest to Feeling and Sight, which is known among Physicians by the name of the Pulse. 2. For by the Pulse the Physicians understand the two-fold opposite, and contrary, yea reciprocal Mo∣tions of Expansion, and Contraction in the two∣fold parts mentiond according to its Sides or Tuni∣cles: And the Motion of Dilatation and Straitning according to the Cavity of the Ventricles of the Heart and Arteries. 3. We think the Right Ventricle of the Heart is
Displaid, both by the Plenty of the Blood driven in, and by the Largeness of it soon Rarefying by the Ef∣fervescency; and the Left Ventricle by the Plenty of the over-hot and as yet boiling Blood, howsoever more or less temperd in the Lungs by the Air Inspir'd: and Both Ventricles are Straitned by the musculous Sub∣stance of the Heart, contorted wonderfully like a writhd Shell contracted by the Animal Spirits filling its Fibres, after the manner of the other Muscles. 4. We also judge the Arteries are Displaid by the Blood Expelld by the Contraction of the Heart into Them; and the same are again Straitned by the Ani∣mal Spirits filling their annular Fibres, and Narrow∣ing their Cavity. 5. The Pulse is felt by Physicians, not so much in the Heart it self, as in the Arteries, and especially in both Wrists, where they are more manifest to the Sense of Touching: Although the Pulse of the Ar∣teries may be observd also about the Temples, and moreover at the Neck; as the Motion of the Heart, by laying the hand on its Region, chiefly when its Pal∣pitation urges, that cannot be enough distinctly known by the Pulsation of the Arteries, or when a little or no Pulse is felt in the Wrist. 6. The Primary Differences of the Pulse felt in the Wrist may be reduc'd to three chief Heads, the Strength, Greatness and Frequency of the Pulse. For the Swiftness ascrib'd to the Pulse, may indeed be conceivd by the Mind, but not toucht and felt with the Fingers: And Hardness is but seldom found in the Pulse, and always in a Praeternatural State; when as those aforementiond are observd both in a Natural and Non natural Pulse. 7. A Pulse is call'd Strong, when the Artery smites forcibly the Fingers of him that Touches; but
Weak, when it happens only gently and light∣ly. 8. The Pulse is said to be Great, when the Artery is unfolded much, and with a large space; but Lit∣tle, when little and in a narrow space. 9. The Pulse is call'd Frequent, when the expan∣sion and smiting of the Arterie is observd in the same space of Time ofter, then otherwise, or in others; and Rare, when it is less oft, then is wont, or ought to be. 10. The Pulse is call'd Moderat, or Mean, which is the middle between the extrem's of the three fore∣said Differences. 11. A Strong, or Potent, and Valid Pulse is causd by the Animal Spirits plenteously carri'd to the Mus∣culous Substance of the Heart strongly contracting it; whence it is never preternatural upon its own ac∣count, yet somtimes upon the account of the Cause provoking. 12. A Weak Pulse oft follows a Ʋniversal Defect of the Animal Spirits in the Universal Body, at least partly in the Heart it self; somtimes a Sluggishness and Drowsiness, or Unmovableness of the Universal Body. 13. A Ʋniversal Defect of the Animal Spirits is, both because of Defect of the Blood, by a notable Ef∣fusion and Haemorrhagie of it, somtimes by prolonged Hunger: and because of the Effervescency and Rare∣faction of Blood hindred in a Syncope, Hypochondriac Suffocation, &c. whence a Weak Pulse always con∣curs with one Little: And because of the Spirits exhausted with Cares, Hunger, Watchings, or too much Motion or Agitation of the Body: and because of the ill affected Brain being averse to the separation and preparation of the Spirits.
14. The Animal Spirits will be Deficient in the Heart peculiarly, if the Nervs tending to it be wound∣ed; r I seare think that they alone, the others be∣ing well, can become unfit to let the Spirits pass through by any moisture. 15. The Animal Motion of those that walk in Sleep, testifies that Sluggishness and Drowsiness of the Animal Spirits is not always to be found in Sleep, or Drowsiness it self, and the Pulse it self in a grie∣vous Sleepiness oft very Strong: Whence it is mani∣fest that Narcotics, as such, do not so affect the Animal Spirits perhaps, or all the Nerves equally, as the Organs of the external Senses, or the Nerves tending to them. 16. But Sluggishness and Drowsiness is always found in the Animal Motion by Frost, and any vehe∣ment cold of Air, Water, and other things, although we may doubt, whether the Animal Spirits Them∣selves, or rather the Maseles be then indeed and by themselves affected by cold; seeing (unless its Cause be extrem) that Drowsiness of the Parts according to Motion, may be prevented or also overcomd by a vehment agitation of the Body, which could not be, if Drowsiness had seid on the Spirits; which bing, moble and subject to the Government of the ad, the Museles may the easier be freed from Drowsiness by their more plenteous afflux to them  is wnt. 17. A Great Pulse follows an ample and full Rare∣  the Stness of the Arteries concur∣. 18. A  Pulse happens, both by a small Ra∣r  and by the Hardness of the Arterie,  cannot be much displaid. s for its Cause either the , so that it cannot be
enough receivd by the Greatness of the Pulse only; or the Hardness of the Arterie in a mean Rarefaction of Blnd; wh  Gre Pulse is conjoind there to O Frque hre On Little; or any thing else oft pulling the Heart  Cotract it slf. 20. Lastly, A re Pulse haps by a small and slow Rarefaction o Blood. 21. The nty of Animal Spirits follows a due Ʋse of Fod abounding with a Volatil Spirit, and their Fermentation in the Stomch, and Separation in the Gats, and Effervescency in the Heart, and especially, beside the laudable Productions of all the other Hu∣mors, the Separation of the most Spiritous Part com∣pleat in the Brain and Cerebellum: As Their Defect, beside those we mentiond in Sect. 13, 14. all contrary o these fore-mentiond; as is manifest by treating of the nam'd Functions Deprv'd. 22. The Blood Rarefies much, when it is laudable, nd a potent Fire is stird up in the Heart, when the ffervescency is; which yet, when it is too Great, e Blood Rarefies more than enough, and thereupon l, as is wont to be in Burning Fevers. 23. The Blood Rarefies less, or Little, when it is ess fit to rarefie, and more fluid, or viscous then is usu∣l; or a more Sparing Fire is stird up in the Heart, nd not enough to rarefie the Blood suffiintly. 24. The Natural Hardness of the Arteries is to be scrib'd to the Thickness of their Coats; as the Prae∣ernatural is commonly wont to be ascrib'd to the In∣ammation of the Membrans. 25. The Blood Rarefies very much and suddenly, when both it is more fit to rarefie, and a sharper Fire  kindled in it and the Heart. 26. The Heart is Oft or continually pulld to C∣ract it Self, both by and Sharp thing carri'd toge∣ther
with the Blood to it, be it a Sowr, or a Lixivia Salt, or mixt of both, as is Salt Brine; and by any Vaporous or Windy Thing piercing into the Ventricles of  Heart, and a little, but not too much unfold∣ing its Sides, and so indeed, that they may again be contracted; and by any Thing without the Heart, t wit, containd in its Pericardium that corrodes and piks it. So we found a Salt and Sharp Humor thr years agoe in the Pericardium, by which as well the Memorane of the Pericardium, as of the Heart, was corroded and fretted. 27. A Small, and Slow Rarefaction of Blood, pro∣cedes either from Its exceding Viscousness, or from th Fire more sparingly breaking forth in the conflux  both Bloods, or from Both concurring together. Fo it can scarce ever be, that Choler or Lympha shoul be very sharp, the Universal Blood being for som∣time too Viscous; unless in regard of Diet, and esp∣cially of Food, somtimes (holer more Sharp, som∣times Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas m Sowr; somtimes Spittle, and Phlegm be bred m Visus: which easily haps, when Men use Food  many sots, apt to breed one while one, another ti another ill Humor; and moreover use now hot, an cold Air; and besides are immoderat in the Moti of their Bdy and Mind, &c. 28. How the mentind kinds of a deprav'd Pul ought to be Help'd, is not difficult to conclude  what is propos'd here and there. 29. So the other Differences, and Causes of  Deprav'd▪ to wi Ʋtequal, Intermitting, &c. Pu▪ may without difficulty be searcht out from what  ben said. 30. Otherwise, God willing, in the Second Edi∣ti of is rk, w tend more accuratly to ex∣amine,
and explain all these, and enrich them with a notable Addition; And now let us hasten to the Diseases consectary, or accompanying the Pulse De∣prav'd several ways. CHAP. XXVII. Of Fevers in General. 1. IF we observe the manner of Practtioners, and their Signs, (which wholly ought to be in searching out the Nature of hidden or controverted Diseases) from which They and Others are wont to conclude of the presence of a Fever, it will easily be manifest that They argue a Fever from the Only over-Frequent Pulse not natural: But when the certain kind of the Fever is to be determind, and distinguisht from others, Then who but a mere stranger in Practice knows not? that they do attend to more Signs at once. 2. But least we repete here unprofitably, (those hings which we have already publisht in our Two Disputes of Fevers, and may annex them to this or another Book) we will sek out the various Kinds and Differences of manifold Fevers from several Causes of the Pulse over-Frequent, otherwise then naturally, ef∣fecting diversly as sought from daily practice, so again directed to the same. 3. Therefore the Cause of the Pulse beside nature oo Frequent; to wit; having the conjoind, or soon pproaching trouble of the Body, or notable Pain, and so the Weakning of some Function requir'd o the happiness of Natural Life; is either, I. A
permanent and over-Rarefaction of the Blood, made by an over-potent Fire bursting out from the Effervescency of both Bloods. 4. Or, II. Any thing that is Sharp, somtimes Sowr, somtimes Lixivial Salt, somtimes Briny Salt driven forward through the Veins together with the Blood to the Heart, and Internally gnawing the Sub∣stance of the Heart. 5. Or, III. Any Vapor like Windy thing, in like manner carri'd to the Heart, or stird up by the Ef∣fervescency of the same in the Heart, and encreasing the Opening of the Ventricles of the Heart. 6. Or, IV. Any Sharp or Hard thing, being ei∣ther in the Pricar lin, or elswhere, and external∣ly coing or pricking the Heart. 7. You may further Observe, That the Causes of the Pulse more-Frequent beside Nature, doth somtimes affect the Heart by Intervals only, and those somtimes d and certain, somtimes inordinat and uncertain: Whence depends the most notable Distinction and Disin of Fevers into Continual and Intermit∣tin. 8. A Fever is call'd Continual, which remains from the first moment of its Invasion, to the last Moment of its Duration, and its whole Cessation. 9. A Cntinual Fever, when more mild, continues only on day, and is call'd Diaria, and Ephemera; as that which is call'd Diaria of more days, or a Syno∣us not putrid, when it also being more mild, is continu'd a few three or four days. 10. An Intermitting Fever, is that which returns after Intervals, somtimes longer, somtimes shorter in divers Fits. 11. Whence according to the divers Space of every Access or Fit the same gets also divers Names. For if a
new Fit return daily, answering the precedent in proportion, it is call'd a Quotidian; But if it only hap every other day, it is call'd a Tertian; If the Fits return after two days of the intermission, it is call'd a Quartan, and so forward. Although Quin∣tans, Sextans, &c. are seldom observd, yet are they observd somtimes. 12. Beside this double primary Kind of Fevers, there is yet one mixt or compounded of both and in∣deed Continual, yet having some Fits, and again Re∣missions, and that somtimes every day, somtimes the third, somtimes the fourth, whence it is deservedly nam'd, either a Quotidian-Continual, or Tertitan-Continual, or Quartan-Continual Fever. 13. There are moreover Observd Fevers many ways compounded of more Intermitting Fevers. Such are, I. Double, or Triple-Quotidians, as oft as two, or three Fits are produc'd in the same day, successivly answering in a differing proportion. 14. Such are, II. Double, or Triple Tertians con∣sisting of two or three Tertians, whether in a Dou∣ble Tertian two Fits the same day, or one each other day return; or in a Triple Tertian two in one day, one in the other day, or somtimes Three in one day, in the other day no Fit troubles. 15. A Double Tertian returning in divers days, is distinguisht from a Quotidian, both upon the ac∣count of the time of its coming, and by reason of its continuance, and by reason of the Accompany∣ing Symptoms. For when because of all these the First Fit answers to the Third, and this to the Fi, and the Second to the Fourth, and this to the Sixt, and so on, we conclude there is a Double Tertian; and a Single Quotidian, when the First Fit answers to the Second, this to the Third, and so on.
16. A Double Tertian is also argued, when a Single Tertian preceded, returning every other day; which if it afterward return daily, it is wholly to be estem'd a Double Tertian, but not a Single Quoti∣dian. 17. I know there are not wanting Great Physici∣ans, who deny all Quotidian Fevers, and only ad∣mit of Double Tertians, or Triple Quartans, and indeed, at least as much as I can judg, more by Pre∣judice, than certain Experience, or Reason compel∣ling: Which if any consult with an attent Mind, I see not by what right Quotidian Fevers should be excluded from the number of the Rest; as it will be more evident, where we shall propose our Thoughts of the Causes of Intermitting Fevers. 18. Such, III. Compounded of Intermitting Fevers are Doubled, or Triple Quartans. For it haps somtimes▪ that the Sick is free from a Fever only one day, and has new Fits the two following; and then there is no doubt of a Double Tertian. 19. But there also happens, that a new Fit daily returns▪ yet so, that the First answers to the Fourth, and ns to the Seventh; the Second to the Fifth, and this to the Eighth: Lastly, The Third to the Sixth, and this o the Nieth, and so forward; or that of a Single Qrtan one Double be bred, and at length of one Duble a Triple one; whence in like manner it is easily distinguisht from a Single Qotidian, or Double Tertian: A Confirmation whereof is som∣times had from its Cure; if, to wit, one Fit be first taken away, and then the Fits still return both days following, one day of intermission being interpos'd; or if two Fits be taken away, one only remaining and returning any fourth day. That I may now onocal other Symptoms more proper to Quartan
Fevers, and but seldom observable in Tertians or Qartans, and that usually then, when they incline to the nature and likeness of Quartans. 20. Beside these Intermitting Fevers that are or∣derly, and return for the most part at a certain time, unless some Error be committed in Diet, or some Medicin be us'd, there are even others observ'd fre∣quently enough returning and afflicting, somtimes at this, somtimes at that time, and even uncertainly; which therfore who might not fitly name them Inor∣dinat and Wandring? 21. But although the most Fevers are wont to in∣vade the Sick with a greater or less Sense of Cold, Heat somtimes lighter, other-times more grievous succeding it; yet are there not wanting, such as on∣ly Cold, or only Heat, or neither accompanies, ma∣nifest to the Sense, as well of the Sick, as of Physi∣cians, or by-Standers: Let none think, as is com∣monly said, That the essence of every Fever, Consists in Heat encreasd, beside Nature in the Heart, hence di∣sperst through the Ʋniversal Body. 22. None who hath weighd accuratly with an at∣tentive Mind both the Fabric and Ways, or Vessels of the Containing Body, and the natural Motion of the Containd Body, that is, of the Blood, and other Humors, will deny that the Cause of Continual Fevers is requir'd Continual, that is, continually carri'd to the Heart: As on the contrary, the Cause of Inter∣mitting Fevers is not continually, but only by Inter∣vals carri'd thither, and therefore apt to be hindred in its motion to the Heart. 23. Seeing Cold and Heat are deservedly numbred as the chief and more frequent Symptoms among the most of manifold Fevers, we must diligently enquire into the most probable Causes of both, and hence into
the Causes of the Continual Heat after the first Cold overcomd; or both of Cold and Heat returning by In∣tervals; or of Heat stird up only in a divers and de∣terminate time: For those things being lookd into and determind▪ it will not perhaps be very difficult to explain the Fevers, though most divers, and to ex∣tricate the Mind desirous of Truth, from almost in∣finite difficulties to be mov'd by any. 24. That therefore, omitting the Opinions of others, (for I think it behoovs every Man to prove his own) I may in a few words relate, That that seems true even to me, I judg, (I.) That the Cause f every Continual Fever is Choler, or Lympha, (under which I comprehend the Juice of the Pancreas, and so Spittle it Self, in as much as they are carri'd to the Heart) or Both vitious, and raising such an Effer∣vescency in the Right Ventricle of the Heart. whence the Pulse is continually produc'd more freauent. 25. But I deduce Cold observable about the first b∣ginning (if a Continual Fever depend on Choler a∣lone primarily vitiated) from the same vitious Choler, together with the Juice of the Pancreas raiing an Ef∣fervescency vitious in the small Gut, and that such, as somwhat sowr Vapors are carri'd up by the said Juice, and being anon driven every way, breed a light Cold every where, which yet a little after gives place to Heat bred by the same Choler carri'd to the Heart. 26. But if a Continual Fever depend on Lympha alone, primarily vitiated, seeing it follows both the Conglobated Glandul's, and also in part the Conglo∣merated Glandul's, and so the Pancreas it selt ill-affected, what wonder if the Juice of this being made somwhat more Sowr, breed a vitious Efferveseency with Choler in the small Gut, and together send form somwhat sowr Vapors, which being disperst through
the Universal Body, every where stir up a Sense of Cold divers according to its greater or less Harm? 27. But if a Continual Fever depend both on Choler, and on Lympha together vitiated, Cold trou∣bling the Sick about its beginning, is produc'd from the mentiond Causes conjoind. 28. After the preceding Cold somtimes more grie∣vous, somtimes lighter Heat is wont to follow in the most of Continual Fevers, and much greater, and more troublesom from Choler alone primarily peccant, whence therfore Burning Fevers do arise; but much less, and more mild, and somtimes None from Lympha alone primarily peccant, chiefly when much Phlegm together abounds in the Sick, to which Chill Fevers are to be ascrib'd: Lastly, Heat being mean, from both together vitiated, and separating it self again after a certain manner. 29. When the Lympha is vitiated, and the Glandul's that are in the Brain are together much affected; First, A Stoppage of the Head, that is, a Burthen∣som Pain in the Head, (if we follow the proper sig∣nification of Words) is wont to be raisd, and a lit∣tle after both somtimes Coryza, when the Liquor falling down from the Brain distils to the Nostrils; and somtimes an Hoarsness or Cough, when it distils to the Jaws, or Lungs, known by the name of a Catarrh; whence the Fevers then accompanying are wont to be nam'd Catarrhal Fevers. 30. II. I judg the Cause of all Intermitting Fe∣vers to be the Juice of the Pancreas in some part of it, standing still in one r more lateral Passages of the Pan∣creas obstructed, and made sharper by its stay there, and piercing through Phlegm more, or less viscous, the Cause of the noted Obstruction, a way being prepar'd by force by that sowr Acrimony, and effus'd
into the small Gut, and there raising a vitious Esser∣vescency with Choler and Phlegm, and indeed produ∣cing different Cold in the beginning of the Fit, som∣times more grievous, somtimes lighter, somtimes longer, somtimes shorter, till at length (when no more of it retaind against Nature, and so vitiated flows out) the same is overcom'd again (which is usually) by Choler, partly before comprest, and, as it were, supprest, now again being returnd to it slf, part∣ly sliding down continually; whence the Mixture ri∣sing from both and Phlegm, and being carri'd to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, is the Cause of the Heat following, somtimes greater, somtimes less, som∣times none, as Choler and Phlegm are variously af∣fected to the Juice of the Pancreas always at least then in part vitiated. 31. III. I judg the Cause of Fevers compounded of Continual and Intermitting Fevers, and not quite Intermitting but Remitting only, and again stird up both Causes of each, newly mentiond, together con∣curring. 32. IV. I judg the Cause of Continual and Mild Fevers in the mean time stird up about Two Hours after any Food taken in (commonly call'd Hectic Fe∣vers) to be chiefly Spittle vitious, and giving occa∣sion for vitious Chyle because of more Glandul's to∣gether affected; by which Chyle so carri'd to the Heart, the Esservescency being deprav'd, the Pulse is still stird up more frequent then before. 33. In like manner as I judg all Cold in any Fevers to be deriv'd partly and chiefly from the Juice of the Panereas, as swr, and perhaps somtimes also from Lympha, in like manner being more sowr; partly from Phlegm either Insipid or Acid: So I think all Heat is to be attributed to Choler upon the account, both of
its Lixivial Salt and Oil; for Oil is apt to take the force of Fire and keep it; on the contrary, a Sowr Liquor is apt to extinguish it, and again to condense the Oil that was rarefi'd by the Fire; but a Lixivial Salt especially joind with an Oil, as oft as it causes an Esser∣vescency with a Sowr Liquor, produces a notable Heat. And so, when all are moderat and keep their requisite proportion▪ and due manner, the vital Fire is preservd in the Universal Blood by that friendly fight; but it is encreasd, as oft as Choler being very Salt and Oily has Dominion; on the contrary it is diminisht as oft as the power of the Sowr Liquor is greater; Lastly, The same is extinguisht, where the extreme excess is in either, or both of those somwhat Contrary. 34. A Fever may in general be Cur'd; Either, I. By Condensing the Blood too much rarefi'd, and by allaying the over Esservescency of the Blood. 35. Or, II. By Tempering any Sharp, or Sowr, or Lixivial Salt thing found in the Humors and carrid to the Heart. 36. Or, III. By Discussing every Vaporous Windy thing, or by preventing its rising. 37. Or, IV. By taking away every Sharp thing, pulling the Heart on the out-side. 38. Among the Symptoms of Fevers, that are more frequent and primary, Cold, is Corrected by Medicins that temper the Sowr Humor, and amend Insipid Phlegm; and Heat, by Medicins that mitigate the Lixivial Salt, and condense the Oil. 39. An Obstruction of the Passages of the Pancreas, may be Cur'd by loosering, at least by removing viscous Phlegm out of its preternatural place, and by carrying it out by Vomit, Stool, Ʋrin, or Sweat. 40. And by what Means and Remedies all these may be performed, will not be difficult from what is
above-said, and will yet be more evident from the peculiar Cure of the several kinds of Fevers to be propos'd hereafter. CHAP. XXVIII. Of a Fever of One Day. 1. THat we may not seem rather to confound Students busied in the reading of Classic Au∣thors, than help, we will treat in order the Kinds of Several Fevers, as they are commonly distinguisht and propos'd. 2. Therefore let us begin at the Diarian Fever, which is either of one day, and scarce continues the space of 24 hours, call'd Ephemera; or continues two, three, or four days, call'd by certain Diaria of More days, and a single, pure, or not putrid Sy∣nochus. 3. A Diaria is wont somtimes to begin with a light shivering, testifying a little Cold accompanying or preceding; somtimes without it, and chiefly when the Universal Body by degrees is so far heated by some Non-natural Thing, that at length a little Fever is stird up, wherein Heat in the Heart and Blood doth not so much begin to be encreasd, as to degenerate out of a more encreasd Non-natural Heat, into a Preterna∣tural Heat, which besides may deprave other Functi∣ons, and produce a Pulse more Frequent then is Natu∣ral, and although its Cause b taken away or mode∣rated, yet remaining longer than is wont with greater or less trouble of him that is Sick. 4. Heat in a Diarian Fever, following a Shivering,
or stird up without it any way, is wont neither to intermit, nor to be made more intense by any new Fits, but uses to persist continual to the end, and re∣main in an Ephemera, as also a Synochal Homotonus or Aemastic, so call'd, usually in the same degree; as gradually to decrese in a Paraemastic, and in an Epaemastic perpetually to increase, till at length it again case by degrees. 5. The same Heat is gentle, mild, and vaporous in an Ephemera, the Skin remaining soft and moist: In a Synochus somwhat greater, yet not sharper when the Blood, and other Humors are temperat; but sharper, when the Blood is more sharp by Choler or Lympha, a little sharper than is natural, declining a little to the nature and manner of those call'd Pu∣trid. 6. The Causes of all Diarian Fevers, are the Six Non-natural Things, so call'd, vitiously us'd, and therefore soon manifest. 7. The observable Symptoms in Diarian Fevers, beside the over-frequent Pulse are divers according to the diversity of the noted Causes, either Alone or Adjoind. 8. For when a Diarian Fever is rais'd, by the alone Heat of Air, to be ascrib'd either to the Sun, or Fire, or Bath, no Shivering is observ'd, but Heat alone, and that by degrees more and more encreasd in the Body, till at length being made Preternatural, testi∣fies the presence of a Fever, not only by the Pulse greater and more frequent then is wont, but also by the Pain and Pulsation of the Head, and such like Symptoms anon to be recited. 9. If Cold of Air, or any other thing come upon the Body hot, what way soever, whence a Diarian Fever is raisd, a light Shivering will precede the
greater Heat soon after following; and then in the beginning indeed the Pulse will be little, but anon greater, and conjoind to both more frequent, other Symptoms also happening. 10. So when a Diarian Fever is raisd by strong, that is, very Spiritous, and especially Aromatic Drink taken in too much quantity, a Shivering will scarce ever precede the Heat continually encreasd, and at length made Preternatural and Feverish, and not on∣ly manifest by a greater and more frequent Pulse, but by a Heat moreover troublsom, and by other Symp∣toms. 11. When a Diarian Fever, is bred by an over-agi∣tation, weariness, and more vehement Motion, the Pulse is observd, not only more frequent, but more∣over weak, beside a universal and troublesom weariness of the whole Body. 12. But when a Diarian Fever is caus'd by the Passions or Motions of the Mind, it owns Anger for its Cause, and then the Pulse is not only more frequent and greater, but moreover unequal and troubled; as, when it is bred by a sudden Sorrow▪ it is Little, Weak, and Ʋnequal, and about the beginning of its approach Rare, and a little after more Frequent; in both Cases with a more sharp Heat, and a light driness of the Skin. 13. When a Diarian Fever arises from Watchings prolongd, and Cares, a Frequent, Little and Weak Pulse is wont to be a present Companion, with a dry∣er Heat of Body, and Pain of the Head, carrying be∣fore it the Sense, somtimes of Weight, other-times of being Void, or of Emptiness. 14. All the Symptoms of Diarian Fevers, use not a little to vary, according to the various Constitution of the mentiond Causes, and of the Body both
Continent, and especially Containd, that is, of ma∣nifold Humors. 15. But the most Frequent Symptoms in the Dia∣an Fevers are, a light Shivering preceding, Heat som∣what more grievous following. Thirst somtimes greater, somtimes less. Somtimes a manifest Bitter∣ness of the Mouth, somtimes none. Ʋnquietness and Weariness of the Ʋniversal Body, & especially the Lims more or less troublesom. A grievous Head-Ach, with a notable Pulsation. Watchings prolongd, or an over deep Sleep. A more stird Respiration. An over∣frequent, and together somtimes greater and strong enough Pulse, somtimes Less and Weak; seldom Ʋnequal. The Veins turgid. The Skin for the most part foft and moist, seldom harder and dryer. The Face red and tumid. Ʋrine in the Ephemera scarce chang'd from its natural state; in the Diaria of more days more of a reddish colour. Sweat breaking forth, somtimes sooner, somtimes later, not ill smeld, nor troublesom to the Sick, seldom none. 16. A Diarian Fever is not dangerous of its own nature, whence it is terminated somtimes of its own accord with Sweat or Moistness for the most part; other-times it is overcom'd by an easie Art: But the danger to be feard, is either because of the vitious Con∣stitution of the Body, especially Containd, affected, by reason whereof it may degenerate into others, both call'd Putrid, and the Hectic, or because of a new Error committed in some part of Diet, or in Medicins whilst it continues, because of which it may in like manner be chang'd into the named kinds of other Fe∣vers, or other more grievous Diseases. 17. The Cure of Diarian Fevers is not difficult, seeing that the most go away of their own accord by a Sweat: But when the Physician is call'd for a Cure,
as at other times always, so also here the Cure is to be Vari'd according to the variety of the Causes; the vari∣ous Constitution of the Body, as well Containing, as espe∣cially Containd; and the Symptoms most urging. 18. When therfore the alone heat of Air hath pro∣duc'd it; the same is to be chang'd with more tempe∣rat, at least to be temperd with cold Water or Vine∣gar pourd on the Floor, with Watry and Sowr Plants, Lettice, Sorrel, Vine-Leaves, &c. disperst through the Chamber of the Sick: And for him that is Feverish together Thirsting, let the following Ju∣lap, or one like it, be taken by intervals. ℞ Carduus-Water ℥ vi. Sorrel-Water ℥ ii. Syr. of Red Poppies ℥ i. Sp. of Nitre vi. drops. M. Let the Sick be moderatly coverd to promote a Sweat mildly, and together to remove the Fever. 19. If Cold of Air, or any other thing come upon the heated Body, and by reason of this, a lighter per∣haps, or more grievous Obstruction in the Vessels any where, and the Standing still of what is Containd, and hence other more grievous Evils be feard to follow, you may profitably mix a Scruple of the Volatil Salt prepar'd of Harts-Horn, of Salt Armoniac, or of any such-like with the foresaid Julap, and use it at seve∣ral times. 20. If a Diarian Fever be raisd by Strong Drink too plenteously us'd, the Cure may be Instituted by Drink somwhat Sowr▪ the Julap newly prescrib'd, or the following Tincture of Roses, which ℞ Barley-Water ℥ xxx. Rose-Water ℥ i. Flowers of dried Red-Roses ℥ i. Oil of Sulphur made  Campanam, what suffices for a grateful aci∣y. Infuse them in a Glass Vessel clos'd, and in a warm place t trat the Tincture of a pleasing Red Colour;
to what is Streind, add Syr. of Jujubs ℥ iii. M. By the moderat use of this most grateful Tincture, the Heat bred against Nature in the Blood and Uni∣versal Body, may by degrees be allayd, and the Fever joind with it be removd soon, safely, and plea∣singly. 21. If a Diarian Fever be raisd by too much Moti∣on and Weariness of the Body, the Animal Spirits con∣sum'd more than enough, are to be repair'd with Spiri∣tous Drink, yet so, that the Heat conjoind to the Bo∣dy be not encreasd, but rather together diminisht. To this end I mention the following Mixture to be us'd by spoonfuls by short intervals. ℞ Water of Line-Tree-Flowers, of Betony, of Fenel, of each ℥ ii. Sp. of Wine reciifi'd, or A∣qua Vitae of Matthiolus ℥ i. ss. Sp. of Salt dul∣cifi'd ℈ i. Julap of Roses  i. M. 22. When the Diarian Fever is raisd by over-vehe∣ment Anger, beside those things which make the Mind chearful, I commend the following Mixture, which may correct Choler together mov'd and made over∣sharp, and may allay the Feverish Heat depending on it, if moreover it be taken by spoonfuls. ℞. The Water of Plantane, Lettice, Sorrel, of each ℥ i. Cinamm-Water ℥ ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ ss. Syr. of Diacodium ℥ i. M. 23. If the Commotion of Mind remain vehement, it will be profitable to add gr. ii. r iii. of Laudanum to the aforesaid Mixture, whereby the Body may the sooner be reduc'd to Sleep, and the Mind to Tran∣quillity. 24. When on the contrary, a Diarian Fever arises from a sudden and grievous Sorrow, for its Cure toge∣ther with wholsome counsel apt to comfort and raise the Mind, I commend this following Mixture, which
is wont to amend the Tart Juice bred or encreasd in all grievous Sorrow, and together renew the then Vitiated and Feverish Effervescency of Blood in the Heart. ℞. Penny-royal, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Our Carminative Sp. or Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae ℥ ss. Laudanum 2 Gr. Sp. or Volatil Salt of Salt Armoniac ℈ i. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. M. Give a Spoonful of it oft, till Sleep glently come, at least the Sick be better, and less molested about the Midrif, where unspeakable anxieties are wont al∣ways to urge in a grievous Sorrow. 25. When a Diarian Fever arises from prolongd Watchings for its Cure, Sleep is to be mildly promo∣ted, both by removing the Causes of Watchings, and by disposing the Body to Sleep by this Emulsion, or one like it. ℞. Cleansd Barley boiid till it crack ℥ i. ss. the Seeds of White Poppies ʒ ss. With the Decoction of the same Barley, Make it an Emulsion to ℥ xv. ad∣ding Syr. of White Popies ℥ i. Fenel, or Rose-Water ℥ i. ss. M. Let him that is Feverish often drink a Draught of this Emulsion till he get Sleep. Which if it come not so, ii. or iii. Gr. of Laudanum may safely be added to the same Emulsion, and then Sleep may be pro∣duc'd more easily and potently; which coming they must abstain from farther use of the Emulsion, unless the same being interrupted, necessity of farther using it return. 26. When a Diarian Fever is raisd by Cares en∣roding the Mind▪ and beside Watchings, making com∣monly all the Humars Sharper, I commend the Mix∣tme which I gave in Sorrow of Mind, producing a Diarian Fever, for Young Beginners in curing this Fever also.
27. We admonisht, not without cause, in Sect. 17. that its Cure is to be vari'd according to the variety of the Humors occurring in any Sick of a Diarian Fe∣ver. 28. When therefore a Plethora of Blood is observd in such an one Feverish, it will be advisedly done to let out so much of it by a Vein opend, as can be taken out without harm or swouning. For although Blood let even to Swouning, doth not always ill saccede; yet because somtimes and oft enough its great Eva∣cuation made suddenly, hath brought many Evils to several Sick People, I always prefer its repeted less diminution, as the matter and need requires, som∣times instituted in the same day: least when we would soon cure, we cure not safely enough; seeing it is soon enough, if well enough, and safely enough: Which Observation I only commend to Younger Physicians. 29. It matters little whether the Vein opend be in the Arm, or Hand, or in the Foot, or in any other place; unless perhaps one place be preserd by the Sick: Or in Women one part is to be chosen before another, because of the Monthly Couses either at hand, or hindred; and One Vein may be opend saf∣lyer or more easily than another: All which I would have accuratly observd every where by Physicians and Chirurgeons. 30. When Choler is plenteous in the Body, let it be diminisht safely by a mild Cholagogue, and espe∣cially in the form of a Loosening Decoction or Ju∣p, adding together those things that may temper the Feverish Heat; For Example; ℞. The Root of Succory ℥ i. the Root and Herb of Dandeleon M. ii. the Leaves of Sorrel M. i. Ta∣marinds ℥ i. ss. Bil them in Barley-Water, ad∣ding
to ℥ xx. of what is Straind, Syr. of Suc∣cory with Rhubarb ℥ ii. ss. M. Or, ℞. Barley-Water ℥ xii. Fenel or Cinamon-Water ℥ ss. Syr. of Succory with Rhubarb ℥ ii. Sp. of Vitriol, what suffices for a grateful Aci∣dity. M. Let the Sick take oft a Draught of this prescrib'd Decoction or Julap, till the Body be made more so∣luble; and then cease from farther using it, un∣less it become over-costive; for then some of either of them may be taken again. 31. When Choler is not so Much, as it is Sharp, Altering Medicins, and especially Sowr Things are to be taken in Drink, and chiesly those that are wont also to promote Sweat, Distild Vinegar, either single, or compounded together with others added to it be∣fore distillation, whither I refer the Alexipharmio Water of Amsterdam, and the Preservative Water much more grateful; for Anno. 1655. to escape the Plague, we together with Dr. Franciscus vander Schagen, and Dr. Paul Barbette, famous Physicians, took care that beside other things prepar'd by common Counsil at Amsterdam, it should be made for the sake and good of the Sick) whose Form therefore I think fit to add here. An Excellent Preservative Water. ℞. Angelica, Zedoary-Root, of each ℥ i. Butter-Bur-Root ℥ ii. The Leaves of Garden-Rue ℥ iv. Of Balm, of Scabious, Marigold-Flowers, of each ℥ ii. Ʋnripe Walnuts cutlb ii. New Pome-Citrons cutlb i. Beat them all together, then pour onlb xii. of the best Wine-Vinegar, distild by it self to three fourth parts in Sand in a Glass Cu∣curbit.
Digest them all Night, in the Morning distil them with a slow Fire of Ashes almost dry, and that without burning. This Vinegar, of great strength and most grate∣ful, is to be kept for Use. 32. It may be mixt with ordinary Drink, Beer, a Decoction, Broth, &c. to a grateful acidity for any that is Sick, often us'd in a small quantity to take away Thirst, and to promote a mild Sweat. 33. When there is a rational fear, or some more manifest signs appear, that Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas is over-Sowr in the Body for preceding Causes, a sharp Cold of Air sufferd, many Sowr things long us'd, a continu'd Sorrow of Mind, and such-like, it may be commodious to use the Volatil Salts of Harts-Horn, Salt Armoniac, or others more benign, (that both temper Sowrness, and mildly dis∣pose the Body to Sweat) together with Food in Wine, or any other ordinary Drink. 34. When a Diarian Fever siezes on a Man, in whom Phlegm is found peccant, either in plenty, or viscousness, or saltness, then should endeavour be made, that when it is over-much it be diminisht, be∣ing viscous it be cut, being salt it should be temperd, and so many Evils feard that otherwise would follow, may be shund; and that by Medicins oft propos'd and mentiond before. 35. Medicins that are more mild, and more tem∣perd, are to be us'd among Delicate People, and such as have a more tender Constitution of Body: Among Stronger People, stronger Medicins. 36. A more mild Thirst, and only following Heat may be remov'd, especially by watry and somwhat sowr things; as the same when more grievous, and owning the Acrimony of Choler encreasd, or such a
like cause will need more sowr things; of which see Sect. 18, 20, 22, & 31. 37. When Bitterness of the Mouth urgeth, they will avail that mildly carry out Choler by Stool, of which we spake in Sect. 30. 38. Those things that Cure Ʋnquietness, or Wea∣riness of Body, are propos'd in Sect. 21. 39. They will take away the Head-Ake, and its Pulsation, and Watches, which are had in Sect. 22. and 25. To which may be added, among External Things, Epithems, or the following Liniment. ℞. Betony-Water ℥ ii. Rose-Water ℥ i. Marigold-Vinegar ʒ vi. Opium of Thebes ℈ ss. M. for an Epitheme. Which being warm, with a Cloth dipt in it, cover both all the Forehead, and especially the Region of the Temples; and as oft as the Cloaths are found dry, presently moisten them in like manner with the same, till Pain be lessend and Sleep follow. 40. Prepare a Liniment of these, or such-like; ℞. Ointment of Poplars ʒ ii. Opium of Thebes, dis∣solvd in Oil of Roses ℈ i. M. for a Liniment. Wherewith anoint each Region of the Temples, and spread it on a brown Paper, and apply it thither. 41. Those things that are containd in Sect. 21. and especially 24. will diminish deep Sleep, if you omit Laudanum. 42. When more Symptoms concur, it will not be very hard, from what is aforesaid, to frame or joyn such helps as may conduce to the same.
CHAP. XXIX Of Synochal, commonly call'd Containing Fevers. 1. THe Fevers that some call Putrid, to distinguish Diarian and Synochal Fevers not putrid, so call'd by them, of which we have treated in the for∣mer Chapter; the most distinguish into Continual and Intermitting Fevers; as again them into Containing, or Synechals, and Continuals, in special so call'd, or Synechals. 2. It matters little that Synochos is an unknown word to the Antient Greeks and Hippocrates, and Continual and Containing is among the Latins us'd for the same; because, where divers Things occur, or are feign'd, which are destitute of distinct names, we may, yea it becoms us moreover to distinguish from one another the terms of their Origination and Signification, for a more distinct Doctrin's sake, and use every one enough explaind before in a diverse Sense. 3. Therfore they call those Synoch{ou}̂s, or Contain∣ing Fevers, which continue without any Fit to their last and compleat ceasing; but Synechὲιs, or Conti∣nuals, have the general name of Fevers; which al∣though they always persist to the end, yet do they daily, or every third or fourth day undergoe some Fit: I will examine them in this, these in Chap. 31. as Intermitting Fevers in the next following. 4. I said the Cause of Containing Fevers in Chap. 27. Sect. 24. was in my judgment somtimes Choler,
somtimes Lympha, and they that flow together with Lympha, somtimes both together ill affected, raising such an Effervescency in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, whence continually the Pulse is bred more fre∣quent against Nature. 5. Who therefore could not unfitly distinguish these Containing or Synochal Fevers, upon the account of their diverse Cause, into Choleric and Lymphatic Fevers. 6. And because under the general name of Lym∣pha we do not only comprehend that Lympha, which goes from the Conglobated Glandules, and also from other Parts to the Heart; but moreover the Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle it self, proceding from the Conglomerated Glandules, and so the Liquor that is to arise from the Three-fold Sway of the Guts, all mixt together with Lympha with the Descending Blood; Lymphatic Fevers may be subdivided into Glandular, Pancreatic, and Salivary Lymphatic Fevers. 7. All these Fevers may differ somthing according to the divers Constitution of other Humors together being in the Body. 8. I judg that Burning Fevers are chiefly produc'd by Choler; and Fevers coupled with acute Pains, and Prickings of the Head and Lims from the Glandu∣lous Lympha; as from the Juice of the Pancreas any joind with gripes and prickings of the Belly; lastly, from the Spittle, those which are observd troublesom with anxieties and distensions of the Stomach, and the parts near it. But as oft as several Humors of those mentiond are together vitiated, so oft the Symptoms of more are wont to concur together, as moreover the same occur more glentle then is wont, by the mu∣tual tempering of the Humors peccant. 9. Choler at that time is wont to be peccant, either
with a Lixivial Salt Acrimony only, or moreover with an Oily Infameableness. Whence there indeed the encreasd Heat is observd sharper, here together great∣est. The Pulse there other things considerd is more frequent, here together greater. The Ʋrin there thicker, here beside more colourd. Thirst is there very troublesom, here insatiable. The Tongue is there dry, here together cloven or black. 10. The Lympha of all, or at least the most Con∣globated Glandul's being more sharp and sowr, and raising a Feverish Effervescency in the Right Ventri∣cle of the Heart, breeds an Heat more corroding then great, and every where troublesom with Gripings. 11. The same Lympha becoming more sharp, and salt Brine, or together Acid, in the Glandul's of the Head especially, beside a stoppage, or burthensom pain of the Head, and hence the Coryza, or Hoarsness, or a Cough afterward following, is wont to produce the Catarrhal Fever so call'd, acompani'd with Heat, not so vehement and intense as gnawing and sharp. 12. In every Lymphatic Fever, a light shivering oft troublesom is present and urgeth. The Pulse is fre∣quent more then great. The Ʋrin is voided died and red for the most part, but soon after troubled, grow∣ing yellow, or white, and seems to let fall much manifold-settling, according to the various constitu∣tions of the Humors; a grievous and pricking wea∣riness uses to possess the Lims. 13. The Juice of the Pancreas being all of it diver∣sly vitiated and made over-sharp, and breeding a Con∣taining Fever, manifests it self both with Anxieties about the Midrif, and Gripes of the Belly, and Prick∣ings, or bloody Purgings, or sharp Pain coupled, as also by the Pulse frequent chiefly, and inclining to littleness and weakness; and afterward unequal, with
the Appetite somtimes dejected, somtimes encreas'd; with Thirst more rarely urging; with Ʋrin common∣ly crude and watry. 14. The Spittle breeding a Containing Fever, is wont to be peccant with encreasd Viscousness; whence it is perceivd more mild and soft, the Appetite being commonly dejected, and a burthensom Pain following the taking in of Food, somtimes a Distension and puffing up of the Stomach and Guts happening; and soon after Wheazing, or Difficult Respiration, and sleepiness; together with the frequencie of the Pulse encreasd, one or two hours after Food taken in, again by degrees remitting; and therefore this Salivary Fever hath great affinity with that call'd Hectic, if it be not a lighter Kind of it, or at least always coupled with the Hectic. 15. They will less wonder or contemn these new Distinctions and Names of Containing Fevers, who being free from all prejudice, accuratly attend to all the observable Symptoms and Depravations of the Humors peccant in several Feverish People, and neg∣lect not the new Anatomical Inventions of this Age; as when compar'd with Chymical Changes, afford a wonderful Light to the intricate Doctrine of Fe∣vers, to be extricated easier and more happily. 16. We have taught you before from what kind of Non-natural Things the aforesaid depravations of Cho∣ler, Lympha, the Juice of the Pancreas and Spittle do arise, so that it seems needless to stay longer here about them, seeing they may and ought to be re∣quir'd thence. 17. But any Studious of Truth may ask, How Heat troublesom, though diverse in these Synochal Fevers, is bred from so diverse Causes? 18. That to my ability I may endeavour to satisfie
this just Question, I judg, I. That Feverish Heat is bred properly, and by it self, of Choler both over-sharp and fat, in as much as it raising an Effervescency both in the small Gut with the Juice of the Pancreas, and in the Right Ventricle of the Heart with Lympha, whence soever flowing drws forth of it self, not on∣ly more particles of Fire, wherewith it abounds, but again receivs their greatest part then breaking forth every where with its Oily Parts, and indeed anon mx, more exactly with the Blood in the Heart, whence the same rarefies more then is wont, and in like mannr every where communicates a greater Heat, with a greater and more frequent Pulse. 19. II. I judg that feverish Heat is accidentally bred by the over-sowr Lympha of the Conglobated Glan∣dul's, in as much as it raising an Effervescency in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, with Choler mixt with the Blood Ascending, assaults it sharper then usual, and so changes or corrupts it, that is, frees or de∣prives it of its viscousness, that the fiery Particles break forth then more plenteously, from which a sharper and more fretting Heat is raisd by its mixing with a sowr Liquor, and it not a little varying in certain Circumstances, according to the diverse Con∣stitution of the other parts of the Blood with a Pulse more frequent indeed, but seldom together greater, but oft rather Less. 20. III. I likewise think that Feverish Heat is ac∣cidentally bred by the Juice of the Pancreas wholly over-sowr, in as much as Choler is not only too much al∣terd and broken by it in the small Gut, but the Mix∣ture arising from the confusion of Both, and of the Salivary Phlegm being more sowr then is wont, when it com's with Lympha to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, rises anon more potently against the rest of
Choler ascending together with the Blood, and after its natural Viscousness is diminisht, stirs up a sharp Effervescency with it hurtful to the Body, whence likewise not so great, as sharp Heat breaks forth, and that according to the diverse difference of the whole Mass of Blood in some, the present Pulse being al∣ways over-frequent, and as to greatness Little or Mean, seldom great, unless Choler together be very Sharp. 21. For, IV. as oft as Choler is found sharp and oily enough in the Body, either Natural or Non-natu∣ral, (that is, by reason of the use of a Non-natural Thing, as Summer Air, or Strong Drink, &c. con∣tinu'd a while) and yet not depraving any Function, and the Acidity of Lympha, or of the Juice of the Pancreas, or of Both both be suddenly and so far en∣creasd by a Non-natural Thing, as the over-cold Air, or sowr Drink, to wit, Rhenish-Wine, &c. that thereby a Synochal Fever be bred, no wonder if Heat, not only sharper, but together greater, be then stird up by over-sharp, and together over-fat Choler concur∣ring, and a most frequent Pulse be joind with one greater, but not the greatest. 22. But, V. when Spittle is peccant with such a Viscousness, whence not only the Fermentation of Food is less commodious, but moreover usually two hours af∣ter they are taken in, the Pulse being now frequent, becoms still for some space more frequent, with Heat, seldom indeed manifest or troublesom to the Sick, yet somtimes notable to By-standers and Physicians, beside the encreasd redness of the Cheeks; I judg that that Change haps, both as to the Pulse over-frequent, both continually, and yet more after Food taken in, and as to any kind of Heat then together observable, in as much as Spittle tending to the small Gut, the
Stomach being empty, doth so vitiate the Effervescency of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, that a Li∣quor proceding from these three, is not only dull'd, but moreover Vapors somwhat flatulent arise from it, and indeed more plenteous and more volatil, when the most fluid Part of Food slides down to the Guts, usually two hours after it is taken in. Which Va∣pors being carri'd to the Heart, both provoke it to a more frequent Contraction of it self, and being carri'd every way together with the Blood, breed an Heat not so great indeed, or very sharp, or grievous and troublesom to the Sick, yet coupled with driness of the Skin enough manifest, had for a sign of Heat en∣creasd; and with redness of the Cheeks, according to their notable oft encreasd plenty and volatility; whilst in the mean time a more frequent Pulse indeed, and little and weak enough is observd; the Leanness of the whole Body concurring and daily encreasd, by reason of the Blood made daily over-viscous and un∣fit to nourish the Body. 23. And now we have reduc'd all Synochal Fevers upon the account of their Causes, that are wont to be notably peccant in Mans Body to the four primary Differences, we think fit to consider, and here weigh in a few words also some of their Differences taken from the more grievous Symptoms eft accompanying them, after the Example of Famous Practitioners, and chiefly Great Platerus: not mentioning farther a Catarrhal Fever, of which we spake in Sect. 11. 24. And the first place will we give to a Burning Fever, among the Greeks , so call'd, from its exceding heat and burning most urging: Which exceding Heat, because it is observd, not only in Continuals, Synechals, that have a Fit returning every other day, but also in Containing, Synochal
Fevers, we deservedly mention here a Burning Fever. To which no wonder if a dry Thirst, which you can scarce quench, be a present Companion. 25. Some give the second place to a Fever call'd Leipyrias, in which all the time of the Disease the External Parts are cold, while the Internal Parts burn. 26. These Fevers challenge the third place, that chiefly are troublesom with Heat, and an obscure red∣ness of the Jaws, whence the Tongue also is not only Dry, by ting'd with a blackish red Colour. This Dis∣ease, by reason of the said Colour, is call'd Breune, as well among the Dutch, as Germans, and is oft Epidemical. 27. The Fourth place we give to Raving Fevers, so call'd, because of a grievous Raving, (such as is oft observd in many Fevers) somtimes inclining to raging, which happens to the Sick in a few days space, and doth not a little trouble the By-standers; chiefly when such Fevers are Epidemical, and at length kill the Sick, Convulsions coming upon them. Constant Watchings use to accompany them, and a great Pain in the Head is wont to precede a Raving. 28. Wasting Fevers, so call'd, may take the Fifth Place, in which the Body is wont in a short time to be consum'd and grow lean. 29. In the Sixth Place we will mention Malign Fevers, suddenly dejecting the Vital Strength, with∣out manifest Causes and Reasons, and unexpectedly killing the Sick; which for the most part are also wont to be epidemical. They also have the other Symptoms more mild usually then is wont, beside a weaker Pulse. But of these we intend particularly to treat in Chap. 33. 30. I. Choler both primarily, and only peccant,
not only in a Salt Acrimony, but moreover in a very inflameable Oiliness, is the Cause of a Burning Syno∣chal Fever: Wherefore the greatest Pulse is wont to concur, beside one over-frequent, and in the begin∣ning at least strong enough, together with troublesom Watchings, and an obstinate Thirst. 31. II. Because I do not remember that I ever observd the Leipyrian Fever, therfore I the more hesi∣tate in assigning its true Cause; especially seeing those things do not satisfie, which others bring rather from their Prejudices,I my self have once lately ob∣servd such a Fever. then from those things that ought to be observd in the Sick, and so be propos'd. 32. Yet if ever, of which I much doubt a Lei∣pyrian Fever be Synochal, and I may conjecture somthing of its Cause, I think that it then consists of a Double Fever, Choleric and Pancreatical, and so in∣deed that such-like Vapors may be continually raisd in the small Gut by the Juice of the Pancreas, univer∣sally over-sowr, which may be confus'd only with the Mass of Blood, and breed a Sense of Cold in the ha∣bit of the Body, whilst a burning Heat is stird up in the Internal Parts by a Fever, due to Choler more oily then sharp. 33. III. The Cause of a Fever having an obscure red Colour of the Tongue and Jaws accompanying, seems to be Choler both over-sharp and fat, chiefly hurtful to Spittle, and the Glandulous Liquor of the Jaws, and more closely adhering to them, where it is ex∣pir'd in the form of a Vapor, together with the Air; wherefore beside the troublesom heat of the Univer∣sal Body, the Lips also somtimes are cloven and ex∣ulcerated, yea loaden with filthy Scabs. 34. But wherein that peculiar Constitution of
vitiated Choler consists, by which it is more adverse to the Mouth, and Humors carried thither, then to others; hitherto I cannot determine, unless it come by the Oiliness of Choler. 35. IV. The Cause of Raving Fevers, so to be call'd, from a notable and grievous Raving accom∣panying, at least for some days, is Choler peccant, both in a Salt Acrimony more, and an encreasd Oiliness less, that so diminishes the viscousness of the Juice of the Pancreas, which therfore causing a vitious Effer∣vescency with it being made sharper, makes an Hu∣mor not much unlike black Choler, from which toge∣ther with Watchings, the Head-Ake, hence Raving, at length a Convulsion, and lastly, Death it self is pro∣duc'd. 36. V. The Cause of a speedily Wasting Fever is Choler, quickly bringing such a Constitution to the Blood, by which the same becoms unfit what way soever to nourish the Body, and yet needing more plenty of Food, because of the Feverish Consumpti∣on of several parts. 37. But wherin that Ʋnfitness of the Blood to nou∣rish consists, whether it be bred of one sort only, or manifold in several Men, those things that hitherto are communicated to me, or observd by me, are not sufficient, whence I may give the solution of this Doubt. 38. And now having offerd the most Differences of Synochals, both according to their various Causes, and the more noted and grievous Symptoms accom∣panying them, the next thing is, that at length we subjoin to their Causes, a Method of Curing every one of them, agreeing both with Reason and Experience, and therfore Dogmatical. 39. I. Therfore a Synochal Choleric Fever may be
Cur'd; 1. By Correcting the Salt Sharpness of Choler, chiefly by more temperd Acids, the dulcifi'd Spirit of Salt, &c. 2. By Amending the Inflameable Oiliness of Choler, by somwhat harsh Acids, Sempervive the greater, Plantane, &c. 3. By iminishing Choler, if it be observd never so little to abound, (which is usual) by Cholagogues, but more mild and a little sowr, or joind with Acids, the Creme or Crystals of Tartar, Salt of Tartar Vitriolated, &c. and that soon in the beginning, or after that by the help of Altering Medicins, Choler being over-intirely joind with the Blood, begins to be again separated from the same, and made fit to be totally voided: which is chiefly to be expected from Acids oft mention'd, but more mild, or artificially temperd. 40. Among Compound Medicins for correcting the salt sharpness of Choler, the following Decoction oft to be us'd in a day in a small quantity and warm may conduce. ℞. The Root and Leavs of Sorrel M. ii. The Leavs of Strawberries, Violets, of each M. i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind; Syr. of the Juice of Citrons ℥ iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ ss. M. 41. To Amend the Oily Inflameableness of Choler, the following Decoction may be prescrib'd in like manner to be us'd. ℞. Plantane Root ℥ i. The Leavs of Sempervive the greater, Purlan, of each M. i. Boil them in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is Streind; Syr. of Purslan ℥ iii. Oil of Sulphur prepar'd Per Campanam, what suffices for a grateful Aci∣dity. M. 42. To separate Choler again from the Blood, be∣ng over-intirely mixt with it, the following De∣coction
may conduce, being us'd after the same man∣ner as the former. ℞. The Root of Dandeleon, with its Leavs M. ii. The Herb of Fumitory M. i. Boil them in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is Straind sim∣ple Syr. of Succory ℥ iii. Salt of Tartar Vitriola∣ted ʒ i. M. 43. Lastly, To diminish or empty out Choler Loosned from the Blood by the preceding Decoction, or a Me∣dicin like to it, and dispos'd to be voided out gradu∣ally and mildly together with the rest abounding, or turgid in its Bag, the following Decoction to be ta∣ken twice or thrice a day warm to ℥ iii. or iv. may serve, beside others, both single and compounded, oft noted before. ℞. Succory-Root ℥ ii. Endive-Leavs M. ii. Da∣mask-Rose-flowers M. i. Creme of Tartar, or Crude Tartar ʒ ii. Boil them in a glaz'd Ear∣then Vessel in pure Water; adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of Succorie with Rhubarb ℥ iii. M. 44. Yet because of the Cure of Fevers arising from Choler any way peccant, it suffices not to direct their Cure to Choler it self, Their Cause, whereby a Fever will neither be encreasd nor fed; but farther we should attend to all the Symptoms accompanying these Choleric Fevers, and to all Changes therefore happening to both Bodies, as well the Containing as Containd, more things are to be us'd for their intire and perfect Cure. 45. Wherfore by reason of an Exceding Heat stird up, and of the Pulse encreasd in Greatness, following a greater Rarefaction of Blood by the Fire encreasd in the Heart, least the Vessels at length being by degrees more and more distended should burst, or
be opend any other way, or over-Vital Fire be suffo∣cated because of the hindred motion of Blood in the Heart, or elswhere by its over-rarefaction filling its Vessels, a Place is to be prepar'd for it by letting a suf∣ficient quantity of Blood out at a Vein opend in the Arm, Hand, Foot, or elswhere. 46. And by this letting out Blood, because it ap∣pears by daily experience that the heat of Blood is not a little diminisht, thus far also an opening a Vein is to be nd; whether that troublesom Heat be temperd  of sharp and fat Vapors more plen∣teously us'd together with the Blood, or it happen by any other Cause that may diversly be feignd, ac∣cording to any Bodies prejudice. 47. Thirst then very importunate, may be allayd by degrees by the Decoction prescrib'd in Sect. 40, 41. or the Tincture of Roses describ'd in Sect. 20. of the preceding Chapter, or the following Julap, or any like it, oft taking a little of it, which I prefer before much Drink drunk at once, because every sudden change is deservedly judg'd by Hippocrates hurtful to Nature, and therfore dangerous. ℞. Barley-Water ℥ xx. Syr. of Purslan ℥ ii. of the Juice of Citrons ℥ i. Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd ʒ ss. M. 48. The thick Juice extracted out of certain Seeds by the help of any Water, and the Mucilage, such as we draw out of the Seeds of Quinces, Flea-wort, &c. with Rose-Water, or any other that is conve∣nient, will asswage the troublesomly Dry, or also ∣ven Tongue. Some of this should be kept for a sp in the Mouth, and again spit out; which should  be repeted. 49. The same may be obtaind, if the Leavs of Sempervive the Greater have their out Rind pld
off, and put into pure or Rose-Water, hence oft laid upon the Tongue, and be ever and anon renu'd. 50. Pure Water will do the same, if a little of it be kept in the Mouth, and again spit out after garg∣ling and oft repeted. Instead also of pure Water, a Decoction of Turneps, or a mild Emulsion, such as fol∣lows, may be us'd. ℞, Cleansd Barley boil'd till it crack ℥ ii. With its Decoction make an Emulsion of ℥ xv. adding Ju∣lap of Roses, or simple Syr. of Violets ℥ i. M. 51. To this end also the Yolk of an Egg beaten and mixt with ℥ iii, iv, or v. of Rose-Water, or any other grateful to the Sick, and a little Sugar may in like manner be us'd, a spoonful of it at a time be∣ing taken into the Mouth, and afterward either swal∣lowd, or again spit out. 52. II. A Glandular Synochal Lymphatic Fever may be Cur'd; if 1. soon in the beginning, whilst Shivering yet continues, the following Mixture be ta∣ken by spoonfuls in short intervals. ℞. Parsley-Water ℥ i. ss. Fenel, simple Treacle-Wa∣ter, of each ʒ vi. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ i. M. For by the help of this, the Shivering will not only be diminisht, but moreover the sowr sharpness of Lym∣pha temperd, and the Heat that would afterward fol∣low, will at least in part be prevented. 53. If 2. During Heat, such Medicins be given, which will overcome the Fire that is more Corroding then Burning, and be compounded of temperd Acids, not neglecting Volatil Salts. The following Mix∣ture therfore oft taken by Spoonfuls may conduce. ℞. Water of Parsley, Fumitorie, of each ℥ i. ss. of Fenel ℥ i. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ i. Volatil Salt of Amber ℈ ss. Laudanum 2 Gr. Syr. of the five Roots ℥ i. M.
54. When Thirst also urgeth, the following Deco∣ction may be prepar'd, and as the matter requires gi∣ven, abstaining from over-much drinking. ℞. The Roots of Vipers Grass, of Smallage, of each ℥ i. Crude Barley ℥ ii. Boil them in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of white, of red Poppies, of each ℥ i. ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ʒ ss. M. 55. If 3. Lympha abounding in the Body, and in a manner at least temperd by the mentiond, or such∣like Medicins be Diminisht and Empti'd out by mild Hydragogues. To which end the following Decocti∣on may conduce. ℞. The Root Parsly, Fenel, Eringo, Danewort, of each ℥ i. the Leavs of Seabind Weed ℥ ss. Boil them in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of Diacnicum ℥ iii. M. Take ℥ iii or iv of this Decoction twice or thrice a day, till a commodious Evacuation of the Serous Humors follow. 56. They who prefer a Conserve, may oft take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this following, which ℞. Conserve of Damask-Roses ℥ i. ss. Electuary of the Juice of Roses ℥ i. Pouder of Jabap Root ʒ ii. of Creme of Tartar ʒ i. with a little of the solu∣tive Syr. of Roses, M. for a Conserve. Our Hydragogue Electuary describ'd before in Chap. 7. Sect. 55. may also avail, being very mild and grateful. 57. If 4. a Lymphatic Fever siezes on a Phletho∣ric Body, and especially in the Summer Constancy of Air, I would not disswade a mean Blooding, especi∣ally of those that are accustomd to it; seeing they bear it better and more commodiously.
58. But if 5. a Lymphatic Fever come upon one Choleric, then by reason of Choler, not only drawn into consent, but making an Heat greater then is wont, both Altering and Purging Medicins may be us'd ju∣diciously to be compos'd of these propos'd before, and in Sect. 40, &c. For Example, take this fol∣lowing Decoction, satisfying both Indications, if us'd in a mean quantity, till a moderat Purging fol∣low. ℞. Succorie, Fenel-Root, of each ℥ i. Fumitorie, Burrage-Leavs, of each M. i. Boil them in Bar∣ley-Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind Syr. of Succorie with Rhubarb, of Diacnicum, of each ℥ i. ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ʒ ss. M. 59. If by reason of Choler vitiated by Lympha great Heat follow, by reason also of it Bleeding may avail, as we shewd you before in Sect. 45, 46. 60. If Lastly 6. the Lymphatic Fever be Catar∣rhal, then because the Glandul's that are in the Head are affected before all the other Conglobated Glan∣dul's, Medicins are to be prepar'd so, that the Part most affected be chiefly minded. To which end the Restoring of the Glandul's of the Head may be tri'd by Fuming, but among Ʋniversals, both Al∣tering and Emptying Medicins may be us'd, which are actually observd, most appropriated and useful to the Head; yea, Evacuation peculiar to the Head should in time be had. 61. You may therefore Fume with Amber, Mastich, and such-like; which should not only be receivd, as oft as can conveniently be, in at the Nostrils and Mouth, the Head being coverd, but all the Head-Cloaths should be fum'd with the same, and soon af∣ter put on, lest the power of the Fuming be lost by delay.
62. Let this following be an Example of a Ʋniver∣sal Altering and Evacuating Decoction to be us'd as the forme. ℞. The Root of Pionie. Vipers-Grass, of each ℥ i. of Smallage ℥ ss. the Leavs of Betonie, Violets, Pise, of each M. i. Gummie Turbith ℥ ss. Mechoacan-Roat ʒ ii. Crude Tartar ʒ i. ss. Moun∣tain Siler-seeds ʒ ii. Boil them in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of Di∣acnicum ℥ ii. M. 63. The Particular Evacuations of the Head are obtaind by Errhins and Masticatories. The new Leavs of Betonie or Majoran being rubd between your Fin∣gers and put into the Nostrils, may afford a benign Errhina; and the Sp. of Salt Armoniac appli'd to the Nostrils in a little Bottle with a long Neck, will much conduce, because it both loosens the Viscous Humor that obstructs the Glandul's, and tempers the saltish-sowr humor thence bred. 64. Mastich alone, or the root of Pellitory of Spain chewd, draws down Phlegm and Serous Liquor in∣to the Mouth out of the Head, to be spit out. 65. III. A Pancreatical Synochal Fever may be Cur'd; If 1. more mild Medicins be us'd, that Tem∣per the Acid Humor, as are all Lixivial Salts, but chiefly those Volatil and Oily. For which reason Opium avails exceedingly here, and every Opiat, and Aromatic Medicin: Of which we have prescrib'd several Compounded Medicins all over in this Work. Yet with an over-plus take this following Mixture, to be us'd by Spoonfuls so long as Cold urgeth. ℞. Parsley, Grass, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or simple Treacle-Water ʒ x. Laudanum iii. Grains. Syrup of the five Roots, ℥ i. M.
66. If 2. Heat now urging, by Reason of Choler vitiated and drawn to consent Medicins be given, fit to temper both the Acid and salt Acrimonie together, and therfore prepar'd of two sharp things but broken. To which end the following Decoction may avail, drunk oft to some ounces. ℞. Smallage, Succorie-Roots of each ℥ i. Agrimo∣ny-Leavs, Fenel, Fumitory-tops, of each M. i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of Byzantium ℥ iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ i. or Sp. of Nitre xii drops. M. for a Decoction. 67. If any like a Mixture better, you may pre∣scribe the following to be taken by Spoonfuls. ℞. Carduus, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. simple Treacle-Water ℥ ss. Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd ℈ i. Laudanum iii. Gr. Syr. of Fumitory ℥ i. M. 68. If 3. this Fever be troublesom by permanent Anxieties about the Midrif, by reason of over-viscous Phlegm together concurring, and resolvd into Flatu∣lent Vapors, Oily Volatil Salts, and distild Oils, ad∣ded in a small quantity to the preceding Mixtures may conduce. For Example; ℞. Fumitory, Mint-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. Matthio∣lus his Aqua Vitae ℥ ss. Sp. of Nitre viii drops. Laudanum ii Gr. distild Oil of Mace iii drops. Syr. of Mint ℥ i. M. 69. If 4. Gripes of the Belly chiefly urge, because of the Humor of the Pancreas not only more Sowr, but together more Tart, oily Volatil Salts will chiefly conduce, or made Oily distild Oils being added, and put to the Mixtures to be taken by Spoonfuls. For Example take this following Form.
℞. Mint, Fenel, Parsley, Scurvygrass-Water, of each ℥ i. Sp. of Nitre x drops. Laudanum iii Gr.The Author approv'd not of that Sp. distild on Quick-Lime, but only on Salt of Tartar. Sp. of Salt Armoniac ℈ i. Oil of Anise vi drops. Syr. of Fe∣nel ℥ i. ss. M. 70. If 5. this Fever be grievous with Bloody Purg∣ings, or at least joind with sharp Pain, beside the newly mentiond Mixtures, the Clyster prepar'd of Cows Milk, Turpentine and the Yolk of an Egg, such as that in Chap. 13. Sect. 51. may chiefly con∣duce, being oft injected during the Disease. 71. IV. A Salivary or Phlegmatic Synochal Fe∣ver may be Cur'd; If 1. the Viscousness of Spittle, and hence of Phlegm be Corrected and Amended by Medicins, either Aromatical, that is, having an Oi∣ly Volatil Salt, or temperd sowr things, or both mixt together, and that according to the various Consti∣tution of the other Humors Choler, and the Juice of the Pencreas: Of which sort many are here and there, and also in this Chapter propos'd, together with convenient Forms to practice with successfully. See Chap. 14. Sect. 45, &c. 72. If 2. Flatulent Vapors bred by it, raising both in the Stomach and Guts, first a Distension and Inflati∣on; afterward an Irritation in the Heart, an over-Frequent Pulse, a Wheazing in the Lungs; at length sleepiness in the Brain be Discussd, and their new ri∣sing Hindred. To this end Medicins mentiond in Chap. 14. Sect. 56, &c. may conduce. 73. If 3. the Appetite be dejected, it should be Restor'd by the dulcifi'dƲnless it be dulci∣fid, it is too corrosive. Sp. of Salt, Elixir Proprietatis, and such like temperd Acids mixt with ordinary Drink, or with other
Liquors and Mixtures to be us'd by Spoonfuls, pri∣marily convenient for the Distemper; and if besides Deprav'd more or less, it should be Corrected. 74. The Cure of Synochal Fevers, nam'd from grie∣vous and very urgent Symptoms, ought to be the same which we propos'd, unless that then, as always in other Cases, there ought to be an exact and careful ac∣count had of those most grievous Symptoms. 75. For all the Professors of Physic are deceivd, and do no less injure their Students then Patients, who think, at least teach, that any Diseases may be cur'd by Art, when their grievous, and therfore urg∣ing Symptoms are neglected; all which they would have cease of their own accord, when the primary Diseases are Cur'd; seeing that we daily observe with great loss of Mortals by their stubborn obstina∣cy, and negligence of these smattering and prating small Physicians, the Sick are as oft sooner taken away by their grievous Symptoms, then the Diseases cur'd alone are removd by their Medicins. 76. Add that Medicins convenient to remove or diminish any Symptoms amend, and together correct the depravations of Humors, or solid Parts, on which those Symptoms immediatly depend. The Diseases therefore are together remov'd, whilst the Symptoms are remov'd: Neither do we doubt with some fa∣mous Physicians, to refer the Depravations of Hu∣mors to the number of Diseases; because the Parts containd are not less requir'd to the Compleatness of the whole Body and Functions, then the Parts Con∣taining. 77. I. Therefore to a Dogmatical Cure of Burn∣ing Synochal Fevers, Blood is forthwith to be Let out plenteously and frequently enough, whereby that Great Heat may be diminisht or remov'd: which is
so much the more to be done, if a Plethora, that is, abundance of Blood be present. 78. Blood being Let, as much as the Patients strength can commodiously bear; while Choler is yet turgid, and there is hope of carrying it down to the Guts and anon with success of carrying it out, a mild Cholagogue, such as is the Decoction noted in Sect. 43. may be safely given, and that an hour after the opend Vein is tied; by which if in a short while, that is, in two hours space they go not to Stool, more therof ought to be taken till it purge; which succed∣ing Altering Medicins, and such as allay Heat and Thirst, are oft to be us'd; of which we have spoken in Sect. 47. and elswhere. 79. Neither doth it suffice to let Blood, or purge Choler once, but those Evacuations are oft to be ite∣rated, not neglecting Altering Medicins, till by the diminisht feverish heat it appears, that the Cause of this Fever is Diminisht, or remov'd, or overcom'd. 80. II. If I have rightly conjectur'd, when I suspected a Leipyrian to consist of a Choleric and Pan∣creatical Fever, it may be Cur'd, by using Medicins which correct the exceeding sowrness of the Juice of the Pancreas, and abounding oiliness of Choler, and concentrate any sowr thing, and imbibe, and contemper any Oily Liquor. 81. They that do both these, are Pearl, Coral, Crabs-Eys, and all kinds of Shels, chiefly those cal∣cin'd, Chalk, &c. if they be oft taken in a small quan∣tity. 82. Besides Medicins may be us'd that somtimes temper Cold more, somtimes Heat, as this or that doth more molest the Sick: Such as are oft before mentiond, more being to be prescrib'd in the next fol∣lowing Chapter.
83. III. A Fever having the Tongue and Jaws colourd blackish red, & a dry Heat accompanying may be Cur'd, if beside Universal Remedies convenient to that Fever enough burning, and such as are to be sought from what is already said, those be in special us'd which are observd to conduce to the Heat, Driness, and vi∣tiated Colour of the parts of the Mouth. 84. Gargarisms are chiefly mention'd, prepar'd with Water, or the Decoction of Plantane, Lettice, Night-shade, Purslan, Privet, Strawberry-Leavs, Prunel, or Brunel, (which name they say was given it from that Disease, because it is believd to be proper for it before all others) Hony-suckle, &c. the sowr and tart Juices of Blackberies, Barberies, Sorrel, Ci∣tron, &c. being somtimes added. 85. Here also is commended, among Chymical things, Nitre prepar'd with Sulphur, and therfore call'd Salt Prunella. 86. Let this following be the Form of the best Gargarism. ℞. Prunel, Willow, Strawberry-Leavs, of each M. i. whole Barley 1 Pugil. make a Decoction in pure Water, dissolving in ℥ xii. of what is straind; Diamorωn ℥ i. Lapis Prunellae ʒ ss. M. to be a Gargarism; with which warm let the Sick oft wash and gargarize his Mouth. 87. In this Disease also, for the most part an Open∣ing of the Ranine Veins under the Tongue, conduc∣eth, and that as oft as they are observd to be tumid, and manifest to us the Quinsie at hand, or molesting. For it is no new thing that the Quinsie should be coupled to this Fever. 88. Pouderd Chalk made with Creme to the con∣sistency of a Liniment will asswage, dry and remove those filthy Scabs of the Lips being appli'd to them;
as also the white Ointment Camphorated in like manner us'd. 89. IV. A Fever attended with a grievous and furious Raging, may be Cur'd; by giving, beside what is before mentiond, those things especially, which will not only promote Sleep, but powerfully and mild∣ly temper a sharp choleric Humor, and so asswage its over-sharp Effervescency with an Acid. 90. To this end Opium will conduce beyond any commonly known Medicine, and any Opiat thence prepar'd: Yet do I judg any fixt Mineral Sulphur, of Vitriol or Antimony more excellent. 91. Opiats may be us'd both Internally and Exter∣nally: many Forms whereof we have given before, and in special in Chap. 28. Sect. 22, 25, 30, & 40. whence they may be sought. 92. V. A speedily wasting Fever, may be Cur'd; by using and mixing with the other Medicins, those that powerfully, though mildly correct Choler too sharp together, and fat: To which end I commend dulci∣fi'd Spirit of Salt before many others, and others such∣ike first temperd by the Spirit of Wine, to be mixt with other Altering Medicins prescrib'd here and there in this Chapter. 93. But always attend to the other Symptoms, more or less differing in every Patient, and therfore requi∣ring some difference of Medicins in a right Method of Curing: wherein the prudence and judgment of a Physician diligently examind, somtimes wonderfully appears; seeing that the excellent Precepts of others formed by long use of things do indeed direct, but not contribute Judgment to a Younger Physician. 94. We intend shortly to give you the Cure of Ma∣lign Fevers in the following 33 Chapter.
CHAP. XXX. Of Intermitting Fevers. 1. INtermitting Fevers are such as molest the Sick with divers Fits, which of their own accord do wholly depart, and then come again anew. 2. For as oft as the Sick are troubled with a Fever, returning either in certain or uncertain Intervals, no Error being committed in the Non-natural Things, by Internal Causes; so oft it's said to Intermit, that is, not continually afflict, but return by Fits, and again wholly cease. 3. As oft on the contrary as a Fever is stird up, not by Internal, but External Causes, and chiefly by one or more Errors committed in the Non-natural Things, so oft it is call'd only a Fever; till it may probably be thought to prove either Continual, and that of One day, with or without Fits, by Symptoms accompanying it; or else after some certain days its kind may certainly be determind. 4. For they ascribe too much to themselvs, that do vainly boast to obtain a fame of quick Judgment amongst ignorant People, (though oft taken in Mi∣stakes) that they can certainly, determin even in the very first Invasion, and at the beginning of the Inva∣sion of any Fever, whether it will be but of One day, or with or without Fits; and indeed whether it will be a Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan-Fever. Which Thrasonic boasts we willingly yield to them, who feed themselvs and others with sinoak and de∣light in Wind.
5. The different Kinds of Intermitting Fevers, are taken; 1. From the divers Interval, somtimes shor∣ter, somtimes longer, which happens between the Fits. 2. From the grievous differing Symptoms which use to accompany them. 6. I. By reason of the divers Intervals, Intermit∣ting Fevers are divided into Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, Quintans, &c. in so much as they return either every day, or in the Third, Fourth, or Fifth Day, &c. which we have oft told you we observ'd in Chap. 27. Sect. 13, &c. to be somtimes Single, other-times Manifold, Double, Three-fold, or Com∣pounded of Divers, adding the Signs that distinguish them from one another. 7. II. By reason of the grievous Symptoms, as we have already said in Chap. 29. Sect. 23, &c. of Synochals, Intermitting Fevers get divers Names. For, I. they are somtimes observ'd Chill, not only with Cold chiefly, but with Cold only, troublesom; so that somtimes, and most frequently a gentle Heat, somtimes and more seldom none at all doth fol∣low. 8. Such Fevers, even always Cold, we have had in our Academic Hospital, so manifest, that not on∣ly at the beginning, and augmentation, but even in the vigor and declination, yea, at the end of the Fit, that is, always both to their Own, and the By-stan∣ders, and also the Physicians perceivance, the Sick were troublesomly all-over cold, never warm, much less hot in any part. And these grievous Chill Fevers are perhaps always Quotidians. 9. But the more troublesom Intermitting Fevers do so oft come with Gold preceding, as with Heat following, that they have taken their Name from it; not only in the most of the Regions of Germany, and
others of the North, but most of the common Peo∣ple think they have the Fever only so long as they endure sharp Cold, judging themselvs freed from the Fever so soon as Heat often not at all, or but a lit∣tle troublesom or grievous begins. And then such most commonly are Quartans, somtimes Tertians. 10. II. Oft Intermitting Fevers are Burning, and chiefly Tertians, in which a short and light only, or almost no Cold is noted, or a gentle Shivering Fit to precede Heat, and extreme Burning, and that oft remains long, and is always troublesom after the Fit is ended: So that somtimes a new Fit returns before, that the great Heat of the former doth wholly re∣mit. 11. But it is not necessary, that therfore the Fe∣ver should be thought to have remain'd together with the Heat remaining, because the Pulse remits of its former swiftness; but the encreasd Heat of the Body does not return to its former temper: Whence somtimes also a Continual Fever by degrees follows such an Intermitting Fever, and becoms a Continual Tertian. 12. But although somtimes Intermitting Fevers trouble the Sick with Cold only, or Heat, yet, for the most part, they are molested with both, and Heat uses to succede Cold; and then somtimes Cold, som∣times Heat does most oppress them, or continue longer, rarely afflicting them equally. For they are utterly de∣ceiv'd, who by their false Prejudices, and against daily Experience, do falsly teach their Pupils, that the preceding Cold is overcomd by two-fold, three-fold, or four-fold Heat succeding, either upon the account of its Continuance or Vehemence. 13. For, briefly to describe the History and Man∣ner of the Invasion and Change of the most of Inter∣mitting
Fevers, according to their two-fold newly mentiond Symptoms most frequent above others, and most noted, but withal not neglecting the rest, there is wont to precede as a Fore-runner, a Yauning and Gaping, and somtimes a Ʋniversal Weariness of the Lims, or Unquietness, rarely Sleepiness, and more or less to continue and molest. 14. To one or more of these troubles there suc∣cedes for the most part (at least as far as I could ob∣serv in my Patients) Coldness in the Region of the Loins, and truly somtimes more grievous, other-times more light; which a little after goes in the Passage of the Back-bone, as well upward as downward, to all the Remote Parts of the Body, and which not only manifests it self in the Fingers and Toes, but in the Nose, Ears, Chin, Tongue, yea and moreover in the Whole Skin, afflicting and molesting the inward as well as the outward parts. 15. It is rare that no Cold at all is perceiv'd in the Region of the Loins, or not but late. Which somtimes  have observ'd troublesom only, to the Sick, in the middle of the Belly, where the small Guts are wrap∣ed round. 16. But even somtimes in the Inner Parts of the Head, and have observd an exceding grievous Cold, nd that now in the back part of the Head, now in he fore-part of the Head, other-times in the Crown. 17. A Shivering uses to accompany a lesser coldness, ut Stifness a greater. 18. During Cold, the Pains are Corroding, Beat∣ng, Piercing, with Gripes of the Belly, and other ertain troublesom Symptoms, from which anon we ntend to name same kinds of Intermitting Fevers. 19. Upon the beginning of Cold, you may ob∣serv, that as the Pulse grows more frequent, it is both
Less and Weaker, and while it still troubles, it's so Little, that often it can no longer be Felt. 20. Where the Cold begins to remit, most com∣monly Anxieties about the Midrif, are wont to be the beginnings of Heat even just following. 21. Yea even with Heat, Thirst by degrees is kind∣led and encreasd; for seldom during Cold does it trouble; but somtimes notwithstanding. 22. Farther, with Heat the Pulse, continually more frequent, is by degrees made Greater, and for the most part also Stronger. For if it be then Little or Weak, the Fever is judg'd Malign, or a great want of Strength, and so the danger is encreasd. 23. When the Heat is augmented, commonly there attends Drowth of the Tongue, more vehement, and somtimes Difficult; Heat of the Head, and Pain, Pul∣sation of the Temples, Watchings, and somtimes Ra∣ving. 24. Last of all by degrees while the Heat remits, Sweat is usually wont to spring out more or less, or at least a sufficient voiding of Ʋrin. And then the Sick is free again for a time from all, or at least the most Symptoms by a various Sleep, one while more quiet, other whiles very unquiet and grievous, with Dreams or Wakings usually concurring; till a new Feverish Fit coming on, either the same, or fewer, or more do afflict him more or less; which at length, either of their own accord, or by Art, are wholly or at least in part taken away, or take him away. 25. And so are many tormented with Intermitting Fevers, whilst Cold precedes, and Heat succedes: although somtimes, (that we may go forward unto the rest of their Accompanying Symptoms). III. They are observd Epialae so call'd, mixt Fevers, in which every where Cold and Heat together vehemently op∣press.
26. IV. They are call'd Thirsty Fevers from Thirst importunate and past quenching; which are not only observ'd usually in burning Heat, but even whilst Cold troubles; so that though the Sick do drink continually, yet nevertheless they do thirst. Nor have the Sick only this great trouble, although they much indulge themselves to too much Drink, but even Physicians also in curing this froward Thirst. 27. V. Let us call them Hungry Fevers, to which ravenous and unsatiable Hunger is joind; so that un∣less Meat be given, even whilest the Fit continues, the Sick takes Faintings, and other troublesom Symptoms. For although the Appetite of most is Lessend or Abolisht somtimes wholly; nevertheless others have, not only a moderat but greedy Hunger together with the Fit. 28. VI. Heart-aking Intermitting Fevers do mo∣lest, often with an unspeakable and intolerable Pain accompanying, about the upper Orifice of the Ven∣tricle, and with this Symptom chiefly are they grie∣vous, and somtimes Pestilential, whether attended with Vomiting or no. 29. VII. Moreover Fevers seem to be nam'd Griping or Colical, from the painful Gripes of the Belly, or which are wonderfully troublesom with Distensions, coming or departing as the Intermitting Fever comes or goes. 30. VIII. Swouning Fevers get their name from Swouning Fits invading the Sick, together with the Fever, very grievous and dangerous, and ther∣fore in no wise to be passd over with silence. 31. IX. Intermitting Fevers are observd from their accompanying Hypochondiacal Suffocation, commonly call'd Hysterical, with a Feverish Fit grie∣vously
afflicting, (chiefly Women) are to be nam'd Strangling Fevers, seeing indeed somtimes they choak and kill the Sick, although they be not also very grievous, as to other Symptoms. 32. X. Let us now join Difficultly breathing Fe∣vers to the abovesaid, so namd from the difficulty and wheasing of breath, which wonderfully and mi∣serably vex the Sick, with or without Palpitation of the Heart. These I have oft observ'd to begin with distention of the Abdomen, and Anxiety of the Midrif, the Pulse being Little, Weak, and Swift, Cold and Pain also troubling the Region of the Loins. Which if Wind break out either upward or downward then the Fit was lighter, if not, more tedious: For after the Distension and Anxiety had lasted an hour or more, both decreased gradually, and also a diffi∣cult Breathing and great Wheasing was stird up, and indeed so great, that the Body could not endure even the least stirring or motion of it self, the Pulse gra∣dually growing Greater rather then Stronger, and continually Swifter, together with the Veins all over sore sweld, which were so small, that they could scarce be seen when the Fit was not. This Difficult Breathing somtimes molests more grievously, other times more lightly, again a longer or shorter space; whence somtimes fit Medicins for the Hypochondriac Strangulation have been us'd with success. And at length the Fit ended more with a Moistness then with a Sweat, till a new one came on, seldom a Quotidian, oft a Tertian. 33. XI. Asthmatic Fevers, so call'd, from short-windedness accompanying, somtimes grievous, som∣times not are usual. In which likewise the Disten∣tion and Anxiety of the Abdomen usually precedes; and when they remit, then follows Difficulty of
Breath, truly Asthmatic, which together with the Fit continuing long enough, and somtimes for one, or two days, decreases, and at length ceases; som∣times it continues after the Fit is gone. I have seen an Asthmatical Fever of this sort returning for a time in the fourteenth day, and afflicting the Sick sore enough for more days every time, unless it were les∣sened both as to its pain and continuance, with fit Medicius. 34. XII. A Cough is not only wont to accompa∣ny these above describ'd Asthmatical Fevers, but at other times when there is no Asthma at all, from which Cough then sorely troubling the Sick, above other Symptoms, I thought they might very fitly be nam'd Coughing or Bechical Fevers. For so soon as the Fit increases, a Cough begins to molest, for the most part Dry, seldom and that by chance is it Moist; to wit, as oft as a various Humor mov'd, either of its own accord, or by a Fever, or by a dry Cough slides down to the Lungs. 35. XIII. Amongst Intermitting Fevers also are observd Catarrhal Fevers, from a Catarrh descending not only upon the Lungs, but even also to other Parts, moving and ceasing with the Feverish Fit. For a new Humor does not disperse it self after the Feverish Fit, but that which has already disperst it self, does not return or forsake the part grieved, al∣though the Feverish Fit cease. 36. XIV. Somtimes Practitioners reduce Gouty Fevers to the Catarrhal, because they think the Gouty Fevers arise from the other. And because I judg that a different Humor which breeds the Gout is carri'd to the Jaws through the Arteries together with the Blood, I altogether think the Arthritics are to be distinguisht from the Catarrhals: As often
as I had opportunity to observ very exactly the Rise and Progress of the Gout by my Patients faithful narration, even so oft I have minded that it has ri∣sen together with a Continual or Intermitting Fe∣ver: Whence the Gout was not a little augmented by the return of the new Fits of the Intermitting Fe∣ver, till it was either chang'd into a Continual Fever, or ceased of its own accord, or was Cur'd by Art, the Pains of the Joints persevering nevertheless. 37. XV. As Continual, so Intermitting Fevers are oft attended with Mad and Raving Fevers, call'd by the Dutch Rasende Koortsen, from their Ra∣ving, seldom indeed during Cold, but oft when Heat does follow the Head-ach, and Pulsing of the Tem∣ples, and then ceasing by degrees with the Fit again, and that after Sleep, either pleasant or troublesom with wakings. 38. XVI. The Emetic, or Vomiting Intermitting Fevers are so call'd from the Vomiting that som∣times continually, other-times by intervals are very troublesom, either when the Cold begins, or in its continuance, or in the appearance or encrease of Heat: so much the more grievous, that the Sick are not thereby eased, but more griev'd. Whence that Vomiting is deservedly judg'd Symptomatical, and not Critical. 39. XVII. So Intermitting Fevers also are ob∣servd from a great and frequent Purging, and som∣times also with Gripes much troubling and weaken∣ing the Sick at divers times of their Continuance, therefore to be call'd Emptying or Cleansing Fe∣vers. 40. XVIII. The Fits of most Intermitting Fe∣vers use not only to end with a Sweat good for the Sick, and therfore then to be esteem'd Critical; but
oft for the most part of the Fit a great Sweat, hurt∣ful to the Sick, and therefore Symptomatical, most commonly hot, seldom cold Breaths out of the whole Body, or a particular part, as the Head, Breast, Ab∣domen, or Lims, which makes the Sweating Fevers: Such also are Continual Fevers observd to be, that are known by the Name of The English Sweat. 41. XIX. But Intermitting Fevers are also ob∣servd with almost a continual Urining, and that Symptomatical, weakening the Sick, not Critical and easing them; which therfore may fitly be call'd Ʋre∣tic Fevers. 42. XX. Lastly that I may put an end to these partly new names, Intermitting Fevers are observd to be accompanied with a grievous and troublesom Spitting, and therfore to be nam'd Spitting Fevers. 43. Without doubt there are yet many more Kinds and Differences of Intermitting Fevers to be nam'd from their grievous and molesting Symptoms; but let it suffice to have mentiond the most notable ones, which I being much hurried could call to Mind. 44. If any ask me the Causes of Intermitting Fe∣vers differing so many ways among themselvs; I an∣swer, That one cause makes an Intermitting Fever, as Intermitting, and another makes it of this or that Kind, in as much as it returns in this or that day, or is accompanied with these or other grievous Symptoms. 45. If any where, certainly in assigning the true Cause of all and every Intermitting Fever, the great difference of Doctors of Physic is observd, lastly mine also perhaps varies not a little from the Opini∣on of the rest; I now intend more deeply to enquire, more accuratly to examin, and explain more exqui∣sitly then ever I did before, all this hard and intricat business chiefly upon their account who never heard
or are like to hear me publicly, or ever have hall or may have conference with me about this Matter: Which I will do as much as I may for my Concerns, and Distractions daily encreasing, rather then de∣creasing, and therfore perpetually withdrawing my Mind from an attentive Meditation, wholly requi∣site here, my privat Auditory tarrying for the same, and the Printer daily urging. 46. There is therfore requir'd to produce an Inter∣mitting Fever; that is, which returning somtimes in certain, other-times uncertain, now in shorter, othertimes in longer Intervals, and indeed after a to∣tal Cessation, and that also somtimes longer, other∣times shorter by new Fits longer and shorter like∣wise both on the account of Cold and Heat, which seeing it is not in the Blood, otherwise it would be a Continual Fever, is mixt with it and carri'd to the Right Ventricle of the Heart; and truly 1. From such a part of the Body, which should communicate it self by its Vessels with the Heart, either immediatly or mediatly. For here we suppose as our Foundation the Circular Motion of Blood, both prov'd abundant∣ly by others, and Us also elswhere. 47. 2. From such a part, and by such Vessels, in which it may, by an External Cause, consisting al∣most in the Non-natural Things, so be infected and afflicted, that it may be suddenly stopt in some part in its Motion, and that for some time, and hindred now longer, other-whiles shorter, lest it should constantly come to the Heart. 48. 3. It should be such a thing, as either for its stopping alone, and standing still in its Place or Vessels of its own accord, or for any other Internal Cause con∣curring to be nam'd, or demonstrated should acquire such a vitiation, from which (where after that an open
passage to the Heart is restor'd to it by what way so∣ever) either alone, or joind to others also to be deter∣mind all the Symptoms, though never so divers and observable in the manifold Kinds of Intermitting Fevers describ'd may commodiously be deduc'd and confirmd by a rational and certain Cure. For We com∣mand all Hearty and Worthy Students of Physic, the Queen of Arts, once and always to bid farewel to the Commentations and vain Fictions, contrary to the Practice of Physic. 49. 4. It should be such an Impediment, which for a time may bind up such an Humor stopt before, and after it has got an Out-let, by what cause soever, at last it should return to its former Nature, and therfore should likewise stop the like Humor to the former so long in the same place, till the same, as the former, pour'd out by away prepar'd after what manner soever, should produce a new Fit; and that should be so long conti∣nu'd by course, til at length (unless the sick perish first) either of its own accord, or by chance, or by art the no∣ted Impediment should be corrected, or taken away, and the Intermitting Fever be Cur'd by the same. 50. If therfore we should attentively consider that all the Humors of the Body of Man (for we leave the oeconomy of Brutes to Ferriers to be weighed and ex∣plaind) are prepar'd in their proper Places, or be kept there, and after that be carri'd through their Vessels to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, we shall observe that beside the Blood returning to the Heart by the Veins from all the Containing Parts; 1. Cho∣ler mixes as well immediatly by its Passage through the Liver with the Blood Ascending; as mediatly with the Blood Descending through its Passage to the Gut, in the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and the Lymphatic Passage of the Brest. 2. The Lympha mixes it self
immediatly with the Blood Descending by its Lym∣phatic Vessels, and their Trunk. 3. The Juice of the Pancreas is only mediatly mixt with the same Blood Descending through its proper Passage, the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Brest. 4. Lastly, The Spittle in like manner mediatly only mixes with the Blood Descending, through its Passages, the Mouth, Throat, Ventricle, Guts, Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Brest, and together with it is drawn forward to the Right Ventricle of the Heart. 51. Beside which four Humors, seeing hitherto none are known to be carri'd to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, of necessity we must judg the Cause of Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, to be deduc'd from One or More of them; since all may see, that the Blood when ill-affected, causes a Continual, and not an Intermitting Fever, because of its perpetual Motion to the Heart. 52. If the Blood stand still any where, presently there arises an Inflammation: which if communicated to the rest of the Blood, in like manner produces not an Intermitting, but Continual Fever. To which somtimes is coupled an Intermitting Fever, and espe∣cially a Tertian, and then from both for a Continual Tertian to arise is no new thing nor wonder, for reasons manifest enough by what is said beneath. 53. The Blood therfore herein being laid aside, I. None will judg that Intermitting Fevers, as Inter∣mitting, can be deduc'd from Choler, who hath dili∣gently considerd, that it cannot be so infected and af∣flicted in its Passages suddenly by any External Cause, so as to be stopt either wholly or in part in its motion for a time, and again either of its own ac∣cord, or for any other demonstrable Internal Cause should find a way, by which it may produce the
Symptoms above noted, by what way soever it's brought to the Heart, and that either alone, or joind with others. 54. I do not deny that Choler is turnd into smaller or bigger Stones, and also into a Stony Crust in its Passages through the Liver: But as neither coms sud∣denly, so neither is it observd that either of them were dissolv'd by any Internal, but only External Cause, nor yet so, that any thing like to Intermit∣ting Fevers can thence be deduc'd. 55. In like manner somtimes Choler is judgd not to be carri'd down to the Small Gut from what cause soever, when the Excrements are obscurly white and thicker then usual. But an Intermitting Fever is not always observd to accompany the Jaundies, although often it doth; which therfore cannot be taken thence for an impediment of Choler. 56. II. Neither from the Lympha can Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, be deriv'd. For, besides that the most Symptoms accompanying them for the most part, and observable chiefly in the Abdomen, cannot be expected even in a Dream, from the Lympha; besides, if Intermitting Fevers did depend of, and were produc'd by the Lympha, then either all, or but part of the Lympha were faulty, as though it were hindred and farthered again reciprocally in its Motion to the Heart. If all? where and what kind of Impediment could that be? whether or no in all the Conglobated Glandula's, Muscles and Bow∣els? or in all the Lymphatic Vessels, or their Trunk about their insertion into the Jugular or Axillar left Vein? But if only a part thereof, then which and where? Whether that which goes only to the Heart from all or some only of the Conglobated Glandules? Or whether it be hindred in all the Glandules? But
these Glandules are rarely found to swell or be hard, and that only when the Head is stuft, or in Catarrhal Fevers (of which we spake in the former Chapter) scarce ever, though the Intermitting Fever be very troublesom, the Causes whereof we search: so that, by how much the more diligently any searches the Rise and Motion of the Lympha, as also its Supply and Vessels, so much the less will he encline to a∣scribe the Cause of Intermitting Fevers as such to the Lympha. 57. III. Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, in no wise seem to be deduc'd from Spittle. For (that we transfer not hither more Arguments from what is now said of Lympha) although somtimes, for that is not perpetual, a little before the Feverish Fit, or together with its Beginning, the Spittle is observd to flow more plentifully or slowly unto the Mouth, notwithstanding the same Spittle is not noted to be such, that the molesting Symptoms of every Inter∣mitting Fever, I say not all, but even the most fre∣quent, may folidly be ascribed to it. The Spittle is not always, I say, carri'd, which if so, should whol∣ly be carri'd in the time of Intermission, more slowly to the Mouth, and more plenteously while the Fit be∣gins or molests; and somtimes the contrary, som∣times neither happens. But the Vitiations which are found in the Spittle, do nothing less then testifie the primary, but rather the secondary Vitiation of Spittle, as it will more evidently appear from what is to be said hereafter. 58. IV. Any Man may easily think that Intermit∣ting Fevers, as Intermitting, are to be deduc'd from the Juice of the Pancreas, who shall observe with an at∣tentive Mind, all and every of the Requisites, noted in Sect. 46, &c. to produce them, to concur here and only here.
59. For 1. This Juice is carri'd from the very Pancreas, in such a Part, which by its Vessels and pro∣per Passages (as it is said in Sect. 50.) mediatly com∣municates with the Right Ventricle of the Heart. 60. 2. The same Juice is carri'd by such Vessels, to wit, the Lateral or Side Passages, in one or more wherof, it may be so infected and afflicted by an Exter∣nal Cause, that it may suddenly be stopt in some part, in its motion, and hindred for a certain time, least it should continually go to the Heart. 61. And that falls out, as oft as Phlegm, which uses to be much gatherd and accumulated in the Small Gut, is dissolvd either by Heat of Air, or a vehement Motion of Body, or Watchings prolongd, or Care of Mind, or Anger continu'd, or Meats, Sauces, or sharp Medicins, or else by any other Cause; and then being mixt with the Blood, is carri'd together with it all over to all parts of the Body, and being joind more or less every where with all the Humors, is carri'd with the same in their Vessels; Whence as in other places, so in the Lateral Passages of the Pancreas, I mean the strait ones, the same Phlegm thickens, stops the same Passages, and hinders that the Juice standing still there, cannot go into the Middle and Greater Passage and so forward, for some sudden External Cause, which is apt to Coagulate Phlegm, (as Air frozen or blown with chill Winds, or with any Blast causing cold, Rain or any Water touching the Body, and afflicting it with its coldness, Drink of any cold Liquor, especially when taken in a large quan∣tity; A sudden and especially unexpected Terror, and great Grief of Mind, &c.) 62. And perhaps this happens easier, and ofter in the Pancreas, then in all the Parts of the Body, be∣cause Phlegm is easier and more plentifully joind
and transported to the Acid Matter of the Juice of the Pancreas, exceding all the other Humors in Aci∣dity; and again it separates easily, when Coagulated by any Cause; wherby the Separation between that Acid, though not very sharp, Juice, and Phlegm, though Clammy, being only confus'd, in no wise wholly mixt, is promoted. 63" Nor have we only Concluded that the Obstru∣ction of the Pancreas in the Lateral Passages, may be in probability by the now mentiond Causes in part con∣trary to it, and mutually receiving one another, but we have evidently cleard, by ocular inspection more then once, that it is actually done in our Dissections of Bodies. 64. For somtimes among our Dissections, even publicly, several being then present in our Academic Hospital of the Sick, besides other grievous Diseases, we had the Bodies of those that died of Intermitting Fevers, and indeed often manifold, and of long con∣tinuance; we forc'd in a liquid Volatil Salt coloured blew into the Passage of the Pancreas, where it opens into the small Gut, by a Syringe fit for this matter. Which Salt, because it pierced only into some, and not into all the Glandules at first, (though the next day it opend all) whilest it entred into both those that were near and remote, and indeed some near, as well as remote were not colourd, and dy'd them of its colour, there must needs be some obstacle, which hindred the infus'd Liquor, from passing through all the Lateral Passages of the Pancreas, into the adjoin∣ing Glandules, which all the Spectators beheld, and without doubt could not but acknowledg the same. 65. And that that hindrance was an Obstruction by a thick and viscous Humor stuffing up the Lateral Pas∣sages; I therfore affirm, because (beside which,
none, not the least sign of Compression, or of any other kind of Straitness, to which this can be a∣scrib'd did present it self) all the Antecedent Causes, as oft as they come to be known, and the Symptoms wonted to accompany Intermitting Fevers, and so al∣so the most rational and certain Manner of curing them, are found to agree, and exactly to square with an Obstruction. 66. 3. Such is the Juice of the Pancreas, as that it may of its own accord get such a vitiation by its delay and standing still alone in its Lateral Passages; as that then all the Symptoms of Intermitting Fevers, though never so different, may commodiously and without diffi∣culty be reduc'd to it, partly alone, and partly joind to others, hereafter to be determind and confirmd by a rational and certain Cure. 67. For the Juice of the Pancreas is naturally sow∣rish; which is cleard by several Arguments propos'd by Me in My second Disquisition of Fevers, Sect. 32, &c. and also by Experience, in the happy success of that Ingenious Dr. Regnerus de Graaf, tried often here and elswhere in Dogs, and also once at Anju. in a Man unhappily opprest and kill'd with a Beam falling on him, and in a peculiar Exercise here ex∣pos'd to public examination, at the end of the year 1664. I being Praeses. 68. This Juice because it is sowrish, therefore is such also, which by its delay and standing still, is vi∣tiated of its own accord in any of its Passages, and indeed so, that first of all it becoms more Acid then usual; and hence dissolvs the Phlegm obstructing its Passages either wholly, and then carrying it out, or at least pieces and passes through; and at length both Alone, and joind with other Humors afterward to be explaind, is not only like to produce, but indeed produces ill
the Symptoms that happen in all Intermitting Fe∣vers. 69. For daily Experience testifies, that any Acids, become always of their own accord more Acid. So Vi∣negar the older, so much the sowr. The Reason wherof I take to be this; to wit, that the Acrimony of Acids is then encreasd, because the Volatil Spirits that temper that Acidity, do at least in part vanish away, whence no wonder, if any Acid Liquor be∣ing kept, grows sensibly more Acid. By the same means the making of Vinegar may be promoted, though unknown to many, in a common place warmd with Fire, or expos'd to the Sun on an House top; for by these means a way is prepar'd for the more ea∣sie and speedy efflux of the Volatil Spirits. 70. And as any Acid Liquors not within our Bo∣dies, do of their own accord and more encrease in Acidity; so within the same, the Symptoms both in Melancholic Diseases so call'd, and which here is more requisite, those that are observable in the begin∣nings of Intermitting Fevers, and as they oft rise without the wrong use of any Acids, so are they to be referd to an Acid Liquor, these, I say, do prove that the Juice of the Pancreas by being stopt does grow more Acid, which therfore we intend strait way to search more accuratly. 71. The Jaice of the Pancreas grows Acid with standing still in its Passages, because the Volatil Spirit which is naturally conjoind to it, and so tempers it, departs then gradually more and more. 72. This Juice of the Pancreas, by standing still as aforesaid, becoming more Sharp and Acid, begins to use its force, and to Cut the Phlegm that stops its Pas∣sages; which if it prevail with so much toughness and thickness, that it cannot be wholly cleansd, loosed,
and thence remov'd, it pierces it then, and opens a way for it self by force to pass through. 73. We intend to deduce the rise of all the ob∣servable Symptoms in Intermitting Fevers, from the too much Acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas, and other Humors joind to it, after we have premis'd in a word the fourth Requisite, Sect. 49. also here to concur, to wit, that the Phlegm that obstructs the La∣teral Passages of the Pancreas, which not only compels the Juice for a time to stand still there, but moreover when it has yielded it an Out-let, causd by its Acri∣mony, does presently again come together, grow in one, and so repairs and renues the Obstruction that was in part opend, and hence stops likewise that Juice so long in the same place, till being let out also as the former, in an open way, it produces a new Fit; and that so long continu'd, till the Fever and Obstruction be wholly cur d any way or the Sick himself destroy'd. 74. That the nature of Viscous Phlegm is such, that though it be pierc'd through, yet runs together and unites again, is sufficiently evinc'd by the li change of all viscous things, and also the eradicang and choaking Medicins of Intermitting Fvers  whether they be of an inciding or cutting na, and Diuretics, or Sudorifics, or whether V or Purgers. For all these seem to my appr to cure Intermitting Fevers, in as much as they ∣cide, loosen, cleanse, and carry down to the Gts, a somtimes totally educe out of the Body, though i a divers way the Viscous Phlegm that stuck in the Passages of the Pancreas. Which any that seriously weighs and examins the special, and commonly call'd Specific Medicins for happy curing of Intermit∣ting Fevers will easily acknowledg. 75. As oft as Intermitting Fevers are not ended
suddenly and by Medicins us'd by art or chance, or by the Non-natural Things not naturally us'd, and exceding custom, but vanish away slowly and almost insensibly, so oft, if any observe all, which befal the Sick, he will find that the reason of this Solution is wholly to be ascrib'd to the same Non-natural things and somtimes to Medicins, but very moderat ones, and therfore such as do slowly and less observably produce this worthy Effect. 76. Having now fully proved the rise of Inter∣mitting Fevers, as Intermitting from the Juice of the Pancreas Obstructed and Standing still in its La∣teral Passages, the next thing in course is, that we deduce all the Symptoms in Fevers, though never so different if notable, both from the same, and also from other Humors join'd with it, and so prove and confirm our Opinion of Fevers and their Rise, at least in part, as we hope, already prov'd. 77. The Juice therefore of the Pancreas, being made more sowr then naturally it is, by its above∣nam'd Obstruction, and poured out into the Cavity of the small Gut after it has pierced through the obstructing Phlegm, forth-with rises up against Cho∣ler meeting it, and so raises an Effervescency with it sharper then usual, and indeed varying according to the variery of Phlegm also adjoining. 78. For so long as that Acid Juice by the help of Phlegm over-powers Choler, it produces Coldness, fnt very much in many Circumstances. 79. For 1. most frequently there is vehement Cold i  Ri of the Loins, where there is a conflux of the three fore-mentioned Humors in the Small Gt when the aforesaid Juice is more Acid, and  is not very viscous, by which, piercing the Tnicle of the Guts, it afflicts them with Coldness.
80. 2. In the same Region of the Loins there is little or no Coldness felt, when the Phlegm of Spittle is very Viscous, and hinders the piercing of the Juice of the Pancreas to the Tunicle of the Gut, whence Coldness molests, one while in the middle of the Belly, to wit, about the end of the small Gut, ano∣ther while in the extreme parts of the Body only. 81. 3. Coldness seems chiefly to molest in the In∣ner Parts of the Head, when it abounds with a Phleg∣matic Humor, to which the Acid Juice, or its Va∣pors joining, manifest themselves there, more then elsewhere, and so torment the Sick whilst a Destilla∣tion of Rheum does assault and attend. 82. 4. By these same Vapors if more gentle, and also by the mixture of Phlegm of the Guts be∣coming more flatulent and going to the Lungs there are raisd in the beginning of most of the Fits Yawn∣ings, as also Gapings, Ʋnquietness, and weariness of the Lims, by the same dispersd through the Habit of the Body. 83. 5. At other times these over-sharp Vapors, being less mixt with Phlegm, but different in degrees of Acrimony, do produce somtimes a Shivering, somtimes a Stifness. 84. 6. These same Vapors, when they are more Acrimonious, do breed Gnawing, Pricking, and so Griping Pains of the Belly: as when they have much Phlegm mixt with them, they then breed more weighty and beating Pains. 85. 7. These same Vapors being both flatulent and acrimonious, cause the Pulse in the beginning to be more frequent because of their Irritating the Heart when they come thither: which by Degrees grows Lesser when Cold increass by reason of the increasd Acidity in these Vapors that arise, the Blood
being more coagulated, and so less fit for its rarefacti∣on: Whence no wonder if beside all this the Pulse be made Weaker together with the whole Animal Motion; which therfore can scarce or not at all be observd, whil'st Coldness doth molest. 86. But where all the Juice of the Pancreas be∣coming sharper by the Obstruction is effus'd into the Small Gut, and Choler getting dominion again becoms sharper, either by it self, or is made sharper by reason of the vitious Effervescency made with the aforesaid Juice, the Vapors which are then raisd for the most part more Choleric, 1. do usually cause an Anxiety about the Midrif, and somtimes a Queasiness, and Vomiting, or besides, a Loosness, of which we intend to speak more largely hereafter. 87. 2. These same Vapors being very Choleric, and partly rising up to the Ventricle, and hence up to the Jaws, partly passing through to the Heart and Lungs do provoke Thirst. 88. 3. Likewise when Choler hath gaind domi∣nion in the Heart, the Blood by degrees rarefies more, and the Pulse becoms greater and stronger; al∣though the former frequency remains, which is in∣creasd by an irritation of the Acrimony of Choler, and the rarefaction of Blood at the Heart. 89. Though chiefly the Heat and Burning in the Heart, and thence in the whole Body is encreasd by Choler successivly over-ruling. 90. And no Wonder if then 5. a driness of the Tongue do accompany such a Heat, seeing Vapors ef∣fus'd out of the Blood and carri'd into the Lungs through the sharp Artery do dry the same. 91. Neither is it a wonder if 6. Breathing be more difficult and encreasd seeing the Blood is much rare∣fi'd.
92. As also, if 7. Heat, Pain, and Pulsation of the Head chiefly, do vex the Sick, seeing no part of the Body hath so many Arteries, and receivs so much Blood as the Head; in which Region of the Tem∣ples the same Pulsation is felt more troublesom then elswhere, because of the remarkable winding clefts of the Brain, through which great Arteries are carri'd. 93. Neither Wonder, if 8. Watchings, and som∣times a Raving do so frequently molest; for then of necessity the Animal Spirits are vitiated and mov'd troublesomly, and hindred of natural Rest, or at least Tranquility, wherfore the empty Mind of the Sick is disturbd, and oft distracted. 94. And after the preternatural heat and fury of Choler made sharper by the Juice of the Pancreas also sharpned after the same manner by its Obstruction, begins to remit, and the Humors are dispos'd to sere∣nity, and former tranquillity of the whole Body, which during the troublesom Fit were more confus'd one with another, do now sensibly separate and loosen from one another again, yea some of them also are voided by Ʋrin or Sweat together with Drink taken pretty liberally. 95. And as Watchings molest while the Fit conti∣nues, so when it declines, a pleasant Sleep uses to overtake the wearied, and recreat them again. 96. Which if the Humors of the Body more close∣ly united, separate from one another only in part, the Sleep is observd less quiet, and grievous with Dreams or Watching; which testifies the Diseases rather to encrease, then decrease. 97. But, that we may prosecute in order all the kinds of Fevers mentiond, I. Chill Fevers arise from the Juice of the Pancreas over-Acid, and joind to
Phlegm plentiful and tough enough, mean-while Choler being very slow. 98. II. Burning Fevers arise from Choler then Sharp, and Oily, and Plentiful, the Juice of the Pan∣creas being less sharp, and Phlegm but little, and less tough. 99. III. The Fevers call'd Epialae, I judg to be two-fold Intermitting Fevers, but both caus'd by the Juice of the Pancreas too sharp, and Choler also sharp, and so indeed, that continually the Coldness of the one concur's with the Heat of the other, and the new Fit of the first and Coldness return, when the Heat of the latter begins to be augmented, and molest the Sick. 100. IV. I ascribe Thirsty Fevers to the over-sharp Salt in Choler; which if much Oiliness also accom∣pany, Thirst is troublesom chiefly in Heat, but if it be more gentle, then even while Cold molests; and its hurtful quality is more manifested at the meeting and vitious Effervescency of the Juice of the Pancreas forcing out after its feverish obstruction. 101. V. I derive Hungry Fevers from the Juice of the Pancreas obtaining a more grateful Acidity, but ptent by its obstruction, when it ascends to the Ven∣tricle breeds both that cruel Hunger, and somtimes Fainting and other Symptoms except Meat be given. 202. VI. The Juice of the Pancreas breeds Heart∣aking Fevers by getting a Corroding quality, chiefly when Choler is also sharp, and their concourse make a potent Effervescency; whence exceding sharp Va∣pors rising to the upper Orifice of the Ventricle do sharply bite and gnaw it. 203. VII. Griping Fevers arise from the same Juice of the Pancreas both too sharp and too tart by its obstruction, and putting forth its Acrimony, one while into the Small, other times into the Thick
Guts; With which if Viscous Phlegm and Choler, at least moderatly Sharp, do concur, they raise Wind, which distend the Belly together with the Guts, and beget the Colic pain an importunate Companion of this Fever. 104. VIII. Swouning Fevers have their rise also from the Juice of the Pancreas, but more Volatil then Sharp in Acidity by its obstruction, Choler being lit∣tle and slow then, whence the same breaks forward without delay through the Lacteal Veins piercing to∣wards the Heart, not only all over, and raising a cold Sweat, but forthwith does so coagulate the Blood also, that for a season it cannot be rarefi'd sensibly, nor yet the Pulse observd, till Choler get some strength when this hurtful Juice begins to cease, and the Sick seems then to return from the Dead to Life. 105. IX. I attribute Strangling Fevers to Sowr Vapors of the Juice of the Pancreas growing more sowr by its obstruction, stird up in its Effervescency with Choler, and not only rising to the Ventricle and Throat, but also to the Thoracic Passage, by the Lacteal Veins, to the Heart and Lungs, and causing somtimes a Sense of Suffocation in the Gullet, and a true Suffocation in the Lungs. 106. X. I also ascribe Difficulty-Breathing Fevers to Vapors after the same manner, but less Sowr, of the Juice of the Pancreas less Sowr, join'd to Viscous Phlegm in the Small Gut, and so more Flatulent; from which all the Symptoms reckoned Sect. 32. may be easily and only deduc'd, and commodiously enough explain'd. 107. XI. Asthmatic Fevers have their rise in my Judgment from Viscous Phlegm found in the Small Gut, which being dissolvd by the Juice of the Pan∣creas raise a Feverish Fit, and being carri'd with it,
together to the Heart and Lungs, and sticking there, causes a Breathing with Snorting; whil'st many or few Belches come forth by the same, and make a more grievous, or lighter, longer or shorter Fit. 108. XII. Coughing Fevers are caus'd by Vapors, most commonly, seldom Wind, and not so Viscous as Sharp, partly to be ascrib'd to the Juice of the Pan∣creas, partly to Phlegm in the Guts, but sharper and more biting, so often as they come to the Lungs, and provoke and compel Them to cough continually. 109. XIII. Catarrhal Fevers arise from Humors in the Head gradually gatherd, and dissolvd by the Cause of an Intermitting Fever carri'd thither, and mov'd every way according to its Distillation and Defluxion. 110. XIV. Gouty Fevers are to be found in the Juice of the Pancreas so corrupted, that it chiefly as∣saults with it Choler, with which it does vitiously effervesce, and raise the most grievous Pain; or less Sharp, rising against Viscous Phlegm, and not sharp Choler is much dulld of the same, and hinders the Motion of the part with a Phlegmatic Tumor, ra∣ther then an Acute Pain. Where it is to be noted, that often, daily, or every other day the Feverish Fits which return, do not afflict the Sick with a no∣table or troublesom Coldness, or Heat, but rather with a light Pain of the Head, and moreover a Thirst, the Pulse also being too Frequent and too little at first, and then somwhat Greater: whereby a New Fit is observed; the Gouty Pains also being imbitterd after some hours, and so, that although they remit again in part, either slower or quicker, yet do they not wholly intermit; but though the Fe∣verish Fit be ended, yet notwithstanding the grievous
or more light Pains of the Joints still continue, till at length they depart either of their own accord or by art. 111. XV. The Symptoms that attend Distra∣stracting Fevers, do prove the new Feverish Fit to arise from Choler, chiefly sharp enough of it self, and sharper by meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas. 112. XVI. All may see that Vomiting Fevers a∣rise from the same Choler very Volatil, and somtimes also sharp meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas, and so much stird up by its consequent Vitious Ef∣fervescency and rising up to the Ventricle; which the excretion of Choler somtimes Yellow, othertimes greenish doth confirm. 113. XVII. Fevers with a Loosness are wholly to be assign'd to Choler also, but less Volatil, and more sharp, and still made sharper by meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas, which by gnawing the Guts having dissolvd the Phlegm therof do provoke them to thrust forward what is containd in them. 114. XVIII. I take Sweating Fevers to arise from the Juice of the Pancreas more Volatil, then sharp, and therfore rather dissolving then coagulating the Mass of Blood. 115. XIX. I am perswaded that Ʋrining Fevers arise from the same Cause but less Volatil, seeing that not only the Matter of Sweat is the same with that of Urin, but where Sweat is hindred by external Coldness, there Urin is voided more plentifully. 116. XX. I deduce Spitting Fevers from the same Juice of the Pancreas, being so vitiated by its Ob∣struction, that when it produces a Feverish Fit, it is carri'd more plentifully to the Salivary Glandul's, and so affords the Spittle more plenteous and fluid matter.
117. From what has been said, I suppose that the Causes of many other Intermitting Fevers with most grievous Pain of the Head, and Teeth, and other parts, or any other notable Symptom may easily be unfolded by those which are Ingenious, wherfore be∣fore we come to the Cure of all and every of the Fe∣vers propos'd and explaind, let us mention their di∣versity in returning, according to the Intervals of their Fits now shorter, other-times longer in Quoti∣dians, Tertians, Quartans, Quintans, and others, as also the Reason and Causes of their difference, which I take to be most true, and intend to apply them explaind to my Opinion. 118. And although I do not wholly follow the di∣vers manner of these Sorts commonly ascrib'd to di∣vers, yet do I not think that these divers Humors are here to be neglected, seeing that, as shall appear by what is to be said, if they cause not that diversity immediatly, they much contribute, to do it medi∣atly. 119. As therfor the new Fit of every Intermitting Fever is stird up according as we have taught, so oft as the Juice of the Pancreas becoming sharper by its Obstruction, bores through the Phlegm that obstructs its Lateral Passages and passes to the small Gut, and hence having raised an Effervescency vitiated howso∣ever with Choler, and other Symptoms in the same place, and adjacent parts carri'd through the Lacteal Veins, and Thoracic Passage, and the hollow upper Vein into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so forward: so the same new Fit, is raisd sooner, or later, as Phlegm obstructing the Lateral Passage of the Pancreas is pierc'd, and bored through by the foremen∣tiond Juice. 120. And this piercing and penetrating of Phlegm
Obstructing, is sooner or later, both upon the account of the Phlegm it self obstructing the Passage, and also of the Juice of the Pancreas piercing through it. 121. For by how much the more viscous and plen∣teous Phlegm is, by so much the more difficulty and so slowly will it be pierced through: and on the contrary, the lesser and less Glutinous it is, the easier and so the sooner will it be pierc'd through. 122. Again, the more Acid this Juice of the Pan∣creas is of it self, the sooner will it acquire by its obstruction a greater and sufficient Acrimony to pe∣netrate the Phlegm obstructing easier and sooner: and on the contrary, the more obtuse or sowr and little this Juice is, so much the slowlier can it acquire a sufficient Acrimony to cut through the Phlegm. 123. Therfore by how much the less and less glu∣tinous Phlegm obstructing is, and the Juice of the Pancreas be more Acid and Plentiful, so much the sooner will a new Fit of an Intermitting Fever arise, and so a Quotidian, that is, one returning in the space of about 24 hours. 124. Again how much the more viscous and plen∣tiful Phlegm obstructing is, and the Juice of the Pan∣creas more obtuse or tart and little, so much the slower will the new Fit of the Intermitting Fever be a com∣ing, and so a Quartan or Quintan, &c. 125. But as oft as 1. Phlegm obstructing, and Juice of the Pancreas are in a medium, or 2. The Juice of the Pancreas is of it self too acid or plentiful, and Phlegm obstructing too viscous or plentiful; or 3. the Juice of the Pancreas is less and less Acid, and Phlegm lesser and less Glutinous, so oft new Fits of the Fevers will return almost every other day, and then they will be Tertians, much differing in their Symptoms
beyond what other Intermitting Fevers do; and in∣deed because of the newly mentiond possible three∣fold respect of Phlegm obstructing, and the Juice of the Pancreas piercing through it. 126. And here you may note, that Intermitting Fevers do but seldom return in the exact Interval of natural days of 24 hours; but return quicker or slower for the most part; wherfore then they are said to anticipate the appointed and expected Time for some hours, which is disliked; or to come later, which is commended, although it matters not whether the Fits anticipate or come later, if so be that their con∣tinuance, and the grievousness of Symptoms daily accompanying be diminishd; to which a Physician should chiefly give heed when he prognosticates by Art, and would foretel a change certainly to come. 127. From what hath already been said, the Causes of Intermitting Fevers, both manifold, and compound∣ed of divers, may without much difficulty be found out and assignd, to wit, the Obstruction both various, and in divers Lateral passages of the Pancreas. 128. But there still remains a difficulty not to be despis'd, which is more requisit in explaining the multiplication of any simple Intermitting Fevers, to wit, Quartan or Tertian, that is, its change into a double or triple, which I judg to be so oft as new Phlegm is dissolvd in the Body, and especially in the Small Gut, by an Error committed in Diet, or Medicins, Poisons rather not rightly us'd, and hence driven for∣ward together with the Blood every whither, ther∣fore also to the Pancreas; which being again coagu∣lated in one, or more of its passages formerly not af∣flicted, by what cause soever, breed an Obstruction different from the former, more or less, which breeds a Fever more or less grievous then the former. And
if daily Experience do not evince, certainly it abun∣dantly confirms this to be so. 129. And seeing I cannot observe any more nota∣ble difficulty about the Causes of Intermitting Fe∣vers, which I judg could make any scrupling to the Ingenious and Judicious; who attentively consi∣der what is above-said, and chiefly to those who do accurately observe natural things, I betake my self directly to handle their Cure. 130. As we have considerd Intermitting Fevers, in searching and assigning their Causes, both as they are Intermitting, and as they are accompani'd with vari∣ous Symptoms, and as they return in divers Intervals, so now we will keep our Method in their Dogmatical Cure propos'd, and will attend to the same, seeing that the Cure according to Art will be easier and more succesful, when they are accurately and rightly ob∣servd. 131. Because therfore the Juice of the Pancreas is the apparent and determind Cause of Intermitting Fe∣vers as Intermitting, when it is made more acid and sharp, by reason of the Obstruction of its Lateral Passages caus'd by Phlegm coagulated in them, and hence carri'd down into the Small Gut after the Phlegm Obstructing is opend, and there raising an Effervescency vitiously with Choler and Phlegm of the Guts meeting, after that creeps with them in what form soever to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and therein by stirring up the Heart causes a more frequent Pulse, not only by its Acrimony or Flatulency, but moreover alters and troubles divers ways the Vital Effervescency, and Sanguification it self, and produces all other Symptoms above noted, and explaind in di∣vers places, the Cure wherof will be performd, if I. Phlegm obstructing more, or less glutinous and co∣agulated
be cut, and dissolvd, and thence remov'd, be∣cause peccant in place, and carried down at least to the small Gut, or wholly carri'd out of the Body. II. If the Acidity and Acrimony encreas'd of the Juice of the Pancreas be Temperd and Corrected. III. If its viti∣ous Effervescency with Choler in the Small Gut be hin∣dred or amended. 131. I. Phlegm obstructing will be Cut most commo∣diously with Aromatics and any Volatil Salt, but espe∣cially so us'd, that the whole Body grow warm, either with Motion, or a Fire, or Bath, or Cloaths also; whereby the force of the Medicin being disperst all over, may come also to the Pancreas it self, and its Lateral Passages, and so to the place Grievd and Fuel of the Disease: which chiefly conduce to Melancho∣lic and Phlegmatic People. 133. For Example sake take of this Mixture one Spoonful several times in a day, and two, or three hours before the Fit coms take three Spoonfuls; also increasing the heat of the Body mildly, as is above∣said, even to the breathing of a gentle Sweat: for so it will perform more, and somtimes happily cure the Fever. ℞. Parsley-water ℥ ii. Fenel-Water ℥ i. Treacle-Water, or Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus ℥ i. ss. Vola∣til Salt of Amber ℈ i. Syr. of Carduus ℥ i. M. 134. If the Constitution of the Sick be either Na∣turally or Preternaturally Choleric, let him take sowr things that loosen and cut; For Example, ℞. Fumitory-Water ℥ iii. Salt Armoniac, or Salt of Tartar Vitriolated ʒ i. Diaphoretic Antimony ʒ ss. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. M. 135. When Choleric and Phlegmatic Humors do abound together in the Sick, these Mixtures may be prepar'd of the two above-mentiond differing ones. For Example;
℞. Carduus and Succory-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. Sim∣ple Treacle-Water, Distilled Vinegar, of each ʒ vi. Crabs-Eyes pouderd ʒ ss. Syr. of the five Roots ℥ i. M. 136. If the Phlegm Obstructing be not very gluti∣nous, the Obstruction is often loosend wholly, by one Sweat, and its Cause carri'd down into the Small Gut, and the Fever Cur'd. 137. You may administer a Vomit three or four hours before the return of the Fi if there be little Phlegm, and much Choler in the Body▪ by the hlp whereof not only Choler abounding, ut also Phlegm obstructing is expell to the Small Gut, and thence to the Ventricle, and at length by the Gullet and Mouth, and so the Fever is said to be choak'd, because it is remov'd. To which end I have often us'd with hap∣py success a Sapa Vomitoria made by my Self of Glass of Antimony, and other Medicins made of Antimony in this case proper before all others. 138. Such things also as Purge, perform the same, if they have such as both cut and purge Phlegm mixt with them. For Example; ℞. Fetid Pils ℈ ss. Troches of Alhandal, Mercury dulcifi'd, of each Gr. 5. Oil of Amber 2 drops. M. Make them into five Pills Guilded, and tak them four or five hours before the Fit coms, which will purge mildly. 139. II. The Encreasd Acidity and Acrimony of the Juice of the Pancreas, is best Temperd with Vola∣til Salts, and all Aromatics not neglecting Opiats. To this end therfore the Mixture prescrib'd in Sect. 133. may be us'd, and it will be more effectual, if you add to it Laudanum three Grains, and Oil of Cloves two Drops. 140. III. The Vitious Effervescency of the Juice
of the Pancreas and Choler may be Hindred, at least Amended with the newly commended Mixture, and chiefly because of Opium wonderfully lenifying and tempering both kinds of Sharpness by its Oiliness. 141. And by these few forms any young Practiti∣oner may easily invent other Prescriptions in some things to be vari'd as the Distemper requires; espe∣cially if he attend to all the Rules, and Examples of Forms which he may find here. 142. And now we have premis'd the Rational Cure of Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, con∣firmd by long Experience, let us see what the Symp∣toms so notable by their great diversity, and oft so troublesom to the Sick, do indicate and require for their Cure. 143. Against Coldness, and the other Symptoms that usually accompany it, the Mixture prescrib'd in Sect. 133. is convenient here, if you add what we commend Sect. 139. seeing I have not observd hi∣therto that any thing does so temper Coldness, as Oil of Cloves; and while the Sick is Cold, he may take three or four times in an hour a Spoonful of the above-mentiond Mixture. 144. To temper Heat, and its Symptoms accom∣panying, the Mixtures every where prescrib'd, as al∣so the Decoction set down in Chap. 29. Sect. 40, &c. are convenient; to the imitation of which, you may easily form more. 145. III. In Epial Fevers Medicins compos'd of the foremntiond differing Prescriptions are convenient; such as is the Mixture propos'd in §. 135. and many other sch-like in this Treatise; also any may form  according to the Symptom that most molests, and change it after it is taken with different success. Fo we must always attend to such things as Conduce
or are Prejudicial; and according to them, Remedies are to be alterd and renewd; seeing in this the Judg∣ment and Ingenuity of Physicians appears. 146. IV. To asswage and take away Thirst, I com∣mend what I mentiond in Chap. 29. Sect. 47. And note, that during Heat you may drink more plenti∣fully, whereof take heed whilst Coldness molests; in which time it is safer to wash the Mouth with clean Water, and moreover mix with Wine, and to deceive Thirst, rather then drink much: or then you may dissolve some of Lapis Prunellae in Drink, and often take it in a small quantity. 147. V. To Cure Hunger that threatens fainting, all things conduce that do potently destroy and con∣centrate the Sowr Humor, Crabs-Eyes, Pearl, Co∣ral, Chalk, &c. only reduc'd into Pouder, and ex∣hibited in Mixtures otherwise conducing, or alone in another Liquor, Wine, Beer, or Broth, to the quantity of some Grains, till Hunger is observ'd to be diminisht. 148. VI. The Heart-ake so oft very grievous, is chiefly Cur'd by Opiats; which may be added to di∣vers Medicins according to the diversity of the other Symptoms also concurring; because they mitigate and asswage both kinds of Sharpness, whence that Pain of the Ventricle arises. But they must be taken oft and in a little quantity, until the diminishing, or curing of the Pain, being the benefit sought for, be obtaind. 149. VII. The Mixture mentiond in Chap. 29. Sect. 69. to be taken by Spoonfuls, is proper in Gip∣ing and Colical Fevers. Hither reduce those things propos'd by me in Chap. 14. Sect. 45, &c. and else∣where more at large. 150. VIII. To prevent Swounings, I commend
the Mixture prescrib'd in Chap. 19. Sect. 74. or one like it, oft us'd by Spoonfuls some hours before the Fit, and the other things there mentiond. 151. IX Hypochondriac Suffocations joind to In∣termitting Fevers, are to be diminisht and cur'd by Medicins mentiond by me both elswhere, and in Chap. 19. Sect. 71, &c. 152. X. Wheasing Anxiety coupled to the same Fevers seeing it arises from the same Cause, but not so violent, may be Cur'd or Lessend with such-like Medicins, as well when the Fit molests as begins, and oft us'd in a lesser quantity. 153. XI. An Asthma accompanying an Inter∣mitting Fever may happily be Cur'd with a Vomit ta∣ken some hours before the Fit comes or the day be∣fore, after the Phlegmatic Humor is cut, and especi∣ally by those that do easily vomit: Otherwise it may be evacuated downward by gentle Purgation with Phlegmagogues powerful and effectual, such as are all Mercurials, Colocynthis, Hermodactyls, &c. 154. As for Phlegmatic Humors somtimes then also sliding down from the Head, and filling the Sharp Ar∣tery, the same Phlegmagogues are convenient to be ta∣ken oft in a small quantity together with such as cut and correct Phlegm, and chiefly in form of Pills; such as we have oft prescrib'd before. 155. As for Windy Vapors so commonly producing the Asthma, either wholly, or at least much encrea∣sing it, all things will conduce, which both amend their matter and efficient cause, and hinder their rise, and discuss and dissipate them when bred; concerning which see Chap. 14. in which the most are containd, that respect hither. 156. XII. The Feverish Cough is Cur'd, by such things as both temper, and discuss the over-sharp Va∣pors.
Which Opiats do being join'd to Volatil and Oily Salts, and often us'd in the Fits in a little quan∣tity, whereby they will perform it the happier, sooner, safer, and surer. To that end I commend this following Form. ℞. Mint-Water ℥ iii. Our Carminative Spirit ℥ i. Sp. of Salt Armoniac 20 drops. Landanum 3 gr. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. ss. M. 157. XIII. Catarrhs stird up together with the Feverish Fit, require divers Medicins to cure them, as they consist of a different Matter, and afflict divers Parts. In general their vitious quality is to be cor∣rected, their plenty diminisht, and the Parts usually afflicted strengthned. 158. Moreover thick and viscous Catarrhs are to be attenuated and cut with Aromatics before menti∣ond: Serous and Salt Catarrhs are to be temperd with Oily and Opiat Things, as Pills of Hounds-Tongue, of Styrax, &c. 159. The Thick are to be evacuated with Phlegma∣gogues, the Serous with Hydragogues. 160. The Parts afflicted, or that may be afflicted, are to be strengthned, against viscous and thick Phlegm by grateful Aromatics; on the contrary Salt Serous Matter by Glutinous Things; externally us'd in the form of a Plaster, Unguent, or Liniment; and in∣ternally in the form of Pills, Tablets, or Conserv's, &c. 161. The Cure of the Gout accompanying Inter∣mitting Fevers will consist I. in the Ʋniversal Amend∣ment of the Juice of the Pancreas proposd before. II. In the Correction, or Emptying of Choler vitious ei∣ther by it self, or accidentally, mentiond before. III. In the Altering or Diminishing of Phlegm peccant any way, often exhibited in this Tractate. IV. Lastly Defending the Joints Afflicted as well against future
Pain, as freeing them when Pain is present and mo∣lests. 162. The Joints are defended against future Pain with extrnl Medicins to be vari'd according to the various Humors breeding a different Pain: Which seeing lss effctual ones are requir'd, then they which should overcome Pains molesting, they may easily be selected from those which are to be propos'd in order. 163. That therfore Gouty Persons may be freed Dog∣matically, that is, as well by Reason as Experience from Pains, present and molesting, seeing they are not freed always with the same Medicins, no not in the same Fit, much less all that are Gouty, we must consider it comes, in as much as the Causes of Pains are often different, not only in divers Sick People, but also in the same at another time of the Fit. 164. The Causes are Different in Divers Sick Peo∣ple, in as much as Choler, and that divers, or Phlegm, also divers is coupled to the primary Cause of the Gout, the Juice of the Pancreas, also much differ∣ing. 165. The Causes of Pains of the Gout are divers in the same Sick Party but in a divers time of the Fit, in as much as the Juice of the Pancreas in the begin∣ning hurts chiefly and that by its Sowr Acrimony breeds pain; and after that Choler is coupled to it, and either overcomes, or changes its Acrimony, breeding  divers pain according to the diversity of its faultiness, and chiefly troublesom with exceding Heat; seeing that rather a Corroding then Burning Pain is rais'd by the Juice of the Pancreas: which is accuratly to be observd in potently correcting both kind of Pains chiefly with special Medicins; for ei∣ther Acrimony may easily and happily be mitigated,
and so the Pain asswag'd with more gentle ones, and chiefly with Oily things. 166. Hence it is, that Poultisses prepared of Mea∣ly Things, and Cows Milk do conduce almost to all Gouty People grieved with any Pain. For Exam∣ple; ℞. The Meal of Marsh Mallow-Roots, Line-Seeds, Barley, of each ℥ i. Boil them in Cows Milk to the consistency of a Pultis for a Poultise: Which let be applied indifferent warm. 167. Where exceding Heat concurs, and the Body abounds with sharp Choler, instead of sweet Milk you may substitute Butter-Milk. 168. In a Phlegmatic Constitution the Meal of Beans, Flowers of Camomile, Elder, and other things gently Cutting may commodiously be added. 169. A Poultise of the best Wheat-Bread, that is the Crumb prepar'd of the Flower only of the Meal, Saffron and Cows Milk boil'd, is deservedly com∣mended of many seeing it asswages any Pains. 170. Where Fermentations please better, I com∣mend this following in excessive Heat to be appli'd warm, and to be renewd as soon as it is dri'd. ℞. Elder and Fumitory-Water, of each ℥ iv, Mari∣gold-Vinegar ℥ ii. Opium of Thebes ʒ ss. M. 171. When the Pain is more Corroding, then Burn∣ing, I commend the following Fomen ation in like manner to be us'd. ℞. Parsley-Water ℥ v. Simple Treacle-Water ℥ i. Opium of Thebes ℈ i. M. for a Fomentation.
172. When Impotency of Motion does molest the Sick ore then Pain in a very Phlegmatic Body, then things more Aromatical may commodiously be us'd, both in Poultises, and in Fomentations, and in Pla∣sters▪ Unguents, or Liniments, Opiats being then usually omitted, as being less requisite or profitable. For Example; ℞. Th Root of Flower de Luce poudred ℥ i. Mint-Leavs, Wormwood Tops, Camomile-Flowers, of each 2 handfuls. Cumin-Seeds poudred ℥ i. ss. Beans-Meal ℥ ii. Boil them in clean Water to the consistency of a Poutise, adding about the end Sim∣ple Treacle-Water ℥ ii. M. to be a Poultise, and appli'd hot. 173. They whose Skin can bear fat things, to them apply Unguents and Oils, such as are when Heat molests of Poplar, the White Camphorated, of Roses, the Cooling of Galens and such-like; In a Corroding Pain Aregon and Martiatum. Somtimes it is better to mix these, and make them more tem∣perate. 174. Not long since I experienc'd the stupendious power of Balsam of Sulphur Ambred in a Goutish Pain very Corroding with great admiration, some few drops being anointed on the part griev'd, whence forthwith there was rais'd an hot Effervescency in the place afflicted, yea burning, and presently cea∣sing again together with the exceding Pain remov'd in a momnt. But I question and not without ground the like success in all, seeing all cannot bear Oily things, nd chifly such as are prepar'd by distil∣lation, and Cholr is sharper in many; yet I judg they in whom Sowr Juice excedes, and Phlegm a∣bounds may more easily bear this Balsam, and be helpt with it: Mean while beware, that its use be
not too long continu'd, but after the pain is over, another gentler Medicin should then be us'd to com∣fort and by degrees restore again the membranous parts. 175. To the same purpose may Unguents, or Li∣niments be prepar'd of Volatil Salts in Hogs-Grease, Butter, or other Fat. 176. Neither is Camphur undeservedly commend∣ed both in Plasters, and Unguents, and Liniments, and Fomentations mixd with Spiritous things, see∣ing it wonderfully conduces to temper any Sharp∣ness. 177. Many also approve of their own Spittle rubd in i the morning to defend the part affected against new assaults: which is to be granted to Spittle, the most temperat humor of our Body, and therfore most fit to temper either sharpness, and to strengthen the Parts against them both. 178. From these few Observations it will not be very difficult to select other things necessary out of the Writings of Practitioners, and use them to cure the Gout. 179. XV. Whatsoever do both powerfully and smoothly correct and temper the Acrimony of Cho∣ler will Cure Distracted Fevers, such as are chiefly Oily Things, Emulsions, and Opiats internally us'd; and the same appli'd any way outwardly to the Head. 180. XVI. All things that fix Choler, and render it unfit to Effervesce powerfully, will best Cure Vo∣miting Fevers, as are all Tart Things that thicken and coagulate; and also Opiats that blunt it. 181. XVII. The same things joind together and often us'd in a small quantity at several times will Cure Fevers attended with a Loosness. For Example;
℞. Conserve of Red-Roses ℥ ii. Diascord. ʒ ii. Con∣fection of Jacinth ʒ i. Terra Sigillata ℈ i. Dra∣gons-Blood ℈ ss. M. to be a Conserve taken often in a day to the quantity of a Walnut. 182. But Medicins prepard in a drier form are here to be preferd for use; because Moist things too much dilute Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, and stir up, and rather promote, then stay their Ef∣fervescency. Whence to tame a Vomiting, or Loosness, it is better to drink sparingly, and chiefly Steeld, or Guilded by red hot Gold: whether it be Beer, or Wine, and chiefly Red Wine; or Cows Milk, &c. 183. XVIII. Sweating Fevers are not so easily Cur'd, and yield not unless to Tart Things. Which are to be us'd dissolvd in a little Liquor, oft in a day, and also in a small quantity, wherby the volatility of the Juice of the Pancreas is gradually and continually amended and corrected. For Example; ℞. Plantane-Water ℥ iii. Cinamon-Water, Distild Vinegar, of each ℥ ss. Syr. of Purslan ℥ i. Red Coral pouderd ʒ i. M. Take this Mixture by Spoonfuls; which if any would have more potent, let half or a whole Scruple of Acacia, or the Juice of Cistis be added to it. 184. XIX. The same newly mentiond Medicins do conduce to Ʋrining Fevers, seeing the Causes of both do only differ in degrees. 185. XX. Spitting Fevers can scarce be Cur'd otherwise, then by carrying down, and educing the Juice of the Pancreas either by Stool, or by Urin, or to the Superficies of the Body with Hydragogues, Di∣uretics, or Sudorifics taken in time, that is, before the Fit coms, or when it begins. 186. Although I have not given the Description
of Fevers with the Tooth-ake before, yet I intend to annex here somthing of their Cure. Which will consist, beside general Remedies for the Intermitting Fever, in tempering the over sowr Humor that stirs up the Tooth-ake, by Mixtures often taken by Spoon∣fuls before the Fit, yea during the Fit, and by a gen∣tle educing it when temperd in the time of intermis∣sion. 187. To which end this following Mixture is fit; ℞. Betony and Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Simple Treacle-Water ℥ i. ss. Laudanum 3 Gr. Oil of Cloves 4 drops. Syr. of Arabian Staechas ℥ i. M. 188. I have oft appli'd new Treacle on Leather spread like a Plaster to the place pain'd (for seldom does one Tooth only ake) to lessen the Pain repeat∣ing with Pries. 189. Which Humor in part at least temperd with this or such a-like Mixture is educ'd by Hydragogues in the most acceptable form to the Sick, and indeed in a little Dose, but administred often. For so Pains are more happily taken away, then if Purgers were once taken in too large a dose. 190. And by what has been offerd, I judge every one may know, how to succor and help Intermitting Fevers according to the more molesting Symptoms so much differing upon their account. It remains, that we should instruct you briefly in the Cure of Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, &c. seeing we have ascrib'd them not so much to divers Humors, Phlegm, Choler, or the Melancholy Juice, as to Phlegm Obstructing, and the Juice of the Pancreas so different. 191. Therfore in Curing these we must not so much attend to the Interval of the Recourse of each, as to the diversity of Symptoms accompanying, and
chiefly of Cold and Heat: for according to these if you procede in the Cure, as we have taught you be∣fore, without doubt it will be happy; as on the con∣trary, we have oft observd it unhappy or none, if the Cure be tri'd by the prejudice of every Humor then believd to be peccant no ways agreeing with the Humors then truly peccant. 192. For although, to illustrate the Matter with an Example, Tertians chiefly come in Summer, and indeed when the heat of the Sun molests, in Youth and Manhood, and chiefly to Choleric People, whence in their Cure there is then had an exact ac∣count of Choler much peccant both of it self, and by reason of the Feversh Fit: Yet there are some Tertians, which in Winter, when it is Frost, siez on Old Men or Children, in whom Phlegm abounds; in which case, if any attend to temper or educe Choler chiefly, he will wholly err. For as in most Tertians the effct of great Heat, Choler being then peccant, is observd, so in many there is none or little Heat molesting the Sick observd; therfore a prudent Physician and f from all prejudice will vary the Cure, according to the variety hereof now being present, at other times absent. 193. What I have now said about tiens will also be found true in Quotidians, Qrtans, &c. by and Physician that more attends the complaints of the Sick, and Observations of the more accurate Pacti∣tioners, then the Fictions of Theoretic Authors, and considers therin a great diversity both of Cold and Heat, and of other Symptoms noted in order before; according to which I have cur'd my Patients much more happily hitherto by Gods Blessing, then many other Physicians blinded with their own or others prejudices, so that I seriously exhort my Students to
keep and follow the same Method, yea any Readers addicted only to Truth and their Patients good. 194. I say, we must always attend to all Humors eccant together after what manner soever in the Body, n the Dogmatic and Rational Cure of Intermitting Fevers, seeing they are the Cause, why Phlegm Ob∣structing is more or less glutinous, why the Juice of the Pancreas is more or less sharp, and also why the Fit varies in all its Circumstances and Symptoms. 195. For as oft as Choler has dominion in the Bo∣dy, Phlegm is less clammy, and the Juice of the Pan∣creas not so sharp: and therfore the Fever will be Cur'd easilier and quicker when rightly cur'd. 196. But when Phlegm over-rules the other Hu∣mors in the Body, the Juice of the Pancreas, and Choler, and Phlegm it self obstructing more slower in its Cure, though easie enough, having almost all the Symptoms lighter. 197. When a Sowr Humor abounding in the Body excedes the other Humors; Choler will be more bro∣ken and sluggish, Phlegm being somtimes more glu∣timous, and chiefly when the Sowr Humor inclines to tartness, and joind more compleatly to the saltish part of Choler, and making the serous part Salt like Brine, together with Phlegm over-fluid; and then the Fever is more slowly, and more difficultly cur'd. 198. And after what manner we must procede in the Dogmatical Cure of these Fevers so many ways different among themselvs, no less confirmd by large Experience, then apparent with solid Reason, any excelling in Ingenuity, as well as Judgment, may easily collect from what is said. For we bid all that
are destitute of such endowments of Spirit, to bid adieu to Dogmatical Physic. 199. And as Simple, so are multipli'd Intermit∣ting Fevers to be cur'd; unless the Physician have more need of circumspection here for the Interval of Intermission, or Remission, and the exact observati∣on of fit Seasons, seeing they are somtimes shorter, other-times more seldom; which being neglected, the Cure it self is also commonly neglected, or per∣verted. 200. I said the Interval, not only of the Intermis∣sion, but also Remission is shorter, as well in Multi∣pli'd, as Simple Intermitting Fevers; because there is oft observd no full Intermission of a Fever, but only a Remission, by reason of the Duplication and Multiplication of new Fits: in which time those things are chiefly to be done, which are or ought be performd with some disturbance of both the con∣taining and containd Body, to which Purges and Vo∣mits chiefly belong: which unless they be taken in a convenient time, they oft hurt much, but profit no∣thing; as many Sick do daily experience to their great loss. He is therfore truly an Happy Physici∣an, whom other mens dangers make cautious.
CHAP. XXXI. Of Synechal, or Continual Fevers so espe∣cially call'd. WE have before in Chap. 27. Sect. 12. taught that there were Fevers that were continually ermanent, yet having new Fits daily, or in the third, urth, or an other day; which they commonly and well all Quotidian-Continual, Tertian-Continual, Quar∣an-Continual, &c. Fevers, seeing that they are com∣ounded of Continual and Intermitting Fevers concur∣ing; although many Physicians judg and teach other∣wise, being more attent to the pleasure of their Au∣thors, then the Observation of the Sick: whence they name them not compounded, but singly Conti∣nuals. 2. For the most part there is no Cold observd in any ew Fit, because the continu'd Heat of Those with∣out Fits is wont to break, and overcome the lesser owrness of the Juice of the Pancreas, the Acrimo∣ny and Oiliness of Choler exceding. 3. Yet somtimes either a small Shivering, or little Stiffness is perceivd in any Fit; that is as often as the over-weak Acrimony of Choler cannot suppress the great Acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas whenceso∣ever arising, but it manifests it self at least after a certain manner by cold, or a fretting of the mem∣branous parts, and a light concussion of the fleshy Pannicle following it. 4. For the most part Intermitting Fevers; so cou∣pled
with Continuals, are Tertians; seldom Quoti∣dians; much less Quartans. 5. The notable and most grievous kind of these Tertian Fevers is call'd Causos, or a Burning Fever, in which a great Heat persevering to the end vexeth, and molests the Sick, though remitting a little by In∣tervals, and hence again more grievously afflicting. And beside that most troublesom Heat, Thirst is then wont vehemently to molest the Sick; as on the con∣trary Hunger is wont to be abated. Driness and Black∣ness of the Tongue often attends these, with Chops and a filthy Exulceration of the Lips, horrible Scabs after∣ward growing upon them. Neither is the grievous Head-Ake unusual in these Fevers, together with a Raving vehement enough. In some the chief Symp∣tom is a difficult Gnawing of the Stomach very trou∣blesom to the Sick with or without Vomiting. The Hicket also grievous to many molests several. A Loos∣ness overtakes others; or Bleeding at the Nose. Also often large Sweats are sent forth together with an in∣tensness of the Fit, or Ʋrin is voided plenteously, whence the Bodies of the Sick in a short while suffer a kind of wasting, and that Fever is particularly call'd Colliquans. 6. In Quotidian Continual Fevers a Bruising Pain doth often enough shake the Loins, and Back, and Lims of the Sick. Yea somtimes with a new Fit of the Fever they also fall into a Swouning, or Syncope, whence it is then call'd a Syncopal Fever. 7. As therfore as well Synochal, as Intermitting Fe∣vers, so those Compounded of both have receivd a sin∣gular denomination from the grievous Symptoms ac∣companying, both among the Common People, and among Physicians that practice Physic, and in the Cure not without cause attentive.
8. The Primary Cause of these Synechal Fevers, whereby they molest the Sick with a great and continual Heat is Choler peccant by too much Acrimony and In∣flamedness; whence it doth not only perpetually raise a vitious Effervescency in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, but also in the small Gut, and especially the Juice of the Pancreas coming by fits being made too sharp because of its stoppage, and producing an obscure fit. 9. The chief Cause of the troubles of those Fe∣vers with an almost perpetual Coolness or Shivering, is judg'd by me to be the Lympha, and especially all the Juice of the Pancreas peccant with a Sowr Acrimony, and then continually, driving forward Vapors a little Sowr out of the small Gut every way, especially at the producing of a new Fit, and so stirring up a wan∣dring sense of Cold. 10. The Cause and Reason of the other Symptoms usually accompanying these Fevers, may be easily drawn from those things that are spoken in the pre∣ceding Chapters, so that it is not needful to stay lon∣ger on this matter. 11. So also the way of Curing Them is not hard to be taken from what is afore-said, by following the Cure of Synochals in the most, and using moreover those things in a convenient time, which will mildly loosen an Obstruction in one, or more of the Passa∣ges of the Pancreas, and correct the Juice it self hi∣therto too sharp. 12. The Opening of a Vein then chiefly conduces, when there is exceding Heat; and the provoking a Sweat, by mild Aromatics and Volatil Salts, when there are signs of a Sowr Humor any way trouble∣som; and lastly Purging by Stool or Vomit, when Choler swells, or molests being plenteous.
CHAP. XXXII. Of an Hectic Fever. 1. AN Hectic Fever is much spoken of among Phy∣sicians, in which, an Heat a little troublesom to the Sick is perceivd, beside an over-frequent, as also Little and Weak, and after a certain manner Hard Pulse; which notwithstanding is a little sharpned and encreasd, one or two hours after Meat, and again returns a little after to its former equality, and is perceivd to be greater about the Arteries, then the other parts of the Body: A continual and lingring Lean∣ness of Body following, wherby this Fever being re∣duc'd to its extremity is call'd Marasmodes. 2. Seeing that always a little after the taking in of any Food, and so the sending down of their more fluid part to the Guts this Fever is more or less sharp∣ned, any may believe and not without cause that a no∣table faultiness of Spittle always concurr's to produce it, or that it depends on it. 3. Hectic Fevers are observd somtimes to arise im∣mediatly from the Non-natural Things, too much ex∣ercise of Body, or continu'd labor; somtimes from most vehement Anger, and especially from an immode∣rat Sorrow and Sadness of Mind: somtimes from Watchings long continu'd; often from too much Hun∣ger, as also Food of little, or bad Juice, and such-like. 4. Yea Hectic Fevers are observd to follow other Diseases, and especially Fevers of one day proceding from a great error in Diet, and also Continual, and In∣termitting Fevers very dangerous or vehement; and
most frequently the Inflammations of most of the Bow∣els, especially of the Lungs, and Apostem's, and Ʋl∣cers following them. 5. And seeing Heat is little in an Hectic Fever, and therfore rarely troublesom to the Sick, and the Pulse Little, and Weak, I judg that then the Liquor of the Conglomerated Glandul's is chiefly peccant, and not only Spittle, but the Juice of the Pancreas also, with an encreasd Viscousness, and not a molesting Sowr or Harsh Acrimony, although I have somtimes found this also grievous; Whence who can wonder or deny that Choler is also too sluggish? and all may see that Lympha is likewise too much blunted. 6. And therfore I judg the Cause of a troublesom Pining in an Hectic Fever to be too much Viscous∣ness of all the Humors, and so of the Blood, because of which the Nourishment of the Parts is daily di∣minishd: and the cause of the Sharpness happening one or two hours after Food is taken to be Spittle in like manner too Glutinous: by reason of which the more fluid part of Food descending sooner to the Guts, and meeting with Choler is at least in part opend in∣to such-like Vapors and carri'd to the Heart, and there more rarefi'd, stirs up the Pulse more frequent then is wonted, and being soon driven all over causes a little Redness in the face, and a mild Heart in the rest of the Skin, and elswhere stirs up other Symptoms ac∣cording to the divers Constitution of the other Hu∣mors and Parts. 7. The Appetite of all Food is diminishd, and at last dejected by the noted viscous Toughness of all the Humors, to wit, without an external Cause, as too much Meat, &c. the Loathing of them also attending; and moreover their Fermentation, Separation of Ʋseful Parts from Ʋnuseful ones, Sanguification, Generation
of the Animal Spirits, &c. is hindred and destroyd. Whence the Toughness and Sluggishness of Choler, Spittle, the Juice of the Pancreas, and Lympha is daily augmented, and so the Evil becom's by degrees greater, and at length incurable. 8. When an Hectic Fever is produc'd by too much Motion and over-long Weariness of the Body, then I think that not only the Animal Spirits, but also the Watry part of Blood is too much exhausted, and therfore both Sharpness more inwardly united being made sharper all the Humors are made too Viscous, and all the Natural Functions as was above said, are destroyd. 9. When an Hectic Fever arises from most vehement Anger, then I affirm a Sowrness is drawn to consent by Choler then having an exceding Acrimony, and the same being made in like manner sharper promotes the noted inward Union of both being Sharp. 10. When an Hectic Fever is stird up by Sorrow and an immoderat Sadness of Mind, then I think all the Humors become more Glutinous by the Juice of the Pancreas too Tart. 11. When an Hectic Fever is made by prolongd Watchings, then I think the Animal Spirits being too much consum'd, the Acrimony in either Sharpness be∣ing encreasd their Ʋnion becoms more narrow, and all the Humors are bred too sluggish and tough. 12. When an Hectic Fever follows over-long Hun∣ger, then I judg that the Acrimony of both is en∣creasd by want of Food asswaging both kinds of Sharpness, and furthermore a more compleat Ʋnion being made the Humors become more viscous. 13. When the same Hectic Fever happens by Food containing little mild nourishing Juice, then that coms to pass that was newly mentiond, but slowlier.
14. When an Hectic Fever arises from the defect of better Food, or because of Pica from the neglect of Food of an evil, to wit, Glutinous, or otherwise Fat, or Sharp Juice over-long us'd, then the Humors will be over-glutinous sooner, or more slowly either of themselvs, or by chance, as we have already ex∣plaind at large. 15. When an Hectic Fever succedes Those of One Day, then its Original is to be requir'd according to the divers Errors of Diet producing them, as is newly explaind. 16. When an Hectic follows Fevers without Fits, then, when they take their rising from vitious Choler, it is to be ascrib'd partly to the Acrimony of Choler according to Sect. 9. partly to Medicins that alter it, if long and plenteously us'd, and so corrupting and thickning the other Humors together. 17. When Intermitting Fevers turn to an Hectic, then the Humors breed it that are most peccant be they more or fewer according to what has been said. 18. Lastly when an Inflammation gone into an A∣posteme of the principal Bowels, and especially of the Lungs breeds an Hectic Fever, then the whole Mss of Blood is infected by Matter, and gets a singular Glutinousness, which being communicated to the other Humors spoils them with the same fault and renders them unfit to perform the Natural Functions right∣ly. 19. Although in Leanness of Body all the kinds of an Hectic Fever do agree, yet will the Cure of Every of them differ not a little according to the diversity of Causes so diversly producing it. 20. Yet in General, because of the hurtful Tough∣ness and Glutinousness of all the Humors those Medi∣cins may be us'd, which mildly amend and correct it,
to wit, all gentle Aromatics, and Oily Volatil Salts; as they that cut, and alter every Viscous Thing, and reduce it into its natural state. 21. And such are to be selected, as do most con∣duce to and agree with the Constitution both natural and present of Every Sick Person; which the Physi∣cian may easily find out and know by the Medicins that help or hurt. 22. Take diligent heed in rightly governing and directing Diet, that I. the Air be most temperat ei∣ther naturally or by Art. 23. II. Let Food be of easie Fermentation, as Milk and that either Womans, or Asses, or Goats, or as now the custom is, Cows, taken whilst it is warm; sundry Broths, Yolks of Egs, Flesh of younger Creatures; Wheat Bread rightly leavend and bak'd; Beer not too strong and yet fermented, Wine of good age and small and diluted in a little Water, &c. 24. III. Let the Motions of the Mind be Mode∣rat, especially shunning those things from which the Hectic Fever arose. 25. IV. Let the Motion of the Body be gentle, and chiefly, when an Hectic Fever is raisd by its excess. 26. V. Let Sleep and Watchings keep a mediocri∣ty, seeing here all excess is very hurtful. 27. VI. The wonted Emptyings, and especially those that are natural, and serve the Individual, if they do not weaken the Sick, and procede too slow∣ly, ought to be promoted, and all the other to be shund, as all Effusions of Blood, or in Women the Monthly Courses, of Seed, and of Milk as suck∣ing. 28. When an Hectic com's with or succedes Fevers Without, or With Fits, then upon their account the Cure may be vari'd, according to the divers harm of
divers Humors differently peccant: all which may be seen in the former Chapters. 29. None can ever cure an Hectic following In∣flammations, Apostem's, Ʋlcers and Fistula's, who beside the Remedies newly mentiond doth not also use Medicins that potently cleanse, and hence consoli∣date Ʋlcers and Fistula's. Among which the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise, or any other Aromatic Oil is not the least effectual; as also all Medicins made of Antimony, that are more fixt, and therfore nei∣ther promote Vomiting, or Purging. Among com∣mon things all those are famous, which have the name of Vulnerary Plants, and are us'd in Decoctions be∣ing appropriated to the Cure of Ulcers, as well as Fistula's. 30. And now having exactly observd all, in which according to the manner of treating the divers Causes of Hectic Fevers agree or differ, the Physician will far more easily obtain his desired end in their Cure, whil'st he has both obedient, and patient Sick Peo∣ple, (which is seldom) and the Evil be not delaid to the last. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Malign Fevers. 1. AS otherwise any Disease or Sickness, so a Fe∣ver takes the name Malign, as often as the Strength of the Sick is suddenly and unexpectedly de∣jected, or far more grievous Symptoms occur, then are wont to be observd in such a-like Disease. 2. The Strength that is wont to be dejected in
Malign Fevers are call'd Vital, to be manifested and discernd by the Pulse even from its beginning too Weak, or suddenly much Weakned, and by unexpe∣cted Death overwhelming the Sick. 3. Malign Fevers are either Epidemical raging a∣mong many in the same time, having a common Cause, as the Air, or Food vitiated, or Privat, affecting this or that Man only, and that for a singular Cause, and then for the most part known by the name of Poi∣son. 4. Again they are either Contagious, infecting others, or in no wise Contagious, not harming the By-standers. 5. Again they are either more Acute, tending to an end in a few days, or Longer, continuing more days. 6. In Malign Fevers there is for the most part ob∣servd a light Shivering to precede, and Heat soon to follow it, seldom great, commonly more gentle, so that the Sick scarce use to complain thereof. Their Ʋrin for the most part differs little or nothing from healthy peoples Urin. The Pulse is indeed Frequent, but withal Little and Weak, and always unequal, som∣times Intermitting or Deficient. Often Drowsiness or a kind of Lethargie, seldom Watchings urge. The Sick are often vext with Turbulent Dreams, and un∣quietness of Body. They have often Gripes in the Stomach troublesom enough, and somtimes Lothing, yea moreover Vomiting also; and the Head-Ake, and somtimes Raving or Giddiness. A greater Thirst often, then Heat of Body and of the Jaws. All the Members seem somtimes weari'd with much La∣bour, and as it were afflicted by weariness. Som∣times there happens Choleric, and Foerid Loosnesses. A Drooping or plenteous flux of Blood out of the No∣strils
or Womb doth often concur; and the Blood that drops or runs out of its own accord most commonly will not clotter. Spots and little Pimples divers both in colour and greatness somtimes break forth in the out∣side of the Body; and Tumors in the Glandul's. Som∣times the extream parts soon wax hot, and again are presently cold. Sweats either none, or very plente∣ous come forth, by which unless the Sick get ease, especially when they are promoted by Art, there is no hopes. 7. From all which Symptoms rightly consider'd, and compar'd with those which are known by Ex∣perience both to resist Malignity, and overcome it, I judg the Cause of Malign Fevers, if not always, yet at least is most commonly a Salt that is both volatil and sharp, which will weaken the somwhat sowr Li∣quor of the Glandul's, and make it sluggish, and of little force: whence the natural Consistency of the Blood is diminishd, and therfore its Rarefaction deceivd, and often the separation of the Animal Spirits hin∣dred; and hence the other Symptoms above-mentiond are produc'd; according as that Sharp Volatil Salt is drawn with the Air by Inspiration into the Lungs, and thence into the Blood also, or is swallowd down with Food or Spittle into the Stomach, or creeps in through the Pores of the Body or infects, weakens and spoils the Liquors of the Glandul's first, or them together with the Blood. And hence depends the varie∣ty of divers Symptoms observd several ways in Ma∣lign Fevers; as also from the other Humors found in the Body of any. 8. The Blood therfore being less consistent sustains a less rarefaction, whence the Pulse becoms is, it only Little, but moover Languishing; yea bendes the Vital Fire kindled and sustaind in the Blood is more easily,
opprest, and extinguisht, and Death unexpected often overwhelms people unfit for it. 9. I think the Cause of all Malign Fevers to come from without, and never to be produc'd by it self in the Body from the Humors corrupted of their own accord, for it procedes from a Fire exceding sharp, which is not in Choler. 10. Mans Body as well Containing, as Containd is defended and preservd against all such Malignity in a Volatil Sharp Salt by the frequent and moderat use of Sowr things, and especially a little Tart. 11. But this Volatil and Sharp Salt, the Cause of the noted Malignity, is Corrected and Amended with the same, and also Oily things, but especially mixt with a Sowr or Tart Earth. To which appertain all Potters Clay and Seald Earths, Bole Armeniac, the Earth Lemnia, &c. and so every Mineral or Metallic Sulphur (rightly prepar'd) of Vitriol, Antimony, &c. Hither reduce those that are commonly known Trea∣cle, Diascordium, &c. Yea to correct this Salt, mild, and Oily Votatil Salts conduce, as moderating and asswaging its hurtful Acrimony. 12. Sudorifics drive forward and expel most safely and commodiously out of the Body the same Sharp Vo∣latil Salt more, or less temperd, or at least to be tem∣perd by it. For it is known by manifold Experience that the Cure of Malign Fevers is most happily in∣stituted by this manner and way. 13. Simple Sudorifics are not only approv'd, but those compounded also, Treacle, Mithridate, Dias∣cordium, and infinite other Opiat Confections de∣vis'd of several to imitate the former, and so us'd. Where ke this Note from me, that they are always to be preferd, which can also temper the Acrimony of the Volatil Salt, which will therfore be commo∣dious to be added to the rest. For Example;
℞. Old Treacle ʒ ii. Diaphoretic Antimony ʒ i. Syr. of Carduus Benedictus ℥ ii. Our Preservative Water ℥ i. Cinamon Water ℥ ss. Scabious-Water ℥ ii. M. Let the Sick take a fourth or fifth part of this Mix∣ture, and dispose his Body to Sweat, and after half an hour let him again take one or two Spoonfuls, and so let him go on, till a profitable Sweat follow. Mean while, if he be very thirsty and the Tongue be dry, let him moreover drink upon it a little Broth first temperd to a gratefulness with some sowr thing, the Juice of Citrons, Oranges, Verjuice, Vinegar, &c. whereby the breaking forth of the Sweat will not only be promoted, but moreover the hurtful Acrimo∣ny of the peccant Salt will be corrected. 14. This Poison is seldom to be sent out by a Vo∣mit, nor at all, unless when part of the hurtful Salt sticks in the Stomach, or Guts, and a Loathing also urgeth: and then I prefer before all others Antimoni∣al Vomits, but mild and fixt, because they have an admirable Sulphur in them, whereby any sharpness is wonderfully temperd. 15. By vertue of this Sulphur I commonly add to the other Sudorifics or Altering Mixtures Diaphoretic Antimony, or Mineral Bezoard either single, or vari∣ously compounded, and other Sudorifics rightly pre∣par'd of Antimony. 16. After that Malign Poison that is found in the Volatil and Sharp Salt, is carri'd out of the Body by Sudorifics sufficiently and rightly us'd, they must persist for some time in a moderat use of Sowr things a little Harsh mixt with Drink, whereby the former Consistencie may by degrees be restor'd to the Blood. Therfore Verjuice, Pome-Granats, Quinces, Oran∣ges, Berberies, &c. conduce here. 17. We intend to speak farther of the Nature,
Harms, and Cure of the Volatil and Sharp Salt, when we publish our Thoughts, and Observations in a pe∣culiar Treatise of the Pest; mean while these may give an occasion to the diligent Searchers of the Works of Nature to search and find out more. CHAP. XXXIV. Of an Universal Languishing, as also of Swouning and Syncope. 1. SEeing that Chyle is made of Food taken in, Blood of Chyle, of Blood both all the other things containd in the Body, and all the Containing parts of the Universal Body are nourisht and encreasd, with good cause respect is had to the Blood, wherein both the Strength, and the Reasons thereof are examind, weigh'd, and determind. 2. Therfore seeing the generation and first prepa∣ring of Blood of Chyle begins in the Right Ventri∣cle of the Heart, and is finisht in the Left, and the repairing and renewing therof more or less decaid, and here and there depriv'd of several parts, and therfore flowing back to the Heart, many Evils do necessarily befal Man even here by the intricate ill-affected Change which happens to the Blood in the Ventricles of the Heart: which among the first ma∣nifest themselves to every one, and especially to Phy∣sicians by the Pulse being variously chang'd. 3. We deriv'd Fevers hitherto from the Pulse be∣ing beside Nature too frequent, as the only common, and proper, and so Prognostic Sign of all Fevers; there being other Symptoms distinguishing every one
of their kinds, and degrees from one another: The next thing now is that we may draw and in a few words explain other Diseases from a Little and Lan∣guishing Pulse. 4. These Diseases, which are observd various both by reason of the accompanying Symptoms, and distinct in degrees, are signifi'd in general by the names of Imbecillity, or Debility, in special by the name of Swouning, Eclusis, Leipothymie, Leipopsychie, Apopsychie, Asphyxie, Syncope, and others. 5. We will not curiously inquire here into the O∣riginal of all these Words, seeing that words are as they are us'd, however many vex themselvs and others; but into the Nature, Essence, and true Causes of those Diseases denoted in those names, and in Practice giving trouble to Physicians attent on the Cure of the Disease. 6. A Universal Languishing of all the Parts, and Functions, and Strength is somtimes observd, either bred from the Nativity, or rising after it by degrees and insensibly, or coming, or remaining after some Disease preceding. This they call Infirmity, Imbecil∣lity, or Debility; which has for its Companion both a Little Pulse less then it ought to be, and Weak and more Languishing then should be, and oftner more Rare, and somtimes Intermitting once, or ofter by certain or uncertain Intervals, and somtimes more and more deficient call'd Miurus, according to the Passage of the Artery, and often Creeping or Wrig∣ling. 7. Dulness of the Internal and External Senses, and Defect of the Animal Motion of Body, known by the name of Weariness do usually concur in this Disease when more grievous. 8. Weakness is also observd somtimes, not perma∣nent,
or continually persevering, but orderly, or disorderly, and so repeting somtimes at certain, other∣times uncertain Intervals, one while lightly, another while grievously afflicting the Sick, the same return∣ing one while sooner, another while more slowly, unless it take away and kill the Sick. 9. If any would constitute two kinds only most different in degrees, and not unfit to the method of Curing this Imbecillity and Debility, he may point out the lighter kind by the name of Swouning and Leipo∣thymie; the more grievous kind by the name of Syn∣cope, Leipopsychie, or Asphyxie. 10. In all Swouning the Pulse is Less and Weaker, so that in its lighter kind it can scarcely be perceivd, and not at all in its more grievous kind. The Exter∣nal and Internal Senses commonly are both darkned, or also cease to act. The Animal or Voluntary Moti∣on also is weak, or none. And so Respiration it self is found to be either obscure, or quite deficient. 11. For the most part a Cardialgie or Tickling in the upper Orifice of the Ventricle, or a compression of the Heart, and Yawning uses to precede and foretel a Swouning; and somtimes a Distension of the Belly, a Croking, or Gripes; Dimness or Darkness are before the Eyes, with a Giddiness, and a Tinkling in the Ears accompanying, or suddenly following them; Stretch∣ings, and often Convulsive Motions. For it is to be noted, seeing that Swounings do not only differ in degrees, but also in number and vehemency of Symp∣toms, that it does not seize on all always after the same manner. 12. When the Swouning is again loosd, and the Sick seem to return to themselv's, then the Heart is wont to stir again, yea often to palpitate; and the Pulse is not only felt by degrees greater, and stronger, but
also more frequent: and the External, together with the Internal Senses, though never so Languishing as yet, being by degrees restor'd, the anxiety and com∣pression also of the Heart, and other Symptoms are observd to be diminisht, and at last vanish away; un∣less that Weariness, and Tiring of the Ʋniversal Body depart more slowly. 13. The most grievous, and singular kind of Swouning is the Syncope, in which the Sick fall on a sudden as it were surpris'd with cold Air, a sudden and almost unexpected Tinkling in the Ears preced∣ing; presently there is no Pulse nor Respiration ob∣servd; which is proper to the Syncope, and most grievous Hypochondriac Suffocation: Mean while a cold and glutinous Sweat breaks forth; and all the Parts of the Body wax cold and pail, yea often Ʋrin and the Excrements come away; so that they are more like dead then living. 14. Seeing all these Diseases are manifested by both a Less, and more Languishing Pulse, you may call to mind what we handled in Chap. 26. of the various Differences of Pulses, and their Causes; whereby you may the easilier understand, that which is chiefly to be observd here, to wit, that an Universal Lan∣guishing, and a Swouning, and Syncope are the Symp∣toms of the Vital Function, that is, next pertaining to Life. 15. Seeing therfore that in all the noted Diseases the Pulse is observd both Less, and more Languishing then is Natural, I think that their Cause is always Glutinousness encreasd in the Blood, and the other Hu∣mors severd from it; and also somtimes an encreasd Acidity in the Juice of the Pancreas, Lympha and per∣haps also in Spittle it self. 16. When the Infant hath got such-like Blood, and
such-like Humors in his Mothers Womb from over∣glutinous Seed of the Parents, or at least by the Mo∣thers Blood, then he will have an Ʋniversal Languish∣ing bred with him often occurring in Practice. 17. When, though the Infant be born in health, the Man contracts sooner or later an harm like it in the Blood, and all the Humors by degrees from the faultiness of Diet often above noted, then that Ʋni∣versal Languishing is call'd Acquir'd, often obvious in Practice. 18. Lastly when too much Glutinousness in the Blood coms, or remains after any Disease that rises not slow∣ly, but speedily, and of late not rightly Cur'd by the fault of the Physician, Patient, or By-standers, then that Ʋniversal Languishing may be call'd Symptomati∣cal, too frequent in Practice. 19. I said after a Disease not rightly cur'd by the fault of a Physician, Patient, or By-standers; For the Physician may be deceivd and cure the Patient amiss, especially when he is blinded and conceited with Pre∣judices not enough minding those things that Help and Hurt, and had rather his Patient should die, then he change his own Opinion, though never so errone∣ous and confuted, the condition of the Sick growing daily wors and wors. 20. Here also may the Sick be in a fault, when he doth not only neglect or despise the safe Counsel of a Pru∣dent Physician, but especially is abus'd to his hurt by hurtful things. 21. Yea, also the By-standers may err, when they are not only too indulgent of the morose Sick, but moreover disswade them from the best Prescriptions of Skilful Physitians, instead of which they dare give them hurtful and forbidden things. 22. I added that too much Glutinousness might come
to, or remain in the Blood and Humors. It Comes to the Blood, when Medicins that Thicken and Stuff the fluid and thin Humors are too much, or too long us'd. It Remains in it when Medicins that Cut and Attenu∣ate are not given strong enough, or long enough in Diseases arising from the Glutinousness of the Hu∣mors. 23. When Acidity is joind with Glutinousness of all the Humors encreasd from a great error in Diet in the Li∣quors of any Glandul's, and especially those of the Pan∣creas, then either a Swouning, or also Syncope is easily joind to the Ʋniversal Languishing, according as both Errors are lighter, or more grievous: although it is no new thing that a Swouning, but not Syncope is pro∣duc'd without a notable Clauiness of Humors; which I think was scarce ever observd without it, but rather Death the External Cause being most grie∣vous: as indeed more is requir'd to produce a Synco∣pe, then Death. 24. Because there is a less Rarefaction of Blood, and therfore a less Pulse in an Universal Languishing, by reason of the Toughness encrad of all Humors that constitute or produce the same Blood, it becoms of necessity Weaker; for unless the Ventricles of the Heart be much dilated, they cannot be much, nor therfore potently straitned. Add that Blood tough and clammy is unsit to breed plenteous and subtil A∣nimal Spirits; for which cause also the Pulse will be weaker then is natural. 25. The Pulse will also then be more Rare, because all the Humors are more Mild shall I say, or more Dull, and therfore raising a weaker Effervsncy, and less provoking the Heart to Contract it self, either upon the account of its Acrimony, or Effrv scency,
and so of the Vapors arising; unless the Pulse be more stird up in regard of any External Cause. 26. And this is the usual Generation of an Uni∣versal Languishing; but the Production of a Swoun∣ing and Syncope, Diseases more difficult to be known, and explaind, as it is usually describd by the Vital Spirits, which because it satissies not me, I will en∣deavour to deduce it otherwise by degrees in a few words from their manifest Causes, as more known Principles. 27. Both a Swouning, and somtimes a Syncope is observd to follow; 1. Certain Smells inspird with the Air, either grateful or ungrateful of themselvs, as of Musk, Civet, Roses, Cinamon, &c. the Smoak of a Candle put out, &c. 28. 2. The sight of Things or Persons ungrateful and envi'd breeds a Swouning in some. 29. 3. The same is observd to be by the Taking in of these things that are any way ungrateful. 30. 4. Prolongd Hunger is a common cause of Swouning. 31. 5. Among the Passions of the Mind Joy ex∣cling has been observd to produce a Swouning, or Syncope, and smtimes Death it self. It has been wn that the same has often come to pass by a ve∣ . A Swouning doth not seem so much , or Anger, as that a Man is dis∣p , who will sooner fall into this Evil, if he  and sddenly by both the con∣trary Pll f the Mind; that is, if an unexpected and  happens about the same object to one that  ful or fearful; if Terrr, and Fear, and therfore  rula ite one that is very Angry. 32. 6.  ouning or Syncope is wont to come
upon a Great Effusion of Blood out of the Nostrils, Womb, Haemorrhoids, or other Vessels opend and wounded by Art, or chance or mischance. 33. 7. The same happens to too great an Effusi∣on if Seed, coming away either of its own accord, or especially by immoderat Venery. 34. 8. The same often is after an over-great Eva∣cuation of the Humors by Vomit, Stool, Urin, Sweats, &c. and especially when it com's with great Pains, or a vehement Agitation of Body. 35. 9. The same com's to pass when either the Water of Hydropical Persons, or Matter in those that have putrefi'd Lungs is pour'd out excessivly. 36. 10. The same is observd to come to pass by a Sting or Bite of certain Poisonous Creatures, 37. 11. This same Evil accompanies the Fits of certain Intermitting Fevers, either soon in the Be∣ginning, or often in the Encrease, or in its Vigor; seldom when it Declines, unless perhaps by too large Sweats. 38. 12. Somtimes a Swouning comes upon cer∣tain very vehement Pains of the Teeth, the upper Ori∣fice of the Stomach, the Guts, Bladder, &c. 39. 13. The same Swouning oppresses some af∣ter too much Motion and extreme Weariness of Body. 40. 14. Somtimes a Swouning is produc'd by a great Heat, either of the Sun, or Fire, or Bath, or Fever. 41. 15. Nor is it seldom that a Swouning hap∣pens by Hunger, or Thirst too long and sorely vexing. 42. 16. Yea somtimes Swouning happens to cer∣tain Women giving Suck by too great loss of Milk, chiefly depending on the potent sucking of a strong Infant; and somtimes by the very grievous Pain of the Clefts of the Paps, or otherwise ill-affected.
43. From the mention'd and such-like manifest Causes diligently considered, and diligently compar'd with those, which we have before propos'd we judg every Swouning is to be deriv'd next and immediatly from the Blood it self coming from both parts to the Heart, and all those, which are joind both according to, and beside Nature, and are carri'd together with it to the Heart, and so disturb and change its natural Effer∣vescency th Rrefaction of the Blood is not only diminisht, but the Heart it self is not enough expanded, and contracted, and the Blood not sufficiently effus'd into the Arteries, and therfore the Pulse is felt Less, and more Languishing, yea somtimes None. 44. For if to make a laudable Pulse be requir'd as we think, 1. Blood returning from every and both places to the Right Ventricle of the Heart: 2. Choler Joind to the ascending Blood; 3. Lympha returning from every place with the Descending Blood; 4. A singular Lqur arising and soon after straind through the Lacteal Veins) from the conflux of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas and Spittle in the Small Gut; and perhaps 5. Air attracted into the Lungs by Inspi∣ration, and nxt in some part of it with the Blood circulating through them, whil'st the rest is again thrust one in the Expiration next following; and soin 6.  although it be not always, but  taken in driven to the Heart. I say, if all t be requird to make a laudable Pulse, as every on  be both present. and rightly disppo'd: but i  ref ths be wanting wholly or in part or  thre in trger loty, or come thither endow'd with a rag lity; or others go together also not rquir'd, and therfore necessarily hurtful, without d there will b some wrong to the Pulse beside the spng of the ctions wont to be in the Heart.
45. And to remain in our present business, 1. the Pulse will be deficient more or less in greatness and strength, by an Universal Defect of Blood, after a no∣table Haemorrhagie or Hunger much prolong'd: whence the Blood will not only be deficient, but other Humors also in the Body, Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, Lympha, and the rest that are necessary to make the Vital Rarefaction of Blood, and so the Pulse great. 46. 2. The same Pulse will be deficient in Great∣ness, and hence in Strength by the defect of Choler in a great Loosness and Vomiting, and especially the Disease Cholera; whence if Choler be carri'd to the Heart in a lesser quantity, and at length perhaps none, is it a wonder, if a less, or no Effervescency be sird up in It? if there be a less, or no Rarefaction of Blood? if a less, or no Expansion, and Contraction of the Ventricles of the Heart follow, and the Pulse be felt either Less, or None? 47. 3. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Great∣ness, and hence in Strength, by the Defect of Lym∣pha with too Great a Sweat; with which that the Lympha is also diminish beside the Animal Spirits, Acids no less, then Spiritous Volatil Medicins much recreating and restoring those that Sweat seem to evince. By the defect of Lympha somwhat Sowr the Mean Consistency of Blood, and its Effervescen∣cy will be deficient, whence it will neither enough rarefie in the Heart, nor will its Explication, and Complication be great enough; whence the Pulse will also be observd of necessity Less then is Natu∣rally. 48. 4. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Great∣ness, and hence in Strength, by the Defect of the Li∣quor arising from the Three-fold Sway in the Guts in a
troublesom Vomiting and Loosness, especially continual. For this being in part, or wholly excluded, the Blood will necessarily want its benefit; we judg in an other place that it conduc'd to procure the natural Coagula∣tion of Blood; if therfore the Blood be more or less destitute of it, and is not repaird continually for want of this, as is newly said, the Blood will be less apt to rarefie, and open the Ventricles of the Heart, and the Pulse will necessarily follow a Less. 49. 5. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Great∣ness, and hence in Strength by the Defect of Air to be Inspir'd in any straitness of the Mouth, and Nostrils, or Jaws, or sharp Artery; for which the Air coming in less plenty cannot bestow the desired coolness on the Blood, or any other Change; wherfore the Blood being driven through the Lungs more slowly, and not making a sufficient place for the new Blood follow∣ing out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, hinders the Contraction of the Heart, and is the Cause of the Pulse hitherto Less. 50. 6. The same Pulse will be deficient in Great∣ness, and hence in Strength, by the Defect of Chyle, both in a preposterous Hunger, whether voluntary, or compeld, and in the Fermentation of Food, or Se∣paration, or Transcolation, or Conveyance any way hin∣dred. For unless Food be taken daily, and especially in the accustomd time, by which the Chyle drawn from it may be carri'd to the Heart, the Blood con∣tinually lost will not only be unrepaird, but the Hu∣mors flowing together in the Heart, and Small Gut, will act too much or amiss upon themselvs, and the rest of the Blood, and somtimes will make the Blood more or less consistent, and hitherto unfit to the due, or sufficient Rarefaction of it self, and the Explica∣tion and Complication of the Ventricles of the
Heart; whence there will necessarily follow a Less, and Weaker Pulse. 51. The Pulse will be Less, and more Languishing, not only by the Defect but somtimes also the Excess of the fore-nam'd Humors. For 1. the abundance of Blood, call'd a Plethora, hinders, that the Blood by the defect of space and place cannot be expeld plen∣teously into the Arteries, nor therfore the same be much, and enough rarefi'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart; nor that the sides of the Heart can be much unfolded and again folded. 52. Yea 2. Choler being carri'd in a greater plenty to the Heart, especially in Burning Fevers, doth not only rarefie the Blood more then is wonted, and too potently, with an over-great and strong Pulse; but after it has at length filld all the spaces of the Vessels in that too great rarefaction by distending them, and constituting the Plethora at or in the Vessels so call'd, or to be call'd, however it keep the hurtful Heat, yet it cannot for want of Space spread out the Blood as be∣fore, and produce a Great and Strong Pulse; which is rather observd Less, and Weaker gradually by the deficient Rarefaction of the Blood, and the Explica∣tion and Complication of the Ventricles of the Heart; till by any effusion of Blood there is a new Place prepar'd to receive the rest more rarefi'd, toge∣ther with a greater and stronger Pulse soon concur∣ring. 53. 3. The Lympha somwhat sowr, if it com's in too great plenty to the Heart will also make the Pulse Less, and so more Languishing; because it will give a more firm and solid Consistency to the Blood, then that it can be duly, and enough rarefi'd, sufficiently to dilate the Ventricles of the Heart, whither a notable
constriction may succede altogether necessary to make a Great and Strong Pulse. 54. 4. The same is to be said of that Three-fold Liquor of the Small Guts, if especially its office be, to give to the Blood a natural coagulation, depending on a somwhat tart sowr Liquor: For when this is encreasd, the Coagulation also of the Blood will be encreasd; on the contrary its fitness to rarefie will be diminisht, the Pulse will be diminisht, and will also become Weaker. 55. Seeing that a great plenty of laudable Air drawn into the Lungs cannot but be useful, a Lesser, or more Languishing Pulse cannot be expected nor derived from it. 56. Yet 5. may the Pulse become Less and Weaker by Chyle carri'd to the Heart after any manner in a greater plenty; in as much as it fills the Vessels of blood too much, & both effects & encreases a Plethora. 57. If both the Blood, and other mentiond Hu∣mors carri'd with it to the Heart could produce a Less and more Languishing Pulse, the quantity being either deficient, or exceding, certainly they will no less per∣form the same, when they are peccant in an hurtful quality. For 1. the Blood either too fluid or solid, is unfit for its laudable Rarefaction, which being de∣ficient we have often already shown you that a Less, and more Languishing Pulse follows. 58. So 2. Choler Glutinous, and not sharp enough will less effervesce, and more sparingly send forth fiery parts; whence the Blood will less rarefie, and at length the Pulse will be Less and Weaker. 59. 3. Lympha either too Sowr or Tart will not only render the Blood more glutinous, and so less fit to rarefie, but moreover will not only blunt Choler, and its fiery parts whencesoever breaking forth, and
so will give occasion both for a Less, and more lan∣guishing Pulse. 60. 4. You may think, and speak the same of the fore-namd Three-fold Liquor either too sowr, or Tart. 61. 5. The North and sharper Air conduceth much to coagulate the Blood much, and hinder its Rarefaction. 62. If 6. Food too Sowr or Tart be taken in, the Chyle will also be made like it, from which the noted inconveniences may be expected with a Less and Weaker Pulse. 63. A Less and Weaker Pulse is caus'd also by other Things carried to the Heart beyond the Laws of Nature, when the Humors are either corrupt in the Body, or Vapors, or Wind raisd by them, or Poison piercing in at the Mouth, Nostrils, or Pores of the Skin, or any other way into the Body come to the Heart together with the Blood, and either too much loosen or dis∣solve, or too much coagulate, or curdle the Blood, or render it unfit any other way for its due Rarefacti∣on, as we have before explaind at large. 64. And that we may more closely apply all, that we have hitherto premis'd, to a Swouning and Syncope, and deduce more clearly the Nature and Generation of both Diseases, because in both the Pulse is not on∣ly observd Less, and Weaker, or None; but the Ani∣mal Functions also, Sense and Motion are not a little weakned, let us see if, and how so divers Diseases can be produc'd of one, and the same Cause. 65. The Symptoms therfore, which are wont to be common to each Disease are to be considerd, and distinguishd, from those, which are peculiar to a Syncope; for a cold and glutinous Sweat breaks forth in a Syncope, but not in a Swouning, in which not so
much as Coldness of the Ʋniversal Body is always ob∣servd, although it be constant with a Syncope; but the other Symptoms are often wont to be noted in each Disease. Whence it is manifest that these Dis∣eases do partly differ in degrees, partly somthing more grievous uses to accompany a Syncope continually. 66. If any examin with an attentive Mind all the Symptoms fore-mentiond, as also the External or Ma∣nifest Causes, and compare them with those which we have now deduc'd largly of a Less, as well as Weaker Pulse, he may easily conclude that each Dis∣ease, and especially a Syncope, do's chiefly arise from a sowr Liquor carri'd in a more large plenty to the Heart, which obtains rule in the Blood; not neg∣lecting in the mean while the Glutinousness of several Humors. 67. That this may be more evident, we are pleas'd to weigh both the noted Symptoms, and the menti∣ond Causes in order, and for Younger Physitians sake, especially Learners, build all things on a sowr and glutinous Humor abounding. 68. We have said the Sign of a Swouning at hand is for the most part 1. a Cardialgie, or Tickling in the upper Orifice of the Stomach. And what is more apt to stir up each of these Diseases, than a sowr Hu∣mor? Which if it be milder, and ascend to the up∣per Orifice of the Stomach in the form of a Vapor, will only tickle and gnaw the said part; but if it be too sharp, will bite the same, and cause a trou∣blesom Pain, known by the name of Cardialgie. 69. We added 2. that somtimes a Compression and Gaping of the Heart precedes. Although the Com∣pression of the Heart is caus'd by a Phlegmatic Humor both plenteous and glutinous, and gaping from Fla∣tulent Vapors; yet because these Diseases are observd
not to urge the Sick so perpetually, as to infest them before the Swouning suddenly to follow; therfore we must acknowledg another Cause also, and that either deducing unactive Phlegm into act or produ∣cing Windy Vapors from the same; it is very evi∣dent that a sowr Humor is requird both to stir up and encrease the force of Phlegm, and to breed Vapors that cause Gaping; because, especially if it be a lit∣tle Tart, it will make the Phlegm more glutinous, which may produce the Sense of Heaviness and Com∣pression sooner and more potently; and raising an Ef∣fervescency vitiously and victoriously with Choler, as we taught you happend in the beginnings of the most of the Intermitting Fevers, giv's occasion to Windy Va∣pors, and so to Gaping it self. 70. We said 3. that a Swouning did somtimes precede the Distension of the Belly, Belches, or Gripes: all which seeing they arise from Wind either very mild, or sharp, deduc'd and deriv'd from Phlegm either viscous only, or also sowr at a certain time, and a little before a Swouning, the Truth of our Sayings is abundantly manifest. 71. We taught you 4. that Dimness and Darkness before the Eyes, together with a Giddiness, and Tink∣ling in the Ears did often precede a Swouning. And who knows not that all these arise from Vapors rising from the lower parts to the Brain, one time mild, another time sharp, having alwayes Viscous, often also Sowr Phlegm for its Matter, and troubling wonder∣fully the Motion of the Animal Spirits. 72. 5. Lastly we have Observd that Retchings, and Convulsive Motions do somtimes also precede Swouning. And because the efficient Cause of Retch∣ing uses to be the same as that of Gaping, and they only differ in the part affected, hither you may trans∣fer
what we have told you before of Gaping. And because that Convulsive Motions arise (as we intend if God permit, to shew you in the following Book) from an Humor, or Vapor sharp, but withal sowr cor∣roding and pulling the Beginnings of the Nerv's by course, our Opinion is not a little so confirmd. 73. And now we have declar'd the Symptoms that usually precede a Swouning, let us also run over the others very notable which are wont to accompany It: Among which although a Pulse Less, and more Lan∣guid, or None at least manifest to Sense cannot be reckond the last, yet because for that end we have al∣ready mentiond more of its Causes, lest we do one thing twice, let us go on to the other Symptoms. 74. In every Swouning therfore the Internal, as well as External Senses are drawn into consent, and are always darkned more or less, yea somtimes they cease from all their Operation. And that the reason of this wonderful Effect and Event may be more mani∣fest, I would have the Younger Physicians to consi∣der, (for Old Men, and such as are Compleat in the Art of Physic need not mine information) That in every Giddiness, which we told you did for the most part precede a Swouning, and especially its more grievous kind, the Internal, as well as External Senses were troubled, and after a manner darkned. And seeing that it is known by manifest Experience that the swift Turning round of an External Thing seen, or of the Body it self produces Giddiness, the Animal Spirits in like manner being mov'd round, at least confusedly stird; why should we doubt, when the same Spirits are in like manner mov'd, disturb'd, and perhaps turnd round by Vapors in the Body very much mov'd and rising up to the Brain, that the Senses as well Internal as External are not only trou∣bled
and disturbd, but also darkned, so that they seem to cease for a time? For, if they then do any thing which is unknown to them, yet the disturb'd and confus'd Mind, not being in its power keeps no Remembrance therof. 75. These things being thus laid no wonder, if in a Swouning the Animal also, or Voluntary Motion be Diminisht or Abolisht; and Respiration it self either Obscur'd, or Deficient. For the Animal Motion fol∣lows the orderly and perpetual, and also by the Will determind (as the matter and the various Disease re∣quire) Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs to the Fibres of all the Muscles, or those se∣lected; of which Motions seeing neither can consist intire with the disturd, and pervers Motion of the Animal Spirits, it is necessary, that in such a case the Animal Motion, and Respiration also it self should be spraind, and loosend. 76. But the External, and Internal Senses, and Animal Motion will not only cease for a time because of the disturbd Motion of the Animal Spirits; but also by reason of their Motion hindred or taken away; which may be, when they cease to be bred and separa∣ted from the Blood, because the Mass of Blood is coagu∣lated and made unmoveable by any sowr, and chiefly tart thing. For there is need to perform the Internal as well as External Senses, and Animal Motion that the Animal Spirits should be freely and plenteously mov'd to all their Organs; although it is easier to fancy ac∣cording to pleasure, then to point and demonstrate solidly what they are, which peculiarly serve the In∣ternal Senses: Yet do we observe in any attent Fun∣ction of the Mind that the Brain is intent, and ma∣ny Animal Spirits as it were to be spent and consumd; which may so long suffice to assign some Organ to
the Internal Senses, until all these can be more di∣stinctly conceivd by the External Senses, and be ex∣plaind to others, and at last the Assent of every one be mildly compeld to have the same Opinion. 77. But let us yet confirm the propos'd Cause by those things, which are wont to be observd, when a Swouning ends. For we said that then the Heart was by little and little mov'd, and did palpitate. Therfore the Cause of Swouning was such, as hin∣dred the Motion of the Heart, and which being over∣come and conquerd, Motion is restor'd unto it. 78. If therfore we have given you the true Cause of the Motion of the Heart in short before in Chap. 26. Sect. 3. and in more words have explaind it in our first Disquisition of Fevers, certainly then the Effervescency in the Heart Ceasing to Sense, and the bursting forth of the Fiery Parts much Diminishd, and the Rarefaction of the Universal Blood Defici∣ent, and therfore the Desir'd Motion and Pulse of the Heart will be attributed to the Glutinousnes, or Acidity of Humors confusd with the Blood: which is then actually renewd, when at least in part the ex∣treme force and harm of a Glutinous, or sowr Hu∣mor is corrected, or conquerd, and that by Choler, or any Aromatic Liquor mov'd to the Nostrils, or rather pourd into the Mouth, or lastly elswhere out∣wardly appli'd, and piercing to the Heart, or any other Fire, or Fomentation of the Evil. 79. For then not only the Blood again rarefies more and more by Choler, or Aromatics us'd successivly ob∣taining rule over a Glutinous and Sowr Humor, but moreover Vapors or Wind are produc'd, by all which the Ventricles of the Heart are again Open'd, the drowfie and sluggish Animal Spirits are stird up, and anon the same Veniricles are Foulded in, and so the
Blood has its Motion Restor'd, yea it becoms more stird and disturbd, that is, there is a Palpitation of the Heart; of which in the next following Chapter we intend to say more. 80. Nor, is Motion restor'd to the Heart only, when a Swouning is ended, which most commonly is inordinate and with palpitation, but the Pulse by degrees gets its lost Greatness, and former Strength, although in the beginning it is also more Frequent: the Cause and Manner of all which is newly gi∣ven. 81. When the Cause of so many Evils is corrected and destroy'd by degrees, as was said, no wonder if the other Symptoms also be easd by degrees, and ta∣ken away; seeing that when the Cause is taken away the Effect ceases. 82. The Functions which were last weakned, seem to return also more slowly; although all these vary not a little according to the divers heat and fomen∣ting of the evil: which any meanly verst in Practice, and attent to all may easily observe, and attain them by what has been said. 83. The Symptoms always joind to a Syncope, also here to be weighd in a few words we shewd you was Coldness and Paleness of all the Parts of the Body, but especially a Cold, as well as Glutinous Sweat; to which is joind perpetually an extreme Anxiety of the Heart, troubling the Sick no less, then if Death were at hand; and no wonder, seeing it is often a certain Messenger of Death hasting. 84. If any can by solid and consequent reasoning deduce that chill Coldness both in the Body, and in a Sweat from any thing else, then from a Sowr Humor in Man, he will not a little make me admire him, see∣ing that my continual and solicitous Practice of
near forty years, and laborious observation of all ex∣ternal Causes, I found nothing yet in rerum Naturâ that can manifestly breed Coldness in Man beside a Sowr Humor, and whatsoever partakes therof: as I have testifi'd it in several Exampl's in this Treatise and elswhere. 85. Seeing I am certainly perswaded that Cold∣ness may, and is wont to be produc'd in Man by a Sowr and only Sowr Humor, I may on good grounds think that a Sowr Humor, or Vapor is the Cause of a Cold Sweat, and Body in a Syncope mixt from some other place with the Blood, and carri'd to the Heart. and driven forward together with the Blood every way, and sticking in the outside of the Body, and there affording a Sense therof both to the Sick and By-standers, and Physicians themselvs. And this will I think and suppose so long, till an other demon∣strate another Cause hereof evident enough. 86. The same Sweat is Gluinous by reason of  Phlegmanic Humor dissld by the noted Sowr Humor, and together with is expeld out, and of its own accord again congealing and coagulated without the Body. 87. Paleness happens to the Ʋniversal Body b re∣son of the same Sor Humr every where bred, esp∣cially when there is Glutinous Phlegm; an Imitator and Companion of the Sowr Humr. 88. An extrme Anity of the Heart and Midif, unxplainabl y the Sick, doth manifest partly the hot Original or the Evil, that is to say the Belly, and the Parts disning themselvs into the Guts, and especially the Pancreas, partly the Fomenting of that Evil, a Humor not only Sowr, which may breed Pricking, or Corroding, or Boring Pains, but more∣over Glutinous, which firmly adhering to all the Parts goes more slowly and difficultly from the same, and
therfore urges more stubbornly; and being deduc'd by Choler opprest, into Viscous and Tough Vapors, and Wind encreases the noted Anxiety. 89. And so I seem to my self clearly enough to have deriv'd the rising of an Ʋniversal Languishing, and of Swouning, and of the Syncope from slow and glutinous Phlegm, partly from an Acid, and som∣times also Tart Juice mixt with it; it remains, that we subjoin the Method and Reason of Curing those Diseases by abridging prolixity with brevity. For it doth not seem necessary here to repete many things afore-said with a vain and unprofitable Labour; see∣ing that when the Disease is rightly describ'd and known, its Cure is easily understood and done. 90. The Cure of an Ʋniversal Languishing may be always in that respect instituted alike; which cannot be said of the Cure of Swouning or a Syncope, be∣cause these Diseases return by Fits, and then they sorely molest the Sick, out of which they give them respit; which to the Physicians is the best opportunity of preventing new ones, in no wise to be neglected, seeing they are wont to be perilous. 91. There ought always to be a continual, and slow Correcting and Amendment of a Glutinous and Phlegmatic Humor for an Ʋniversal Languishing, and also for a Swouning and Syncope feard; and an Emp∣tying therof, by Stool and Ʋrin chiefly with repeted turns, where it do's together abound, or cannot be wholly amended. 92. Because we have often before treated of the Correcting and Emptying of a Phlegmatic Humor, whi∣ther we send the studious Reader, we only intend to annex here some forms of the more select Medicins for the sake of Younger Physicians. 93. Therfore to Amend the Phlegmatic Glutinous
Humor abounding, both in the Universal Body and Blood a Medicinal Wine or Beer prepar'd with several Aromatic parts of several Plants, daily to be us'd both at Dinner and Supper time, and at other times in a small quantity, according to the diversity of the Age, Sex, and Languishing it self may conduce. For Example, from Roots only. ℞ The Roots of Angelica, Galangal, Acorus, of each ʒ i. of Smallage, Alicampane, Fenel, of each ʒ ii. of Lovidge ʒ i. Cut and grosly Beat them, then sew them into a Bag somwhat long, and put them into a Stone, or Glass Vessel of a strait Mouth, then pour on of lau∣dable Wine ℥ xxx or thereabout, and let it be in a Cellar all Night, in which time the Aromatic Strength of the Roots will be communicated to the Wine, a draught wherof, as is said, may be taken twice or thrice a day, and another Wine may be pourd on in∣stead of what was drunk, so long, till near all the Aromatic Strength is extracted; for then new Roots may be taken, but first dried in the Shade; which is always to be observd in all the Aromatic parts of Plants to be us'd by Infusion. 94. If any please to use Medicinal Beer, then in∣stead of Wine, let them pour upon the aforesaid Roots their usual Beer, although then I prefer that which is Bitter before the Sweet, and Observe it is safer every Night to pour upon the Roots so much Beer, as will be drunk the next day; because the sirngth of Beer soon fades, unless shut up in an Hogshead; whence somtimes whole Hogsheads, som∣time greater, somtimes less, not only of Beer, but Wine also so Medicind are prepar'd for daily use: whether they be Roots only, or if other parts also of Plants be p into them, in more plenty.
95. If Aromatic Leavs be preferd, you may use the following Form or one like it. ℞. The Leavs of Rosmary, Majoran, Hyssop, Sage, Garden-Rue, Mountain-Calamint. Curld Mint, Wild Time, of each Man. ss. Cut these in like manner and put them into a Bag, and pour upon them Wine, or Beer, and use it as was said daily. 96. Seeing many approve of Wormwood Wine, if the tast of Wormwood please you, you may ad some of it to the rest. 97. When the Sick detaind with a Universal Lan∣guishing are also molested with Wind, then Aromatic Seeds may in like manner be us'd before other parts of Plants, and many may be prescrib'd according to the Form, and imitation of the following Form. ℞. The Seeds of Coriander, Sweet Fenel, Anise, of each ʒ ii. of Smallage, Parsley, of each ʒ i. ss. of Cardamom, Carua, of each ʒ i. Beat them round, and put them into a Bag, pouring upon them Wine or Beer for daily use. 98. Such Medicinal Wines and Beer may be pre∣par'd most commodiously of sundry parts of Plants joind together after the Example of the following Form. ℞. The Roots of the Aromatical Reed, Alicampane, of each ʒ ii. the Leavs of Majoran, Sage, of each Man. i. the Flowers of Rosmary; love-Gilli∣flowers, Arabian Staechas, of each 2 Pugils. Seeds of Poley Mountain, Sweet Penel, Sharp Cina∣mon, of each ʒ ii. Nutmegs, dri'd Orange Peel, of each ʒ i. Cut, and roundly Beat them, put them into a Bag, nd pour upon them presently Wine or Beer in a con∣enient Vessel for Use.
99. Although Medicins that Amend Glutinous Phlegm may most commodiously be continu'd for a time in the form of Wine, or Beer, yet may you both prescribe, and use the same in the form of a Pouder, Electuary, Tablets, Decoction, Pills, or any other more pleasant to the Sick. So many Aromatic Spe∣cies are in use among Practitioners, most convenient in this case, such as are Diacalamint, Diagalangal, Dia∣lacca the Greater, Diambra, Dianthos, &c. To which if four times, six times, or eight times as much Sugar dissolvd in a convenient Water be added, they may easily be reduc'd into Tablets. The same if put among Hony, or a fit Syrup, will make convenient Electuaries; to which you may also add divers Con∣servs. For Example; ℞. Conserve of the Flowers of Betony ℥ i. of Rose∣mary, Eye-bright, of each ℥ ss. the Species Di∣ambra ʒ ii. Diagalangal ʒ i. Syr. of Mint, what suffices M. for a Conserv. This Conserv is to be ten somtimes in a day to the quantity of a Nutmeg. 100. I cannot contain my slf, without admo∣nishing Younger Physicians here, diligently to beware in Correcting Glutinous Phlegm, that they use not Medicins with much Sugar and very much Sugard; seeing that Phlegm is not so much thence amended, and loosned, as encreasd, yea daily made more glu∣tinous. Whence after an ill, yea the worst manner, even here in Belgia the fruitful breeder of all sorts of Phlegm, many Physicians negligent of those things that Hurt use, shall I say or abuse, the Conserv of Red Roses daily taken in a large quantity in almost every Cough continu'd a while threatning a Consumption of the Lungs▪ yea rather furthering it already begun; whence the Ʋleer risen in the Lungs is not only not
cleansd, dri'd up, and consolidated, but moreover a Sense of Weight and intolerable cold is raisd in the Re∣gion of the Stomach, together with the Appetite de∣jected, and by this means the Evil is at length incu∣rable. Which evil manner of some they imitate, who after the manner of Beasts follow the Flock of them that go before, and go whither they go, not whither they should go. 101. What I have newly said of the Conserv of Red Roses, may also be understood of Emulsions ill us'd in this case by certain, even Old Physicians, whether they be made of cleansd Barley, and the grea∣ter cold Seeds, so call'd, or sweet Almonds; because they ought only to be us'd seldom to asswage some Symptoms, and again be laid aside. And that the Matter is so, Experience will teach every one that desires to be Wise, being also the Mistris of Fools. 102. They who are better pleasd with Pills, then other Forms, may have these and some like them pre∣scrib'd. ℞. Gum Galban. prepar'd with Vinegar ℈ ii. White Amber, select Mastich, of each ℈ i. Male Fran∣kincense, Red Myrrh, best Castor, of each ℈ ss. Vitriol of Mars dri'd white in a slow fire ʒ ss. distild Oil of Mace 8 drops. Make them into forty Pills to be guilded. Three or five of these Pills may be taken at any time, and especially in the Morning fasting, or in the Evening one hour after Supper, or at both times▪ wherby they will correct Phlegmatic Humors sooner, and more potently, or more slowly, and more mildly, and at length do the same benefit to Man. 103. If an Old Wives Veneration possess any of the Old Physicians only delighting in Decoctions, he
may here also imitate them, and use the following Form of Prescription, or one like it. ℞. The Roots of Valerian, Acorus, of each ʒ ii. of Smallage ℥ i. the Herbs of Betony, Balm, Hore∣hound, Savory, Scabious, the Tops of Centaury the Less of each Man. ss. the Leavs of Rosmary, Roman Camomile, Arabian Staechas, of each 1 Pu∣gil. the Seeds of Sweet Fenel, Bishops-Weed, of each ʒ ii. the Berries of Juniper ℥ i. of Laurel ʒ i. ss. Boil them on a gentle Fire (the Vessel be∣ing clos'd) in clean Water, to  xl. To what is straind, add Syr. of Oak of Jerusalem, Hyss p, Mugwort▪ Staechas, of each ℥ i. Tincture of Ci∣namon ℥ i. ss. M. Two or three ounces of this Decoction may be once or twice daily taken at any time: Least any should in vain trouble himself, thinking with many who are less mov'd with Reason, then with Custom that all Medicins are safely taken only when the Stomach is empty of Food, seeing I have found the contrary true in many cases, especially as to those that Alter and Correct the Humors. For I have daily Observd that Altering Medicins, but mild, which only I would have Physicians use, are often us'd, a little before or after Food taken in, yea together with them, then at a∣nother time with greater benefit to the Sick: Nor is Reason contrary to this Experience, for so the power of the Medicin mildly mixes and incorporates it self not only with Spittle in the Stomach, but with the Three-fold Humor flowing together in the small Gut, yea also to the Universal Blood, and all the other Humors in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and all the Arteries, and Veins: whrby the desired Amend∣ment and Correcting of It, or Them, is performd sooner, easier, and more happily.
104. Hitherto we have propos'd Medicins com∣monly known and approv'd of all; and if any being taught to be wiser then common People erect his Mind to Chymical Preparations, and Medicins more effectual, and so more safe, if they be both rightly prepar'd, and administred, we will commend unto him both Tinctures, and Extracts, and Oils artifici∣ally made of the foresaid, and Volatil, especially Oi∣ly Salts to be prepar'd by Art of most of the Parts of Living Creatures, and to be conveniently us'd: Which seeing they are usually not so ungrateful as common Medicins, may be taken in a much less quantity, and will work both sooner, and more mild∣ly, and more effectually, are deservedly desir'd of the Sick enough afflicted of themselvs; so that it may well seem to a Physician (rejoycing in the name of Favourable) unworthy even unhuman, not to be willing to ease (when he can well enough) the Infirmity, Loathing and Queasiness of the Sick with a more grateful Medicin, much rather then willingly to add affliction to the Afflicted. Wherfore I think that benign Physicians, and such as do accommodate themselvs and their Medicins any way to the natural infirmity, and somtimes Squeamishness of the Sick are to be preferd before those which are so morose. For it is far more easie and decent, though with some pains, and often great enough, for any Physician to seek out, and by trying to find Medicins more grate∣ful to the Sick, then for a Sick Body being delicate, and much afflicted with the Disease, and therfore somtimes loathing the most grateful things, and the most pleasant Meat and Drink, yea at the sight or smell of Medicins presently Loathing, and somtimes Vomiting, to take and keep in his queasie Stomach, with a violence offerd to Nature, any Medicins, espe∣cially
nauseous, and in a large plenty. Which how advers it is to sound Reason, he that has Reason may judg; and how much with the complaints and de∣triment of many Sick, as is known to all, the same is tri'd, and obstinatly defended, by some hard hear∣ted Physicians; and especially, seeing there is a more commodious, and easier, yea safer way brought in∣to Use, and already long continu'd by other Physici∣ans no less learned and well verst in an happy Pra∣ctice. 105. In a Universal Languishing, of which we speak, they know best, who have for some time us'd Medicins Chymically prepar'd, when their Use should be continu'd long, how usefully and happily they may be us'd, and deservedly commend the same to others; for so the desired Health, to be preferd before all earthly good things is obtaind, and gaind with less trouble and almost insensibly. 106. Phlegmatic and Glutinous Humors, producing an Universal Languishing, may and ought not only to be corrected, but when they also abound, or can∣not be wholly amended, are to be Diminishd also, and Educ'd out of the Body, and chiefly by Stool and Ʋrin; which is easier, and more happily performd, after that they are at least in part corrected after the afore∣said manner. 107. We have already given you many Forms of Medicins that Evacuate Viscous Phlegm by Stool; wher∣fore resting with them for the present we will add one here, which may carry it down to the Kidneys and out with the Ʋrin, in the Form of a Decoction. ℞. The Roots of Smallage, Eringo, Asarabacca, of each ℥ i. the Leavs of Hemp-like Agrimony, Net∣tles, Chervil, of each Man. i. Seeds of Sweet Fenel, Hartwort, Saxifrage, of each ʒ ii. Boil
them in clean Water, to ℥ xxx. straind add, Syr. of the Five Roots ℥ iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd, or Volatil Salt of Amber ʒ i. M. Let the Sick drink a Draught of 3, 4, or 5 ℥. of this twice a day when the Stomach is empty of Meat, that is, at least five hours after Meat is taken in. It will be better, if us'd hot or at least warm. 108. Volatil Salts daily taken, even with Food will do the same; as not only amending and cutting Glutinous Phlegm, but driving forward part therof to the ways of Urin, and expelling it in the form of a Setling: which by degrees is deficient in Urin, and therfore gives an undoubted sign that the most part of Phlegm is corrected and overcome: which even therfore is here admonisht for Younger Physicians sake, because there are Elder, who being less verst in pre∣paring the best Volatil Salts, and less exercis'd in ad∣ministring them, and therfore less accustomd in ob∣serving their strength do oppore the same more indi∣rectly, then directly not without some suspicion of Envy. And so many blame what they know not, and will not learn with hand-working: as though to turn over the Writings of some, and unskilfully, to esteme or praise this or that Man's Opinion be∣fore others as he lists without experience were suffici∣ent to get a solid knowledg of Natural and Medicinal Things. But Skilful Practitioners deride such un∣skilful Censurers, and Theoretics though very high Pretenders, not only in curing the Sick, but in pre∣paring Remedies. I speak all these things by Expe∣rience, though mine Adversaries and other Malevo∣lents fret at it; for whose sake also I conceal not a few things, which otherwise I would liberally de∣clare. 109. These may suffice for the Cure of a Univer∣sal
Languishing: and because we said that an Acid Liquor, and especially that of the Pancreas did concur with Glutinous Phlegm, to produce a Swouning and Syncope, a consideration of each Humor deservedly ought to be had; wherfore always a Correcting, and often an Educing of the Acid Humor also is then to be instituted, and indeed in Preventing those Diseases, when the Fit is not present; which being present, and urging, Medicins more Effectual and Spiritous are to to be us'd, which can soon pierce to the parts most affected, and soon remove the danger of Death at hand. 110. Those Aromatics abounding with a Volatil Salt which we said could amend Viscous Phlegm, are often said before likewise to conduce to temper and correct a Sowr Humor: Therfore Medicins newly pre∣scrib'd in divers Forms may conduce to both; which let suffice that I have said it once. 111. Hydragogues commonly call'd, serve to educe the Acid Humor temperd; which we have often men∣tiond and prescrib'd before, wherfore we will only add one Form here. ℞. Gum Sagapen, dissolvd in Vinegar and again thickned ʒ ss. Rosin of Jalapp ℈ i. Magistery of Gum-Gotte ℈ ss. Oil of Juniper Berries 3 drops. M. Make them into fifteen Pills guilded, or done over with Licorish Pouder. Let the Sick take five, or more, or fewer, as he is more difficult or easie to be purg'd. 112. I purposely omit Aloes in the most Pills pre∣scrib'd by me; because it is wont to open the Haemor∣rhoids in many with trouble, and somtimes harm. 113. When the Fit of Swouning and the Syncope is near, and the Signs of it above-mentiond appear, you may give those things that are fit to concentrate
powerfully, and discuss Vapors, and somwhat Sowr, and somtimes also Glutinous Wind; which we late∣ly said were requir'd to be very efficacious and subtil, wherby they may pierce every way and be joind to them. And such are both Spiritous, and Volatil Oily Salts united most intirely by the help of Art. —. 114. Therfore all Volatil Oily Salts conduce, pre∣par'd by Art especially of several parts of Living Creatures, or Plants: Aromatic Tinctures drawn by the help of Spirit of Wine rectifi'd either by Infusion only, or Distillation also of divers Spices, or any parts of Plants, as also Living Creatures. All which ought to be dissolvd in convenient Liquors, and often given to the Sick. For Example out of parts of Plants only; ℞. Mint, Fenel Water, of each ℥ i. Scurvygrass Water, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, of each ℥ ss. Laudanum 2 grains. Syr. of Mint ℥ i. distild Oil of Cloves, and Mace, of each 2 drops. M. 115. Let none wonder that in the propos'd Mix∣ture to be taken often by Spoonfuls, I add Laudanum, seeing we have often before assorted that Opium hath an exceding power to hinder, and mitigate the viti∣ous Effervescency of Sharp Humors both in the small Gut, and in the Heart, and elswhere; without which Effervescency hurtful and somwhat Acid Va∣pors, and such as cause the Diseases which are now to be Cur'd, are not wont to be raisd. 116. Several things prepar'd (and very efficacious) of the parts of Living Creatures may be added to the foresaid Mixture, or one like it, as the Tincture of Castor, the Salt Spirit of Salt Armoniac, or Ʋrin, the Volatil Salt and Oil of Blood, Bones, Horns, Hoofs, &c. the Ods should be rectin'd, and not ony be freed in part from the smatch of the Fire but moreover be
made more piercing, and more potent. Which Re∣ctification is commodiously done with Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd. 117. The newly mentiond Volatil Salts, and Oils may be given in a Spoonful of any Liquor, Water, Wine, Beer, Broth, &c. 118. None, but he who has tri'd, will be easily perswaded of the wonderful efficacy of the aforesaid Medicins, and their exceding power not only in pre∣venting, but moreover in diminishing and soon cu∣ring Swounings and the Syncope. For these Remedi's may be us'd not only before the Fit, or when it coms, but when it molests, by warily pouring in a little of them into the Mouth, and by applying or anointing the Nostrils with them: For their volatil force is every way disperst and piercing to the inmost parts is easily joind to its like, that is, Volatil Vapors, and alters, changes, tempers, and corrects them, so that they cease not only to provoke or pull the Sensible parts, or affect them with a sense of Coldness, but chiefly too much to condens the Blood, and so far to cloud Life, and almost blot it out with their Aci∣dity. 119. Others, also may be us'd when a Swouning or Syncope urges, as is usual, which may stir up any External Senses, such as are Frictions of the Exter∣nal Parts, Shoutings, Application of Sharp Things about the Nostrils and Mouth, of Vinegar, Rhenish-Wine, Cinamon-Water, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, the Apoplectic, Antepileptic, Treacle, &c. Waters. Manifold Fuming as well moist as dry, Vinegar a∣lone, or joind with Cinamon, Cloves, or others, Amber, Partridg-Fethers, and such-like well enough known by the common People. 120. When the Fit is ended either of its own ac∣cord,
or by Art the Strength both Animal, and Vital for the most part prostrated, is to be recreated by Spi∣ritous, as well as Aromatic Medicins. For the Ani∣mal Strength is wont not a little to languish after∣ward, whether or no because the Spirits are not bred in the Brain during the Fit? yet are they restor'd forth forth with strong Wine, or its Spirit sparingly us'd. 121. And Aromatics use to repair the Vital Strength, so call'd, whether or no because they do more agree with Choler which is not a little broken and weakned both in the small Gut, and in the Heart by Acid Va∣pors? If therfore some Aromatics be joind with Wine, or the Aromatic Spirit of Wine be us'd, both Faculties being Debilitated may be helpt by one, and the same Work. For Example; ℞. Betony-Water ℥ ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus ℥ i. Confection of Alkermes ʒ i. Syr. of Burrage ℥ i. M. to be us'd often by Spoonfuls. CHAP. XXXV. Of the Palpitation of the Heart. 1. THe Palpitation of the Heart is deservedly referd to its Motion and Pulse deprav'd against Na∣ture, which I think is to be estem'd its Convulsiv Mo∣tion; seeing it is indeed an inordinate, forct and often also vehement Motion of the Heart. For there is not always a notable vehemency, whence the Palpitation of the Heart uses to differ much in degrees. 2. This inordinate Motion of the Heart may be manifested by the Pulse of the Arteries in part and
after a certain manner, yet not plainly and fully; whence there is need, that for the most part the Hand should feel under the left Pap: although in a vehement Palpitation of the Heart the same Motion may be seen, as also heard often at a notable di∣stance. 3. For it happens somtimes, that there is such a vehement Palpitation of the Heart, and such a smi∣ting of the Ribs, that they are broken by it, or dri∣ven forth in younger and more tender People, and re∣main sticking out. 4. There are also, as we hinted before, some de∣grees in the Palpitation of the Heart upon the ac∣count of its greater or less vehemency; whence som∣times it will not be manifest unless you apply your hand to the Brest; somtimes it is soon manifest to Seeing, and also Hearing. 5. I take the Cause of the Palpitation of the Heart to be, whatsoever is apt to stir it up to the inordinat, and somtimes also vehement Contraction of it self with∣out intermission; whether it be containd within the Ventricles of the Heart, or in its Substance, or it be without the Heart, yet continually pulls, bites, or pricks it for a time or always. Whence a certain Palpitation of the Heart is noted perpetually trou∣bling the Sick, another urging for the time and again urging, or wholly departing. 6. Whatsoever is effus'd out of the Veins and Elets into the Ventricles of the Heart, and is again soon expeld by its Contraction into the Arteries, be∣coms somtimes the Cause of a Greater, or more Po∣tent Pulse, but not of Palpitation; to produce which there is need, that its Cause should stick to or in the Heart, and continually provoke it to Contract
it self, which therfore will be both inordinat, and un∣equal, and besides together vehement. 7. Now having examind, and weighed those things, which I have both observd in the Sick trou∣bled with a Palpitation of the Heart, and also seen noted of other Physicians, I judg this Palpitation of the Heart for the most part, arises from Humors, or Wind very Viscous and together Sharp carri'd to the Ven∣tricles of the Heart, and sticking in them, and conti∣nually provoking the Heart to an inordinat, and un∣equal Contraction of it self. 8. These Humors, and Wind, may be more fre∣quently carri'd out of the small Gut to the Heart, whether they be driven forward of their own accord being mov'd by their vitious Effervescency; or being stird up are carri'd by a more stird Motion of Body, especially in their ascending a steep place, or a grie∣vous Passion of Mind, Anger, Fear, Sorrow, or Joy; or be in like manner constraind, or urg'd by an Ex∣ternal Cause as the Heat or sharp coldness of Air; by sweet or sowr Food; by a potent, and that somtimes sweet, other times ungrateful, or like smell of any thing to raise an Effervescency, and produce Vapors as well glutinous as sharp, to be transmitted to the Heart. 9. Hence it is, that in the most kinds of Hypo∣chondriac Symptoms, the Palpitation of the Heart is so frequent, and familiar. 10. Hence it is, that so often about the beginnings of Intermitting Fevers, while Cold still urges, or re∣mits, as also in their Vigour, when the Heat is ex∣ceding, the Palpitation of the Heart is perceivd trou∣blesom. 11. Beside the noted Humors, and Wind somtimes there are observd Fleshy Tumors, or Bone like or Gri∣stle-like
Excrescencies in the substance of the Heart, to which a Palpitation being joind till Death, was not undeservedly ascrib'd. 12. Worms found in the Pericardium by pricking the Heart, or a Sharp Humour by biting may be the Cause of an unwonted Palpitation; as also a Wound given to the Heart. 13. The Causes noted in the two latter Paragraphs as they are difficult to be known, if not impossible, so neither can they be cur'd. 14. The most frequent kind of Palpitation of the Heart mentiond in the former place when the Fit molests may be Cur'd, if it rise from Wind, by Me∣dicius that both Cut, and Discuss, and especially Tem∣per an Acid Acrimony, often propos'd before. For Example; ℞. Parsley, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. Matthio∣lus his Aqua Vitae ℥ i. distild Oil of Mace 4 drops. Sp. of Salt Armoniac 20 drops. Lauda∣num 3 Grains. Syr. of Mint ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take one Spoonful of this Mixture every quarter of an hour, till he get some ease. 15. If the Palpitation of the Heart be thought to be produc'd from a Viscous and Sharp Humor, the same Altering Medicins that Cut and Temper Acrimo∣ny are to be us'd: yea somtimes, if the Fit persevere long, (which is usual) use those that empty out the Humor. 16. To Cut and Temper the nam'd Humor the Mixture newly prescrib'd, or one like it may con∣duce: And to Educe it I prefer before all others, Pills to be made of Gums, seeing They loosen the Glutinous Humors, and dispose them to be easier car∣ri'd out. For Example;
℞. Gum-Galbanum dissolvd in Vinegar of Squils, and again thickned ʒ ss. Vitriol of Mars calcin'd white ℈ i. the Troches Alhandal ʒ ss. Diagridi∣um 15 Grains. Oil of Carua's 6 drops. M. make them into xxv. Pills, to be guilded. Take five or seven in the Morning, the Stomach being empty; drinking upon it half an hour after, Broth, or Beer boild with a little Bread, and aroma∣tiz'd with Mace. 17. They who abhor Pills, may use a Decoction prepar'd of such as Cut, Aromatics and Purgers; for which end we commend the following very bitter and efficacious. ℞. The Root of Smallage ℥ i. of Angelica ʒ i. Sha∣vings of Lignum Sanctum ℥ iii. Berries of Lau∣rel ʒ ii. Pulp of Colocynthis ʒ i. Seeds of Carua ℈ ii. Orange-peel ʒ ii. Boil them according to Art in pure Water, in ℥ xxx. of what is straind, dissolv the solutiv Syr. of Roses with Senna ℥ iii. Sp. of Wine rectifi'd ℥ ii. M. Let the Sick take ℥ iii, iv, or v. If the Sick purge little or nothing by so much, he may drink as much, or more, as the Physician thinks fit, either in the same day or the next, and so diminish and educe the hurtful Humor by easie purging. 18. Out of the Fit such-like may and ought to be us'd both Alterers and Emptiers, and that daily. For the nam'd Humors cannot be weakned unless in length and continuance of time: which are also to be educ'd by Intervals, being more stubboru, and past amending: where it is safer to empty them at times, and by degrees, then to cast the Sick into more grie∣vous Diseases by trying the same together and at once.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Flowing of Blood out of the Left Ven∣tricle of the Heart through the Great Arte∣ry to all the Parts of the Body deprav'd. 1. THe Blood being perfected in both Ventricles of the Heart and the Lungs between is carri'd at last through the infinite Branches of the Aorta or Great Artery to all Parts of the Body, wherby They may be Nourisht, and out of it Liquors farther Ʋseful or Unuseful for their dispensing in Mans Body are separated in several places, and again sent back to the Mass of Blood, or are excluded straight out of the Body. 2. This Flowing of Blood through the Arteries is deprav'd somtimes, either Ʋniversally, or in some Parts; and that 1. when it flows too slowly, or not at all; or 2. is mov'd too quickly, or too potently; or 3. so flows into the Substance or Cavities of the Parts, that it sticks there; or flows out of the Body. 3. The Blood flows Ʋniversally too slowly, or also is quite stopt and stands still in its Motion: 1. in the Plethora call'd in the Vessels, by defect of a sufficient space to receive the Blood perfected in the Ventricles of the Heart, and therfore also more rarefi'd. 4. 2. In a Swouning and Syncope, as also a Uni∣versal Languishing of the Body, because the Blood is not fit to rarefie; as was largely said and explaind in Chap. 34. 5. The same Blood flows particularly more slowly through the Arteries, or is also somtimes stopt and stands
still because of any kind of Straitness in the Arteries of some Part, and especially a Compression or Obstruction; for I can scarce conceive that a Stopping Uniting to∣gether, or Setling can have place in the Arteries. 6. The Arteries may be Comprest by an over-hard Tumor near them, by hard binding, &c. 7. The Arteries may be Obstructed, and especially the Capillaries both by Glutinous Phlegm carrid toge∣ther with the Blood through Them, and either of its own accord or by degrees again closes, or coagulated by the Cold of the Air piercing thither through the Pores of the Skin, then compacted from the Blood It self because of External Gold, or a Sowr Humor injoin∣ing it self thither. 8. The Blood is Ʋniversally mov'd through the Arteries too swiftly, or too potently in all Burning Fe∣vers, as well Continual, as Intermitting, as long as the Pulse remains not only too frequent, but together Greater and Stronger for after that the Blood is then so far rarefi'd, that it distends the Vessels too much, and makes a Plethora at the Vessels, the Pulse usual∣ly becoms both Less and Weaker; till by letting Blood by opening a Vein a greater space is prepar'd to receive the Blood, and together the Vital Fire being near Suffocation is as it were recreated and stird up by the same means; whence the Pulse also is then again both Greater and Stronger. 9. In like manner the Blood mov's Ʋniversally too Potently, and too swiftly in the Palpitation of the Heart, because of the Heart as well forc'd, as pro∣vok'd to an over-frequent contraction of it self. 10. The same happens after a notable, but not extreme Effusion of Blood, and that either of its own accord, or artificial, or by chance, to wit, by a Wound receivd casually or by force.
11. The Blood mov's more swiftly and potently to a certain and determind Part, because of Blood effus'd out of the same, yet not in too great or high a quan∣tity; because, where this happens, the rest of the Blood is carri'd thither, yea is so carri'd out, that by its defect the Vital Fire is diminisht in the Heart, and the Blood deficient, and little, however rarefi'd there, can less open the Ventricles of the Heart, and ther∣fore can less provoke its Musculous Substance to con∣tract it self, therfore the Blood is less driven every way, and at last fails, unless Life be speedily helpt, after a Universal Languishing. 12. The Blood effus'd flows into the Substance of the Parts, or Cavities of the Body, and is gatherd there out of the Arteries any way internally opend and lying open: as the same flows out of the Body and Arteries hurt about the superficies of the Body. 13. A Plethra at the Vessels for its Causes argues an healthy Constitution of the Body, and a more liberal use of the best Food, a Mind void of Cares, little Exercise of Body, much sleep, and such-like. 14. We have spoken of the Causes and Cure of Blood less apt to rarefie in Chap. 34. where you may see them, which make hither. 15. We must speak elswhere of the Rising, Causes and Cure of several Tumors; and of an Obstruction of the Vessels of Blood, and its Causes, Effects and man∣ner of Curing it, we intend to propose more in Chap. 40. 16. Of Fevers, as also a Palpitation of the Heart we have professedly treated before; but of the seve∣ral Differences, and Causes, and Cure of Wounds, perhaps we may comment elswhere, God wil∣ling. 17. We will therfor admonish only one thing among
many that make for a Cure of the noted Diseases from the Flowing of Blood through the Arteries de∣prav'd of Curing a Plethora at the Vessels so call'd soon, and safely; to wit, that it may be absolvd by a sufficient letting Blood out at an opend Vein: where I would have you observe, that according to the pro∣per Constitution of every one to be Cur'd the Blood be let out at one, or more times, and that somtimes in a greater, somtimes in a less plenty. 18. The Encreasing of the same Plethora may be prevented; 1. by diminishing the quantity of Food which is of much and laudable Juice; and by substi∣tuting in its place Food of more difficult Fermenta∣tion, and that which contains less of a nourishing Juice. 19. 2. By daily exercising, and wearying the Bo∣dy more. 20. 3. By withdrawing by little and little som∣thing from Sleep. 21. 4. By calling into use, and Encreasing Cares, and serious Occupations of the Mind, which ought not to be too much vexing. 22. 5. When by these means the too great en∣crease of Blood cannot yet be enough hindred, en∣deavour must be us'd, that moreover the Blood ne∣vertheless more encreasd, should be diminisht in time by opening a Vein.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Nourishment of all the Parts deprav'd, and in especial of Atrophia, or Pining. 1. THe general Ʋse of Blood carri'd to all and eve∣ry of the Parts is their Nourishment, or repair∣ing of the Particles by degrees departing from them and perishing; as also in Youth their Encreasing to a decent bulk and bigness. 2. This Nourishment, and Eucreasing of all the Parts is deprav'd somtimes either Ʋniversally or Par∣ticularly, and that often according to the Flesh of the Muscles, and Fatness, seldom according to the Sub∣stance of the Bowels, and Bones. 3. This Depravation happens when 1. that Nou∣rishment is Deficient in an Atrophie, or Pining: 2. when it is too Much, specially in Fleshiness, or Fat∣ness. 3. When it is Ʋnequally or Evilly in a Ca∣chexie, Anasarca, Leucophlegmatia, Rickets, &c. 4. In this Chapter we will Treat of an Atrophia, or Defect of Nourishment, in the following, of the rest. 5. The Nourishment of the Body is wont to be De∣ficient manifestly, as is said, upon the account of Fat∣ness and the Musculous Flesh; and not upon the ac∣count of Gristles, Bones, or the Substance of Bowels. 6. When Fatness only is consum'd, and is not e∣qually repaird,  may be call'd Leanness; when the Flesh is together diminisht, and is not restor'd, Pin∣ing. Neither is it a new thing to observe Men, whose
Fat only decays; but somtimes also, those whose Flesh perishes more, then their Fatness. 7. This double Atrophia is often Ʋniversal, through the Universal Body; but not so often Particular and in some determinate Parts only, especially in the Lims. 8. This Atrophia happens often by the Fault of Blood, seldom by the fault of the Part affected. 9. The Atrophia happens by the fault of Blood, when it is either deficient in the Universal Body, or some part; or is unfit to repair the Parts that grow lean. 10. Blood is Deficient in the Ʋniversal Body, both because of a voluntary, or forc'd Hunger; by any kind of notable Effusion of Blood; by the defect of convenient Food; by too much Motion of Body; by Watchings too long continu'd; by permanent Cares; by too much and too long heat of Air; and because of a Loosness prolong'd. 11. The Blood is usually Deficient in some Part be∣cause of its hindred Flowing unto or into It, and so the Cutting or Compression whatsoever of the Arteries tending to it, by the Ʋnjointing of the Bones, hard Tu∣mors, Bonds, &c. 12. The Blood is unfit to nourish and repair the Bo∣dy Containing, and its Parts more, or fewer because of a vitious Quality, or Vitious, Salt, Viscous, Pu∣rulent, &c. Humors mixt with it. 13. The Blood oft retains a vitious quality after great Symptoms and Diseases gone before, Burning Fe∣vers, the Dysenterie, &c. or as yet present, an He∣ctic Fever either single, or Tisical, Wasting, and slowly or suddenly consuming the Body: Although I then think the vitious Humors are to be considerd, which produce the noted Fevers, and do moreover
vitiate the Blood, and make it unfit to nourish the Bo∣dy, especially Matter infecting and corrupting the Blood in a Tisic. 14. We have in several places, and still intend to propose in this Treatise the rising of Vitious, Salt, Viscous, Purulent, &c. Humors, whence they may be sought. 15. Pining happens by the fault of the Parts to be Nourisht, when they suffer some harm by what Cause soever, and especially External, and Accidental, to wit by a Chance, Contusion, great Wound, &c. whence the Vessels carri'd through Them are not only burst, or cut, but the Flesh it self, and the Membrans, &c. are wasted and vitiated wherfore the Blood is not on∣ly deficient, but the Food also coming to them is cor∣rupted. 16. The Cause of Pining which some seek or place in the Defect of the Radical Moisture, or Inbred Heat, or the Inward Temperament chang'd into too hot and dry, I think is to be sought, and found in Choler, Lympha, and also Spittle, and the Juice of the Pan∣creas not feignd and commented, and so Chimaerical but actually existing, observd by many, and sensible Humors, but after divers manners chang'd and viti∣ated. 17. In an extreme Pining, beside the Hippocratical Face, consisting in the Temples fall'n, the hollowness of the Eyes, the Nostrils sharp, the Chops giving out, and the Mouth gaping, the Ribs in the Brest stands out, and the Gristle call'd Ensiformis is seen crooked; the Sholder blade, and Collar bones appear like Bows; the spine of the Back shows it self; the Belly appears fall'n, and contracted; the Buttocs are lank, or con∣sum'd; the Legs, Arms, Feet, and Hands with Fin∣gers are beheld dry, and Swellings about the Joints
seem to stand out; the Nails are crookt; the Hair falls off; and the Skin becoms limber, wrinkled, swart, and dry; mean while the Veins swell out, be∣ing conspicuous and wan every where; and the Uni∣versal Body is observ'd in some almost transparent and pellucid. 18. All Physicians testifie, whom Experience fa∣vours, that a Pining, especially after it has continu'd for some time is hard to Cure, and oft-times Incura∣ble; although the most think that it is not hard to cure in the beginning, so that it be known. 19. Pining may be Cur'd, 1. by Repairing the Ʋni∣versal, or Particular Defect of Blood; and by using the best Food, in a moderat quantity, and by removing, or amending every Cause of that Defect; of which we have spoken, or will, elswhere. 20. 2. The same Pining may be Cur'd, by Cor∣recting any kind of Fault in the Blood, and by Remo∣ving from it every vitious Humor mixt with it, by those that Evacuate, most convenient for every one, Vo∣mits, Purges by Stool, and especially Diuretics, or Sudorifics, and moreover Salivating Medicins: of which we have spoken elswhere, whence they may be selected, which are most profitable here. 21. The Correction of Blood alterd and vitiated se∣veral ways may be vari'd according to the variety of their faultiness, by using Medicins most fit for every Fault, unless you have at hand Ʋniversal Correctors, such as are made most efficacious of Minerals and Metals, and other things less determinat to the parts of Living Creatures, and therfore the best, and in special of Antimony, Gold, Iron, Vitriol, Coral, Pearl, &c. whence the Tinctures, and Sulphurs, &c. to be made of these above-said, are not undeservedly men∣tiond, and commended.
22. The same Pining may be Cur'd 3. by Repai∣ring the harm of the Parts to be nourisht com'd by a mischance, of which thing we intend to speak pro∣fessedly in the Chirurgical part of Physic. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of an over-Fleshy and Fat Constitution of the Body. 1. WE said in the former Chapter, that Nourish∣ment was too much notably, both in the Fleshy Excrescency of the Muscles, and in Fatness, whence the whole Body is observd greater; which is not equally, when the Substance of the Bowels, or Glandul's increase to too great a bulk, by reason of which there are Tumors only thought to be every where produc'd. 2. The Musculous Habit of the Body becoms more Fleshy by much and laudable Blood; the Motion of Bo∣dy, and moderat Exercise concurring; the Life void of anxious Cares; a moderat or more prolongd Sleep; a large taking in of Food of much Juice, and easie to ferment. 3. The Body becoms over-Fat in Habit and Super∣ficies, as within, by Blood too Fat, to produce which the healthy Constitution of the Body conduces, yet an Acid Juice concurring plenteous enough, but mild, and temperd; as Choler over-sparing, and not very sharp; the Motion of the Body little; Life also without corrod∣ing Cares; Sleep pleasant and too long; continual and much taking in of fat Food.
4. The Body is seldom loaden with much or too much Flesh, but commonly with Fat. 5. Too great an Encrease of the Musculous Flesh, may be Cur'd, 1. by speedily Diminishing Blood with opening a Vein. 2. By Exercising the Body much and longer then is wonted to a Weariness notable enough. 3. By Employing, and Vexing the Mind with grie∣vous and solicitous Cares. 4. By Encreasing Wak∣ings, and by lessening Sleep. 5. By Using more sparingly Food of much and the best Juice, or in their stead taking those that less nourish, or are more difficultly fermented. 6. The same Fatness of Body may be Cur'd, 1. By Using often and plenteously any sharp Sauces, both Sowr, and Aromatic, that is, salt, or bitter; which as well make the Glandulous Liquors more Acid, as Choler more bitter and sharp. Such are Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, Spirit of Salt, &c. Pepper, Cloves, Ci∣namon, Mace, Ginger, Cresses, Rocket, Mustard, ny Radish, and chiefly Horse-Radish, &c. 2. By Moving the Body much. 3. By vexing the Mind with Cares. 4. By daily lessening Sleep. 5. Whol∣ly abstaining from Oily and Fat Food; for so by lit∣tle and little the superfluous Fat will not only be con∣sum'd, but its new encreasing hindred.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of a Cachexie, and in special, Anasarca, and Leucophlegmatia. 1. THe Nourishment of the Body peccant in quality may, and is wont to be call'd a Cachexie; in which the Native Skin and especially Colour of the Face languisheth, and is chang'd pale, and somtimes yellow or livid and very wan; as in some swart red, or somwhat redish, together with little Pimples rising up commonly in the Nose, and Cheeks of several sorts. 2. In the most kinds of a Cachexie a Dyspnaea con∣cur's, which is more encreas'd, when the Body is mov'd, especially over-much, and in ascending an high place. And then most usually a Palpitation of the Heart, and a Pulsation of the Arteries about the Throat, and Temples, manifest to Sight, is produc'd. Commonly there is a Weariness of the Ʋniversal Body, and Thighs especially. Often a pressing and vexing pain of the Heart urges, which uses to be encreasd af∣ter Food taken in. Yea for the most part there is a lingring Fever, and that either Continual, or Inter∣mitting, or Compounded of both. Ʋrin coms away often Crude, or Watry, seldom Thick or Troubled, unless they be troubled or chang'd by another Disease accompanying, or an External Cause. At length the Universal Body waxes Lean, and Pines in some; as in others the same Swels and is Turgid. And an Anasarca comes by a Serous Humor; as a Leucophleg∣matia by a Phlegmatic, and more viscous Humor; and
an Ascites, from both, at least the former, when the Belly with the Thighs only is troubled. 3. A Cachexie spares none, nor People of any Age; although most frequently it siezes on Women because of their Monthly Courses Staying too long, and hindred, or any way Supprest; it is also often enough wont to accompany the Hypochondriac Disease, and its notable kind, the Scurvy. 4. The Cause of every Cachexie is the Blood endued with a vitious quality, because of which although the parts of the Body be a little, and for some time nou∣risht, yet are they not nourisht, as is requir'd; but their nourishment is deprav'd several ways according to the variety of the quality peccant: whence also more kinds of a Cachexie are observd, to be distinguisht both according to the diversity of Heat chang'd, and especially of the Symptoms conjoind. 5. The Quality of Blood is faulty both by the Na∣tural Humors concurring to the Constitution of the Blood in the Heart, but having a vitious quality; and by the Non-Natural Things so call'd, vitiating some of the nam'd Humors, and Blood it self, and so corrupting them, that an ill Nourishment of the Body follows. 6. The Natural Humors, that are wont to be con∣fus'd with the Blood, and hitherto known, are Cho∣ler, and Lympha of the Conglobated Glandul's, and the other Parts of the Body, as also Spittle, and the Juice of the Pancreas, joind together with Choler in the Small Gut, and compounding a singular Liquor to be mixt with Lympha, and so the Animal Spirits returnd any way to the Blood; all which I scarce think that any verst though but a little in the Art of Physic, and addicted to the Truth can deny to be af∣fected with a vitious quality, and to communicate it self with the Blood.
7. We have noted several Depravations of these before, and shall yet relate more: whence they may be requir'd that make hither. 8. As several Depravations of Humors are somtimes by degrees & insensibly produc'd in the Body, so the same are somtimes bred suddenly and sensibly by the Non-Natural Things, or others to be noted with the name of Poison peccant in a notable excess, and very much troubling, or corrupting all things in the Body. 9. The Depravations most frequent and manifest are Acrimony both Acid and Salt-like Pickle, and somtimes a Lixivial Salt, and too much Viscousness, or Fluidity: the Causes of which, and manner of breed∣ing we have often propos'd, and explaind before; whither we remit the Studious Reader, lest being too oft spoken it be tedious to the Nice. 10. The reason of the mentiond Symptoms will easily be known to any that thinks oft, and weighs, that as oft as the Blood whence-soever hath been made Vitious, and producing a Cachexie; so often all the nam'd Humors, seeing they arise from the Blood, are also bred faulty; whence likewise not on∣ly both the Appetite of Food is deprav'd, but more∣over their Fermentation; wherfore Anxieties about the Midrif, and a pressing Pain of the Heart follow as well before as after its being taken in. 11. But when part, or the whole Mass of Food ill Fermented is driven forward through the small Gut, the Juice of the Pancreas and Choler which are confus'd with it being alike vitious, do not only cor∣rupt the expected Separation of useful and unuseful parts; but also here happens a vitious Effervescency of these Humors; yea often manifold Vapors, or Wind being raisd out of that vitious Mixture do not only encrease the fore-describ'd Anxiety, but carri'd to the
Heart do breed its Palpitation; and carri'd to the Lungs make a difficult Breathing; and driven every way breed the noted Weariness. 12. From the same Vitiousness of all the Humors a Continual, and Slow Fever depends, in as much as they raise a vitious Effervescency in the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, among many other Symptoms they likewise make the Pulse more Frequent then is wont, and so preternatural. 13. And seeing the Sick through unquietness often lay their Bodies bare that were coverd with Cloaths, it easily happens, that Phlegm being carri'd through the Vessels of the Pancreas is coagulated there, and breeds an Obstruction; by which the Juice standing still may be the Cause of a manifold Intermitting Fe∣ver, and it will be sooner, and easier, if the Body run down with Sweat, and the Pores of the Skin are open, or the Air be colder and sharper. 14. Ʋrin comes away Crude, and less Colourd, or Thick because of the Humors mentiond over-sharp, incorporating with the Blood, or Watry abounding, which diminish the desired Effervescency, so that the Separation, much less Excretion of the Excrementi∣tous Parts, to be voided together with Urin, being requir'd and useful doth not follow. And as then all the Parts are ill Nourisht, so the Skin of the Face ex∣pos'd to the Air and Sight before all others, gives signs of its harm by Heat according to the variety of several Humors most peccant. 15. When the Acrimony of the Humors concurs, then is it manifested internally with Pains, or exter∣nally with Pimples. 17. When the vitious Humors abound together in Plenty, then several kinds of the Dropsie at length succede; if not, the Universal Body grows Lean by degrees.
18. The Cachexie which in special happens to Wo∣men because of their Monthy Courses flowing less com∣modiously or in due season, God willing, we intend to give the Reason, and Generation therof in the Third Chapter of the Third Book. 19. From wat has been said here and elswhere, the pction of every Hypochondriac, and Scorbutic Cachie. may sily be deduc'd by a Judicious and  us Physician. . And that we may pass on to the Cure of the  kow, that if any where, then for certain  his Glden Precept is to be observd accuratly, propos'd in the following Distich; Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras. Resist beginnings, late is Physic us'd, When the Disease delaid is deep infus'd. For unless the Cachexie be helpt in time, it becoms oft by degrees so stubborn, and rebellious, that it can be cur'd only late, or never. Therfore are the Sick and their Parents, or Kindred, or Friends to be admo∣nisht by their ordinary Physicians, though unaskt, so soon as the gns of a Cachexie beginning manifest themselves in the Colour of the Face chang'd, that that Evil, as it is in the Proverb, be not neglected in the Blade, seeing that it is soon wont to take deep root, and hard to be rooted out, which afterward cannot be overcome unless by an Herculean Labour. 21. The Cure of every Cachexie will consist in the Correction and Amendment of the Blood any way vitious. Where the kind of the Vitiusness and true Canse is to be observd whether it be one, or manifold.
22. As therfore this or that Humor is primarily and most peccant after this or that manner, and de∣pending on this or that Error committed in the Non-natural Things hath vitiated the Blood, and produc'd a Cachexie, so are the Medicins to be selected, which may mildly, and by degrees alter, and reduce both the noted Humor, and the Blood it self to their natu∣ral constitution; or, if they cannot be clearly and wholly amended, yet do they empty out by dgrees the same at least corrected after a certain manner; mean while not neglecting the Non-natural Things, or others producing, or cherishing these Evils; which unless they be corrected, or shund the happy wisht for Cure, and laudable Success of what is to be done will be expected in vain. 23. You have often told you before by what Medi∣cins and Forms the mentiond Corrections and Emp∣tyings of several Humors may, and ought to be per∣fected; where they may be seen. 24. We must therfore persevere a while in the Vse of convenient Medicins, and especially, when the Cachexie has continu'd for a space, and fix its growth, which will depart slowly; yea, in the use of any Medicin profiting, so long as the Sick dos not only amend by it, but can e it withou loath∣ing, and dislike: As soon therfore as it cases to please, or benefit though the most grateful, o also best Medicin, prescribe an other, or the same to be given in another form. 25. In a long continued Cachexie the Medicins are always convenient that Correct, and Evacuate tough and glutinous Phlegm, seeing that all Prolongd Dis∣eases depend on it either wholly, or at least in part. 26. If a Humor Sowr, or like Salt Pickle be cou∣pled with Glutinous Phlegm, which commonly hap∣pens,
or a Lixivial, or Choleric Salt which seldom happens, Medicins that satisfie both Indications are to be joind together, which are oft propos'd and men∣tiond; by the help whereof the gaining of Health lost may somtimes be expected sooner, other-times flower. CHAP. XL. Of the Reflux of Blood through the Veins, from all the Parts to the Right Ventricle of the Heart deprav'd; and in special of an In∣flammation. 1. AS the Universal Blood is carri'd through the Arteries from the Heart to all and every Con∣taining Part of the Body, both to Enliven, Nourish, and Encrease them, and also to separate all the Hu∣mors, or useful and unuseful things Containd any way fom the remaining Mass; so the same Blood re∣mainig after this manifold benefit many ways be∣stowed on both Bodies, yea many ways despoild of se part of it self and decaid is again carri'd from all the same Containing Parts through the Veins to the Heart there to be renewd by the mutual Mixture, and after that the Effervescency, and Vital Rarefaction of several Parts concurring. 2. This Flowing of the Blood and reciprocal and altering Reflux, is now known and made known by the name of the Circular Motion. 3. The Blood is somtimes hindred in its Reflux, when it either Stands still, and stops in its▪ Vessels
and Ways, or is effus'd out of them, whether it be within the Substance of the parts beside it, or Cavities of the Body, or it hap out of the Body. 4. The Blood stands still in its Vessels, either be∣cause of a great Plethora and that call'd at the Vessels; or by a straitness one while by Their Compression, ano∣ther time by their Obstruction made. 5. We sufficiently mentiond the Plethora at the Ves∣sels in Chap. 36. which may be seen there. 6. The Veins are Prest to hinder the Reflux of Blood, somtimes by hard Tumors near, other-times by Bands about the parts, straitly binding the Veins, as well as Arteries. 7. The Veins somtimes are obstructed by the Blood it self, or Phlegm Coagulated and compacted in them, other-times though seldom, by a Stone bred in them, and by degrees more encreasd. 8. I would have the Hollow Substance of every part referd to the Veins, through which I think with ma∣ny that the Blood for the most part goes out of the Arteries into the Veins. 9. The Blood is Coagulated both by the great Cold∣ness of the Air or Water very much affecting the parts; and by Medicins potently Astringent, or Tart, com∣municated to the Blood from without or within, and Congealing it. 10. Phlegm is Coagulated in the aforesaid Vessels by the same Causes, most frequently by the Cold of the Air, Water, Drink, or other things suddenly inva∣ding the Parts before warm, either Externally or In∣ternally, and again there curdling and thickning the Phlegm, specially Viscous, by what Cause soever dissolvd especially in the small Gut, and hence carri'd to the Blood, and together with it driven forward every way.
11. Phlegm in the small Gut is wont to be Loosend, 1. By the hot Air of the Sun, Fire, Bath, &c. 2. By Food, as also Medicins both Spiritous and Aromatic, or abounding with a Volatil Salt. 3. By a vehement Motion of Body; whither Frictions, and Coverings may be referd. 4. By immoderat Anger. 5. By pro∣longd Watchings. 12. Where note, how much the more causes do concur, and are peccant in a greater excess, so much the easier, sooner, and more plenteously the nam'd Phlegm is loos'd and transferd toward the Blood. 13. The Blood standing, and by little and little collected in its nam'd Vessels, distends them more, and more, and so, that somtimes they burst or any other way give it an Out-let; whence there then happens an Effusion of Blood out of its Vessels, whether it stick in the Substance of the adjacent Parts, or be collected in a near Cavity of the Body, or be wholly pourd out of the Body. 14. The Blood Inclos'd as yet and standing in the Capillarie Vessels, and perhaps in the middle sinuous substance of any of the Parts; or Effus'd am  mean plenty at least gatherd without those its wonted ways, but opend and patent into any kind of porous, and especially fleshy, or membranous substance of their parts, that are near, or their spaces between presently of its own accord waxes hot and produces a trouble∣som Sense of Heat in a sensible part; and being by de∣grees corrupted, is wont to turn into Purulent Matter. Whence the first Change is call'd an Inflammation, as the latter, and Abscess or Aposteme. 15. I judge the Blood is kindled and breeds an In∣flammation in as much as out of it being in Vessels ve∣ry much distended, or standing in any other Parts the Spiritous, and more Volatil and Subtil parts, that
are wont to temper both the Acid, and Salt Parts, do afterward begin to vanish; whence both being made Sharper do more sharply rise up one against another, and stir up an Hot Effervescency because of the Oily Parts of the Blood present, yea by degrees do so corrupt the Blood, as to turn it into Matter, different according to the variousness of the Blood corrupted. 16. Blood Effus'd into some Cavity naturally void of Humors, as of the Brest, or Belly, and there Col∣lected and Corrupted into Matter constitutes a Sup∣puration. 17. The same Blood Effus'd into the hollow Parts of the Body, the Stomach, Guts, or Ʋrinary Bladder, makes a various change, because of the several Humors then mixt with it, unless it be soon sent out of them. 18. The Effusion of the same Blood out of the Body, is call'd in general an Haemorrhagie; although in par∣ticular this name is given to Blood bursting out at the Nostrils; as the same when it flows out of the Ves∣sels of the Fundament is call'd Haemorrhois: and Blood distilling every Month out of Womens Wombs, is known by the name of Monthly Courses; and that which uses to be evacuated plenteously after Birth that way, the Lochia. 19. Where it is to be noted, that there is no natu∣ral Efflux of Blood beside both newly mentiond proper to Women, of which variously deprav'd we intend to speak at large, if God permit, in the Third Book of this Work. For every other Haemorrhagie, whe∣ther coming of its own accord, or by chance, or if it be procur'd by Art; or whether it be hurtful, or useful, always happens beside the ordinary course of Nature, seeing that none such is to be expected of perfectly healthy People.
20. Therefore the Cause of every Efflux of Blood is any kind of Opening of the Vessels, whether it be by too much Distension of the Vessels by plenteous, much rarefi'd, or retarded Blood, or Wind; or by the corroding Pain of an Humor stopping either in, or out of the Vessels, or by an hard and sharp thing wounding; or by a blunt thing bruising or if the same happen any other way. 21. We intend to speak elswhere of the most Cau∣ses, and the Cure of Blood Effus'd beside nature out of its Vessels, in this Chapter we will prosecute the Essence, and Cure of an Inflammation. 22. It is requir'd to the Cure of an Inflammation and Aposteme following, that. 1. The Compression, or Obstruction of the Vessels be taken away. 2. That the Motion of Blood Stopt, and standing still be restor'd. 3. That the Blood effus'd out of its Vessels, if it can be, be removd thence before it turn to Matter. 4. That if the Suppuration cannot be removd, and so hindred, it should be ripend, and promoted. 5. That the letting out of Matter bred be hastned. 6. That the cleansing and consolidation of the Ʋlcer be most spedily absolv'd. 23. I. The Compression of the Vessels by Bonds straitly cast about the parts may be taken away, when they are taken away; or by an hard Tumor, when it is cur'd; of which, elswhere. 24. An Obstruction of the Vessels by Viscous Phlegm, or Blood Coagulated in them may be Cur'd, by using Medicins that as well internally, as externally loosen the Humor peccant, and again make it fluid. 25. Among Internals, Volatil Salts prepar'd of se∣veral parts of Living Creatures conduce before all others, as having an egregious power of dissolving all things Coagulated and Conglutinated in mans bo∣dy,
and of reducing the same to their wonted fluidity, and moreover to move sweat; which together being mildly promoted that desired and amiable Dissolution of those Gathered together is obtaind much easier, sooner, and more happily. 26. Hence it is, that often by one Sweat prepar'd of these mentioned Volatil Salts, or such-like, given in season a Pleurisy, that is an inflammation of the Side has been most happily cur'd without opening a Vein, and letting Blood. 27. Hence it is, that Mixtures prepar'd of such like, and us'd by spoonfuls by short intervals in time, have cur'd both a Pleurisie, and Peripneumonie, and Inflammations of other parts soon, safely and plea∣santly. 28. I here set down an example of such a Sudori∣fic Mixture for Younger Physicians sake, which ℞. Parsley, Hyssop, Fennel-water, of each ℥ i. Sim∣ple Treacle-water ℥ ss. Sp. of Salt Armoniac ʒ ss. Laudanum Gr. iv. Syr. of white Poppies ℥ i. M. 29. Instead of Sp. of Salt Armoniac you may add Volatil Salt of Harts-Horn, or any other, and ac∣cording to its greater, or less Acrimonie add more, or less of it to the Mixture, which may be taken in a greater, or less quantity at every time, and the body be kept in a warm place, especially in bed, to promote the power of the Medicin every way, and after that to facilitate a Sweat; although there is scarce need to raise a sweat continually; seeing it profits not, unless in asmuch as the volatil and Salt force of the Medicin pierces easier, and sooner to the place affected and Obstructed. 30. Crabs Eyes, the Jaws of a Pike, the Bone of the Heart of an Hart, &c. may and ought to be re∣ferrd
to a Volatil Salt seeing they abound with it. 31. In this case likewise All fixt Metallic and Mi∣neral Sulphurs conduce; wherefore Diaphoretic Anti∣monie is hither referrd being broucht to some fixtnes; although these are here convenient for many causes. 32. Nor do the Volatil Salts of Living Creatures alone conduce here, but all made of several parts of Scorbutic Plants so calld being sharp, emulating their strength, such as are the Juices of Hedge-Mu∣stard Scurvie-grass, Garden and Water Cresses, Dan∣deleon, &c. Treacle-Waters, &c. So that they have power to loosen and dissolv Phlegm Coagulated or Blood Clotterd. 33. Among the Externals the compound Oyntment Martiatum, and of Marsh-Mallows are convenient, &c. the Oil of white Lilies, Camomile, Dill, Bay, Bricks, (commonly call'd) Philosophers, &c. which may commodiously be mixt together, and be anoint∣ed on the external affected part; using before or add∣ing often the rectifi'd Spirit of Wine, aswel simple, as compound, and several ways aromatiz'd, 34. In this Case also Cataplasms, more Dissolving, than Mollifying, or Ripening may be outwardly apply'd; which may Cut, and Loosen the Humor, Blood, or Phlegm Coagulated being prepar'd of the parts of Sharp and Aromatic Plants. For example take this following. ℞. Onions roasted under the Ashes, or in an earthen Vessel, and beaten ℥ ii, the Leaves of Hegde-Mu∣stard, Chervil, Garden-Crsses, Elder, of each M. ss. Meal of Beans, Lupins, of each ℥ i. One Swallows Nest. Album Grae um ℥ i. Make it a Decoction in Butter-Milk to the Consistencie of a Cataplasm. Apply this Cataplasm meanly warm to the affected
part Externally; by the help whereof internal Ob∣structions also may be loosned: and Observ, as soon as it begins to be dri'd, it must be renewd. 35. II. Motion is restord to Blood Standing still and stopt in its Vessels for the most part and most happily by Sudorifics, sometimes by opening a Vein, and Letting Blood. 36. By Sudorifics; in as much as by their help the Blood becomes not only more fluid, and moveable, but moreover is mov'd actually being more, and more rarefi'd by the Volatil Salt that is in them, and again loosens, puls asunder, and therefore mov's the Blood by degrees more or less clottering, only by its stoppage because of it's Acid Spirit. 37. Hence it is, that the Pulse so continually more Frequent, as often together Greater and Stronger is wont to accompany Sweat; unless an extreme dejecti∣on of Strength concur: for then both a Less, and more Languishing Pulse is joynd to one more Fre∣quent. 38. For when the Volatil Salt of the Sudorifics coms to the right Ventricle of the Heart, there the Blood rarefies more, and more potently, and does not only seek an out-let for it self of its own accord, but provokes and forces the Ventricle of the Heart by diating it more both to a more Frequent, and more Valid Contraction of it self, and so to the expel∣ling and driving the Blood forward; and therefore raises, moves, and every way puts forward from the Heart the Blood first by degrees deficient in its Motion. 39. When that mentioned Power of Sudorifics coms to the place of Obstruction, it attempts the Matter obstructing be it what it will, and cuts, at∣tenuates, loosens, and makes it fluid; whence it is
farther driven forward together with it more easily, and happily, the assault of the Blood coming more potently mov'd and forc'd to it. 40. By opening a Vein, and letting Blood, its Mo∣tion is restor'd to the Blood standing still, in as much as that which was next is carri'd into the place of that which is let out, and a larger space being so made for the Universal Blood all the Blood mov's both more swiftly, and potently; wherfore it, which first stopt standing still in its Vessels, the Plethora be∣ing now taken away it stops no longer, but is more potently stird up, and helpt to renew its interrupted, at least much diminisht motion; unless a more grie∣vous Obstruction hinder this, that will not yeeld to Blood alone too vehemently mov'd, but moreover wanting those things that cut and dissolv the Humor obstructing. 41. And then after a sufficient quantity of Blood is taken away, it is profitable to give a Sudorific, and Cutting Mixture at several times by Spoonfuls, such an one as we noted in Sect. 28. whether little or no Sweat follow at its taking, if that the rebellious Ob∣struction be loosend, and taken away. 42. III. The Blood Effus'd out of its Vessels, and disperst through the Substance of the more near parts, is to be remov'd thence, wholly or in part as soon as may be, if it can be remov'd at all, by hindring its coagulation, potently dissolving its over-thick parts, discussing those that are more tender, and together tem∣pering those too sharp; and that as well by Internal as External Medicins. 43. The Coagulation of Blood is hindred by Crabs-Eys, Diaphoretic Antimony, Mumy, Sperma Ceti, Gum Galbanum, Sagapen &c. Opium, Spruse Beer, &c. besides the most of these nam'd do dissolv the over-thick parts
of Blood, and discuss those too thin, and moreover temper those too sharp, especially when they are joind with others, which promote or encrease their force. For Example; ℞. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. distilld Vi∣negar, ʒ vi. Sp. of Wine rectifi'd, or any Aro∣matiz'd ℥ ss. Crabs Eyes ʒ i. Sperma Ceti, Mu∣mie of Alexandria, of each ℈ i. Laudanum iv Gr. Syr. of the Five Roots ℥ i. ss. M. Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture; by the help wherof the Clottering of Blood Effus'd will not only be hindred; but its over-Thick parts incided, and by degrees attenuated; and its over-Thin parts will continually be Discust together with Sweat or insensible Transpiration; and the Pain will be aswag'd its over-sharp parts being temperd, and at length wholly taken away; and so the Obstruction it self will be loosned and dissolvd: and by such∣like alone us'd in time, and diligently Pleurisies, and Peripneumonies, and Inflammations of other Parts beginning, grievous enough, and troublesom with Anxieties, or sharp Pains have oft been Cur'd. 44. You may anoint upon the part affected, the Ointment Martiatum, that of Marsh-Malows com∣pounded, or any other Aromatic; to which you may refer May-Butter prepar'd with the Juice of Aroma∣tic Plants; somtimes adding Aromatic Oils in like manner, that of Bays, Dill, or others more potent, or distild, of Earth, Turpentine, Amber, Bricks, &c. but in less quantity. 45. Among Plasters that of Sperma Ceti is deser∣vedly commended, which ℞. Virgin-Wax. ℥ iv. Sperma Ceti ℥ ii. Gum Gal∣banum, dissolvd in Vinegar ℥ i. M. Make it a Plaster according to Art, through which melted
draw a Cloth, and let it be a Serecloath com∣monly call'd, to be appli'd by course on both sides. This Egregious Plaster does not only preserv the Blood in all the External Parts of the Body, but Milk also from curding in the Paps, yea somtimes it again loosens and discusses, or restores it meanly curded. 46. Fomentations also made of Aromatic Plants and potent Discussers boild in Water, or Wine may conduce; adding moreover when they are us'd some of the Spirit of Wine. For Example; ℞. The Roots of Briony, Smallage, Fearn, of each ℥ ii. the Leavs of Elder, Hemp-like Agrimony, Germander, Mint, Wormwood, of each Man. i. the Flowers of Melilot, Roman Camomile, of each Man. i. ss. Cumin-Seeds, Bay-berries, of each ℥ i. All being grosly beaten Boil them in Rain-Water, on a slow Fire, the Vessel being shut. Keep them for your Use. 47. This Fomentation may be us'd, by sowing the beaten parts of the Plants in a Bag, or Bags, and af∣ter they are boild by expressing the superfluous Li∣quor, and applying Bags meanly warm to the part affected; where they must be left so long, as they are hot; and as soon as they want heat, they are to be remov'd, and others warm to be appli'd. Also a Woolen Cloth, or soft Sponge fit to cover the part affected may be laid on the warm Fomentation, and after be appli'd to the part paind the superfluous Li∣quor being exprest, as is afore-said, somtimes be re∣newd. Yea so much of the Fomentation as is need∣ed, may be pourd into a Beasts Bladder cut off from its Neck and softned in warm Water, that is, after
the part that wants its Neck is tid again, the Blad∣der turgid, but not full and stretcht with the Fomen∣tation may be appli'd loosly on any part: for so all harm easily happening from moist and soon after cold Shirts, or other Linen Cloths near the Body is pre∣vented. 48. By the help therfore of these several Medicins, the Indications mentiond will be satisfi'd; nor will they only be shund, or the Coagulation of Blood be repaird; but moreover its over-thick, or thickned parts will be attenuated; and those more thin will be discust and carri'd out by insensible Transpiration; yea those too sharp will be temperd, if any such can∣not be soon after together disperst, wherby at length they by degrees vanish away, at least they may be ea∣sier, and more happily suppurated. 49. IV. When the Blood is effus'd into such, or so deep a place, out of which it cannot be commo∣diously remov'd without Suppuration and an Apo∣steme; the making and generation of Matter is to be promoted, and hastned. 50. All Emollient and Ripening Medicins do this, the Roots and Leavs of Marsh-Malows, Malows, White Lilies, Brank Ursme, Orage, Mercury, &c. the Seeds of Lint, Fenugreek, Marsh-Malows, &c. or their Meals, as also that of Barley, fat Figs. Mans, Swines-Grease, &c. the Fat of a Goose, Hen, Calf, &c. the Marrw f all Bones, any Butter, Oil of O∣lives, Sweet Almonds, and almost any that is exprest of several Seeds, or Kernels▪ or boild with Emolli∣ent Flowers, &c. 51. When Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors are joind with the Blood, the Knobs of Onions, Squils, &c. are to be added to the former, and somtimes Gum Bdellium, Galbanum, Ammoniac, &c. Liquid Sty∣rax,
Wax, Turpentine, Hony, and many such∣like. 52. Cataplasms are wont to be most commodiously prepar'd of these; For Example, ℞. The Meal of Marsh-malow Root, of Barley, of each ℥ ii. the Leavs of Malows, Brank Ʋrsine, of each Man. iii. the Seeds, or Meal of Lint ℥ i. ss. fat Figs bruisd x. Boil them in Water or Small Beer on a slow Fire, or when there is an extreme Heat, in Butter-Milk to the consumption of their Moisture, and softning of those things boild; then all being exactly beaten, add Swines Grease, new Butter, of each ℥ i. ss. M. for a Cataplasm. 53. When Glutinous Phlegm is mixt with the Blood, and breeds a lighter Heat in the part, then prepare this following. ℞. Onions roasted in Embers, and then beaten ℥ iv. the Meal of Beans, Fenugreek-Seeds, of each ℥ iii. Flowers of Roman-Camomile, of Elder, of each M. i. ss. Boil them according to Art in Small Beer, or pure Water, to be a Cataplasm. 54. When there is much heat in the part Inflam'd, and the Sick cannot bear Fat things, beware diligent∣ly of all Oils, and Oily things; and then I have al∣ways observd that Butter-Milk, which is, the Whey of the Creme of Milk butterd is useful; in which if a Decoction be made, the Cataplasm by help of this will egregiously temper Heat, and hinder, St. Antonies Fire from being easily joind with the Inflammation. 55. If Ointments, or Plasters please the Sick better, and they be not hurt by Fat things, the Part paind may once or ofter be anointed with the Ointments of Agrippa, Simple, or Compounded Marsh-Malows, the Pectoral, &c. Ointment, and either alone, or
with convenient Oils added, of White Lilies, Sweet Almonds, and such-like reduc'd to the consistency of a Liniment; and afterward the Plaster of Diachylon Simple, and somtimes with Gum be laid on it, as al∣so that of the Mucilages, chiefly when the Body and Blood abound with much Phlegm, and that Vis∣cous. 56. V. The Generation of Matter being promo∣ted and finisht by these or such-like Medicins; Its Out-let is not to be delaid, seeing while it is present the Pain persists, and being let out is diminisht; and the Matter becoms sharper by delay, and therfore more hurtful, and the Parts near it are more and more cor∣rupted by it, and so the Ulcer is made greater, and so more difficult to cure; chiefly when the Vessels near it are corroded by that Matter being too sharp, and sowr naturally. 57. For the Aposteme that is deep is seldom opend of its own accord, and not without a long time: wherfore, when Matter begins to appear ripe by the Softness of the part affected manifest to touching, as also Redness and Pain diminisht, as oft as may be, the Out-let is to be prepar'd for Matter either by a sharp Knife, or a potential Cautery, in the softest and lowest place of the Tumor. 58. If the Sick admit of neither, or be delicate, or morose, endeavour to draw the Matter toward the Superficies of the Body, wherby the Skin fretted may be sooner perforated by It; for which use the follow∣ing Plaster often approv'd by me may serve, which ℞. The best Hony, Rie-Meal, of each ℥ i. one Yolk of an Egg. Set them on a mild Fire, and stir them to the con∣sistency of a Plaster: Spread it on a thick Linnen Cloth, and apply it to the part affected, daily to be re∣nu'd.
59. Figs also may be beaten and appli'd warm like a Cataplasm to the softest and most swelling place of the Tumor, wherby the opening of the Aposteme may be facilitated and promoted. 60. When there is much Matter containd in the Aposteme, diligently beware, that all be not let out at once, but by little and little; because otherwise the strength of the Sick is not a little prostrated. But when there is only a little Matter, nothing hin∣ders that all may be let out, which is fit, and ready to run out; not pressing it hard, nor long, which is familiar with many Chirurgeons, by which I never observd that the Sick get any good, but often much hurt. When Matter sticks in a place remote from opening, or is only carri'd in a crooked passage to the place of opening, then may it, yea ought it to be forc'd out by a mild pressure of the parts. 61. VI. A way being made and opend for Mat∣ter we must now forthwith procede to Cleanse and Consolidate the Ʋlcer; to which end several Medicins are wont to be given, all which I neither blame, nor carp at. I have often considerd with admiration the laudable effect of Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Tur∣pentine, Anise, &c. in this case, incredible to ma∣ny, if a little of it be dropt in, or anointed on the Ulcer. For shortly after the generation of new Phlegm is so diminisht, that oft by the help of this one Balsam I have in a few days perfectly cur'd no∣table Apostem's after Inflammations bred both in the Brests, and elswhere. 62. By this Experiment not a little to be estem'd, I judg the Cleansing and Consolidation of Ulcers following Apostem's to consist in the Correction of A∣cid, and Corroding Matter, cleaving to the Ulcerated Part, and corrupting the Blood at least in part that is
apt to nourish it, and turning it into new matter: and this Matter adhering to the part affected is Corrected by the mentiond Balsam of Sulphur, chiefly by its Aromatic Oil, and so abounding with a Volatil Oily Salt; by which the Acid Spirit abounding with Matter, and daily corrupting the Blood into Matter is not only dulld, but moreover mitigated, and so amended, that the Blood flowing to it soon repairs the parts before consum'd, and finishes the last Con∣solidation. 63. What farther may be deduc'd from this Expe∣riment to perfect Physic also in other things, let both Ingenious and Judicious Physicians and Chirurgeons weigh and judg. I had willingly added more, un∣less my great and toilsom Business had deni'd me ne∣cessary leasure to finish this, and other things. CHAP. XLI. Of the Generation and Separation of the Ani∣mal Spirits in the Brain, and Cerebellum, or Hinder Brain Deprav'd. 1. THe Blood affords Matter not only to nourish and restore the Consistent and Containing Parts of the Body, but to prepare and repair the Fluid also and Containd Parts every-where. 2. For a Volatil, anon to be call'd an Animal Spi∣rit, is Separated from the rest of the Mass of Blood in the Brain, and Cerebellum, as we taught in our IV Physical Dispute Sect. 28, &c. which although it be not perhaps seen and discerned with the Eyes of
the Body, yet is it demonstrated to the Mind by solid Reasoning, and that manifold. 3. This Separation of the Animal Spirits, com∣monly call'd Generation of them is deprav'd 1. when there is None, or at least too Little. 2. When per∣haps it is too Much, or too Plenteous. 3. When the Spirits come ill Affected. 4. I. If at any time No Animal Spirits be sepa∣rated, it seems not likely to me that a Man can live long, but I think he will soon die being destitute of Motion, especially of the Heart, and Breast, and Midrif. 5. It is manifest enough that the Animal Spirits are often separated too Few from the Blood, and that somtimes by the Fault of the Blood, other-times of the Brain or Cerebellum. 6. This is by the fault of the Blood, 1. if it con∣tains little of a Volatil Spirit in it self, because of such-like Food us'd too long, either of its own accord, or by chance, or by force. 7. 2. If it adhere more inwardly to the Mass of Blood, by want of the Fermentation of Food in the Stomach, or any other thing together taken that more intirely unites the Spirits with the Blood, such as I judg every sharp and tart thing is; whither also 3. among evident Causes, great and especially per∣manent Sorrow and Fear of Mind. 4. Sluggishness, and Slothfulness, and rest of Body. 5. A loose Mind, and not busied with any thing; 6. An over-long and deep Sleep, &c. seem to contribute. 8. If we could attain, and conceiv clearly, and distinctly how, and by what means the Brain and Ce∣rebellum are affected rightly to finish the Separation of the Animal Spirits, perhaps we could with less
difficulty determin, what aild it, when this Separa∣tion is deprav'd and lessned by the fault of it. 9. Certainly he that granted that the utmost Sub∣stance of the Brain, and Cerebellum was requir'd to be open and open enough, whereby the most spirituous part of Blood might pierce, and be as it were straind through it; as I judge will grant that the same being more com∣pact then is wonted is unfit for the mentioned perco∣lation. 10. The Coldness of Air, Water, or Snow vehe∣mently affecting the head seems to confirm yea to prove this Cause; from which not only a Stuffing in the Head, but also a more sparing production of the Animal Spirits uses to follow. And as we observ the Glandules of the Brain are affected and thickned in a Stuffing of the Head by Coldness not always very great; so I think the Brain and Cerebellum are ill affected when the Separation of the Animal Spirits is diminisht by very great Cold compacting its soft substance, and thickning and straitning it in its pe∣rous passages. 11. And although I deny not that the Blood also tending to the Brain may be ill affected by an external great Cold, yea that it is somtimes clotterd then in its Vessels; yet in such a Clottering of Blood there will not only follow a diminisht Separation of the Animal Spirits; but most of all the motion of the Blood hindred, and after that an Inflammation and whatsoever very grievous thing uses to accompany such an Inflammation in the Head; which yet is not always observd when the Separation of the Animal Spirits is hindred by cold: whence it appears that the Head, and Brain, or Blood found in the Head is not always affected after the same manner by cold.
12. And as External Cold (that is, that which produces cold in us, and is found in the Air, Water and Snow) hinders the Separation of the Animal Spi∣rits; so Internal Cold (that is, whatsoever being in us breeds the Sense of Cold there, to wit in the be∣ginning of Intermitting Fevers) seems in like manner to hinder the Separation of the Animal Spirits, whence they that are taken with vehement feverish cold are for the most part unfit to perform the Animal Mo∣tion, yea or any of the Animal Functions, which I judg is by vapors carrid together with the Blood to the Head breeding cold, and partly making the Blood unfit by its Tartnes to yield its Spiritous parts, partly compacting the external substance of the Brain, or straitning its hollow pores, and so at least in part denying passage to the most Spiritous part of Blood. 13. II. The Animal Spirits seem to be Separated more Plenteously from the Blood in Men vehemently, mov'd in Body, and Mind especially with Joy and Anger. 14. The Cause of this Separation of the Animal Spirits increasd is to be sought, and found somtimes in the Blood it self, othertimes in the hollow Pores of the Brain and Cerebellum. 15. When the same abounds in the Blood without Spiritous parts, especially incident to strong Drink turgid with a volatil spirit being too liberally us'd; and by serene and meanly hot Air it is made more fit for the separation of the spiritous parts; especially when an over-swift motion of Body, or grievous Passion of Mind happens driving all things in the Body out too vehemently; such as are Joy and Anger before others exceeding mediocritie. 16. By which the Blood is made not only most fit
for a plenteous separation of the Spiritous part, but the porous, Hollowness or sinuous Pores become more o∣pen, and therefore more convenient the easier to transmit a larger plenty of the Animal Spirits. 17. III. The Animal Spirits are to be thought ill Affected or Deprav'd, when 1. they are too much Stupid, or Stirr'd, or also wrong Mov'd; when 2. they are Impure and Defil'd by any thing mixt with them beside nature. 18. The Sleepiness, or too much Agitation or Inordinat Motion of the Animal Spirits is most easily observ'd when the Animal Motion is together de∣prav'd; as their Impurity and Defilement when the Internal, aswel as External Senses are thence de∣prav'd. 19. The Animal Spirits are Sleepy and unfit for Motion by a Narcotic Force mixt with them, or by degrees bred in the Body, or entred in from without somtimes by the Air inspir'd defil'd with the smoak of Coles, othertimes by Medicinal Food, especially spi∣ritous wine making drunk, or Medicins themselvs, to wit Opium, and all Opiats wrong, that is, im∣moderatly taken or apply'd in any respect. 20. The Animal Spirits are too much Agitated, and mov'd, both by the very hot Air, and Food very Spiritous us'd too plenteously, but not in the greatest excess, and by a continu'd Weariness of Body, Watch∣ings too long Protracted, a persevering solicitude of Mind, and over-vehement Anger. 21. The Animal Spirits are Wrong Mov'd in Giddy people, when oft Objects themselves, oft the Place, in which the Sick stands sits, or lies, oft the Sick him∣self, oft all these together are believd to turn round and to go in a circuit about. Hither also is the Dis∣ease to be referrd, wherein the Sick not only Insants:
but also People of Years think that they are either actually tumbling down headlong and fall, or at least are in danger of falling and tumbling headlong, and ask, that they may be taken hold on and kept against the feard tumbling headlong, and fall. 22. The Cause of the Giddy-Motion is somtimes External to wit an attent looking at any Object turnd round, or also an attent looking at things very remote, or high, or deep: othertimes Internal a dayly Turning about of the Body it self; all which Causes are manifest: beside which somtimes several are more hidden, as the ascent of Vapors, and Wind to the Head, by which joynd to the Spiritous part of Blood, and carri'd together with the Animal Spirits into the Passages of the Brain, and Cerebellum the Motion of wheeling about (by which they are mov'd) is communicated to the Animal Spirits, and so a Giddiness seems to be produc'd. 23. Somtimes also the Animal Spirits are troubled the Mind being vehemently troubled, and smitten es∣pecially with a panic and vane terror, and being too much agitated they make the Body stagger, and breed that fear of a Fall, of which anon not yielding to any reason, or reasoning. 24. The Animal Spirits become Impure, both by Air impure, cloudy, and defil'd by several exhalati∣ons of Plants ill smelld of themselvs, or by burning, of mans and brutes Carcases, of Minerals kindled, or otherwise stirrd by force of fire, and more or less par∣taking of the nature of sulphur; and by hurtful and corrupt Food, in the time of dearth, sieges, far voyages &c. and also by the Mind together, and potently stirrd up by several and often contrary Passions, whence divers vapors are necessarily rais'd in the Belly by se∣veral Humors ill affected, and anon carri'd thence to
the Heart, and thence to the Brain to infect the Ani∣mal Spirits. 25. I. An over little Separation of the Animal Spirits may be Cur'd, 1. by using Food abounding with much, and loosend Volatil Spirit, Strong Wine rightly fermented, and somtimes Spirit of Wine re∣ctifi'd, either single, or aromatic. 26. II. By Promoting, or Restoring the deficient Fermentation of Food in the Stomach, by Medicins propos'd in Chap. 7. Sect. 26. and 33. among which the newly mentioned Spirit of Wine is nam'd as also any Volatil Salt taking a few drops with a little Wine, or any other ordinary drink once or twice at dinner, and supper: seeing that it also corrects all tartnes of what is taken in, or otherwise corrupted in the body. 27. III, By Freeing the Mind from Sorrow and Fear, and that by reasons whence soever taken, that will stirr up, and recreate the mind afflicted. 28. IV. By Driving away Sloathfulness, and mo∣deratly exercising the body. 29. V. By busying the Mind in serious matters, but also grateful. 30. VI. By diminishing Sleep by little and little daily. 31. When the head is ill affected by the external Cold of Air, Water, or Snow, or a Stoppage of the Head be also bred, or the Defect of the Animal Spi∣rits chiefly urge, then I have observd the Sick to be happily and soon cur'd, if whatsoever has pierc'd into the Head or any other parts of the body bringing harm to them be driven out again as soon as can be, and that by Sudorifics both spiritous and volatil taken at once, or, (which I like better) often and at times; as being such that not only alter, and correct the
Cause of Cold▪ and other evils accompanying it, but do also amend the harm entred into the Body Con∣taining, and Containd. 32. To this end I commend this following Form. ℞. Fumitorie, Fennel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Simple Treacle-Water, or any other Aromatic ℥ i. Sp. of Salt Armoniac xx. drops. Oil of Cloves iii. drops. Mineral Bezoard ʒ ss. Laudanum ii. granes. Syr. of red Poppies ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take two spoonfuls of this Medicin, and expect a Sweat being meanly coverd; which he may facilitate, and get what he desires, if he always take a little of it in half an hours space, till the sweat break forth: for then he may use it more seldom and sparingly; using moreover a little of pure broth, or mixt with a little wine, whereby his Strength may be recreated, and made fitter to bear a Sweat longer. For nothing so much helps the Sick, as a Sweat con∣tinued mildly a while; which Experience hath oft taught me. 33. When the natural, and sufficient Separation of the Animal Spirits is hindred by an Internal or Feverish Cold, or any other without a feverish fit often seizing on Men, then the desired Separation of the Animal Spirits so useful, and necessary to mans felicity is re∣stored sooner, or more slowly by such a Sudorific, as is newly mentiond rightly us'd, the Sweat coming forth one while sooner, another while latter. 34. For by the help of this Spiritous, and volatil, and also Aromatic medicin, or one like it the Vapors and Wind that produce the hurt and troublesom Cold in man, and Srupidness of all the Senses, and Dulness of Motion are discust. 35. They who let Blood while such an external, or internal Cold urges, or think they can carry out
the cause of the evil either by vomit, or siege, put the Sick into danger of life, or at least of more griev∣ous evils, as I have seen done oft by Men more verst in reading Books, then in observing the Symptoms befalling the Sick, and therefore often hurting them∣selvs as well as others. So much can the Mind anti∣cipated do by false prejudices, and therefore unfit to weigh, and discern things equally. 36. II. An over-Plenteous Separation and Breed∣ing of the Animal Spirits, may be Diminisht 1. by Laying aside very Spirituous Drink, and in its stead substituting more Watry. 37. 2. By enjoying by degrees more cold Air, such as the mountain, or marine, especially Northern, and Subterraneal. 38. 3. By less stirring and exercising the Body, and so giving it to quiet and sleep. 39. 4. By freeing the Mind from all vehement com∣motion of Joy especially or Anger, and keeping it ap∣peasd, quiet and almost idle. 40. And because all sudden change is wont to be together dangerous, there ought to be careful endea∣vour, that the noted changes by degrees may happen in the noted non-natural things. 41. And as the more open Cavities of the Brain, and Cerebellum destind and ordaind to strain through the Animal Spirits do follow the mentiond errors of Diet, we need not doubt, but likewise a Diet som∣what contrary to the former may bring again, and reduce them to a natural, and laudable straitness. 42. III. The Animal Spirits Drowsy and unfit for Motion may be stirra up, and freed from the narcotic force mingled with them by Volatil Salts, but such as are very sharp, and all medicins endued with an aro∣matic biting, Pepper, Cloves, Castor, Garlic, Horse-Radish,
Mustard, Scurvie-grass, Hedge-Mustard and such-like often us'd in a small quantity, for example. ℞. Scurvie-grass, Hedge-Mustard Water, of each ℥ i. Tincture of Castor ʒ i. Oil of Cloves 2. drops. Syr. of Scurvie-grass ʒ vi. M. Let the Sick often take a spoonful of this mix∣ture. 43. If any pretending Physician disdain the name of a Mixture, prepare a Decoction after this follow∣ing form, ℞, Galangal-Root ʒ ii. Horse-Radish Root ℥ ii. the leavs of Hedge-mustard, M ii. Cloves ʒ ss. Boil them in Water and White Wine of each alike the vessel being shut, in ℥ xx of what is straind, dis∣solv Syr. of Scurvie-Grass ℥ iii, Tincture of Cina∣mon ℥ i. M. for a Decoction. Let the Sick lying in bed, meanly coverd use often in a day 5. or six Spoonfuls of this Decoction, wherby if possible, a light Sweat may break forth, to ease the Sick. 44. By the help of these medicins the Animal Spi∣rits will not only be freed from their Drowsiness, but even the narcotic force bred in the Body either in length of time, or receivd in from without may also be corrected and at length overcomd, 45. The Sick will be raisd from Sleepiness and Stupidness, usually the companion of Drowsiness by potent external Objects sharply moving the Exter∣nal Senses, and mean while not hurting their organs. So a great Light should be set before the Eyes; a strong Sound should be raisd near the Ears; sharp Smels applyd to the Nostrils, Spirit of Salt Armo∣niac, of Harts-Horn, and such-like; also sharp Spi∣ces, or Salts should be put into the Mouth; his Skin should be rubd with rough cloaths; his Body
should be expos'd to the Fire, and heat of the Air, but not to Cold: seeing it is known that Numness is caus'd by External Cold. Yet does it not follow thence that Opium likewise producing Drowsiness ought to be esteem'd cold, because the same effect may procede from several Causes, diversly acting: add, that O∣pium is bitter, being of a fat nature, which they would have to be signs of Heat: which thing is pro∣perly to be treated in Physics, of the possession wherof although many glory, hitherto have I found none, who after the manner of the Mathematics compeld the assent of those that differd. 46. The Animal Spirits being too much stird and mov'd may be compos'd, and reduc'd to their natural, and mild motion, by amending, or removing the Non-Natural Things occasioning too much motion: that is, by Changing the hot Air into a little cold; by Diminishing the use of Spiritous Food, and in their stead using, those that may breed Phlegm a little tough; by Granting rest to the weari'd Body; and by Causing a mild Sleep by Anodins, and when the Matter requires, Narcotics; by freeing the Mind from all anxious and biting solicitude, and especially by resisting bitter Anger, and by gaining to the Mind a pleasing tranquillity. 47. Musical Sounds will mildly reduce the Spirits too much agitated to a decent, and compos'd motion, but Anodyns more potently, and at length Narcotics us'd prudently, that is, by times and in a small quan∣tity. 48. The Animal Spirits turning round may be re∣duc'd into their order, the External Causes being re∣mov'd, and Internal Causes being corrected; lastly, the Spirits themselvs being brought to some rest. 49. Let the Sick therfore cease to look at Objects
turnd round, more Remote, High, and very Low, let them cease to turn round their Body: but rather let them do all their endeavour, to get Sleep by Medi∣cins often mentiond in this Chapter, and elswhere prescrib'd in convenient forms. 50. When the turning round, and Giddiness of the Animal Spirits depends on occult Internal Causes, without the noted manifest Causes, then the Produ∣cing and Ascent of Vapors, and Wind are to be hin∣dred, or suffocated, or discussd. 51. Their Production is hindred by Medicins that correct, and lessen the Humors peccant in Acrimony and Glutinousness, often propos'd before. 52. Their Ascent is hindred chiefly by Anodyns, and Narcotics often mentiond and commended. 53. They may be suffocated by a liberal taking De∣coctions prepar'd of more mild and grateful Aro∣matics. 54. The same may be Discussd by Oils made by di∣stillation of the Seeds especially, that are commonly call'd, and by Tinctures drawn by Infusion only of any parts of Aromatic Plants with the Rectifi'd Spi∣rit of Wine, or by a distillation following; adding both Syrups, and common Waters in a convenient quantity to make a more grateful tast. Many of which Forms we have all over in this Book for Be∣ginners sake. 55. When the Animal Spirits with the Mind are troubled by a vain and panic Terror, then, as long as he is in his Senses, endeavour, that that Lymphatic fear so often deadly to many, be turnd away by the weight of potent Reasons, and Sleep anon banishing it be speedily brought by any helps, and so by Narcotics themselvs: for unless this be very speedily, in a little time Physic will be late in preparing.
56. The Animal Spirits made impure by External things will not be purifi'd, unless they be remov'd; seeing that the cause, remaining, the effect re∣mains. Remove therfore the Air any way defil'd, and corrupted Food, at least let the Man shun them: who moreover should use Medicins amending, and expessing the harm that is more, or less entred into the Body. 57. Where note 1. Harm receivd with the Air is more commodiously driven out by Sudorifics, those taken with Food by Vomits and Purges. 58. 2. Medicins that Amend may then also be profitably us'd, when the mentiond Evacuations are instituted: which also ought to be continu'd, after these Evacuations are begun; as not seldom before they are begun. 59. Seeing that Volatil Salts are drawn from all the parts of Man by a light Art, (of which therfore I conclude they consist) let it seem strange to none, if I so often commend, and praise Volatil mild Salts among the Medicins that Alter, and Amend the de∣prav'd Humors of Man; to which also I now deser∣vedly attribute the first place in correcting, and a∣mending the harms by Air any way defil'd, or bad Food communicated especially to the Body containd. Nor doubt I, but, as many as now through unjust prejudice, or mere petulancy blame, or laugh at me so oft extolling Volatil Salts, if any time they would experience, how much those hed Salts may do to preserv, and restore Mans Health that art now so ha∣ted, or ridiculous to them, being confus'd with shame they would blush; not so much because of my words, as the Gitts of God the Avenger despis'd, and contemnd. 60. Lastly, When several Humors are ill affected
by several Passions of Mind somwhat contrary, together and potently agitating Man which very oft has place, and so, that manifold Vapors rais'd by their conflux and vitious Effervescency in the small Gut are carri'd to the Heart, and Brain also, and defile and make the Animal Spirits impure, then 1. the immoderat Passions of Mind are to be Compos'd. 2. The vitiated Humors are to be Corrected. 3. The hurtful Vapors are to be Amended, or Discuss'd. 4. The Animal Spi∣rits are to be Cleansd from their acquir'd Impurities. And how all these ought to be obtaind, is often told before; where mild Volatil Salts may do very much: whatsoever many Physicians noise and talk in this Belgia, being ignorant of most natural things, al∣though puft up with an empty Title of Doctors, and the practice of some years. CHAP. XLII. Of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs Deprav'd. 1. THe Animal Spirits being severd from the Blood in the Brain and Cerebellum are every whi∣ther carri'd by their continu'd Marrow as it were in a Pipe into the Nervs, not only to exercise the Exter∣nal Senses, and Animal Motion, but moreover, at least in my conjecture, yea Opinion to temper any Humors, Choler, Spittle, the Pancreatical, or Melan∣cholic Juice, or Lympha of the Conglobated Glandul's, and perhaps to afford the primary Matter to generate Seed. 2. This Motion of the Animal Spirits through
the Nervs according to Nature, if I may be Judg, is Continual and Equal; but Changeable, and Ʋnequal according to the divers Diseases of the Mind. 3. This Motion of the Animal Spirits is deprav'd, 1. when None, or Fewer Spirits are mov'd through the Nervs then is wont; 2. When More, then ought, or was expedient; 3. When they move Ʋnequally, Inordinatly, or beside, and against the Will to certain, or all the parts. 4. I. When No Animal Spirits are carri'd to the Organs of the External Senses, or Animal Motion, the mentiond Functions of Seeing, Smelling, Hearing, Tasting, Touching, and the Sense of Heat, as also of Motion in the Apoplexie and Palsie cease all that time. 5. When Fewer Animal Spirits then are wont are carri'd to the same Organs, the same Functions are observd to be Imperfect and Weak, in a trembling and infirm Motion, not long continuing, when the Sight is weak and soon weari'd, &c. 6. No Animal Spirits, or Fewer then is wonted are carri'd through the Nervs, somtimes by their own fault, other-times by the fault of the Nervs. 7. The same haps by the fault of the Animal Spi∣rits, when they are Deficient, or Drowsie, more or less: of which we have spoken in the former Chapter. 8. The Motion of the Animal Spirits to the Parts is Deficient wholly, or in part by the fault of the Nervs, when they are Cut in two, Comprest, Ob∣structed, (when they can be obstructed) or Clos'd. 9. The Nervs are Cut in two by any sharp things, that are apt to wound the Body. 10. The Nervs are Comprest by Bands, hard Tu∣mors, or compacted Humors, lying upon the Nervs. 11. That the Nervs cannot be Obstructed, I even
therfore think, because their Pipes seeing they are continu'd to the strait Pipes of the Brain, and Cere∣bellum, will receiv nothing into them, that is not exceding small and hath first got into the Pipes of the Brain, or Cerebellum: Into which if any con∣tend that Vapors, or Wind may enter together with the Spirits and soon get into the Nervs, I see not how and by what means the same can judg that the noted Vapors, or Wind can congeal again, that they may there breed an Obstruction. 12. The Palsie arising by a cold Rain, whence the Cloaths are wet, so affecting this or that part, seems to prove that Phlegmatic and Watry Humors abiding about the Nervs may moisten and perhaps so far loosen the Tunicles, or Membrans, and hence the Marrow that it slipping down by a closing, renders its Pipes unfit to let the Animal Spirits pass through, so that somtimes one, somtimes more parts do more or less lose Motion, and Sense. 13. II. More Animal Spirits are mov'd through the Nervs, then the External Senses, or Animal Mo∣tion requir'd to their perfection, 1. By reason of a vehement Motion of Mind, much vexing and molesting Man, especially immoderat Anger, Fear, or Joy. 2. Because of a continual and grievous Irritation urg∣ing about the Head of the Spinal Marrow in an Uni∣versal Convulsion, or in a sensible part of the place grievd, or in its Nerve in a Particular Convulsion. 14. This Irritation for the most part, and perhaps always arises from an acid and sharp Spirit driven for∣ward in the form of a Vapor into the rising of the Spi∣nal Marrow primarily affecting in a Universal Con∣vulsion, and gnawing it somtimes without a nota∣ble, somtimes with great pain; to wit, as it less or more offends the part likely to be affected.
15. The concurring Symptoms considered and weighd with an attentive Mind will confirm that these Sowr Vapors rise either always, or at least most commonly out of the small Gut. 16. Which same Symptoms will evince that these Vapors are peccant in an Acid Acrimony, as also the Cure performed by most simple and known things. 17. The true Cause of a Universal Convulsion secondarily affecting, and chiefly coming upon a Particular Convulsion seems to me the encreasd and fierce, and by the continuance of the Cause provok∣ing by degrees more encreasd and fierce, at length the evil urging all over more obstinatly most fierce Motion of the Animal Spirits by reason of the Part primarily affected; for which thing all the Muscles in the whole Body are most vehemently contracted, and breed a Universal Convulsion. 18. The same Irritation may be bred in a Particu∣lar Convulsion; 1. By a Sharp and Acid Humor, or Vapor fretting the Nerves or Membran's, or Tendons, carri'd to the Muscle labouring of a Convulsion. 2. From any kind of Prick of the same Nerve, Mem∣brane, or Tendon proceeding somtimes from an Ex∣ternal, other-times Internal Cause, as by a sharp Splinter of a Bone. 3. From any other Cause, as an Inflammation, St. Anthonies Fire, &c. producing a sharp Pain in a more sensible part of the Muscle af∣fected, and especially the Tendon. 19. III. The Animal Spirits are mov'd Ʋnequal∣ly, Inordinatly, and beside, or against the Will through the Nervs to the moveable Parts in a Convulsive Moti∣on, and forcd Trembling, or Shaking of the Lims. For this troublesom Trembling, though the Body rest and lie down, is to be distinguisht from the Trembling Motion, of which we spake in Sect. 5. and
which ceases when the Body is at rest, and returns a∣gain the same being mov'd. 20. The Convulsive Motion whether Ʋniversal, or Particular, procedes from the encreasd but alternat Motion of the Animal Spirits against the opposite Muscles. 21. This Alternat Motion of the Animal Spirits, gets an Alternat Irritation in the Nervs carrying the Animal Spirits to the opposite Muscles. 22. The Irritation in a Ʋniversal Convulsive Moti∣on, such as oft occurs in the beginning of an Epilep∣tic Fit, (for a Convulsion is wont at length to suc∣cede) is to be appointed about the first spreading of the Nervs tending to several Muscles. 23. The Irritation in a Particular Convulsive Mo∣tion, such as is oft observd in either Arm, or Leg, or elswhere is to be plac'd about the rising of the Nervs carri'd to the opposite Muscles of the same Mem∣ber. 24. And this Irritation is altogether to be ascrib'd to a thing very moveable and apt to pull at the opposite Nervs, and so to sharp and sowr Vapors, most fre∣quently rising up from the small Gut and piercing to the original of the Nervs. 25. A forc'd Trembling arises from the Animal Spirits driven forward through the Nervs inordinatly and continually with some force to the Muscles of the trembling Members: whether it be Ʋniversal, or Particular; whether the Body be yet strong; or weak. 26. But the Couse of that Inordinat and Continual Fierce Motion of the Animal Spirits is for the mo part to be sought in the Spirits themselvs inordinatly agitated, and especially in a Universal Trembling; somtimes also in the Nervs vext with a continual but
less grievous Irritation otherwise it would be a Con∣vulsive Motion, which I judg has place chiefly in a particular Trembling. 27. The Animal Spirits are inordinatly agitated by Wind and Vapors continually ascending to the Head with the Blood, and together with the Spiritous Sub∣stance of the Blood going forward into the Pipes of the Brain and Cerebellum, soon after into those of the Nervs, and inordinatly, and impetuously agitating the Animal Spirits. 28. That a Trembling is somtimes produc'd by a lighter Irritation of the Nervs is manifest, because that somtimes a Convulsive Motion follows it, som∣times ends in it. 29. I. Seeing the Nervs Dissected cannot be cur'd, thus far the Defect of the Animal Spirits in any part cannot be repair'd. Yet because for the most part se∣veral Nervs are carri'd to the same part both to give it Sense, and Motion, no wonder if Sense and Mo∣tion oft-times remain in any part one or more Nervs being cut asunder in it, although not a little Dimi∣nisht, with some Stupidness and Numness of the Part. 30. Motion may be Restor'd to the Animal Spirits through the Nervs comprest, 1. the Bands straitning them being loosned, or remov'd. 31. The over-Hard Tumors being Cur'd by In∣ciding, Mollifying, and Resolving, or Ripening Me∣dicins: of which we intend to speak elswhere. 32. 3. The tough and compact Humors being Cut, Mollifi'd, and Resolv'd, or Deduc'd, and drawn forth in the manner of imperfect Matter by Medicins de∣scrib'd in Chap. 40. Sect. 33, 34, 35, &c. 50, &c. Where I mind one thing to be added, that Volatil Salts may be here externally us'd with great success,
if in the time of using them they be joind to Fomen∣tations, and Cataplasms, or be mixt with Ointments in a small quantity; whose incredible benefit such as are honest and fearing God will wonder, and cele∣brate. 33. If the Nervs may be Obstructed, and be indeed noted Obstructed, Volatil Salts will conduce before all others both Internally, and Externally us'd, and oft mentiond and prescrib'd by me in this Book. 34. Both Internal Sudorifics, chiefly Aromatic, and External Inciders, and Discussers, among which I again mention Volatil Salts will Correct and Remove the Phlegmatic and Watry Humors sticking about the Nervs, and too much moistning and loosening their Membran's and Marrow; and if the same abound much in the Body, Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues may conduce us'd by turns: whose forms we have oft set down before. 35. II. When the Animal Spirits are carri'd through the Nervs in greater plenty, then ought, and should be, 1. By a vehement Passion of the Mind, then it is to be compos'd, at least to be reduc'd to Mediocrity, and Sleep is to be had for the Body, even by Narco∣tics, when the Matter requires, but us'd in a small quantity by turns. 36. When the same happens 2. by a continual and grievous Irritation about the Head of the Spinal Marrow in a Universal Convulsion, and indeed by  Acid and Sharp Spirit carri'd thither from the small Gut, then 1. the sowr Humors are to be amended, 2. The rising of Vapors is to be hindred; and 3. Their Acrimony is to be diminisht, and temperd; and 4. Their Expulsion by Sweat, or Insensible Transpira∣tion is to be procur'd; then 5. The Part affected by them is to be restor'd, and freed from Pain; and
6. The over-Motion of the Animal Spirits is to be re∣straind and brought to tranquillity, that is, a more quieted Motion. All which how they may be obtaind, is oft mentiond before, convenient Forms of Medicins being added. 37. But when the noted Irritation in a Particular Convulsion is made in a sensible part, or its Nerve of the Place affected by the same sowr and sharp Hu∣mor, or Vapor, then the fore-mentiond Remedies con∣duce, unless that then Externals prepar'd with Aro∣matics and Volatil Salts may be together us'd with great success; which likewise are oft propos'd. 38. But when the same Particular Convulsion a∣rises from a Prick of the Nerve, or Tendon, as it is known to be somtimes by the unskilfulness, pre∣cipitancy, or accident, or troubled Mind of the Chi∣rurgeon in opening a Vein, then most speedily pour into the Wound the Oil of Turpentine hot with the rectifi'd Spirit of Wine, as Ambrose Pare in the Ninth Book, Chap. 38. wrote, was done by his counsel with good success in Charles the Ninth King of France. 39. If this be done too late, or the Wound of the Nerve, or Tendon yield not to this Medicin, the same is to be cut asunder cross-ways; seeing it is safer for some part that its action should perish, then that the Sick should be expos'd to the danger of a deadly Convulsion. 40. So when the Nervs, or Tendons of the Muscles are prickt by sharp Splinters of Bones, soon after a Particular, and at length Ʋniversal Convulsion with grievous Pains succeding, then, if possible, the ex∣treme and sharp fragments of Bones are to be cut away; or, if this have been neglected, or could
not been done, and all incline to a Universal Convul∣sion, you must hasten to cut off the part affected in the most commodious place about the Fracture of the Bone; seeing otherwise the Sick must die of necessity by a Universal Convulsion. 41. When a sharp Pain raisd by an Inflammation, or St. Anthonies Fire, &c. in a more sensible part of the Muscle, occasions a Particular Convulsion, then diligently Labour, that that Pain be diminisht, as well by Internal, as External Anodyns, or Narcotics also, and their Cause, whether Inflammation, or St. An∣thonies Fire, &c. be most speedily and pleasingly Cur'd, not omitting in the mean time Medicins, al∣ready mentiond, useful to diminish and allay the over-encreasd Motion of the Animal Spirits. 44. III. Seeing the more remote Cause in the Bo∣dy of a Convulsive Motion, and so of the Epilepsie it self differs not from the more remote Cause of a Con∣vulsion, unless in the manner of acting here continually, there by turns fretting and irritating the beginning of the Nervs, no wonder, if for the most part these Dis∣eases follow and are cur'd with the same Remedies men∣tiond in Sect. 36. 45. But a Convulsive Motion is wont for the most part to return by Intervals somtimes longer, somtimes shorter, and but seldom constantly to afflict, and then, to kill sooner not otherwise then a Convulsion, which is wont for the most part to continue long. 46. A Rational and Dogmatical Cure of a Forc'd Trembling, depending on an Inordinate, Perpetual Motion of the Animal Spirits made with force to the trembling parts ascrib'd to Wind, and Vapors, mix∣ing with them, and evilly stirring them up so may be orderd, if 1. the Material and Efficient Cause both of
Wind, and Vapors be corrected by a convenient Altera∣tion, and if it be together peccant in quantity en∣creasd, be diminisht by a Purge and somtimes Vomit, Ʋrin or Sweat; to which ends useful Medicins, and their Forms may be found here and there. 47. If 2. the production of the same Wind, and Vapors be hindred by Medicins oft propos'd. 48. If 3. the Wind, and Vapors already bred and every-where occurring be discussd, or compeld to fall by Medicins in like manner oft mentiond. 49. If 4. The Animal Spirits forcd to an Inordi∣nate, Involuntary, and Impetuous Motion by them be by little and little freed from them, and reduc'd to a calm, ordinat and voluntary Motion. Whereof the first may be by the most subtil, volatil and spiritous Medicins promoting Sweat, at least Insensible Transpiration, and so expelling them forth; but the latter by both Anodyn, and Narcotic Medicins usd in a small quan∣tity, and at times: which two will not be inconvenient, but expedient to be given together, seeing that so these commended Medicins do the easier come to the place of the Animal Spirits, and hurtful Vapors and Wind, and the more happily absolv both Works, wherof you may find many Forms in this Book. 50. The Trembling which is bred by a lighter irri∣tation of the Nervs carrying the Animal Spirits to the Muscles, may be Cur'd the same way as a Convulsive Motion; of which we have already spoken.
CHAP. XLIII. Of the Over-perfecting of Blood in the Spleen deprav'd. 1. THat Blood is carri'd to the Spleen through the Arteries, and the Animal Spirits through the Nervs; and that Blood is again carri'd out from the Spleen through the Veins, and Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels may be known by Anatomical Experiments to any that Desire, and cannot be un∣known to those that put their hand to the Work, and to ingenuous Searchers of Truth. 2. And seeing that beside the 4 fold already menti∣ond kinds of Vessels there are no other observd hither∣to, that can carry any thing to the Spleen, or out of the Spleen the natural Function of the Spleen is deservedly drawn from them, and chiefly according to that, in which they have receivd somthing peculiar. 3. Like as we have long ago cleard by ocular in∣spection that the Short vessel so call'd is not a different Vessel from the branches of the Vein of the Spleen car∣rying Blood back from the Spleen and Stomach, but carrying it to neither. 4. The admirable Texture of the Nervous Fibres a∣bout the Ingress of all the Vessels in the Spleen, de∣tected in this age by diligent Anatomists, doth not a little confirm my Conjecture of making the Blood there  sbtil and spiritous, and so over-perfecting it by the Animal Spirits plenteously coming thither. 5. For seeing that the Spleen neither servs for
Sense, nor Motion, it receivs the Animal Spirits in a notable plenty for an other end: and for what other benefit, unless that they be joynd to the Blood flow∣ing thither, and be intirely mixt, and that they make it more subtil and spiritous then is wont, that is, more perfect, and so over-perfect then the rest of the Blood which is already perfect? 7. Nor hinders it, that some cut out the Spleen from living Dogs: for any Creature may live, al∣though its blood be not very spiritous. For the Spleen seems not given to Creatures so simply for life, as for a more commodious life; as the Lungs toge∣ther with the right Ventricle of the Heart are given to such only as Breath. Add that it is not yet manifest, whether the Dogs can long survive so without any detriment to their health. 7. I therfore imagin this over-perfection of Blood ab∣solvd in the Spleen not as yet overthrown, but to be requir'd, and depending on the Animal Spirits, is deprav'd when it is either Diminisht, or also oft En∣creast, seeing that Vertue consists in mediocrity. 8. When the over-perfection of Blood in the Spleen is Diminisht, there is fear, least the whole Mass of Blood becom by degrees very Glutinous and Tough; such as we so oft observe wonderful Crusty in this Bel∣gia, and too much cohering in its superficies, so that it can scarce be divided with a sharp knife; as on the contrary, when the same over-perfection of Blood is Encreast, there is fear, least the Ʋniversal Blood be∣corn less Consistent, and do not enough conjoyn, and cohere; unless on the contrary it be counterveild with a tart-like Sowr humor, on which its natural Coagu∣lation seems chiefly to depend. For this very cause I judge that the Blood of the Spleen is joynd in the Li∣ver not to Lympha going forward with the Descending
Blood to the Heart, and carrying with it the Sowr and Tart parts of the Humors, but to Choler carri'd with the Ascending Blood to the Heart, and hindring the Consistency of Humors. 6. This over-perfection of the Blood of the Spleen brought by Me upon the stage seems to be Dinimisht 1. by the Defect of the Animal Spirits as well Ʋniversal; (of which we have spoken in Chap. 41.) as moreover Particular in the Spleen, because of its Nervs either Fewer, or upon whatsoever account hindred in their work. 10. 2. By the Blood more Glutinous and Viscous, whence it is less apt to receive its over-perfection. 11. 3. The over-perfection of Blood seems to be diminisht by the fault of the spleen ill affected. For when the Blood coupled with the Animal Spirits pierces through the Vessels of the Spleen, and receivs some change in them, there is no doubt but that som∣thing is to be expected should come to it from the sin∣gular Substance of the Spleen. For if its Substance be more solid and firmer, the Blood will not only move slower &c. more hindred through its Vessels, but be∣sides its attenuation, and exaltation will be less pr∣moted. 12. Contrarily the same Exaltation and Attenuation of Blood in the Spleen may be Encreasd 1. by the Ʋ∣niversal, or Particular abundance of Animal Spirits in the Spleen following many or great Nervs inserted in it. 13. 2. By the Ʋniversal Blood Thinner and more Spiritous by an over-immoderat use of Spiritous and A∣romatic Liquors. 14. 3. By the over-Tender and Loos Substance of the Spleen not only giving the Vessels a free place, but facilitating the attenuation and exaltation of the Blood.
15. The Diminisht Exaltation and Over-perfection of lood in the Spleen by reason of the Ʋniversal Defect f the Animal Spirits may be Cur'd 1. by using strong nd Spiritous Drink enough fermented, and so the spi∣it of Wine, and chiefly rectifi'd, as well single, as A∣omatical, mixt with a Volatil Salt. 16. A Particular Defect of the Animal Spirits in the Spleen by too few Nervs carri'd to it is Incurable; but when the Nervs are hindred, they are to be freed with subtil Medicins endued with an abstersive quality, which no-where is more evident, then in Volatil Salts, hitherto so little known to the great prejudice of mortals, and therfore so seldom us'd. 17. 2. Nothing doth so cut and amend over-Glu∣inous, Viscous and Tough Blood, as any Volatil Salt daily us'd at any time, but chiefly at dinner, and sup∣per with wine, or any other convenient liquor. 18. 3. The over-solid and firm Substance of the Spleen may be made looser and more tender by the so oft mentiond Volatil Salts and more mild Aromatics continu'd for a longer time: seeing every chronical and continu'd disease arises from a Phlegmatic Humor, at least hath it conjoind to its Cause, which yields easier, sooner, and safer to no remedy, then to a Vo∣latil Salt us'd according to art. 19. But The Encreasd Exaltation of Blood in the Spleen 1. because of a Ʋniversal abundance of the Animal Spirits in the universal body may be Cur'd by Medicins somwhat Tart oft us'd according to art in a small quantity, and by abstaining from the daily and notable use of too Strong Drink, and so all Spiritous Liquors. 20. The same when it proceeds only from great Nervs carrid to the Spleen, I see not how the fore∣mentiond
Medicins may be safely enough us'd, unless in the least quantity. 21. 2. The same Exaltation of Blood in the Spleen encreasd because of its over Thinness and Spiritousness by the more immoderate use of Spiritous & Aromatic Liquors may be cur'd, partly by bidding adieu by little and little to an immoderat use of these things noted, partly by using wisely somwhat Tart Medicins and Sauces. 22. 3. The same Exaltation encreasd because of the over Thin and Loos Substance of the Spleen, may be Cur'd, if possible, by both internal, and external Me∣dicins somwhat tart oft mentiond by me long enough us'd. CHAP. XLIV. Of the Generation of Choler deprav'd. 1. I Now begin to treat of the Place and Manner of the Generation or Separation, as also the Ʋse, and true Manner of the Motion of Choler, with the De∣pravations, Causes and Cure of each, a matter indeed, before all others perhaps even now obscure in Physic and therfore hard, and full of differences and contra∣dictions. 2. I thought in my 6th Physical Disputation Sect. 36. according to Experiments then known to me, that Choler was bred of the parts of Blood most like to it carri'd through the Cystic Arteries to the Bag of Choler, and by degrees piercing into the Cavity it self through the Pores of the same Coat, and there soon turning into the same nature with the rest of Choler.
3. I judg'd the same Choler was driven forward out of its Bag through the Cystic Passage into the Common Passage so call'd, hence partly through that of the Guts to the small Gut, partly through that of the Liver to the branches of the Port and Hollow Vein, thence together with the ascending Blood to the Heart for notable Ʋses pro∣pos'd in the same Disputation, and more largely to be propos'd here in these following Chapters. 4. Against these my thoughts of the Rising, Motion and Use of Choler several things are sought out, and in∣vented by divers or occurring of their own accord the experiments and arguments are brought into public; the most wherof do not so much evince them of fal∣sity at least as much as I can judg, as render them dubious; one excepted, of which anon. 5. Nor is the controversy mov'd against me pu∣blicly upon this matter elswhere only by Famous and Learned Men, but, which you may wonder, and at which mine Adversaries rejoice, even here by some y Students seeking a little praise in a trivial matter, shall I not say singing to themselvs moreover a triumph before the victory is got, war was not so much denounc'd against me, as brought suddenly upon me not open, but coverd, and conceald, wher∣by some perhaps did hope that I would be 1st sur∣pris'd before I had notice of the contest approaching, and to be undergone. 6. But, I being only addicted to the searching out of Truth, and to promote the common good of mn have learnd also being conquerd to triumph wt the Conquerors▪ I was not in the least afrighted from my purpose with so many troops diversly armd, but rather excedingly stirrd up and corroborated in prosecuting the same more cheerfully. 7. And although hitherto I did hope that all, to
whom I have bin in stead of a Parent by a faithful in∣formation and manuduction to practice (that I do not now mention evident testimonies of my love an benevolence) would be mindful of their oath, o sponsion solemnly given when they were here mad Doctors of Physic, being then put in mind agai that they should account Me instead of a Parent, an if they thought they had observd any thing less con∣sentaneous to truth, or the benefit of mortals in wha I said, or wrote that they would courteously tell m of it as I oft desir'd them, and mine other Auditors▪ Yet was the contrary done here, nay rather thei councils and arts by which some of them did glory that much would be detracted from my reputation whatsoever it was and my fortunes also, were made known on what hope of Promotion I understand not, sooner to mine Adversaries then to me. Therefore I being secure of the good event, when it was signifi'd to me by my Friends in the neighbour∣ing Cities, and anon by those that livd in tis also careful of me, and my reputation so calld in question in what great danger my fame seem'd to many to be brought, that Physicians my own Students would carry away the solemn and public desir'd victory of me conquerd, and dejected, with greater praise of their own name, I took care that the following Co∣rollary wherein their chief arguments were containd should be inserted in the Disputation to be held pub∣licly in the Physicians Auditory, I being President. 8. That neither 1. The defect of a Bag in Hrses, Harts, and other Brutes; nr 2. the insertion of the Cystie Passage with that of the Guts to an obtuse Angle, and with that of the Liver to an acute Angle; nr 3. the Ligature of the Cystic Passage, or the cuting a∣sunder the Bag, and the collection of Choler (but mre
fluid, pale, and less bitter, then was taken out of the Bag it self) in a Glass Vessel fastned to the Passage of the Guts do disprove the Motion of Mans Choler out of its Bag through the Branches of the Hepatic Passage to the Heart. 9. Against which Position of mine, my noted Academic Students invited to this Banquet, disputed sharply in the 15th and 19th day of December, 1668. who, otherwise then I, thought that both the Ob∣servations of Anatomists mentiond in the Corollarie, all the Rules of Mathematicians about Motion, and the subtil Rules of Logicians stood for them: and with what success that Fight was carri'd on, Learned Men alone then present, and void of Prejudices, could and ought to judg. At least I surviving that Fight am prepar'd to begin another Dispute at any time to search farther the Truth, now much latent in this Controversie of the true Motion of Choler, be it of what sort soever privat, or public, honestly to Discourse in Writing or by Word of Mouth with any. 10. But, that I may more from the beginning repeat this Mtter to a greater illustration of the Truth, I confess of my own accord that among the Arguments offerd by many and communicated to me against my Conjectures of the Rising, and Motion of Choler, I never met with any that much urg'd, be∣side those things which Marcellus Malpighius, a Man for many Causes accounted Excellent, and not only most diligent in unveiling the Secrets of Nature by Anatomy, but most candid and courteous in refuting friendly and mildly, even to the Example of others the Opinions of those that think otherwise. 11. He from his Experiments (which although I my self could not as yet reach by the multitude of
business, yet take them from so ingenous a Man for true) says that the whole Liver consists of manifold Lobes, which are joind to certain Glandulous Knobs; by which the extreme parts of all Vessels bringing in and carrying out, that is to say of the Port, and Hollow Veins, Hepatic Arteries, Nervs, and Hepatic Passage of Cho∣ler, and of the Roots springing from the Bag of Gall are ended: all which, as being very small Vessels, al∣though unperceivable, yet seems it consentaneous to Reason that they are so, as he admonishes. 12. Which things so observd, being suppos'd or granted, the Separation of Choler may be expected in the mentiond Glandulous Kernels; as the same most Ingenious Man very probably thinks that all Purify∣ing, and Separation of the Juice, whether Excremen∣titious, or Ʋseful out of the Mass of Blood is had in the Glandules only. 13. And although according to the Experiments of that Illustrious Malpighius admitted, I seem at least in part to change the Place, and Manner of the Separation or Generation of Choler hitherto believd and assign'd by me, and the Manner, whereby I judg'd Choler was mov'd, yet I see not that the Ʋse of Choler, which I esteem the chief thing to perfect a Body of Physic, and whereat I aim, is refuted. 14. For although, his Experiments being sup∣pos'd Choler be separated in the Glandulous Kernels of the Liver, and some part of it be carri'd streight way through the Hepatic Passages of Choler toward their Trunc to that of the Guts, and another part through the Roots of the Bag to its Cavity, and thence through the Cystic Passage to that same of the Guts, and the Gut it self: yet doth it not follow thence 1. that nothing of the same Choler passes out of the same Kernels to the least Branches of the Hollow
Vein implanted also in the Kernels. 2. That none of the same Choler carri'd through the noted Hepatic Passa∣ges of Choler passes into the Branches of the Port Vein closly conj ind to them. For it is neither provd hi∣therto by Him, nor any other, as I know of that Choler is separated out of the Venal, and not Arterial Blood. It is indeed said, but not prov'd by Him, or any else that the Port Vein doth supply the Office as an Artery; which being Hepatic, is not wanting but ap∣pearing. 15. Before I procede to the Motion of Choler, I have one thing to admonish of its Rising, even ac∣cording to the Experiments of the mentiond Mal∣pighius, that it is to be determind two-fold, the one single of Choler receiv'd out of the Glandulous Kernels through the least Branches of the Biliar Hepatic Passage, and driven forward streight way toward the greater Trunc; the other double of Choler admitted through the Roots of its Bag out of the same Glandulous Ker∣nels, and anon carri'd to the Bag it self, and staying here a while, and getting if not a new, then at least a farther change before it be poured out through the Cy∣stic Passage. Whence perhaps (as is set down in Sect. 8.) the Choler receivd out of the Passage of Cho∣ler alone is more pale, fluid and less bitter, then that which is gatherd in its Bag. 16. None ever deni'd, that Choler is mov'd to the small Gut, seeing it may easily be cleard by evident experiments; but many deny that it is carri'd upward through the Liver and the Branches of the Hollow Vein to its Trunc, and so with the Blood to the Heart, as for me I do not doubt now to assert, being mov'd with two Arguments especially, least I should be too long; wherof one argues Motion through the Hepa∣tic
Passage of Choler to be possible, the other that it is necessary. 17. None can deny that Choler may be carri'd through the Hepatic Passage to the Heart, that knows there is an open way for it through this Passage, and hence through the Hollow Vein which the Experiment made by me, and others, describ'd in my Sixth Phy∣sical Dispute, Sect. 51. proves, which is by thrusting in a Pipe, and then blowing Wind into the mentiond Passage, out of which Wind is observd by degrees to have pierc'd to the Trunc of the Vena Cava, and the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so to the Lungs themselvs: seeing all those parts are puffd up by that Wind. 18. The Jaundice demonstrates Choler to be neces∣sarily carri'd out of the Liver toward the Heart, not only out of its Glandulous Kernels, but also out of its Bag through the Passage of the Liver; whether it be ascrib'd to the Passage into the Guts Obstructed, as is the common Opinion of Physicians, or be caus'd by the Spiritousness of the Ʋniversal Choler, and especially that of the Cystica encrest, that is, elaborated in its Bag according to Sect. 15. which I judg to be most consentaneous to Truth for Reasons oft to be pro∣pos'd in Chap. 46. 19. As therfore in the Jaundice, in the preterna∣tural state of Man, either all, or at least the most of Choler is manifestly carri'd toward the Blood, so in a mean Health, and a natural State of Man we must wholly conclude that much of it is carri'd thither: especially seeing not one solid and binding reason against this Motion, is hitherto offerd by any, as far as I know. 20. Now these things of the Rising, and Motion of
Choler being chang'd after a certain manner accord∣ing to Experience, the Use assignd to it by Me re∣maining still, let us see how many and what ways every one uses to be deprav'd; the Separation, or Ge∣neration of Choler may be deprav'd 1. When it is more or less Deficient. 2. When too Much. 3. When bred variously with a Vitious Quality. 21. 1. The breeding of new Choler is more, or less Deficient both by the fault of Blood, and of the Glan∣dulous Kernels. 22. This coms to pass by fault of the Blood, as oft as the useful and necessary parts that are requir'd in it to repair, and restore Choler, are intangled and detaind in it, and so hinder its Separation. 23. All Aromatics especially those that are bitter, and Volatil Salts, chiefly those that are Oily do con∣duce to repair Choler. 24. The Contraries to Choler are Acids, and espe∣cially Tart, as also Viscous, and Earthy things hindring its Separation. 25. The Blood becoms so 1. by cloudy and cold, and so North Air. 2. By viscous, and tart Food. 3. By much and deep Sleep. 4. By sorrow and ter∣ror of Mind. 5. By too much rest of Body. 6. By a more Costive, and somtimes loose Body. 26. Choler may be Deficient by the fault of the Glandulous Kernels, as oft as they are less apt to pro∣mote its Separation: although, it is not yet evident, what kind of ones are requir'd to that end. 27. I have at least observd this, that Medicins, rendring the Blood fit for the Separation of any Hu∣mor, do likewise render the Parts, in and from which all Separations come, apt to finish the same Separati∣on: whence I conclude that there is such an affinity between the Parts, and Humors to be Separated in them,
that the Blood, and Parts appropriated to that Of∣fice are helpt, or hurt by the same thing: From which affinity I hope it will come to pass, that the Nature of every Part serving to every Function or Separation will somtime be found out by any call'd to it. 28. II. The Separation of Choler out of the Blood is Encreasd in like manner somtimes by the fault of Blood, other-times of the Glandulous Kernels. 29. It coms by the fault of the Blood, when it a∣bounds with very convenient parts to breed Choler; and is not hindred by the contrary things noted in Sect. 24. by reason of all the External Causes, at least the mst, and together most desirable concurring for some space. 30. The Blood abounds with fit parts to produce Choler, 1. Because of warmer and hot, and so Sum∣mer Air. 2. Because of Spiritous and Fat Food, and chiefly abounding with an Oily Volatil Salt, such as are strong and sweet Wine, fatter Flesh, the best Leavend Bread, stronger and bitter Beer, &c. Hi∣therto belong all Sauces, both Aromatical, and espe∣cially Bitter. 3. Because of daily Watchings. 4. Be∣cause of frequent Anger. 5. Because of vehement and great motion of Body. 6. Because of a Costive Body, Choler being retaind in the Body, or looser, it abounding, and seeking an Out-let any way. 31. Sweet and sugard, or honied Sauces seem to me not so much to encrease, as trouble, and stir up, and force Choler to make a vitious Effervescency: whence oft an hurtful, yea somtimes together deadly Vomiting and Lsss uses to follow their over-use, and so a∣base. 32. The Separation of Choler may be encreasd by the fault of the Glandulous Kernels when they have
got a vitious, and new, or at least encreasd conveni∣ent disposition to separate plenteous Choler by rea∣son of the same fore-mentiond primary faults of Diet longer continu'd. 33. III. Choler is bred with a vitious quality, when 1. it is more purely, or obscurely yellow in Colour according to its proper sensible qualities; more or less bitter in Savour; more or loss sharp or oetid in Smell; in Hardness when congealing into stones it gets a notable consistency and firmness: or, 2. accor∣ding to its common sensible qualities, it is somtimes more consistent or fluid then is naturally; and ther∣fore somtimes more glutinous, other-times more li∣quid, that I add nothing of its chang'd, and already propos'd plenty. 34. Seeing that both Colours, Savours and Odors are observd to undergoe incredible changes from most different things, I of mine own accord confess that hi∣therto I cannot assign exactly their true Causes and accurate Reasons; and would receive them with a glad and grateful Mind from any so happy. Which things lying hid, yet to be found out by the multitude of Observations, and to be brought to light by the help of Ingenuity, I wish the Royal Societies, appoin∣ted by the Authority of Great Kings, and without doubt abundantly instructed with necessary helps to absolve such a Matter, would not forbear to take pains useful to the Common-Wealth. 35. I am taught by the Observations of some years that the Consistency, and hence Glutinousness of Choler, and oft the other Humors in the Body are Encreasd by a frequent use of Tart things, the same on the contrary are Diminishd by the continued use of Volatil Salts and Sharp Aromatics. 36. I. The greater or less Separation of Choler
Deficient, causd either by the Blood; or the Glandu∣lous Kernels of the Liver may be Cur'd 1. by Air Hot naturally or by art. 2. By Food and Sauces a∣bounding with a Volatil Salt and Spirit, and especially bitter. 3. By Watchings a little exceding custom. 4. By moderat Anger. 5. By Exercise of Body som∣what to vehement. 6. By the Body kept soluble, but not too loose, and fluid. 37. Among Medicins having experienc'd I com∣mend a frequent use of Oily Volatil Salts; as also of bitter Aromatics and chiefly of Wormwood, and such∣like any way us'd. 38. II. The excretion of Choler more, or less en∣creasd, may be Cur'd; 1. By more cold and Northern Air. 2, By Tart, Glutinous, and a little Spiritous Food, and Sauces. 3. By Sleep encreasd even by Art. 4. By moderat sorrow of Mind. 5. By rest of Body. 6. By keeping the Body somwhat Costive after Choler is purg'd out by Rhubarb. 39. All Tart and Earthy Medicins encreasing the Consistency of Blood may avail here, whither all fat and seald Earths belong, Bole Armeniac, and Coral, Pearl, &c. In the use of which beware, least while you avoid one mischief you fall into another, they are therfore to be us'd in a small quantity, and at times, wherby so the Blood turgid with Particles of Choler may be degrees be amended. 40. III. The Savour of Choler being less bitter, may be corrected by frequent use of Sauces, or Medi∣cins mildly bitter, especially of Wormwood, and Worm∣wood Wine made of it, and such-like. 41. The Hardness ascrib'd to Choler, compacted into Stones may be Cur'd by the Juice and Decoction of Grass, as also by the Spirit of Nitre as well pure, as dulcifi'd us'd in Wine, Beer, &c.
42. The encreasd Consistencie of Choler may be Cur'd by somwhat sharp Aromatics, and chiefly by all Vola∣til, but especially also Oily Salts. 43. The encreasd Fluidness and Liquidness of Choler may be Cur'd by a prudent and continu'd Use of mild∣ly Tart things, Verjuice, Quinces, Medlars, Wild-Plums, &c. CHAP. XLV. Of the Retention or Excretion of Choler in its Bag deprav'd. 1. SEeing that enough of Choler is always observd to be gathered and kept during Health in the Bag of Choler in all Creatures that have a Bag (which if it be not sent out through the Cystic Passage per∣petually, then at least by Intervals, whithersoever to be sent afterwards) it is deservedly enquir'd into the Causes and Cures of it Retaind, or thence Sent out beside nature. 2. Choler is too much Retaind and therfore accumu∣lated in its Bag either by the fault of it self, or of the Bag. 3. Choler is Retaind too long by the fault of it self in its Bag, as oft as it is too Glutinous, and so less fit for motion, or compacted into Stones, and therfore most unfit for excretion: neither doth the motion and con∣traction of the Bag seem to be so potent, as to expel the Stones within it. 4. Choler becoms more Glutinous by such-like Food or Tart Sauces, long us'd; as also by cold and sharp
Air; and sorrow of Mind by which the Juice of the Pan∣creas especially, and hence the universal Mass of Blood, and anon all the Humors become too Glu∣tinous. 5. Choler is compacted and coagulated into Stones by a Lapidescent so call'd by some, or rather to be call'd a Juice making a Stone, which I suspect gets its strength from a Tart acid, seeing that Stones and Gravel are dissolved by a subtile and sharp Acid. 6. Choler may be Retaind too long in it by the fault of its Bag, as oft as its Fibres become too loos by rea∣son of an exceding collection of Choler, or the Ani∣mal Spirits become deficient in them, chiefly because of its Nervs ill affected (although I think either of these Causes seldom hath place here) or its Out-let may be clstructed by Choler compacted into an extremely Gluti∣nous Humor, or Stone. 7. The same Choler is sent forth too much out of its Bag in like manner by the fault either of it self, or of its Bag. 8. By the fault of it self, when Choler is more fluid and liquid, by over-using Aromatic, sharper and bit∣ter Sauces, or Medicins and any kind of a Volatil Salt; by which before all other things Choler is made very Liquid and fluid, yea the Universal Blood also, and anon any Humor separated out of it. 9. Hither belong The warm and summer Air, fre∣quent Anger, motion of the Body vehement enough long continu'd and prolongd Watchings. 10. Choler is too much sent forth by the fault of the Bag, as oft as the same is very much provok'd to con∣tract it self; which seems to have place, when the Bag is provok'd by sharp and very volatil humors, and so with such-like Poisons, as Arsenic, &c. either first vitiously effervescing with Choler in the small Gut,
and sending such-like vapors through the Lacteal Veins towards the Heart, hence every-whither with the Blood and to the said Bag, or otherwise carri'd thither any way, and corroding; or a Vitious Effer∣vescency with Choler is stirrd up in the same, whence the same Bag is likewise provok'd to Contract it self by vapors then raisd because of their plenty or acri∣mony. 11. The over Glutinousness of Choler may be Cur'd, by changing as much as may be, the Diet mentiond in Sect. 4. into a somwhat contrary diet, and using Aromatic, somwhat sharp and bitter Sauces and Medi∣cines, and especially Oily Volatil Salts; by the help of which I have oft cur'd the toughness of Choler exceding. 12. Seing it is hard to know that Stones are bred of Choler, no wonder if their Cure seems an unheard of thing to many Physicians. Yet because, when Stones are found in the Bag of Choler after death, the the rest of Choler is like lees, and abounds with dregs and excrementitious setlings; such as I have oft observd sent out by vomit; I should think such are to be feard, least some part of Choler grow into sto∣nes, whilst the other turns into such excrements; and therfore Medicins that dissolve these Stones of Choler, as also that hinder any Concrescency are then to be us'd. 13. Among medicins that dissolve Stones of Choler I doubt not to refer (which I mentiond in one word in the former Ch. . 41.) the roots and herbs of Grass, either distilld, or, which I prefer, boild or bruisd, and the Juice exprest out of it, Sugar or Honey being added to make it pleasant; seeing that it is known by manifold experience that Oxen and Sheep whose food in Winter is hay, and have a stonelike, or gra∣vellish
crust compacted in the Passage of Choler, so soon as they are again turnd to grass in the month of May, are by degrees freed from that disease; it being a sure argument that green and new Grass has that force of dissolving Stones, that is lost, when it is dri'd into hay. 14. The Spirit of Nitre also conduceth to dissolve Stones, which therfore I likewise commend in this case; and chiefly, after it is dulcifi'd and made mild with the spirit of wine: which may be us'd safely to x. xii. or more drops, in Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor, though Physical, and that oft in a day. 15. Any Volatil but chiefly also Oily Salts will hinder a new Concretion; being such as purify, and cleanse Choler, as I am taught by manifold expe∣rience. 16. If after a great collection of Choler, and exced∣ing distention of the Bag, its Fibres are greatly loosend, I see not how they can be restor'd except gradually, more mild Aromaties being us'd for some space as well internally, as externally. 17. The Defect of the Animal Spirit is to be repaird by Spiritous Food us'd prudently, that is, in a small quantity, or daily. 18. An Obstruction being in the Out-let or Passage of the Bag, and arising from Choler compacted into a most tough humor or stone may be Cur'd by dissolving that Humor or Stone by the newly made or purified Juice, Decoction, or Water of Grass oft taken, add∣ing the Spirit of Nitre either single or dulcifi'd, to∣gether with sugar, or honey to make it pleasant. 19. On the contrary Choler more Fluid and Li∣quid may be Amended, and its too great excretion may be Cur'd by shunning Aromatic Medicins and Sauces, and all Volatil Salts, and in their stead using any
thing that is somwhat Tart, Verjuice, Wild Plums, and their Juice, several fat Earths, Bole Armeniac, the Earth Lemnia, and any that is Seald. 20. Hot Air is to be chang'd into Cold; Anger in∣to Sorrow; Motion of Body into Rest; Watchings in∣to Sleep, to which we must somthing give way. 21. As oft as a great Irritation of the Bag of Choler, and a plenteous Excretion of Choler is made by Poison taken in, so oft the Acrimony of Poisons is to be temperd all sorts of ways, yea it is to be expeld by Vomit or Stool as speedily as may be. 22. Fat things before all others do Temper and Blunt the Acrimony of Poison, whence sweet Milk is even in common use, chiefly hot, or warmd, Oil of O∣lives, or of sweet Almonds, fat Broth, a Decoction of Figs, and such-like, which taken alone, or with warm Water plenteously, and oft do blunt, dilute, and render Poison taken in voluntarily, or by chance fit for Evacuation upward, or downward. 23. When these suffice not, mild Vomits, or Purges may somtimes be given. 24. To Blunt the Acrimony of Poison, and to drive it creeping to the more inward parts of Man forth through the Habit of the Body Opium, and all Opiats, Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, Orvietanum, &c. conduce. 25. The vitious Effervescency of Choler both in the small Gut, and in the Bag of Choler may be hindred, temperd, and at length allaid by the fore-mentiond Opiats, especially Diascordium; as also somwhat tart earthy things likewise fore-mentiond, the Lemnia and Seald Earth, Bole Armeniac, Dragons Blood, Blood Stone, Crabs-Eyes, Pearl, Coral, Chalk, &c. 26. I add not the Forms of Medicins in every place, seeing it is easie for a Young Physicians to in∣vent
new Forms, and such as may satisfie every In∣dication from those many already before propos'd. CHAP. XLVI. Of the Motion of Choler to the Gut hindred, and in special of the Jaundice. 1. THat Choler in a most healthy state slowe down to the small Gut through its Passage of the Guts, is not only sufficiently prov'd by the Fabric, and Structure of all those Parts, but by Choler it self found in the said Gut, yea by the Excrements co∣lourd by it; that I bring not Arguments taken from the same Choler in a Non-natural or Preternatural State sent forth bitter enough, and that plenteous enough by Siege or Vomit. 2. The Motion of Choler to the Guts is somtimes hindred, when it is more glutinous and viscous, and therfore more unfit for motion, of which depravati∣on we spake in the former Chapter; or when there is a straitness in the Cystic Passage, or in that to the Gut, because of which Choler is mov'd with more difficulty, and so more slowly, and sparingly through them; which may be both by Choler very glutinous glued to the sides of the noted Passages, and also by the same growing together into a stone-like Matter, and in like manner adhering by degrees to the noted Sides. For it seems not impossible that that may be∣fal Men somtimes, which is observd so oft to happen to Cattel and Beasts in the Winter Season. 3. The descent of Choler to the Gut may be wholly taken away by an Obstruction of the Passage of Choler
nto the Gut, risen either by Choler it self most gluti∣ous overlaying and at length wholly filling that Pas∣sage by degrees more, and more, or by the same Cho∣ler lapidescent, and likewise stopping the whole Pas∣sage. 4. It is commonly receivd that Choler wholly hin∣dred in its natural Descent ascends with force to the Li∣ver, because of the noted Obstruction of the Passage to the Gut, and is so carri'd to the Blood, and anon transferd with it to the habit and superficies of the Bo∣dy, and there breeds the Jaundice. 5. And although I suppose the Jaundice may somtimes be raisd by the foresaid Obstruction, yet do I not judg that that Obstruction suffices to breed it, unless Choler then abiding in its Bag especially get a new change. 6. And that I should be so perswaded, very many both Anatomical, and Practical Experiments move, and in a manner constrain me; which I desire may be always conjoind, as oft as may be, by those who desire to do any thing profitable to Mortals, and so to Physic it self in the Illustration of the more ob∣scure Natural, and Physical things. For it oft falls out, that some Anatomical Experiments seem to contradict Practicals, whence by their long compa∣rison together, and an accurat weighing of all the Circumstances, Truth the more happily and profita∣bly appears. But if this be neglected, our Knowledg is rather obscur'd, and things now occurring to us less distinctly of themselvs are the more confus'd. 7. I have Observd 1. in diffecting Icterical People that the Passage to the Gut, or that call'd Cystic was not always obstructed. 8. 2. I have Observd, that the Excrements are not always pale in the Jaundice, although less dyed then usual.
9. 3. I have Observd the Jaundice oft sooner bred, not only by a peculiar Poison, but by a grievous and unexpected sorrow of Mind, then that any can perswade either themselves or others, that an Obstru∣ction could be bred so suddenly from what Cause soe∣ver at length then present and acting in the Passages of Choler. 10. 4. I have Observd the Jaundice Cur'd by Medicins, and that soon enough, by the help whereof any (unless prepossest with Prejudice) can scarce be∣lieve an Obstruction could be opend, or so soon opend. To this number I refer Cows Milk boild with Hemp-Seeds, by the help of which only benefit I have cur'd several, and known many of the Common People cur'd: Hither I refer Sope prepar'd both with the Oil of Olivs, of Turneps, or of Whales; and in like manner dissolvd in Milk and taken. 11. 5. I have Observd many Infants born with the Jaundice, or the Jaundice soon break forth in them after Birth. 12. Seeing from these Observations it is manifest that the Jaundice may be produc'd without an Obstructi∣on of the Passage of Choler, it is deservedly askt, what is, or may be its true Cause? 13. That this may be the more happily and easily searchd out, I will premise the commonly known Symptoms that indicate the Jaundice instant or pre∣sent, anon I will join some others, noted perhaps by few. 14. The Compressive Pain therfore of the Heart so call'd, most troublesom about the Lower Region of the Stomach, is wont more frequently to precede, and also to accompany the Jaundice in the beginning Anxieties and obscure Gripes concurring in the Right Hypochon∣dre, where both the Bag of Choler, and its Passage is.
15. The Excrements are usually white, or of an Ash colour, and not diversly dyed by Choler, as at other times; yea the Sick have more seldom a motion to go to Stool. 16. By and by the Ʋrin comes obscurely red, and colouring a Linnen Cloath dipt in it of a Saffron Co∣lour. 17. At length there breaks forth in the Face and Neck, and more evidently in the Coat of the Eyes call'd Adnata, constituting their White, hence through the universal Skin of the Body a Citrine and yellow Co∣lour, yea somtimes inclining to an obscure greenness; whence it is somtimes call'd the yellow, somtimes the black Jaundice. 18. When the Jaundice inclines, somtimes a great itching is felt in all the Superficies of the Body. 19. Among the External Causes I have oft seen the Jaundice bred by the abuse of Spirit of Wine, and of other strong Drinks, and the Dropsie Ascites suc∣ceding, for the most part deadly. 20. All which being rightly weigh'd, I think whether the Obstruction of any Passage of Choler have place, or such an Obstruction cannot be feignd, that then Choler suffers a notable change, by reason of which it is mov'd and carri'd more fiercely and plente∣ously towards the Blood, with which notwithstanding it is less mixt then is wont to be, but only confus'd with it, and therfore it the easier severs from it, and not only joins it self to the Skin, and External Parts, but to the Muscles also, and Bowels, and in∣fects and dies them of its own Colour. 21. For Choler being as it is naturally is mixt and imbodied not only loosly, but most intirely with the Humors occurring both in the small Gut, and al∣so in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and that so,
that it cannot be more separated by them: which Union is by reason of its Effervescency instituted in both mentiond places with the Sowr Humor flowing there. 22. Because therfore in the Jaundice that most in∣tire conjunction of Choler with the other Humors, and according to some parts thereof a Mixture, as also that mentiond Effervescency seems to be requir'd, if not wholly, at least in part hindred, let us see, wherein the Cause of both these effects, yea and the Cause al∣so of the Jaundice may be known, what is requir'd in Choler to perfect each Effervescency, and what may be∣fall it, as to diminish or remove it. 23. It is now known to all sorts of Persons, that any Effervescency happens between an Acid and Lixi∣vial Salt, or that which partakes of a lixivial Salt; and in as much as it partakes thereof. 24. And whoever shall examine Choler, and con∣fuse it as well with Sowr Liquors, as with Lixivial Salts of any kind, will easily see that Choler concurs to stir up an Effervescency by reason of its Lixivial Salt, but much temperd many ways in it; least there should be a potent and vehement, and so hurtful, in∣slead of a mild and to Nature friendly Effervescency in the Body. 25. And if Choler has the esteme of a Lixivial Salt in stirring up an Effervescency, let us go farther and see, how its Salt may be affected, that it becoms less apt for an Effervescency. 26. Again it is known by Experience that the pur∣est, and so sharpest Lixivial Salt is most apt for an Effervescency; which same on the contrary howsoever dull'd becoms more, or less unfit for an Efferves∣cency. 27. Many things Blunt the Acrimony of a Lixivial
Salt, and 1. indeed Oily and Fat things; which any Sope testifies. 2. Every Volatil Spiritous Liquor; which the Salt of Tartar volatiz'd with the highly∣est rectifi'd Spirit of Wine testifies. 3. Every Ear∣thy Thing; which Coral, Pearl, Crabs-Eyes, Chalk, and many others testifie. 28. Water promotes and facilitates the Efferves∣cency of a Lixivial Salt, if a little be joind to it; and it abates and allays the same, if much be poured to it. 29. Fire alone sharpens and encreases the Acrimony of the same Lixivial Salt; whence how much the longer it is urg'd by the force and flame of Fire, so much the sharper it becoms, and more convenient for a potent and vehement Effervescency. 30. And that we may accomodate all these things to-our present Business, and according to our Ability bring a clear Light to the Doctrine of the Jaundice enough obscure, who ever shall attentively consider Choler, will easily own that not a little of Oily and Fattish is mixt with it according to Nature; because of which, as the most potent and effectual, and therefore that which doth primarily blunt a Salt Acrimony, the Effervescency of Choler either in the Heart, or in the small Gut is never observd sharp or great during Health. 31. That somthing of a Volatil Spirit is mixt with the same Choler any will acknowledg, who not only sees that Nervs great enough are carri'd to the Li∣ver, but moreover knows that it will be easily mixt with any thing; which would not be, unless a Vo∣latil Spirit were mixt with it in a notable quantity: for by reason of its Oiliness accompanying a Lixivial Salt, it is more difficultly mixt with any thing, to which as oft as a Volatil Spirit is joind, it is more apt
to mix with any. And therby the Salt of Choler is rendred more temperat; whence also hitherto its Effervescency is also more mild in a natural state. 32. Somthing of Earth is found in Choler; yet not so much as many evilly think, because they either work ill, or reason ill; otherwise it would be le movable, and fluid, and less joining it self with other things, yea rendring the same movable; as that is peculiarly manifest in the matter of Colours, which is rendred more fluid, and apt to cast a colour by Choler mixt with it. By Earth although but little mixt with it, the Effervescency of Choler is weak∣ned, least it should be potent, and sharp in an healthy state. 33. I cannot pass by here with silence the gross and hurtful error of certain Men in gaining know∣ledg of natural things by Chymistry: For they think all things, that are in natural things, are manifested by Distillation only, and that nothing is containd In them, that coms not off by Distillation; as though Fire alone, as some wrongfully think, were the A∣gent, and that Universal, which brings every change to Natural Things; which they who assert, do thery fully testifie how little they are verst in taking up Chymical Experiments; seeing that infinite changes occur, which cannot be deduc'd from the Fire, and not a few, that are advers to the Fire. Of which Matter I intend to mention more, if at any time God give me leasure, and other necessaries to perfect that Work; whereby I may communicate in public the Science of Natural Things which I have ponderd in my Mind 36 years. 34. Such, and so great a Fire in mans Body by which the Lixivial Salt of the Choler may be burnt, and
become sharper cannot certainly be feignd by any of a sound mind, no not in a stare most declin'd from that which is natural; seeing that, if any examin the matter rightly, the primary Cause of a more intens Heat that is in the body it self in a non-natural, or praeter-natural state is to be requir'd, and deduc'd from Choler. 35. I said the primary Cause of Heat in the body, whether Internal; whereby I may distinguish it from any External Cause, which nothing hinders but that I may call it either common Fire kept in with any kind of fuel, or by the Sun by which that all the Humors and especially Choler become more sharp is known to every one. 36. Therefore as oft as Choler is renderd Sharper in mans body, and that in its proper acrimony to wit consisting in a Lixivial Salt, so oft that acrimo∣ny is to be sought, and deduc'd from the External Heat somtimes of the Sun, somtimes of common Fire. 37. I said in its proper acrimony, whereby it may be distinguisht from the Accidental, which hap∣pens by an Acid sharp acrimony mixt with it, which breeds Choler somtimes Green, somtimes Black, to wit as a sharp Sowr acrimony is more, or less mixt with Choler, and constitutes a compound Humor although known only by the name of Choler. 38. Seing therefore among those things, which are found in the Body, and may and ought to be re∣ferd to the Internal Causes, nothing occurs, beside the Sowr Juice that may render Choler Sharper, it is also very evident, to what the Burning of Choler com∣monly more celebrated, then understood, or ex∣plaind ought to be ascrib'd. 39. These being so premis'd, we must further
enquire To what especially the unfitness of Choler in mixing, and intirely uniting it self with the other Hu∣mors in the Jaundice is to be ascrib'd. 40. That this may be more easily, and evidently manifest, consider that the Jaundice is in a short while raisd by the biting of a Viper: whose Poison, because it is wont speedily to absolv its work, is wholly to be judg'd very moveable, and so subtil, yea of a Volatil and Spiritous nature. 41. The Jaundice oft enough coming upon drinkers of more strong wine and especially of its Spirit, because of the neglect also of other more solid food, and chiefly when any sorrow of Mind hath preceded, and remains doth seem to confirm, yea to prove that the Jaundice may be bred by a very Volatil Spirit too plen∣teously mixt with Choler, and making it more Spiri∣tous. 42. So that it seems not absurd or improbable to me, that Choler is rendred over-Spiritous when it cau∣ses the Jaundice, somtimes by the most potent and spiritous Poison of Vipers in a short time, somtimes stronger Drink daily us'd, and for a longer time, and less apt to effervesce with Acids conveniently, and hence most intirely to join it self with the other Hu∣mors. 43. But some attentive to this matter may say, If Choler may be so chang'd by the Poison of a Viper, or any other thing or too strong Drink, that the Jaundice may be bred without an Obstruction in the Passages of Choler, Choler will not cease at least to be carri'd to the small Gut; from which although a less and weaker Effervescency with the Juice of the Pancreas happens there, why are not the Excre∣ments at least colourd by the same, as it is wont to be in other causes?
44. To which difficulty that I may give satisfacti∣on, I Answer 1. that in every Jaundice the Ex∣crements are not equally white, and therfore less died with the yellow colour of Choler: whence I judg somtimes more, somtimes less of Choler is also mixt with the Excrements in the Jaundice, by which they are More, or less died. 45. I Answer 2. that in every Jaundice, Choler is not alike evilly affected; whence thus far also it may be mixt more or less with the Excrements, and die the same. 46. I Answer 3. That the Excrements should be rightly died by Choler, there is requir'd a previ∣ous and sufficient Effervescency of the same with the Juice of the Pancreas, because of which its divers parts separate from each other, and having a Tin∣cture are joind to the Excrements. 47. I Answer 4. If during the Jaundice Choler be more Spiritous, and volatil, and therfore more fluid and moveable, the same may more easily pierce out of the glandulous kernels of the Liver through its smallest Passages to the roots of the Hollow Vein and with the Blood to the Heart; chiefly, if the Pas∣sage of Choler to the Gut being provok'd is more narrowly Contracted or somtimes also Obstructed by the same Choler more spiritous; wherfore the assault being made to the Liver, Choler may persist in the same, its ordinary, though great way, towards the small Gut being neglected. 48. For it may come to pass, that, if the Passage of Choler to the Gut be not wholly obstructed, it may at least be straitned by Phlegm made more vis∣cous chiefly after a grievous Sorrow, covering it any way; or the same Passage may be irritated to a more strait contraction of it self by Choler made more Spi∣ritous,
and therfore turgid and effus'd out of its Bag; because of which a free passage to the Gut is deni'd it, and therefore almost all of it is carrid upward to the Liver through the Passage of the Liver, anon being carri'd with the Blood to the right Ventricle of the Heart may be effervescent less then usual with the Descending and Lymphatic Blood, and therfore may be more confus'd, then mixt with the whole mass of Blood, anon every where departing from the Blood may infect all the Parts with its colour, and render them less apt for a natural nourishment; wherfore either a Pining, or Dropsie may by degrees succede the Jaundice, unless it be soon cur'd. 49. And although I do not think that an Obstructi∣on of the Passage of Choler is necessarily requir'd to breed the Jaundice, yet do I not see, why it may not somtimes occasion the Jaundice, whilst it is its cause by stopping Choler in its natural efflux into the small Gut, because Choler staying there may be alterd, and if it be lawful to say so, may grow spiritous both with a greater access of the Animal Spirit, and farther exaltation and attenuation of the parts constitut∣ing it. 50. This even thence seems to be evident, because that an exceding Anxiety is wont to be felt by many in that right hypochondre (before they have the Jaundice) where the insertion of the Passage of Chol∣er into the small Gut is observd to be, somtimes a grievous Sorrow, or the abuse of Phlegmatic Food preceeding. 51. By Sorrow All the Humors are wont to be∣come glutinous and viscous, especially in the small Gut, and indeed because of the Juice of the Pancreas thereby made more tart.
52. But whence-soever Phlegm becoms glutious and viscous, the same is apt to cover and obstruct the Orifice of the Passage of Choler into the small Gut, and so hinder the descent and out-let of Choler; wherefore a Narrowness will be stirrd up there by Choler putting forth its force against the noted Phlegm, and producing Wind out of it, whilst the remainder acting upon it self is attenuated, becoms Spiritous and at length stirs up the Jaundice. 53. From what I have already mentiond methinks I have found and describ'd no improbable manner and account of the breeding of the Jaundice without a ne∣cessary Obstruction of the Passage of Choler into the Gut, to wit the encreas d Thinness and Spiritousness, and therefore unaptness of Choler to be rightly and enough effervescent; which I have therfore noted in Choler, because it is observd then not so much to be mixt, as confus'd with the Blood. 54. Let us further see, whether the usual and fore∣noted Symptoms of the Jaundice may be deduc'd from its fore-assign'd Cause; lastly, whether its noted Cure agree with the same? 55. The Cause of a compressive Pain of the Heart is the same, which I said in Sect. 52. was the cause of Anxieties raisd about the lower region of the Ventricle in the small Gut, Glutinous Phlegm being there gatherd and in part rarefi'd into Wind, stretching open, vex∣ing and pressing the Containing Parts. 56. The Gripings in the right Hypochondre are to be ascrib'd to an Acid Humor of the Pancreas less bro∣ken and so more pure by Choler meeting it less, and putting forth its harm more potently, and pricking and griping the Sensible Parts. 57. The Excrements are less died then is wont both by Choler more sparingly approaching it and by the same
less effervescent, and therfore carrying less of its dying parts to colour them. 58. The Sick have less motion to Stool by reason of the same Cause, and Choler less sharp. 59. The Ʋrine is obscurely Red by reason of plen∣teous and deeply colourd Choler mixt with it. 60. A different Yellow Colour arises in all but chief∣ly the most tender part of the Skin, such as is that of the Face, Neck, Hands; yea in the whole Flesh from the same Choler less effervescent also in the Heart by reason of its encreasd Spiritousness, and more intire Union of its parts, therfore less mixing it self with the Blood, and rather only confus'd with it, and therfore adhering every-where to the noted Parts, while it flows through with it, and colouring them with its Yellow colour somtimes more pale, somtimes more obscure, and somtimes inclining to green∣ness. 61. When the Jaundice declines an Itching is felt in the Superficies of the Body by reason of an efferves∣cency every-where raisd again and somwhat sharp va∣pors thence breaking forth, and mildly gnawing the sensible Parts. For it cannot be, but, that a more potent Effervescency, then was before, of Choler every-where at its meeting with the Juice of the Pan∣creas and Lympha, yea with the Blood it self more sowr then is wont (which I remember I have ob∣servd in the dissection of one dead of the Jaundice) should be stird up after that it is corrected by the use of convenient Medicins, not only that which is in its Bag, in which much of it is Gatherd, but also in the Universal mass of Blood, with which it is con∣sus'd, as also with all the containing and solid Parts, to which it adheres; by which therefore Vapors somwhat sharp may be raisd, which being carri'd to
the sensible Parts, and especially the Skin do there cause an Itching. 62. What is afore-said may be confirmd more by the Cure of the Jaundice, which is not to be negle∣cted, but rather hastned, because commonly a Ca∣chexie, and Dropsie, or Deadly Pining succeds it. 63. The Cure of the Jaundice may consist here in that 1. the more Remote Causes, Sorrow of Mind, the abuse of Viscous Food, or of Stronger Drink be remov'd. That 2. the Mean Causes, Glutinous Phlegm covering, or obstructing the Passage of Choler, as oft as it has place, or any kind of Poison changing and vitiating Choler, be corrected and carri'd out. That 3, the near∣est Cause, Choler corrupted and vitiated, to wit over-Spiritous, and rendred more unfit for a right Effer∣vescency be amended, and again carri'd down to the Gut. That 4. lastly, the ill-favourd colour of the Skin be Separated, and the natural Colour restor'd. 64. I. Sorrow of Mind is overcom'd and remov'd by rightly reasoning about any troublesom matters, and by confirming, and hardning the Mind to bear and suffer stoutly any adversity. 65. The abuse of Glutinous Food is by degrees to be chang'd, and in its stead other Food less Gluti∣nous is to be us'd; therfore Fishes and especially Sea-Fish is to be shund; as also the extreme parts of Li∣ving Creatures: and somwhat Sharp and Aromatic Sauces are to be us'd, Mustard, Horse-Radish, and such-like that correct Viscous Humors; whither Vo∣latil Salts so oft commended by me are to be referd, and added to ordinary Drink, but most commodi∣ously to Wine, and us'd most profitably at Dinner and Supper; although they may be also taken at any other time. 66. Stronger Drinks are to be daily diminisht, and
at length wholly to be omitted, and before all others the Spirit of Wine: Yet must we allow a little Wine of good age and somwhat sweet, and so somwhat fat to those that are accustomd for reasons to be men∣tiond anon. 67. II. I have oft taught that Glutinous Phlegm may be Corrected and Cut with Aromatic and Volatil Salts, whose use I also again commend. 68. When it is in part corrected, or to be cor∣rected by the same means, and Medicin Phlegma∣gogues oft before mentiond and prescrid'd will educe it: yet we will add a Form here of an altering and purging Decoction, by the help of which or of one like it us'd in time, I have oft in a short time Cur'd People of the Jaundice. ℞. The Roots of Madder, Celandine the Greater, Smallage, of each ℥ ss. Broom-Flower M. ss. Seeds of Columbine, Parsley; Anise, of each ʒ ii. Crude Tartar ʒ i. ss. Boil them in as much as suffices of an equal quantity of White-Wine and pure Water, dissolving in ℥ xx. of what is straind the Syr. of Diacnicum, of Succory with Rhubarb, of each ℥ i. ss. M. Let the Sick take twice or thrice a day so much of this Decoction, as moves him to go to Stool twice, or thrice, and he void Choler together with Phlegm. 69. As oft as the Jaundice is bred by the Poison of a Viper, or any other whatsoever, so oft all Sudorifics abounding with a Volatil Salt do conduce to Correct and Expel it, as being such as satisfie to both Indica∣tions; nor is Treacle here mentiond without cause, containing the Troches of Vipers in it, and several other things prepar'd of Vipers, abounding with a Volatil Salt. 70. Hither relates Diaphoretic Antimony taken to
xv Grains, and which is much better Mineral Bezo∣ard taken to ℈ ss. in any Liquor. 71. Hither belongs the Volatil Salt of Harts-Horn, or any made out of any part of a living Creature by Distillation, and if it be more potent somtimes us'd to v or vi drops or grains in a convenient Liquor. For Example; ℞. Old Treacle ℈ ii. Mineral Bezoard ℈ ss. Salt of Harts-Horn 4 drops. or Sp. of Salt Armoniac v drops. Syr. of Red Poppies, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ss. Carduus-Water ℥ i. M. for a Draught to be taken at once; which being taken, let the Icteric Person be meanly coverd, wherby a Sweat may be promoted. 72. If the Sick had rather take a more liquid Su∣dorific at times and by Spoonfuls, and so by little and little expect a Sweat, let him oft use the follow∣ing Mixture, by the help of which a mild Sweat may be stird up. ℞. Fumitory-Water ℥ iii. Simple Treacle-Water ℥ i. Tincture of Saffron ʒ ii. Laudanum 4 Grains. Salt of Harts-Horn ℈ i. Mineral Bezoard ʒ ss. Syr. of Carduus ℥ i. ss. M. 73. If the Form of a Decoction please any better, the following Decoction or one like it may be pre∣scribd for him, which ℞. The Root of Vipers-Grass ℥ i. of Master-wert ℥ ss. the Root of Juniper-Wood ℥ ii. of Sassafras ℥ ss. the Leavs of Carduus, Scabious, Scordium, of each M. i. Juniper-Berries ℥ ii. the Seeds of Co∣lumbine, Nettles, Shavings of Harts-Horn, of each ʒ iii. Boil them according to Art in pure Water dissolving in ℥ xxx. of what is straind Syr. of Carduus ℥ iii. Treacle-Water of any kind ℥ i. ss. Salt of Tartar Vitriolated ℈ ii. M.
Let the Sick take as much of this Decoction toge∣ther or only at times, as is requird to drive forth a sweat mildly; which afterward not coming forth, Urin is voided plenteous enough, which likewise is wont to help. 74. III. The deprav'd and vitiated, and too Spi∣ritous Choler of such as have the Jaundice may be A∣mended chiefly by Oily and Fat things, by the help of which the aptness of Choler for a right Effervescency seems moreover to be restor'd. 75. So I have cur'd several, and seen many cur'd of the Jaundice by the help of Hemp-Seed alone boild till about its cracking in Cows Milk also fat, and then straind, and taken twice, or thrice a day to v or vi Ounces, as I mentiond before in Sect. 10. 76. So I have several times cur'd the Jaundice hap∣pily by any Sope about ʒ i. being dissolvd in hot Milk, and sweetned with a little Sugar, us'd twice, or at least once a day after I had premis'd Medicins which were mentiond before in Sect. 68. 77. I did indeed formerly think that Sope thus far profited in curing the Jaundice, in as much as by its Lixivial Salt it dissolvd the Obstruction in the Passage of Choler into the Gut; which seeing it cannot be said of Hemp-Seed curing the same Disease happily, I now am perswaded Sope conduceth upon a two∣fold account, both by reason of its Lixivial, but Fixt Salt, of which it is made; and by reason of its fat∣ness or Oil, with which it is prepar'd. 78. By reason of its Lixivial, but Fixt Salt, in as much as it being joind to Choler corrupted according to its encreas'd Spiritousness doth diminish, and cor∣rect its over-Volatilness and Spiritousness, by assum∣ing into it self some part of a Volatil Spirit abound∣ing in it.
79. By reason of its Fatness or Oil, but thick, and in no wise Volatil or Aromatic, by the help of which it blunts the sharpness of the Volatil and Spiritous Salt ruling in Choler. 80. And by this double Experiment of the Jaun∣dice cur'd by Sope and Hemp-Seep it seems to be evi∣dent, wherein its chief Cure consists, and from which, or which kind of Medicins it may and ought to be hoped for, and expected. 81. For the confirmation of this mine Assertion, I produce Saffron familiar in the Cure of the Jaun∣dice, and which seeing the Fat is commended, upon that very account it favours mine Opinion; for Saf∣fron is easily joind to a Volatil Spirit, by the help wherof there is made an excellent Tincture, and Ex∣tract; by which seeing that besides the Animal Spi∣rits are wont to be brought to rest, and tranquillity, yea perhaps to sleepiness, sleep succeding both mild, and somtimes deep enough, the whole Matter becoms so much the more manifest. 82. Opium it self, the most potent Drowsie Al∣layer of the Animal Spirits, is Oily and Fat, giving them a slow and difficult Motion, yea almost taking it away. 83. The Volatil Spirits therfore may be fore'd and bound by Fat and Oily things, and brought to rest and tranquillity; whence it seems to be evident, if as oft as the Animal Spirits joind to Choler in too great quantity, or exalted in it, that is, strengthned in their Power and Efficacy, do breed the Jaundice by making it more Volatil, and movable, so oft the same Jaun∣dice is to be Cur'd, its noted volatilness and move∣ableness being overcom'd by Medicins that are Oily, and do mildly procure Sleep. 84. This same seem the fixt and Anodyn Sulphurs
of Minerals, and Metals, mildly fixing and quieting the Volatil Spirits to confirm, being not without cause much estem'd by the more Skilful Chymists. 85. The same Choler more or less corrected is again to be deduc'd to the small Gut by Cholagogues, chiefly by the most commonly us'd Rhubarb taken any way; wherfore I again mention the Decoction prescrib'd in Sect. 68. 86. IV. The ill-favourd Colour of the Skin som∣times Yellow, somtimes of an obscure Green in the Jaundice is of its own accord, and by degrees lost, and abolisht, but is sooner remov'd by subtil Sudori∣fics, having a Volatil Salt in them, whether a mild Sweat, or none follow. For it matters little, whether Sweat break forth then also, or no, seeing that this Choler abiding in any Parts against Nature may be cleans'd by the said Volatil Salts apt to promote a Sweat, and may be driven forth with insensible tran∣spiration. 87. For Example, Let the Party Sick of the Jaundice, whose Excrements are of their wonted Colour, whose Appetite is restor'd, whose Urin is less dyed with a red Colour, whose golden Colour in the Skin is no more encreasd, but rather a little les∣send; let him, I say, use often in a day one Spoon∣ful of this following Potion, by which if a Sweat breath forth, a perfect Cure may be the sooner expe∣cted; but if more of a red Matter, and a little after setling be rather sent forth by Urin, the removing of the vitious Colour from the Skin must be expected more slow, yet as good. ℞. Water of Grass, Wormwood, of each ℥ ii. Tin∣cture of Saffron ʒ iii. Sp. of Salt Armoniac 30 drops. Mineral Bezoard ʒ ss. Laudanum 4 Gr. Syr. of Fenel ℥ i. M.
CHAP. XLVII. Of the Motion of Choler to the Blood through the Liver Deprav'd. 1. ACcording to the Ingenious Observations of that Famous Malpighius about the true place of the Separation of Choler (which I approv'd of in Chap. 44.) I judg'd in Sect. 16, &c. of the same Chapter that Choler also was carri'd from the Glandu∣lous Kernels up towards the Heart with the Blood tend∣ing thither from the Liver. 2. I suppose this Motion of Choler towards the Heart is seldom deprav'd, that is, remov'd, or turnd, unless perhaps in the Disease Cholera; and why not so often therfore deadly? 3. This Rage or Violence downward of the Ʋniver∣sal, at least the most of Choler, if ever it have place, may be ascrib'd, at least in my conjecture, to the viti∣ous Effervescency of the Choleric parts of Blood raisd in its Vessels by Summer-Fruits, or other such-like hurt∣ful things taken, and carri'd to the Mass of Blood; be∣cause of which if not all, then sure the most parts will be hastned to the small Gut, and thence expeld with great force partly upward, partly downward without a convenient separation of it self in the glandulous Knobs of the Liver; unspeakable Anxieties of the Stomach and Gut concurring, by reason perhaps of a new Efferves∣cency also vitious and most troublesom made with the Juice of the Pancreas in the small Gut. 4. This perverse and partly turnd Motion of Choler cannot be Cur'd, unless the vitious Effervescency of
Choler both in the Mass of Blood, and in the small Gut be allayd, yielding to Opiats only, as I have said in Chap. 15. Sect. 34. CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Mixing of Choler with Blood in the Liver Deprav'd. 1. THe same Choler which is thought by me to be sent out of the Glandulous Knobs of the Li∣ver toward the Heart seems first to be mixt with the Blood returning to the Trunc of the Hollow Vein through its Branches implanted in the Liver, wherby the Vical Effervescency between the ascending and descending. Blood may so be more happily raisd in the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart. 2. This mixing of Choler with Blood seems to be deprav'd, 1. when it is more loose and less. 2. When it is more intire and greater. 3. When it is unequal. 3. I scarce think that there can be at any time just no mixing of Choler with Blood. 4. I. I judg that Choler is less and more loosly mixt, and so rather confus'd with the Blood, when it is very Spiritous, as in the Jaundice (of which we have a∣bundantly spoken in Chap. 46.) or very viscous, or earthy; whence it will be more difficultly, slowly, and so more imperfectly and less united to the Blood. 5. II. I judg that Choler is more, and closer mixt with the Blood, when it is more salt and sharp, and perhaps fatter: which seems to be confirmd by Burn∣ing Fevers.
6. III. Choler is Ʋnequally mixt with the Blood in the Liver, when it is not Homogeneal, but Heteroge∣neal, consisting of divers parts, some sharper, some duller; which I think has place in the beginning of the Jaundice, and other cases as yet not enough ob∣servd; for we get different Choler oft enough out of the same Bag. 7. Whilst we here describe Diseases as yet not e∣nough observd and searchd out by Practitioners, no wonder if their Signs be as yet uncertain, and seve∣ral other things therto belonging be even now ob∣scure, which somtime may be found and determind by the diligence of others: mean while we commu∣nicate those things, which we hope may serve the more happy Wits. 8. I. We gave you the Cure of Choler peccant in spiritousness encreasd in Chap. 46. Sect. 73, &c. 9. The Cure of Choler peccant in viscousness encreasd may be most happily instituted with a continu'd use of any more sharp Aromatics, and Volatil Salts. 10. Choler more Earthy and prone to be Lapidescent may be cur'd with the dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre, some drops of it being for some time oft in a day taken in Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor. 11. Choler too salt and sharp may be Cur'd, somtimes by Oily, somtimes by Viscous, somtimes by Spiritous, somtimes by Acid Things, but more mild: which seeing they differ much among themselvs, the Physician will need prudence, that, according to the diversity of the other Humors then being toge∣ther in the Body, the most convenient Medicins be selected and us'd. Whence it is no wonder, if all Physicians have not always the same success, al∣though they use the same Medicins, but not at the same time, as neither in the same Diseases, or
Causes: whose determination depends on a Practical Judgment rightly administring every Remedy for every Discase in its own time, place, and mea∣sure. 12. Choler peccant in Fatness encreasd may be Cur'd both by more temperd Acid; and by a more pure Lixi∣vial Salt of Wormwood, Carduus, &c. and a more earthy, Crabs-Eyes, Coral, Shels, &c. and so by Aromatic, but chiefly bitter Plants; and by them that are mixt of both, Salt of Tartar Vitriolated, Salt of Tartar remaining in the Retort after the Spirit of Salt Armoniac is drawn off, and getting an excellent Ver∣tue by the conjoind Spirit of that-Salt, and such-like. 13. III. If the Sick be urg'd in short Intervals by different Symptoms to be deduc'd from Choler and it only, and therfore it be very probably conje∣cturd, that Choler is Heterogeneal and Turgid with different parts, great endeavour must be made in an auxious and dubious Case; that, the parts of Choler which harm Man being most declind from their natu∣ral state, be correcied, and amended potently, and mildly; which is chiefly to be requir'd from the then most urgent Symptoms, and somtimes bringing sud∣den Death in its first, second, or third access. 14. I wish therfore, that as many as profess the Divine Name of a Physician, (that truly Devilish En∣vy, and therfore reproachful to Physicians, although in  manner proper to them being laid aside and supprest would bestow profitable pains in searching out, and proposing the true Causes of the more obscure Diss∣cuses daily occurring in Practice, for the commen good of Mortals! For I doubt not, but that then many things as yet unknown perhaps to any, of the Nature and Usefulness of Choler may by degrees come to light, God prospering liberal and ingenious
Spirits. I at least do here sacredly profess and testi∣fie before God, that I have for many years taken pains incredible to the most of Men, wherby I might at∣tain to the Nature, and Benefits of Choler in Man's Body, and most profit both the Sick, and then after∣wards mine Auditors according to those things, which are given me from Above: in which my Heart void and free from desiring any vain glory, and so quiet, and assured of a good event even now, rejoyceth in the midst of the many unjust Slanders, Contradictions and Calumnies of several. CHAP. XLIX. Of the Preparation of the Glandulous Lympha in the Conglobated Glandul's deprav'd. 1. EXperience confirms that Lymphatic Vessels come from every Conglobated, but not so from the Conglomerated Glandul's: Wherfore I think that Lympha is prepar'd in them, and that partly from the more Acid part of Blood severd in the mentiond Glan∣dul's from the rest of the Mass, partly from the Ani∣mal Spirits carri'd through the Nervs to Them, and mixt with it. 2. But although I think the more Acid part of Blood is the chief Matter of Lympha, yet do I not think that purely of it self, but diluted with Water servs for this use: which then I at length call Im∣pure, when moreover another part of Blood being mixt meets the same, and renders Lympha less Acid, or Viscous, and somtimes perhaps somwhat Salt. 3. For as the Serous part of Blood is naturally Insi∣pid,
yet in Belgia it is found somwhat Salt in the half perhaps of Men, at least as much as I could conceive by tasting the Blood let out of healthy or Sick People; so it should not seem a wonder to any, if in the same place also different Lympha be pre∣par'd: For an Acid Spirit is very hardly severd from a Lixivial Fixt, but more easily from a Volatil Salt; such a Volatil Salt I indeed incline, to believe is con∣taind in the laudable serous part of Blood out of lau∣dable Choler: In which same serous part of Blood, I suppose an Acid Spirit occurs to afford Matter for Lympha. 4. As therfore the laudable serous part of Blood may be in the Body, or the same may be variously chang'd by External Causes, Air, Food, &c. or In∣ternal, as, the Motion of the Mind, or Body, Watch∣ings, &c. so also Lympha may be bred out of it somtimes more Sowr, somtimes a little Salt, somtimes more Diluted, and more Watry, somtimes more Vis∣cous, &c. 5. As again the Animal Spirits may be Plenteous, o Few; Pure, or Impure in the Body; and Their Mo∣tion to the Conglobated Glandul's may be Free, or Hin∣dred; so Lympha may thus far be bred not a little different. 6. As lastly the Conglobated Glandul's themselvs may occur in the Body either Whole, or several ways ill-affecied; even so by the fault of them the Separa∣tion both of an Acid Spirit from the Blood, or from its Serous part, and the Mixing of the same with the Volatil and Animal Spirit may be divers. 7. Whence any may see how many ways various kinds of Lympha Vitiated may arise, all which to prosecute and reckon in order in a new Matter would be tedious, and perhaps impossible.
8. Let it therfore suffice for the present that we noted the Fountains of Lympha Vitiated, and han∣dle the kinds observd in practice, and to have designd the manner of Curing them. 9. The Preparation therfore of Glandulous Lym∣pha may be Deprav'd, 1. When it is bred more Sparing. 2. When more Plenteous. 3. When several ways bred with a vitiated quality, more or less Sowr then is naturally, and somtimes a little Salt, or Glutinous, and if any more Depravations of Lympha shall be observd at any time. 10. Seeing that all Lympha is carri'd through its proper Vessels, therfore call'd Lymphatic, to wit, its Thoracic Trunc so call'd to the Descending Blood, and with it to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, wherby it may there stir up a Vital Effervescency with the Blood Ascending, and died with Choler, I even now suppose that Lympha is requir'd to be in a notable quantity and somwhat sowr. 11. This Quantity of Lympha ought to answer in due proportion to its opposite, wherby a laudable Effervescency may arise; whence if the quantity of Lympha be greater, Choler will be opprest, and a less and weak Effervescency will arise, and the Pulse will thus far be felt less; but if otherwise the quantity of Lympha be less, Choler will then be more essicacious, and the Effervescency of Blood greater, and the Pulse will thus far be felt greater. 12. That which the greater natural quantity of Lympha doth, the same doth its encreasd Acidity more potently effect; as its diminisht Acidity doth the contrary. 13. Seeing these things are of great use in the pra∣ctice of Physic, they are worthy to be attentivly weighd by all Physicians, and call'd into practical
use. For so by little and little many things in the Art as yet most obscure and confus'd may be illustra∣ted, and most commodiously explaind: to bestow which benefit on their Friends, Selvs, and Relations, I heartily exhort all Physicians of excelling Wit and Judgment. 14. Good God! how oft are the most Learned, and Experienc'd Physicians puzled when a true Rea∣son is to be rendred of a little, and weak Pulse so oft observd unexpectedly in the Sick! how oft they fly to Nature opprest, or deficient, or to occult quali∣ties, or malignity, wherby open Ignorance is hid among those that are ignorant of the Matter! From which darkness of hurtful Ignorance that at length a Health-giving Light should arise to all Men, I have not shund according to my power to take huge and envi'd pains even in this Business; which forreign and succeding Physicians, will own, and mention more then my Contemporaries for Reasons enough known to their Consciences, and not unknown to the Pru∣dent. 15. If a more sparing, or plenteous, more or less acid Lympha doth not a little change the vital Effer∣vescency of Blood, no small change likewise is to be expected from the same when a little Salt, or Vis∣cous; for thus far it may be hindred, whence a nota∣ble change may happen in the Pulse, and the Life be oft in danger. 16. The breeding of more sparing Lympha may pro∣cede especially from a more sparing use of more Liquid and somwhat Sowr Food, and Sauces, from which without doubt Lympha has its rising. 17. The Generation of more plenteous Lympha may be ascrib'd to a more plenteous use of them. 18. The Preparation of more sowr Lympha is to
be requir'd from a frequent and oft using of sowr Sau∣ces, or Medicins, yea Food. For if Lympha accord∣ing to Nature be somwhat sowr, if the Juice of the Pancreas according to Nature be somwhat sowr, each Humor is necessary and useful to an happy Life, like as the consuming of each daily, needs to be repair'd, which is to be done by Food; therfore Food also con∣taining in it Sowr Particles, and thus far more or less Acid should be requir'd; let none expect all Aci∣dity from Sauces, or Medicins. 19. Little Animal Spirit found either in the whole Body, or at least carri'd to the Conglobated Glandul's, and therfore less tempering Lympha, and leaving it more Acid may be a cause why Lympha is more Acid. 20. The breeding of Lympha less Acid may be ex∣pected from the seldom, and sparing use of sowr Food, Sauces, and Medicins: as also by the Animal Spirits abounding in the Universal Body, at least abundantly driven forward to the Conglobated Glandul's, and there making the Lympha more mild, and less acid. 21. Lympha may be bred somwhat Salt by a more frequent, and over-use of Salt Food, or seasond with Salt, or Pickle, or dri'd in the Smoak, as also of such-like Sauces; with which many of the Dutch too much indulge themselvs, being more negligent of laudable Health. Which Evil they who make a long Voyage by Sea cannot shun, being forc'd to use Flesh, and such-like seasond with Salt. 22. The extreme parts of Living Creatures, to wit, their Heads, and Feet, and the most of Sea-Fish, if they be oft and much us'd breed Lympha more Viscous; as also any Food devourd in too great quantity, and therfore not enough fermented in the Stomach, yea the rather therfore having an hurtful toughness, and
making such-like Chyle, and hence Blood, and anon the other Humors in like manner such. 23. If any other Depravations of Lympha be at any time observd, their Causes also may without great difficulty be sought out both from Food, and from the other Non-Natural Things more or less pec∣cant. Of which those things which we have oft mentiond before, may and also ought to be trans∣ferd hither, wherby this Doctrine may become more evident. 24. Seeing it is not yet enough known what Con∣stitution of the Conglobated Glandul's is fitted to breed laudable Lympha; I have nothing now to add of its Depravations. 25. The Figure of Pores undetermind and yet ve∣ry pleasing to its Authors, doth not satisfie my Mind desirous of Truth, not only not prov'd by forcible Reason, but not so much as ever made probable by any by manifest Experience. For that which is said by many of solid or dry things sent through a Sive having Holes of a different shape, doth nothing urge as to liquid and moist things; but neither is it true as to solid Corpuscles, which are carri'd equally through round Holes, if they be Spherical, or Cylindrical, or of any other oblong and round Form; that I say not now any Corpuscles, of whatsoever Figure they be, may pass through the Holes of any Figure, when they are less then them. But take or say for granted ac∣cording to pleasure I know not what Figures of Pores likewise feignd, because determind by none in the Parts or Bowels of our Body, through which Fi∣gures according to all the parts of Blood, and Parti∣cles of the Parts of it fluid, and continually flowing through insensible little Arteries, and Veins some Particles may pass through, more may be stopt in the
Passage, whether this be not to obtrude new Chi∣maeras, instead of things sought out, to be believ'd by credulous Men, let Judicious and Ingenious Men judg. 26. Wherfore they who in things obscure and hid from the External Senses, do explain the changes made in our Body according to Chymical Operations evident to the Senses, although even so they remove not all Difficulties seem to me, whom I therfore fol∣low, to Philosophize more aptly, and to the purpose in Natural Things: yet do they bring more Light to our Darkness, then the others, who, however they use sensible Similitudes, yet do not use such, as do enough square with those things, which come to pass in our Body. 27. And that I may candidly speak, what I think and require in their Opinions they bind up Natural Changes into too strait Bounds, whilst they adher to Affections of Qualities alone, not enough weighing that the Affections of Qualities are far more and much different from the former, according to which the mentiond changes come to pass in Natural Things. Whose Nature, Essence and Diversity, yea manifold manner of acting of the Qualities, although it be very hard to attain to with the Senses or Mind, and to explain clearly, and distinctly with other things, yet should not Ingenious Persons despair of the good success, but rather try with importunat La∣bour this Matter as yet hid in many things, wherby true Glory may be given to the Inventor, and the Public Good be promoted. 28. Would God give me more leasure then I have hitherto had, I my self would try my Fortune now in mine elder years, not doubting, but that I should detect and observ many things by this both great and
pleasant Labour, which would prepare and make a more easie way for others proceding farther. For I now have some things, which for want of leisure I cannot commit to Paper, and communicate them to my Neighbour. But these and many other things depend on Providence, and Divine Aid, without which we cannot, nor do perform any thing lauda∣ble. 29. And although, to return to my Matter, we have not as yet obtaind the exact Constitution of the Conglobated Glanduls, yet let us add a little of their Depravations, because of which the breeding of Lym∣pha is oft, and not a little deprav'd. At least we in∣tend here to mention a Tumor, and Hardness as also Inflammation of them manifest to sense, and oft to∣gether concurring. 30. A Tumor, or encreas'd Bigness, and Hardness, and Inflammation of these Glandul's appear to Sense even in Creatures alive, (for after Death they may also be noted lying hid) both in the Jaws, call'd the Tonsils, and in several parts of the Neck, or in other places in no wise coverd with much Fat, or Flesh, where their noted Depravations are known somtimes by Sight, always by Touching, or by the Sense of Heat. 31. A Tumor of the Glandul's is to be distinguisht from their Hardness, seeing that there may be, yea there is oft a Tumor without Hardness, and Hard∣ness without a Tumor: although Hardness is ofter joind to a Tumor. 32. The Conglobated Glandul's swell, both when they are nourisht, and encreasd more plenteously in the best state, and when they heap together the Blood continually sliding thither beside Nature into their Substance: which is the easier disperst through it
softer and more flaccid, then through the Substance of more firm and solid Flesh. 33. Blood is collected beside Nature in the Con∣globated Glandul's because of its Impediment put to the reflux, and chiefly an Obstruction in the Capillar Veins, or Chanels of the Arteries, and interpos'd Veins, more frequently happening by Phlegm grow∣ing together, more seldom by Blood coagulated. 34. For as oft as all the Humors and chiefly Phlegm, together with the Blood in the Body become more loosend and fluid, yea are more abundantly every way either by the Air hot both naturally, and by Art; or by Food, or Sauces either Spiritous, or Aromatical, or abounding with a Volatil Salt; or by the Motion of Body, or Mind, especially vehe∣ment Anger; or by Watchings; so oft coldness of Air, or Water coming upon them, or Food, Sauces, or Medicins actually cold being us'd, or otherwise endued with a coagulating force, or the Body being compos'd to much rest, or an extreme Sorrow, or panic Fear unexpectedly oppressing Men as both Phlegm, and Blood is wont to be Coagulated in the other parts, so in the Conglobated Glandul's; whence they being made unfit for motion do stick in the Ves∣sels, or Chanels between, and stop the Blood flow∣ing thither, that it cannot go farther through the ways hindred, which being disperst through the next substance of the Glandul's distends the same into a greater bigness, that is, a Tumor. 35. The same humor if more nearly fastned to the substance of the Glandul's, or becomes more solid and compact after the discussion of its more fluid and soft parts, breeds an Hardness in the Glandul's. 36. The nam'd Blood when stopt in its Vessels and Passages, or effus'd out of the same into the sub∣stance
of the Glandul's, breeds an Inflammation fre∣quent enough, and apparent in the Tonsils. 37. As oft as the Conglobated Glandul's observa∣ble about the Plexus Choroeides, in the side-Ventricles of the Brain and elswhere are ill-affected, so oft a Stoppage in the Head uses to follow; which urging the Lympha that is bred becoms sowrish-Salt, and such is tasted in a Coryza. 38. Whence we may probably conclude, what way soever the noted Glandul's are then hurt, that Lympha declines from its natural State and Quality, and is bred sowrish-Salt: seeing that their internal Superficies and Skin of the Face corroded by it flow∣ing down, not only through the Nostrils, but being carri'd or distilling every way within the Body, som∣times lighter, somtimes more grievous Pains are bred, to wit, as its Depravation is lighter, or more grievous. 39. These Pains as they are commonly ascrib'd to Catarrhs not enough explaind, so they are more truly deduc'd from Lympha deprav'd, as has been said, ef∣fus'd out of its Vessels, and finding or making a way for it self by its Acrimony into the adjacent, yea som∣times remote parts. 40. From the same Lympha deprav'd and more sharp sliding down through the Jaws into the sharp Artery of the Lungs, and after an Excoriation by degrees breeding an Ulcer, a Tisic most commonly arises destructive to the most, as being commonly neglected of all in its beginning, when it is easily Cur'd. 41. I do not now remember any other evident De∣pravations of the Conglobated Glandul's, to which Lympha vitiated may be ascrib'd a cause; otherwise,
if they be observd by me, God willing, I intend to add them. 42. As for the Cure of the noted Depravations of Lympha; if 1. Lympha be bred more Sparing in the Body, it may be encreasd with a more large use of somwhat-Sowr Food and Sauces. To this end Ver∣juice, Vinegar, Juice of Citron, of Oranges, &c. may be us'd in Sauces. Among more grateful Fruits Cheries both sweetish-sowr, and more sowr Curran∣berries, Barberries, &c. Among Plants Sorrel, Wood∣sorrel, &c. Among Drinks Wine of the Meuse, or any other somwhat sowr, yet of good age. For new Wines should be shund, as also very tart Beer, seeing that Gripes are raisd by them. Among the more Physical things, Spirit of Salt, and of Nitre, each dulcifi'd are convenient, being us'd with ordi∣nary Drink. 43. If 2. on the contrary Lympha be bred more Plenteous in the Body, the Use of somwhat-sowr Food, and Sauces must be diminishd, and in their stead somtimes more Spiritous, somtimes more Wa∣try, somtimes more Aromatical Food, and Sauces and abounding with a Volatil Salt must be us'd as the Matter requires, that is, according to the singular diversity of Constitutions and Functions. 44. If 3. Lympha be bred more Sowr in the Con∣globated Glandul's, its exceding Sowrness should be lessend and temperd rather, yea the Generation of it more Temperd should be procur'd chiefly by the Use of Volatil Salts prepar'd in a liquid Form, and taken together with the other Food daily in a mean quan∣tity. 45. More Volatil Salts, both Single, and Com∣pounded, may be us'd to this end according as the Industry and Felicity of Any shall be greater or less.
For the mentiond Salts differ very much among themselvs both by reason of their Matter, and also manifold Preparation. 46. If any want the convenience of preparing Vo∣latil Salts themselvs, and so of inquiring into more grateful and efficacious Salts, let them use the Spirit of Salt Armoniac either pure, or mixt with other things, which the Sick may take to more, or fewer drops in Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor at Din∣ner and Supper-time, and may continue for some time in the daily use of the same, till the ill Effects of more Sowr Lympha be wholly remov'd, and over∣comd. 47. If the Sick had rather use his ordinary Drink more pure, and the Volatil Salt rather in a Physical Mixture: the next Form or one like it may be pre∣scrib'd for him, and let him take a Spoonful of this Mixture oft in a day, even soon before or after Meat taken in. ℞. Mint, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus ℥ 1. Sp. of Salt Armoniac 30 drops. Syr. of Mint ℥ i. M. 48. If 4. Lympha be bred less sowr, its acidity may be encreasd by Sauces, or Medicins that have a notable acidity, and us'd in a large plenty, as, more sharp Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, and Sowr Pom∣granats; the Spirit of Salt, Vitriol, and of Nitre. Oil of Sulphur prepar'd by a Glass Bell, &c. any of which may be added to ordinary Drink, or any Ju∣lap, or Broths also, to a grateful acidity for the Sick, and be us'd daily so long, till signs appear of Sowr∣ness restor'd to Lympha. 49. And because Fools, while they shun one Vice, run into its contrary, and an abuse may easily hap∣pen in the over-use of Acids, whither most Men are
wont to incline, they are diligently to be admonishd, least they persevere too long in using Sowr Spirits, and so more hurt, then profit themselvs. 50. When the Acidity of Lympha is diminisht and broken by the over-use of Spiritous Things, then their use is to be diminisht by degrees, wherby the Acidity of Lympha will become more pure, and sharper. 51. If 5. Lympha be somwhat Salt; abstain from the daily use of Salt, or salted Food; which is to be tri'd by little and little, seeing that the most who are addicted to salted Meat are very hardly remov'd from their purpose, and evil Custom, which is as a Law. 52. If 6. Lympha be bred more Viscous, and ther∣fore more slow, beware of much using both Fishes, especially Sea-fish, and the Heads, and Feet of Land-Creatures: yea also among Sauces any Aromatics, and abounding with a Volatil Salt are to be daily us'd, such as are the most Antiscorbutics, Scurvy-grass, Mustard, both sorts of Radishes, both Garden and Water-Cresses, &c. 53. If 7. the Conglobated Glandul's be Vitiated by the Errors in Diet mentiond in Sect. 29, &c. and Lympha be bred sowrish-Salt as is said in Sect. 37. the harm of the Glandul's, as well as of Lympha is to be amended. 54. A Tumor of the Glandul's, and Hardness pro∣ceding from Phlegm coagulated in its ways may be Cur'd by cutting and attenuating Medicins, and espe∣cially such as also move a Sweat, wherby that may be driven forth, which pierc'd from without through the Pores of the Skin, and other openings into the inward parts of the Body, or has affinity with it. To which end the following Mixture may conduce oft taken by Spoonfuls, the Body, when the Sick
lies down, being coverd to promote a Sweat mean∣ly. ℞. Fumitory, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ i. ss. Simple Treacle-Water ʒ vi. Spirit of Salt Armoniac 20 drops. Mineral Bezoard ʒ ss. Or Diaphoretis Antimony ʒ i. Syr. of Carduus ℥ i. M. 55. By such a Remedy Phlegm coagulated in the Glandul's is both loosend again, and being made loose and movable, is remov'd from the place, in which it sticks beside Nature, yea is oft reduc'd again into its Vessels, and anon either wholly amended, and mixt with the Blood, or, when it cannot be amended, on∣ly confus'd with the Blood, and somtimes sent forth through the Pores of the Body with a Sweat, som∣times through the Vessels of the Kidneys, and Passage of the Yard with the Urin, somtimes through the Guts with the Excrements, and cease to do harm. 56. To the same purpose at least in part a Fuming with Carabe, Mastich and such-like may conduce when the Glandul's of the Head are ill-affected, be∣ing receivd in at the Nostrils and open Mouth with the Air inspir'd, and piercing to the inward parts; and not only loosening the Phlegmatic Humor stick∣ing in them, but reducing the Glandul's into their former state, and fencing and corroborating them a∣gainst the new Injuries of the Air. 57. By the same Fuming receivd on Cloaths the Su∣perficial Glandul's may be wholly restor'd by a mild rubbing of the place: To which end the Unguent Martiatum, and that call'd the Compound Ointment of Marsh-Mallows anointed on the part a fected may also be us'd. 58. If the Glandul's, and in special the Tonsils are troubled with an Inflammation beside their Tumor and Hardness, both the Phlegmatic Humor obstru∣cting,
and Blood either standing still in its Vessels, or effus'd into the substance of the Glandul's, and kindled, is to be corrected with Emollient and cutting mild Gargarisms, in no wise Astringent, but us'd warm: with which if it cannot be hindred, its Suppuration is to be promoted by Emol∣lients, especially and mildly cutting Aromatics, and hence the opening of the Aposteme, and so effusion of Matter, and hence cleansing and consolidation of the Ulcer: of which see more in Chap. 40. Sect. 50, &c. 59. Let this following be a Form of an Emollient and mildly cutting Gargarism. ℞. The Roots of Smallage, Marsh-Mallows, of each ʒ i. the Leavs of Mallows M. i. Raisins of the Sun ston'd ℥ ii. Boil them in Barley-Water, dis∣solving inlb i. of what is straind Syr. of Violets, of the Five Roots, of each ℥ ss. M. to be a Gar∣garism. 60. Instead also of a Gargarism the exprest Juice of Turneps roasted, or boild in a little Water may be us'd. 61. The Inflammation being Cur'd, if the Sick be not more negligent of themselvs, the Substance and Constitution of the Glandul's before harmd is to be repair'd by a Gargarism prepar'd of somwhat bind∣ing and less sharp Aromatics, us'd hot somtimes in a day. For Example take this following Form. ℞. Bistort, Masterwort-Roots, of each ʒ ii. the Leavs of Speedwel M. i. of Sage, Red-Rose-Flowers, of each M. ss. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding tolb i. of what is straind Honey of Roses ℥ i. M. for a Gargarism.
62. The other Errors in Diet are to be shund, or, if they be inevitable amended by ways oft mentiond before. CHAP. L. Of the Motion of the Glandulous Lmypha through the Lymphatic Vessels and Passage of the Thorax to the left Jugular, or Axillar Vein deprav'd: As also of the Dropsie of the Brest. 1. I Distinguish the Glandulous Lympha chiefly from that, which I suspect arises out of the Animal Spirits carried and remaining from the Muscles, nd from other parts; with which it being con∣fus'd goes forward through the same Lymphatic Ves∣sels to the Passage Common to Lympha, and Chyle, and through the Universal Thorax placed at the Spine of the Back, and therfore call'd Thoracic, till at length all be unloaden into the left Jugular, or Ax∣illar Vein, where being joind to the Blood, it de∣scends with it through the upper Hollow Vein to the Right Ventricle of the Heart. 2. This natural Motion of Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels, and Thoracic Passage may be de∣prav'd, 1. When it is wholly, or at least after a cer∣tain manner hindred. 2. When Lympha moves in another way, and to another place then towards the mentiond-Veins. 3. If the Motion of Lympha through the Thoracic Pas∣sage be at any time wholly hindred, I judg the Sick can∣not live long after it.
4. The Motion of Lympha through more, or few∣er Lymphatic Vesseis may be wholly hindred chiefly because of their Obstruction. 5. This Obstruction may procede from Glutinous Phlegm carri'd together with Lympha through the Vessels of the same, and growing together and Coa∣gulated in them, and therfore sticking in them, and anon filling them up. 6. Glutinous Phlegm is wont to be carri'd through the Lymphatic Vessels, as oft as it especially that was in the small Gut is loosend or dissolvd by any kind of the heat of Air, or a more vehement Motion of Body, or Spiritous, or Watry Drink chiefly warm, or hot, plenteously swill'd, being 1st of all confus'd with the Blood through the Lacteal Veins, and anon the Tho∣racic Passage, and afterward driven forward toge∣ther with it every way, therfore also to the Conglo∣bated Glandul's, and hence to the Lymphatic Ves∣sels. 7. The same Phlegm is wont to be Coagulated in the Lymphatic Vessels more frequently by External Cold, Air, Rain, Water, or Snow also any way affecting the Superficies of the Body with troublesom Cold, and together Coagulating any fluid thing easily Coa∣gulable in it in any place and forcing it to grow to∣gether. 8. I dare not assert nor deny whether or no as Blood so Phlegm doth Coagulate by a great and un∣expected Sorrow or Terror; although it seems less probable to me. 9. The Motion of Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels is hindred after a certain manner; both, when it is more Glutinous, and therfore more slow and un∣fit for motion, and, when those Vessels are in part prest, or straitned any other way.
10. As oft as Lympha stands still in its Obstructed Vessels and being more, and more gatherd distends them and at length bursts them, so oft the same is pourd out into the next Places, or Cavities near them, and then Lympha is mov'd another way and to another place then it ought. 11. By this Effusion of Lympha through its Vessels distributed in the habit of the Body and obstructed, then burst into the next parts, several Pains and also Tumors are bred, commonly ascrib'd to Catarrhs: Amongst which they are not the least, which possess the upper part of the arm to the very shoulder, and somtimes also afflict the Neck; to which also they are to be referd, that resemble the Sciatica which remaining in the Buttocks hinder walking. 12. Some of these pains endure the parts affected to be coverd with several Cloaths, and be warmd by them; others are imbitterd by cloaths: whence they are more difficulty Cur'd, then the former. 13. They commonly arise from External Cold piercing into those parts first warm till they Sweat and oft laid bare in sleep, and producing various Pains, yielding only to divers Medicins according to the diversity of Lympha after Phleam is Coagulated in the Vessels of Lympha, and an Obstruction, anon a Bursting made in them. 14. For the Lympha which is more Sowr breeds pains more corroding, which may be allaid by Aro∣matic Oils and Ointments; but that which is more Salt like pickle, stirs up pains yielding to oils and ointments less aromatical, such as is the ointment of Poplars. 15. By this effusion of Lympha out of the lateral Lymphatic Vessels obstructed, and anon burst, and piercing into the cavity of the Brest through the
membrane that covers the ribs I judg the Dropsy of the Brest arises most commonly, if not always. 16. An Obstruction of the Lymphatic Vessels in the more inward parts of the Brest may be prevented, by bewaring 1. that the body do not wax too hot; and if this cannot be shund, 2. that the Brest being made bare it do not soon cool, and consequently Phlegm grow not together nor coagulate being dissolvd and every way diffus'd potently in several, and therfore in the Lymphatic Vessels. 17. The same Obstruction may be Cur'd, if as soon as may be, when its mentiond Causes have had place, and there is danger, least the noted evil be bred, an attenuating and cutting Medicin be taken together and at once, or at times, such as Sundry Treacle Waters made with the spirit of wine espe∣cially, as also other Aromatics do afford; Decocti∣ons prepar'd of the woods Guajac, Juniper, Sassafras &c, Of the Roots of Masterwort, China, Salsapa∣rilla, butter-bur, &c. Of the Leavs of Scordium, Carduus benedictus, Carduus Mariae, Scabious, Dan∣deleon, &c. Of the Flowers of red Poppies, Elder, Chamomile, &c. Of the Berries of Juniper, Bays, Elder, &c. Of the Seeds of Milet, Carduus, &c. Volatil Salts of Amber, Harts-Horn, &c. Dia∣phoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoard, Crabs Eyes, &c. For example let the following Mixture be us'd, as has bin oft said, to one or more Spoonfuls, till a Sweat break forth. ℞. Fumitorie, Dandeleon Waters, of each ℥ ii. Sim∣ple Treacle Water, or Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae ℥ i. Spir of Salt Armoniac XXX. drops. Lauda∣num iii. grains. Diaphoretic Antimonie ʒ ss. Syr. of Carduus ℥ i. M.
18. If the Form of a Decoction please any bet∣ter, let him use this following oft to ℥ iii or iv, and being well coverd, let him compose himself to sleep. ℞. Salsaparilla, Smallage-Roots, of each ℥ i. the Shavings of Guajac, and Juniper-Wood, of each ℥ i. ss. the Leavs of Carduus Mariae, Scabious, Scordium, of each M. i. Elder-Flowers M ss. Milet-Seeds ℥ ii. Boil them according to Art in pure Water, adding tolb iii. of what is straind Syr. of Red Poppies ℥ iv. M. 19. If the season of the year be cold, or the Sick abound with much Phlegm, ℥ ii. of Aqua Vitae Mat∣thioli, or any other Aromatic Water may be commo∣diously added to the former Decoction, wherby it may serve for more Indications. 20. The viscousness and toughness of Phlegm, and hence of Lympha may be Corrected by the same alrea∣dy propos'd Medicins, to be taken but in a less quan∣tity, and more seldom even when the noted Harm seems overcomd: when there will not be need to urge a Sweat, but to amend Phlegm, and Lympha gradually only by altering them. 21. The Lymphatic Vessels burst, after that they are freed from the noted Obstruction by Medicins fore∣mentiond, will easily be consolidated, as we see it happens in the Vessels of Blood; seeing that the pro∣per Food of any part is indu'd with a faculty of con∣glutinating being more or less clammy or glutinous. 22. Pains arising in the Lims, and especially the upper part of the Arm, and most troublesom in the Night, after that the abundance of a Serous Humor, if there be any, is diminisht with Hydragogues, and Sudorifics, they may be remov'd by anointing the part grievd with the following Ointment.
℞. The Ointment call'd Martiatum, Oil of Worms, of each ℥ ss. Oil of Amber ℈ i. M. 23. If Pains be encreasd by this Ointment or by Cloaths only, use this following. ℞. The Ointment of Poplars, Nerv Ointment, of each ʒ ii. Oil of White-Lilies ʒ iii. M. 24. If the same Pains affect the Hip, and chiefly so possess the lower part of the Back-bone, that the Body can scarce be stretcht out and move, the Balsam of Sulphur made with the Oil of Turpentine will be the best, if the part affected be anointed with a few drops of it, wherby I have oft cur'd miserable Per∣sons in one Night. 25. The Dropsie of the Brest very difficult to be known, though very frequent in these places, may be Cur'd most safely, (after an opening and consolida∣tion premis'd of the Lymphatic Vessels obstructed, that it may not longer be cherisht) a Sweat being con∣tinu'd, as well by the mentiond Medicins as by a dry Stove, and so the Waters standing beside Nature in the Brest, being by degrees empti'd through the Pores of the Body: wherby if nothing be effected, and it be certain enough that there is a Dropsie of the Brest, I see not, why it may not be lawful to institute an harmless Paracenthesis by an hollow Silver Needle in the Brest; for by such a small Wound there is no danger to the Sick.
CHAP. LI. Of the Preparation of Spittle, as Deprav'd well in the Upper as lower Conglomerated Glandul's of the Jaws. 1. AS Lympha in all the Conglobated Glandul's, so a peculiar Liquor is bred in all the Conglo∣merated Glandul's; which is not carri'd into Passages common to all, but peculiar to every one, and those ending in Cavities appointed to every one of them. 2. Two Passages call'd Salival or Salivarie from Spittle carri'd through them, empty themselvs dou∣ble on both sides into the Mouth, and arising from the upper, as well as lower Conglomerated Glandul's of the Jaws: that I mention not the infinite little Chan∣nels risen from such-like Glandul's and also open into the Mouth, and pouring out the Liquor they contain, first observd at least as far as I know by the most dili∣gent and accurat Anatomist Nicolaus Stenonius. 3. I judg all Spittle procedes partly from that part of Blood which is more glutinous then which servs the Lympha through the Arteries, partly from the Animal Spirits carri'd through the Nervs to the mentiond Conglomerated Glandul's. 4. I judg this Breeding of Spittle naturally Insipid and easie to be mixt with any Liquor is deprav d; 1. When it is more Sparing. 2. When it is bred more Plenteous. 3. When it is prepar'd many ways peccant in sensible qualities. 5. Spittle is bred more Sparing, then it ought, 1. by
defect of its Matter, as oft as it is not suppli'd by con∣venient Food, such as Broths made of the Flesh of Brutes, Milk, more thick Drink, stronger Beer, Cla∣ret Wine, &c. seem to be the chief: or it is carri'd another way, whether it remain within the Body in a various Dropsie, or be effus'd without the Body in a Loosness, or an over-excretion of Urin, or Sweat. 6. 2. By the fault of its Ways, through which the Matter requir'd is carri'd to the said Glandul's, the greater Arteries, and somtimes also Nervs being cut asunder, obstructed, or prest; whence some Defect of Spittle at least must happen. 7. 3. By the Fault of the Glandul's themselvs, when they are unfit to strein through, or admit the mentiond-Matter, or to change it and turn it into Spittle. Although it is not yet well known, how those Glandul's are affected and constituted according to Nature to do this Office. 8. On the contrary Spittle is bred somtimes more plenteous, (as it is known to befal certain Melancho∣lic and Spitting Persons thence so call'd, and to some Sick People troubled with a voluntary Spitting, and that more abundant or sparing); 1. By reason of the abundance of Salivary Matter, somtimes from the large use of more Liquid Food, especially Wine a little sowr; somtimes from a more sparing excretion of Urin, or a wonted Sweat. 9. 2. By reason of the largness or multitude of ways carrying the Blood, and Animal Spirits to the Salivarie Glandul's; because of which more Matter to be chang'd into Spittle is carri'd to the said Glan∣dul's. 10. 3. By reason of the harm of the Glandul's themselvs that make Spittle, because of which more of the Matter of Spittle, then ought, is taken out of
the Blood, and chang'd into Spittle; although hi∣therto I cannot determin of what kind that harm is or may be. 11. That Spittle is somtimes bred vitious in the sensible Qualities, as well proper, as (excepting Quantity, of which we have already spoken) com∣mon, its Savour somtimes Salt, somtimes Sowr, som∣times fulsomly Sweet, somtimes Bitter, if that it do not procede from Choler rising up to the Mouth doth prove: Its greater or less Glutinousness or Watriness somtimes argues the same, and if there be any other Changes observd at any time, or shall be hereafter ob∣servd in its Colour, Odour, Savour, Heat, Cold, or such-like Qualities. 12. The Salt Taste of Spittle procedes without doubt from a Salt Serous Humor in the Blood, the harm of the Salivarie Glandul's perhaps also concurring, because of which they are less apt to remove from them, or to overcome that saltness of the Serous Hu∣mor. 13. So the sowr Taste of Spittle is to be referd to the exceding plenty of an Acid Humor both in the Body, and Blood; and perhaps moreover to some Ʋniversal, or at least Particular Defect of the Animal Spirits in the Salivarie Glandul's. 14. The Tast of Spittle fulsomly Sweet and being equal to, or exceding the Sugar of Lead is to be sought in such a like Serous Humor whencesoever pro∣ceding. For it is very difficult to explain exactly all the Changes of the Humors happening in our Body according to their almost innumerable Qualities, see∣ing we commonly know not what, or what kind of Food the Sick have us'd, and chiefly from what, or what kind of things the Savours, Odours, Colours, and other Qualities of our Humors are so wonder∣fully
alterd; and that indeed, at least in my Judg∣ment, by reason of experimental (if I may so say) Chymistry neglected by the most, and Prejudices ac∣counted of the most instead of Experiments, and Things taken for granted and imprudently, shall I not say impudently obtruded by others. 15. The bitter Taste of Spittle arises either from Choler belcht up, and for some time leaving its Re∣licks in the Mouth, and therfore for some time in∣fecting all the Spittle; or, when such a belching of Choler has not place, perhaps from the same Choler being more in the Serous part of Blood, and mixt to the Matter of Spittle in the Salivarie Glandul's: however I doubt much of this latter manner, seeing that I scarce ever observd the Serous part of Blood bitter. 16. More Glutinous Spittle arises from Blood a∣bounding with much Phlegm also glutinous; as more Watry and Fluid Spittle from defect of the same. 17. A more sparing Generation of Spittle to be a∣scrib'd; 1. To the defect of fit Matter, and convenient Food, may be Cur'd by a more liberal Use of the same: as the Dropsie being Cur'd as oft as its Matter of nou∣rishment is spent or turnd another away; as also the Loosness being Cur'd, when its Matter is evacuated through it; lastly, an over-efflux of Urin or Sweat being remov'd, when it happens by the fault of it. The Cure of these Diseases shall be set down els∣where, and that in their proper place. 18. 2. The Arteries or Nervs cut asunder cannot be Cur'd, and the harm thence proceding is not except slowly at least in part repaird; in as much as the other Arteries and Nervs tending to the same parts are com∣monly by degrees encreasd, and so they at length re∣pair the loss due to those that are cut in two.
19. We have spoken and explaind how an Ob∣struction and Compression of those Vessels ought and may be Cur'd. 20. 3. When we know of what kind the Harm of the Glandul's is, by reason of which Spittle is bred more sparing, a fit Remedy for it will not be very hard to be found out: although, whilst both are as yet unknown, a prudent Physician may chiefly use such Medicins outwardly, as are commonly call'd Strengthners, which are the most of Aromatics: For Example; the Ointment Martiatum, wherewith the Region of each Jaw may be anointed, in which the Salivarie Glandul's are plac'd; whereby if the Sick receive benefit, that Observation may be noted; and at another time in another or the same Sick Per∣son, if he cannot bear fat things, a Fomentation may be prepar'd of Aromatic Plants, adding somtimes the Spirit of Wine, and somtimes an excellentI my self have oft experiencd this to admira∣tion. Volatil Salt; by the help of which also if the Sick get benefit, thus far the Observation may be useful both in curing others, and in searching out the natural Constitution and Harm of the Glandul's. So by de∣grees Man's Knowledg may be enlarg'd, and the Art of Physic daily perfected, not to be attaind unless with strenuous and iterated Labour. 21. A more plenteous breeding of Spittle, may be Cur'd, 1. By diminishing its Matter, and daily ab∣staining a little from more Liquid Food; and by eva∣cuating it by Stool, or with Ʋrin or Sweats. 22. Among Purgers Phlegmagogues and Hydra∣gogues mixt together, and often taken in a small quan∣tity may conduce. For Example, let these following Pills be us'd twice or once at least in a week.
℞. Pills of Mastich ʒ i. Rosin of Jalap ℈ i. Oil of Amber iii. drops. M. to be xx guilded Pills. Let the Sick take three, or four, at Bed-time, that they may purge him twice or thrice at most. 23. Among Diuretics and Sudorisics Decoctions less ingrateful may be proper to be happily us'd som∣times in a day, or instead of Ordinary Drink. For Example; ℞. The Roots of China slic'd, of Smallage, of each ℥ i. the Shavings of Juniper, or Guajac-Wood ℥ ii. of Sassafras-Wood ʒ ii. Raisins of the Sun ston'd ℥ iv. Boil them in pure Water according to Art dissolving in ℥ xxx. of what is straind, Syr. of the Five Roots ℥ ii. Sp. of Salt Armoniac xxx drops. Cinamon-Water ℥ i. M. 24. If any desire to evacuate Phlegm, and the Serous Humor by the same Medicin more ways, he may once or twice in a week dissolv ʒ ii, or ʒ iii. of our Hydragogue Electuary (as the Sick is easier or harder to work on, or as the Physician pleases to Purge him more or less) in ℥ ii. of the Decoction before prescrib'd. 25. 2. The over-largness of the ways that bring matter for Spittle, may be Cur'd chiefly by a Fomen∣tation somwhat Astringent and mildly Aromatic made in Claret-Wine, and oft appli'd hot to the Jaws by a Linnen Cloath: By the help of which the more large ways may by little and little be straitned and strengthned. 26. 3. When any Harm in the Glandul's is con∣cluded by rational conjecture to concur also, although such an Harm is not as yet enough known, yet I think the foremention'd somwhat binding and mildly Aromatic Fomentation may be commodiously us'd, both Externally and Internally. For Example take this following Decoction.
℞. The Roots of Avens, Bistort, of each ʒ i. of Ma∣sterwort ʒ ii. of Select China ℥ i. of slic'd Licorice ℥ i. ss. Boil them according to Art in Claret-Wine, adding tolb ii. of what is straind Cinamon-Water, Syr. of Myrtles, of Red-Roses, of each ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take ℥ ii, or iii. of this Decoction twice or thrice a day. 27. The Saltness of Spittle may be remov'd as well by abstaining from much using of Salt Meat, as by amending the saltness of the Serous Humor by Crabs-Eyes, Coral, Pearl, Shels, and such-like things meanly calcin'd, and chiefly by the Pills of Hounds-Tongue, or of Styrax daily or every other day taken to ii, or iii. Grains. 28. The Acidity of Spittle may be Cur'd by the same, as also with Chalk, Dragons Blood, Blood-Stone, fixt, and especially Volatil Salts, seeing they alter and correct any Humor in our Body more mild∣ly, although also more slowly, which is also the more to be commended. 29. The fulsom sweetness of Spittle may be Cur'd, perhaps by Shells and such-like things meanly cal∣cin'd, as also Volatil Salts somwhat more sharp, yea by fixt Salts also, and Acid Salts sharp enough, lastly Salts joind with Acids, as the Salt of Tar∣tar Vitriolated and such-like; although I have have not hitherto us'd them to purpose,Volatil Salts a∣vail much in this Case, I speak by Experience. because I never had such a Case in hand, from whence to inquire more accuratly into its Nature and Manner of Cur∣ing, and to form my present Con∣ceptions. 30. The bitterness of Spittle causd by Choler rising up into the Mouth will of its own accord and by de∣grees
depart, if it be driven downward, and expel'd y Stool with a Cholagogue; yet a more obstinat bitterness may also be washt out, by washing the Mouth with somwhat sowr Wine pure, or mixt with Water, instead of which also Vinegar may be us'd after the same manner. 31. If Choler remain more pure in the Blood, or its serous part, it may be diminisht by mild Cholagogues, and the remainder is to be corrected by more tem∣perd and more grateful Acids. 32. The over-glutinousness of Spittle may be amend∣ed both by taking in inciding Aromatic Medicins oft mentiond and prescrib'd, chiefly Volatil Salts us'd at Dinner, and Supper-time with a little Wine; and by such like kept in the Mouth, and anon after it is washt spit out; and by such-like Food cautiously o∣mitted and neglected; and by tough Phlegm, if it be also peccant in encreasd plenty carri'd out in part after a previous preparation of it, by Phlegmagogues mildly and slowly. 33. The over-fluidness and watriness of Spittle may be amended by often using Medicins more Glutinous, and somtimes a little Tart, such as are Medlars, Ser∣vices, Quinces, &c. to which as the Matter requires Pills of Hounds-Tongue, &c. may be somtimes joind.
CHAP. LII. Of the Motion of Spittle into the Mouth and Gullet Deprav'd. 1. IT is easie for any to try and observ that Spittle of its own accord flows into the Mouth of every one though they think not of it, and may be drawn thi∣ther more plenteously as any shall please, and the same is anon swallowd down. 2. This Motion of Spittle into the Mouth is deprav'd, 1. When it is brought thither more sparingly or dif∣ficultly. 2. When more plenteously, or easily. 3. Spittle flows more sparingly into the Mouth; 1. Because of its defect, of which we spake in the former Chapter. 2. Because of the Salivary Passa∣ges Obstructed, or Prest, or Cut in two. 4. Spittle flows more Difficultly to the Mouth, be∣cause of its Glutinousness, of which we also spake in the former Chapter. 5. The same Spittle is more Plenteously carri'd into the Mouth; 1. Because of its abundance; of which also see the former Chapter. 2. Because of the Sali∣varie Passages more widend or enlarg'd, wherfore Spit∣tle stays not in them its due time, but flowing out continually makes way for the following Spittle of what sort soever, for the most part therfore more watry and fluid. This largness and widness of the Salivarie Passages is causd oft by a continual Spitting accustomd after an ill manner. For by how much the more or less any shall exercise any Function, by so much it makes the parts ministring to it either
more apt, or unfit to perfect the same more easily and here also more abundantly, or more difficultly and here also more sparingly. 6. Spittle is more easily carri'd into the Mouth by reason of its thinness and fluidness propos'd in the preceding Chapter. 7. The swallowing down of Spittle admitted into the Mouth is deprav'd, as oft as it either cannot be at all or not without great difficulty. 8. Both these Depravations happen especially be∣cause of the straitness of the Jaws, or Gullet, som∣times to be ascrib'd to a Tumor of the Tonsils, som∣times to the Quincie, seldom to a Tumor in the Gul∣let it self, or Flesh growing out of it: whence the Contraction of the Gullet, and thrusting of what are to be Swallowd down are with difficulty, if at all. 9. The Motion of the Gullet may also be deprav'd when it is troubled with a Palsie or Convulsion, or a Convulsiv Motion frequent in a Hypochondriac Suf∣focation. 10. What was mentiond in the former Chapter of the Cure of several Depravations here nam'd, may thence be requir'd: as also from other places, which are or shall be set down there. 11. The Salivarie Passages cut in two cannot be Cur'd: but the Passages Obstructed, or Prest, may be cur'd chiefly by attenuating and cutting Medicins, us'd as well to wash as to Foment those parts. 12. The Salivarie Passages more open or wide, may likewise be Cur'd by washing the Mouth, and Fomen∣ting the Jaws by a Decoction prepar'd of somwhat binding and mild Aromatics; as is describ'd in the former Chapter Sect. 26. But endeavour should also be, that the Sick would gradually uncustom
themselvs from a continual Spittle got into an evil Custom. CHAP. LIII. Of the Generation of the Juice of the Pan∣creas deprav'd. 1. WE call the Humor prepar'd in the Conglomera∣ted Glandul's of the Pancreas, and effus'd through the Passage of the same into the small Gut by the name of the Pancreatic or Melancholic Juice. 2. That the same hath great affinity with Spittle, but is of a somwhat sowr Tast from it insipid, although soon sowring, we do no longer suspect to be distin∣guisht, but affirm it for certain after the Ingenious Observation of Reguerus de Graaf, that truly indu∣strions, and happy Anatomist, and formerly our dearly beloved Student not only made in Dogs, but in a Man, and its Juice collected. 3. The Juice of the Pancreas is therfore naturally somwhat sowr in tast, prepar'd in the Conglomerated Glandul's of the part of Blood most like to it, and of the Animal Spirits; and flowing together continually out of the lesser Passages into the greater, and at length into the greatest and middle, for the most part single, seldom double, and hence into the small Gut. 4. The Generation of this Juice is deprav'd, 1. When it is bred more sparing. 2. When more plenteous 3. When vitious in manifold sensible Qualities, in savour, odour, colour, glutinousness, &c. 5. This Juice is made more sparing; 1. By the de∣fect of fit Matter in the Blood, because of Food con∣taining
very little Acidity too long us'd, or because of it carri'd another way in the Dropsie, or effus'd out of the Body in a somwhat Acid Sweat, and by Ʋrin al∣so more sowr; or in a Lienteric, and Caeliac Loosness. For that which is conjoind with Gripes, and arises from a sharp Acid Humor, is chiefly thought by me for the most part to procede from the Juice of the Pancreas more Acid, which although it be pourd out of the Body, yet was it prepar'd in the Pancreas. 6. The same Juice is bred more Sparing. 2. By the fault of the Ways, and chiefly of the Arteries, through which Blood is carri'd to the Glandul's of the Pancreas, if it happen at any time that they be obstructed, or press'd. 7. 3. By the fault of the Glandul's of the Pan∣creas unfit to separate commodiously the somwhat sowr part of Blood from the rest, and further to prepare it with the Animal Spirits into the mentiond Juice. 8. The Juice of the Pancreas is generated more Plenteous; 1. Because of the abundance of Matter made fit to breed it in the Body and Blood, and by such-like Food long and much us'd, and by the wonted Evacuations of somwhat sowr Humors supprest. 9. 2. Because of the plenty and greatness of the Arteries and Nervs carri'd to the Pancreas; wherfore much Matter fit to breed the Juice of the Pancreas is carri'd thither. 10. 3. Because of the peculiar constitution of the Glandul's of the Pancreas favouring the breeding of much Melancholic Juice: Although here also we as yet doubt in determining and describing their noted vitious, as well as natural and laudable Constitu∣tion. 11. The Juice of the Pancreas is bred vitious in Taste; 1. When it is made too sowr, and that then be∣cause
of the over-use of sowr Food, Sauces, or Medi∣cins; and because of a delay of the laudable Juice made in certain of its lesser Passages obstructed, whence the same becoms anon more sowr, and being again joind to the rest, infects it all at least for that time, and likewise makes it more sowr then it is wont to be: as that is for the most part notably observd in the beginning of the Fits of Intermitting Fevers with Cold, the off spring of a more sharp sowr Humor. 12. 2. When it is bred less sowr, and indeed then because of a more sparing, or no Ʋse of sowr Food, and Sauces; and because of a frequent and plenteous use of things contrary to it, such as are Chalk, Crabs-Eyes, Pearl, Coral, and such-like oft mentiond, as also both fixt and volatil Salts; and because of much evacuation of an Acid Humor by Sweat, or Ʋrin. 13. 3. When it is bred Salt like Pickle; by such a like serous Humor abounding in the Body, and be∣cause of Food seasond with much Salt long taken, and by a troublesom and persevering stoppage of the Head, corrupting the laudable Humors into Humors Salt like Pickle, or such-like Lympha. 14. 4. When the same Juice is bred Tart, and that both because of such-like Food; and Medicins ta∣ken more plenteously or too long, and by an exceding sorrow of Mind, and chiefly when unexpected, and a great unthought-of Terror. 15. 5. When the same Juice is bred ill-savourd, which chiefly happens, when there is a Corruption in the Pancreas, to wit, the making of Matter after an Inflammation, wherof when any is joind to the Juice of the Pancreas, then it gives it its ill savour. 16. 6. When the Colour of the same Juice being like Phlegm, or Water is chang'd into any other not like its natural Colour; which may happen, when
some pure, or corrupted Blood is mixt with it, and doth more or less alter its natural colour. 17. 7. When the Juice of the Pancreas is made more Glutinous, and that because of much Phlegm like it being in the Body, and joind to the Blood, and then infecting the other Humors, and this especially with its viscousness. 18. Seeing that more vitious Qualities of this Juice do not at present occur, let us procede streight-way to the Cure of the mentiond Depravations in its Generation. 19. A more sparing Generation of the Juice of the Pancreas may be Cur'd; 1. By using more abundantly Food and Sauces somwhat sowr, when this Evil hap∣pens for want of them; or by curing an Acid Dropsie or Sweat, or Ʋrin; or a Lienteric, or Coeliac Loos∣ness, when it procedes from them; of which we have treated before, or yet may anon. 20. 2. By Opening an Obstruction of the Arteries, by cutting and attenuating Medicins oft already pro∣pos'd; or by removing their Compression, by freeing them from Bands or Tumors straitning their Ca∣vity. 21. 3. It will be hard to tell how the harm of the Glandul's of the Pancreas, by reason of which its Juice is bred more sparing in them, may be Cur'd, seeing that we know not as yet the due Constitution of the Glandul's to prepare this mentiond natural Juice: yet because a somwhat-sowr Juice is separa∣ted, or made in them, I suppose Medicins mildly A∣romatical and chiefly Volatil Salts joind with somwhat-Acid Liquors may very probably be useful here; For Example, The Volatil Salt of Amber, the Salt Ar∣moniac made more pure by a repeted Sublimation, and several others industriously prepar'd.
22. Where note, seeing that every Change that is to be expected of altering Medicins ought to be per∣formd by degrees, the use of such must be continu'd for some season, wherby the desired success may be had, and here we must make slow haste. 23. This Juice generated more Plenteously needs for its Cure, 1. That the Sick would omit, at least dimi∣nish the Use of Acid Food, and Sauces, as oft as the same occasiond it, and hath afforded Matter for more abundance of the Juice: which now being in the Body may also be diminisht by Hydragogues, as al∣so Sudorifics and Diuretics: which will be so much the more beneficial, if an accustomd Evacuation of the Acid Humors of what kind soever be supprest. 24. Among Sudorifics and Diuretics I commend in this Case any that moreover contemperat, dull, and concentrat an Acid Humor, being oft mentiond and also reduc'd into Forms in this Treatise. 25. 2. If the Arteries and Nervs inserted into the Pancreas could be commodiously straitned (for they cannot be diminisht) by Internal or External Reme∣dies; by a prudent, and most slow straitning of them to be expected only from mildly Astringent Medi∣cins. 26. 3. If at any time the Natural and Preterna∣tural Constitution of the Glandul's of the Pancreas should be known; it is to be Cur'd by the Correction of it by Medicins somwhat contrary to it; which being as yet unknown, they that mildly bind, and also coneen∣trat an Acidity may be tri'd perhaps even to find out each Constitution somtime, amongst which Blood-Stone, Dragons-Blood, Chalk, &c. excel; which, as I newly said of all Altering Medicins, may be us'd for some time in a small quantity, and their success, and effects may be accuratly observd by Prudent Phy∣sicians.
27. The preparation of a more Acid Juice may be Amended; 1. By daily diminishing, and somtimes wholly removing, at least for a time, the Ʋse of Food, Sauces, and Medicins manifestly sowr. 28. 2. By removing the Obstruction made by Glu∣tinous Phlegm coagulated in the side and less Passages of the Pancreas, both by Medicins that drive it for∣ward either into the small Gut only, or also out of the Body by Vomit, or Stool, and somtimes with the Ʋrin, or Sweat. To which manifold end convenient Re∣medies are oft before prescrib'd, so that it seems need∣less to set down here those that have been so oft men∣tiond. 29. When the Juice of the Pancreas is bred less Acid; 1. By the defect of such-like Food, and Sauces, the same may be made more sowr by using somwhat acid and grateful Food and Sauces, and that not by force, and in a large quantity, but long, and in a mean quantity; least by hasting too much the Sick be more harmd, then profited. 30. 2. When it is less Acid by the preposterous use of contrary things, Chalk, Coral, &c. as also sixt, or Volatil Salts; their farther use must be left off, it must at least be moderated and diminisht. 31. 3. When the same happens because of a plen∣teous excretion of an Acid Humor by Sweat, or Ʋrin, endeavour must be us'd, that the Separation of an Acid Humor from the Blood, and hence an Excreti∣on by Sweat, or Urin be by little and little diminisht: which the following Conserve very effectual to this end will most conveniently effect. ℞. Conserv of Red Roses ℥ ii. of Damask-Roses ℥ i. Common Diascordium ʒ iii. or Our Diascordium (describ'd in Chap. 51. Sect. 22. of this Book) ʒ i. Red Coral, Pearl prepar'd, of each scuple; iv.
Syr. of the Juice of Pomegranates, what suffi∣ces M. for a Conserve. [The Author prescrib'd not his own instead of the Common Diascordi∣um in the former Chapters, because he had not in∣vented it when they were printed.] Let the Sick take ʒi. or there-about of this Con∣serve in the morning fasting, as much two hours be∣fore Supper, and as much at Bed-time, washing his Mouth, if he please, with a little of Wine, or any other grateful Drink, and then drinking it. 32. The Juice of the Pancreas bred Salt like pickle in Tast, which may be known by vomiting a Humor like it, is to be Amended by a long and sparing use of Medicins that correct a Serous Humor like it in our Body, and all over describ'd by me both in the for∣mer Chap. 51. Sect. 27. and elswhere: as also by ab∣staining from salted Food; and hastening the Cure of a Stoppage in the Head, if there be any, least more evils succede it neglected. 33. If the Juice of the Pancreas be bred Tart, (which the frequent Hypochondriac Suffocation, with fear of being Strangled, as also the Vomiting of Tart Humors argues) he must Abstain, 1. from farther use of Tart Fruits, or Medicins; 2. All occasions of ex∣ceding Sorrow; and grievous Terror are to be Shund; yea, the Mind is to be fenc'd, and confirmd, and go∣vernd against those Injuries. Lastly, 3. Volatil, and especially Aromatic Salts are to be us'd frequently; and that in a small quantity, to iv, v, or vi drops in a spoonful of Wine; seeing that there is nothing hi∣therto, that I know of,As also his Oily Vo∣latil Salt, which he never prescribes in a Mixture because it was not then exposd to public Sale. doth so potently, effectually, and speedily amend and correct a Tart Humor in Man, as any Volatil, but chiefly Aromatic Salt, which I having
exceding many times experienc'd happily do here te∣stifie and intirely commend to all Younger Physicians that need my faithful Information. 34. If the Juice of the Pancreas be made ill-savourd by Matter in it mixt with it an exact and long conti∣nu'd endeavour must be us'd, that the Ʋlcer left in the Pancreas after an Aposteme may at length be wholly Cur'd, by taking daily Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoard, or any other more effectual and fixt Medi∣cin made of Antimony; Whose Magisterie, Elixir, or Quint-essence if it could be had, will do wonderful things, although they seem incredible to the most of Men, not only in this dangerous, and hard to be cur'd Evil, but even such-like found somtimes in the other Bowels also. 35. The Colour of the Juice of the Pancreas chang'd by Blood mixt with it may be Cur d by the Consolidation of the Vessels of Blood corroded by a sharp acid Humor by the fore-mentiond excellent Medicins that may be made especially of Antimony; which also correct, and temper all Acrimony of Humors, and do much more benefit, then the slothful company of those that Hate Chymistry can conceive or admit in their Mind blinded with Prejudices. For whom let us seriously pray, that at length they may have a sound Mind in a sound Body, so long as at least that happens to be healthful to them. 36. If the Juice be bred more Glutinous in the Pan∣creas, that depravation may be corrected by a continual and continu'd use of more sharp Aromatics, as also of any Volatil Salts, and somtimes also of somwhat-Acid more Spiritous Salts, or artificially prepar'd and ela∣borated with Spiritous Liquors, which also they that hate Chymistry, being ignorant, do discommend. And because I have oft mentiond and describ'd
such before, I remit the diligent and worthy Students of Physic thither. CHAP. LIV. Of the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas, and its Effervescency with Choler deprav'd. 1. I Suppose the Juice of the Pancreas is continually separated in its Glandul's from the Mass of Blood, and is farther elaborated, and perfected with the Animal Spirits, and moves into the greater, and at length the middle Passage, and hence into the Cavi∣ty of the small Gut. 2. This Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas through the less, greater, and greatest Passage to the Cavity of the thin Gut may be deprav'd several ways, and that somtimes according to the whole Mass of the Juice, somtimes according to some part of it only: whilst there is either None, or it procedes more slowly, and difficultly, or more speedily, because more easily. 3. I suppose the Motion of the Juice of the Pancre∣as through its Passages to the small Gut, is either sel∣dom, or never wholly deficient: Which will only come to pass, if it may happen, from an Obstruction of the greatest and middle Passage by most glutinous Phlegm sticking, and in like manner coagulated and fastned about its Orifice; which can scarce remain there for a space, but would anon be loosend by the Juice perpe∣tually coming, or the Sick be cast into present danger of Life: to which unexpected Death may not often follow, what prudent Man will deny, or by accu∣rat observation in a Dead Body, and made before∣hand by this Passage will rashly affirm.
4. I indeed remember that I have somtimes seen glutinous, and plenteous Phlegm sticking, and ad∣hering in this Passage, and not easily giving place or to be remov'd thence. 5. None who have red those things with an atten∣tive Mind, which I concluded in Chap. 30. Sect. 61, &c. of this Book according to Experience, and be∣ing to make tryal, shall recal the same things to expe∣rience by his own Sences can well deny that some part of the Juice of the Pancreas is oft hindred wholly, at least for a season, in its Motion through the less, and side-Passages, to the middle and greatest Passage, be∣cause of an Obstruction risen by Viscous Phlegm grow∣ing together in them. 6. When the Juice of the Pancreas is stopt after the same manner in certain Passages, then any may see it is all mov'd more sparingly to the small Gut. 7. The Juice of the Pancreas may be mov'd more difficultly, and therfore slowly also through its Passages to the small Gut, as oft as it is more glutinous: of which we spake in the former Chapter. 8. The same may be mov'd more easily, and so swift∣ly, when it is more Watry and Fluid then is wont to be, a Cause of which may be much watry and diure∣tical drink, such as Volatil Salts and many Mineral Waters, the Spaw, Swalbats, &c. Whence a Loos∣ness also so frequent, most commonly beneficial sel∣dom hurtful to the Sick, is perhaps to be deduc'd a∣mongst other of their admirable effects; in as much as they hasten not only through the Kidneys to the Bladder, but also through the Pancreas to the small Gut; nor do they only render the Juice of the Pan∣creas more fluid, but also make it less sowr or tart, the most frequent cause of a slow and costive Body; wherfore the Excrements are also easily diluted, and
Choler it self is hastned more then usual to its de∣scent. 9. If at any time a Physician suspect that most plenteous glutinous Phlegm doth not only abound in the Body, but that much of the same is carri'd every whither, and so to the Pancreas, so that there is fear that the middle and common Passage of the Pancreas not only may be, but is obstructed wholly by it, by reason of extreme Anguish suddenly affecting the Sick; I cannot then think that an Acid Spirit, especi∣ally of Nitre, as the most piercing, but mixt with strong Wine, or its Spirit will then be ill us'd to re∣move such an evil; wherby the noted Obstruction may not only be Opend, but moreover the defect of the Juice of the Pancreas may be suppli'd in perpetuating an Effervescency with Choler. 10. I can easily admit that an Obstruction plac'd about the Orifice of the Passage of the Pancreas opening into the small Gut, may be immediatly remov'd by reason of the commerce of an Acid Spirit with Phlegm, by the mentiond Medicin taken in at the Mouth, and carri'd to the small Gut, (without far∣ther transmitting it through the Lacteal Veins, the Passage of the Thorax, the upper Hollow Vein, the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Artery and Vein of the Lungs, hence through the Left Ventricle of the Heart the Great Artery to the Pancreas) whil'st this Phlegm is loosend and dissolvd by it piercing thither. 11. The more sparing Motion of the Melancholic Juice risen from an Obstruction of the lesser Passages of the Pancreas, may be restor'd by Remedies propos'd in the fore-cited 30th Chap. Sect. 132, &c. as also in Chap. 50. Sect. 13, &c. 12. A more speedy Motion of the Juice of the Pan∣creas made by reason of its Watriness and Volatility,
perhaps proceding either from Mineral Waters, or Volatil Salts more abundantly taken may be allaid by abstaining from farther use of them, and mean while using those things that may give it a greater consisten∣cy, such as are sharp and tart things, oft taken in a small quantity. 13. To the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas vitiated follows also the vitious Effervescency with Choler in the small Gut; of which because we have on purpose treated in Chap. 11. of this Book, what is spoken there, may be transferd hither in part, and so be red there. CHAP. LV. Of the Separation of Urin in the Kindeys Deprav'd. 1. AS the best part of Food, and that which is useful to the Body is separated from the Food taken in, and fermented in the Ventricle, being fluid, and of a milky colour, and carri'd under the name of Chyle through the Lacteal Veins toward the Heart, whil'st the unuseful and excrementitious parts go away by Stool, keeping a thicker consistency; so again the serous superfluous part is separated in the Kidneys out of the Chyle chang'd into Blood; which whilst the principal part of Blood flows back to the rest of its Mass, it distills through their capillar fleshy parts into its Funnel, and is sent hence through the Ureters to the Urinar Bladder, so nam'd from the mentiond Serous part then constituting Urin; in which it is gatherd by little and little, till it be after∣ward voided again.
2. The Glandulous fleshy parts are observd to be shut up in the substance of the Kidneys, and stretchd forward into membranous Pipes joind to its Funnel, and having peculiar Passages appropriated to the dropping of Urin. 3. This Ʋrin because it is observd Salt even in those, (in whom the Serous Part of their Blood is found insipid) any may suspect and not without cause, that the Matter of Ʋrin undergoes some singu∣lar Change in the Kidneys, while it is streind through the mentiond fleshy Parts; although it seem to me at least very probable that the Blood as well as Chyle is prepar'd in the Heart in its Vital Effervescency for the Separation of the Urinar Serous Part, and that the same is absolvd in the Kidneys; although I have not hitherto attaind the reason of it, however I think it happens after the manner of Precipitation. 4. This Separation of Ʋrin is deprav'd; 1. When there is None. 2. When it is more Sparing. 3. When more Plenteous. 4. When by reason of both the Liquor, and what is Containd in it, it haps several ways viti∣ous in Colour, Odour, Savour, Thickness, &c. 5. There happens No Separation of Ʋrin in the Kidneys oft by the fault of the fleshy parts Obstructed, or otherwise ill-affected; seldom perhaps by fault of the Blood, or its serous part, to wit, unfit for its Se∣paration, and that because of a more intire mixing of the Heterogeneal Parts. 6. Those fleshy parts may be Obstructed by much and glutinous Phlegm any ways loosend in the small Gut and confusd with the Blood, being afterward again coagulated in the Kidneys, together vitiating their fleshy parts by an External Cold imprudently receivd, and there severing from the Blood in part at least with the Urinar Serous Part, and sticking in the fleshy
parts, and by degrees filling and obstructing their Passages. 7. The Harm com'd to the fleshy parts by external Cold, may perhaps be a straitning and binding of their spongie parts, by reason of which the Phlegm dissolvd by the Serous Liquor flowing through may the ea∣sier stick, and be stopt in them, till at length filling their Passages it may hinder farther passage of Urin through them. 8. The Heterogeneal parts of Blood are more intirely mixt, and so the same becoms unfit for a Separation of its Serous part, as oft as the Acidity of Lympha is more sharp, so that the Ʋniversal Blood grows, too much together, its alone fluidness remaining. 9. This Acidity of Lympha may become sharper, both in the Conglobated Glandul's, and in the Conglo∣merated Glandul's of the Pancreas by an external very sharp Cold, or a great and unexpected Sorrow or Terror of Mind, the notable abuse of Acid things and thus far very sharp, first concurring and preceding. 10. The Separation of Ʋrin becoms more Sparing, by reason of the same but lighter Causes; as a Loos∣ness, and chiefly Sweat plenteous. 11. The Separation of Ʋrin becoms more plenteous by reason of Drink taken in and so accustomd (which is always to be observd) or by reason of the fleshy parts of the Kidneys, if not, too open according to its Chanels, so at least constituted, that they may separate more of a Serous Liquor from the Blood then ought, as happens in a Diabetes; or by reason of the Blood ill-affected for a Separation and sending away of the Se∣rous part more abundant then is wont; or because of wonted Sweats, or a Serous Loosness suppresd. 12. The Blood is ill-affected to a more plenteous dismissing of it self by the vital Effervescency after a
certain manner vitiated by Volatil Salts and other Diu∣retics plenteously taken at any time; whence the Blood is made not only more fluid, but besides less thickned, and less united according to its serous parts with the rest: wherfore Urin departs both more easily and a∣bundantly from it in the Kidneys. 13. Ʋpon the account of the Liquor of Ʋrin it is ob∣servd vitiated; 1. In its Colour, when the same be∣coms Watry, that is endued with a consistencie and watry colour, which coms to pass by defect of its Salt and Choleric part making it more or less of a colour somwhat Yellow. For that is to be noted, that Urin consists of two parts, both Watry and Salt, which being joind together make the Liquor of Urin to have an Orange Colour, and mean Consistency. Whence after that much and especially piercing, and therfore Diuretical Drink, such as is Water, but chiefly Mi∣neral Waters, thin and Diuretical Wine, such-like Beer, &c. is taken in, the Urin that is wont to be first and a little after voided, is observd Watry, and insi∣pid, not only in Colour, but also in Tast: as that which coms away after the Fermentation of Food in the Stomach absolvd, is not only of a more or less yellow Colour, but moreover Salt. 14. And as this Watry Colour follows the taking in of Drink chiefly Diuretical, lately us'd in a notable quantity, and is Non-natural; so the like is observd in the beginning of Continual Fevers, and of the Fits of Intermitting Fevers, and it is then Praeter-natural, denoting a Crudity, that is, a more intire mixing of the parts of Blood, and an hindred Separation or the Salt Parts with the Urin; the Cause of which is a sharper Vital Effervescency by reason of an exceding Acrimony of the Humors flowing together, and too much thickning all the parts of Blood, the Watry
excepted. This is evident chiefly by the Fits of In∣termitting Fevers most commonly raisd with trouble∣som Cold; And seeing that Cold is bred in our Bo∣dy by an Acid Humor, the same must of necessity be carri'd to the Heart to breed an Intermitting Fever, and so trouble the Vital Effervescency there, so that the Pulse becoms not only less, and weaker, (which depends on the Blood too much coagulated by an A∣cidity exceding) but all the parts of Blood are more intirely mixt together, and do then only dismiss the watry part from themselvs into the Kidneys, the other, especially Salt parts, remaining in its Mass so long, till by little and little at least in part the Acid Humor being overcomd, or the same flowing to the Heart in less plenty, or more temperd the Vital Effer∣vescency is restor'd, and Choler more potent or plen∣teous over-rules it; on which depends the more loo∣send union of the Humors, and anon more easie and plenteous, yea somtimes over-separation of those that are Salt like Pickle. 15. From which the Nature and true Cause of a so much mentiond Crudity in Physic, yea Manner, wher∣by it is most commonly bred, becoms more manifest; and moreover the Nature, true Cause, and Manner of a so much wanted Concoction, how it is absolvd, is not a little illustrated: which I will endeavour now to ex∣plain in a few words, this occasion being offerd. 16. Physicians understand the Crudity and Concocti∣on of Humors constituting the Mass of Blood, or mixt with it, when concernd about them in the examining and Curing of Acute Diseases especially, and that it may be to their wish, they so greatly and deservedly desire the Concoction of the Humors. For when the Blood is infected, and ill-affected immediatly, or by Hu∣mors coming between containd in the Body without
the Mass of Blood, as Choler, the Juice of the Pancre∣as, Lympha and Phlegm, then the vital Effervescency peculiar to it is alterd likewise, and vitiated, and in∣deed so, that forthwith the natural and loosend confu∣sion of the Humors that continually flow together to the Heart with the Blood is more or less troubled, whether they be more closly and intirely, or more loosly and less intirely then joind to it. 17. But when the other Humors are more in∣tirely and closly joind to the Blood then is wont, then Ʋrin coms forth more Watry, and having less of Colour and of the other things Containd: which they call Crude, that is, testifiers of Crudity. 18. And after the Ʋrin is again voided more Co∣lourd, and carrying in it more of the things Containd, it is lik'd, and call'd Concocted, to wit, signifying it more, or less begun, or promoted: which coms to pass when the noted Humors, as excrementitious and first more closely, and intirely united to the Blood, are a∣gain by degrees Separated from the same, and in part Voided together with the Urin: which is good, and profitable to Man; as the other was evil and hurtful. For according to Nature, and in an healthy State an Orange-colourd Tincture at least is given to Urin ▪ but no thing Containd is found in Urin, unless some Error be committed in Diet, or the Constitution of the Party decline more or less from the perfect state of Health. 19. If any weigh with an attentive mind all the Humors that are to be confus'd with the Blood, as also the proper qualities of every one, he will comply, and say with us that the more close Ʋnion of them with the Blood procdes from an Acid Humor, and ther∣fore the Juice of the Pancreas or Lympha ill affected; on the contrary their more loosend union with the Blood,
and so solution of a more close union is to be hop'd for, and expected from a Lixivial and chiefly Volatil, and so bitter Salt, and therfore Choler more potent, and bearing sway. 20. How true, yea most true are these things which I have now said, daily Experience confirms, seeing any that searches may know those things that cast Healthy People into several Diseases, and encrease them, and on the contrary restore lost Health to the Sick, that that Concoction in the Blood is hindred by the force of Acid things, endu'd with an Acidity exceding; and that the same is promoted, and obtaind by help of Aromatics, and in special the Bitter, or of Volatil Salts more temperd. 21. By reason of its Colour Ʋrin is oft observd; 2. Red, which if it be Thin beside, arises from an exceding heat that is in the Blood, a little, and only the most Volatil part of Gall being mixt with the Ʋrin; the Separation of the Salt and Excrementitious Parts of Blood, and the Excretion necessary to begin, and absolv the fore-mentiond Concoction being hindred. For although then Choler bear sway over the other Humors, which is evident by the exceding Heat of the Body, yet has it not a quiet, but turbulent rule, because a sharper and preternatural Effervescency is stird up in the Heart, more intirely uniting the flow∣ing Humors together and with the Blood. 22. The same red Ʋrin, if also thick in Burning Fevers as well Continual, as Intermitting, procedes from the more plenteous Separation of the Salt, or other Excrementitious Parts, whether first Corrupted by the rest of the Mass of Blood in a preternatural Efferves∣cency, and from their Excretion with watry parts, and so from a begun Concoction: which coms to pass, as oft as what way soever the somwhat contrary Hu∣mors,
Sowr, and Salt, or Bitter, that are wont to pro∣duce a vital Effervescency in the Blood and Heart are contemperd at least in part: whence the Effervescen∣cy which was before sharper, becoms now more mild; and the Salt parts which were before more closely u∣nited to the Blood, do now again by degrees depart from it; and they which are now Effervescent, are more loosly united together and with the Blood; till at length the Universal Blood, and all the Humors that are to arise from it, and to flow together again to it, are restord by little to their former and laudable Constitution, and the lost Health of Man may be re∣paird after a while. 23. Ʋrin of an obscure Red and somwhat thick, yet having no notable Heat accompanying in the Body, is wont to denote the Jaundice, chiefly when a Cloath dipt into it is made of a Saffron Colour by it, unless it be by somthing taken in. 24. Ʋrin of a Bloody Colour may be easily known from what has been said before, and chiefly if it have a filthy and somwhat black or grumous Set∣ling; which is a certain sign of Blood mixt with it. 25. Other singular and more rare Colours of Ʋrin as Green, Wan, Black, &c. as for the most part they own singular and most grievous external or internal Causes, so are they to be compar'd with Symptoms together concurring in the Sick to know rightly the Diseases then selvs and thence to form Prognosticati∣on: all which to treat here were too long. 26. Urin varies not only by reason of a different Colour but also in respect of its Transparence and Dark∣ness. For some is Transparent, commonly call'd Clear; some Thick, commonly call'd Turbid or Troubled. Where note, that some is made and remains clear, or Transparent; and on the contrary some is made or re∣mains
Turbid or Thick: again, some is made Clear, and Transparent, and are afterward Troubled and Thick, and such either remain, or become clear again: so some is voided Turbid and Thick, and again grow Clear; which commonly coms to pass by the falling of its Sediment. 27. The most Watry, as also Yellow, and Red Ʋrin is sent Clear and Transparent: which Transparence the Watry most seldom, somtimes the Yellow, oft Red Ʋrin loseth: which is most frequent in a stoppage of the Head, and Fevers arising from such a like Cause, and call'd by many Catarrhals: And these sorts of Urin thus Troubled do oft again grow clear, the Sediment falling; somtimes they remain Troubled, to wit, when the Stoppage in the Head is yet in its encrease, neither a Fever nor any other Disease accompanying coms to it in its vigor. 28. Urin declines from its natural Odour, when it is without smell, or smells Sweet, or is ill-smeld. 29. The most Crude, or Watry Ʋrin is without Smell, of which we spake in Sect. 13, &c. 30. Ʋrin of a sweet Smell is seldom voided unless after certain things are taken, as Turpentine, whence it smells like Violets: whether any such thing hap∣pen at any time from Internal Causes, I now at least remember not. 31. Ill-smelling and stinking Ʋrin doth likewise somtimes own an External Cause, for example the use of Asparagus; but more frequently an Internal Cause, to wit, a Corruption in the Blood, but such, by reason of which its parts remain in a slack union, yea its fat parts corrupted being the primary Subject of Odours, and therfore also of ill smells Separate with its Salt parts. Where note, the ill smell of Urin doth not so much reside in its Liquor, as in the things ther∣in Containd.
32. The Savor of Ʋrin naturally somwhat Salt is chang'd; 1. When it is voided Insipid, which hap∣pens not only a little after Drink, and especially Diu∣retical taken in plenteously, and such a change of Tast is Non-natural; but also, when the Urin is preternatural and crude; of which see Sect. 13, &c. 33. 2. When Ʋrin coms away Bitter, which pro∣cedes from much Choler carri'd to the Heart, and very slackly mixt with the Blood, yea infecting its Serous part, and hence the Ʋrin with its bitterness. 34. 3. When Ʋrin is voided Sowr; which som∣times befals very sorrowful and melancholic People, by reason of the Juice of the Pancreas; or Lympha more Sowr, and infecting the Serous part of Blood, and anon the Ʋrin also with its Acidity. 35. Of the Thinness and Thickness of Ʋrin we have already spoken somthing in Sect. 13, 21, &c. and the Cause of each there propos'd. 36. The things Containd in Ʋrin are several, wherof some swim in its Superficies, some fall to the Bottom, some are carri'd in its Liquor, and that somtimes in its upper, somtimes in its middle, somtimes in its lower part; lastly some adhere to the sides and bottom of the Vessel: none whereof is found in Urin accor∣ding to Nature. 37. There are in the Superficies of Urin Bubbles and Froath, Fat, and Gravel. 38. The ordinary Sediment, and more seldom mealy or Bran-like, as also little Threds, Scales, Gravel, Stones, fleshy Parts, clots of Blood, Purulent Matter, Worms settle to the Bottom. 39. There is carri'd to the upper part of Ʋrin a lit∣tle Cloudiness in the middle, that which seems to hang there call'd Euaeorema; in the lower part a Setling, or Sediment: in which there is somtimes much, or little Gravel.
40. And this Triple Matter Containd, to wit, most frequent in the Urin of the Sick, is considerd, 1. By its Quantity, and is little, or much. 41. 2. By its Colour it is White, or Red or Black, or of another Colour. 42. 3. By its Substance either Equal, when all the parts are equally thick and thin; or unequal, when some parts are thinner, others thicker. 43. 4. By its Connexion, either Continual, when all the parts are joind together; or Separated, when some parts are disjoind from the rest. 44. I have most frequently observd Gravel every where in the Urin beheld by Me, that arose from the Conglobated Glandul's harmd by external Cold: and somtimes by long lying on the Back; because of which they somtimes grow together into Stones, as well red friable and softer; as somwhat yellow or more pale and of an ashie, most commonly harder and more solid. 45. Fat swimming in Ʋrin, unless it arises from Oil swallowd down, oft procedes from a Humor Salt like Pickle more sharp, separating the Oily part of Blood beside Nature from the rest of the Mass, and transferring it imbib'd in the Serous part, and hence in the Ʋrin: whence it is observd so frequent in the Ʋrin of Scorbutic People, and of others abounding with such-like Salt Humors, and by the fault of them som∣times Pining:  if Fevers be raisd or cherishd by such-like Humors, they are then call'd Wasting, be∣cause not so much the Fat that is found without the Vessels is then consum'd more then usual, as the Oily part of Blood within the Vessels is corrupted by the noted Humor, and is partly voided with the Urin, partly rendred unfit to repair any Fatness. 46. I deny not that the Original of Froath and Bubbles is causd by Wind; although I have oft ob∣servd
that a Stoppage in the Head, and Catarrhs bred in the Brain accompanies them. 47. Amongst the more rare Sediments, a Bran-like, mealy, scale-like, and such-like oft occurring in Burn∣ing-Fevers are to be ascrib'd to an exceding Heat, be∣cause of which certain more earthy Particls of Blood are farther scorchd, and therfore being severd from the rest of its Mass are voided together with the Urin, and while it cools by little and little, they forsake it and fall to the bottom. 48. Little Threds observd in Urin seem to own a Matter like to Hairs, to wit, a Volatil and Oily Salt growing together into such long threds; which is not unfrequent in Chymical Changes. 49. Gravel setling at the bottom of the Ʋrin is of all kinds, both little, and greater; both that may be crumm'd and solid; both red, and yellow, or somwhat ashie, and so coming nearer to the nature of Stones, yea for the most part giving them their first rising, and daily cherishing and encreasing them; for the sub∣stance of Gravel growing together encreases into Stones in hot Urin more slowly and more straitly then in it being coold. 50. Wherin this force of growing together and of making Stones consists, is not enough known; I will frely declare what I conjecture in this obscure matter, wherby I may according to my power the more help others that are Ingenious to search out this hidden Truth. All Stones, such at least as I have hitherto seen are Dissolvd in the sowr Spirit of Salt-Peter, or Ni∣tre; whence I conclude that the Coagulation of Stones cannot be expected from an Acid Spirit, as such; ther∣fore from another somwhat contrary to it in part at least. If any consider the several things, that pro∣mote a growing together of natural things, he will find
that that force is in Tart things; whence the Gluti∣ousness and Toughness of fluid things is wont to be roduc'd; to which if Earthy, and Volatil Salt parts e joind, somthing breaks forth not much unlike tones. I incline therfore to this Opinion, That an Earthy and Volatil Salt Matter joind to a Glutinous hing Grows together in Stones by help of a Tart Humor. The force of a Tart Humor coagulating is weakned by a sharp Acid, such as is found in the Spirit of Nitre. 51. Fleshy parts found in Urin usually arise from n Ulcer in the Kidneys, and their parts separated rom the rest of the Body, and voided together with he Urin. 52. Blood, and Clots of it occurring in the Urin te∣stifie some Vessel of Blood in the Kidneys, Ʋreters, Blad∣der, or Ʋrethra burst, or corroded. 53. Purulent Matter for the most part follows an Abscess in the Kidneys, Bladder or its Neck and Sphin∣cter, or Ʋrethra burst; seldom arising from a Pleuri∣sie, or Peripneumonie, or such a like Inflammation turnd into an Aposteme. 54. Worms in the Kidneys for the most part arise from Blood there corrupted, and being driven down into the Bladder together with Urin are voided. 55. Among the more ordinary things Containd in Ʋrin, and taking their Original from that part of Blood which is less apt to nourish the Body, and moreover not departing from its laudable Constitution, a little Cloudiness consists of its most fat, and least earthy, and so lighter part; a Sediment on the contrary, of its least fat, and most earthy, and therfore heavier part; an Enaeorema lastly of a mean part, that is, partaking of each. Whence as the Matter of every thing Con∣taind is more pure, so it will keep its place more ac∣curatly; and according as it is more impure, partak∣ing
more or less of any thing, so every one of them doth more or less decline from its place. 56. A greater quantity of the things Containd signi∣fies much unuseful Matter is in the Blood, and so to be separated; as a less quantity signifies there is less of that Matter: if the other Signs agree. 57. These Containd things how much the whiter they be, are lik'd so much the more, and they are the signs of a laudable Concoction, that is, desir'd Alteration, or Correction, and hence Separation of the hurtful Humors in the Blood: how much the more they decline from whiteness, such as are red, and chiefly black, so much the more are they dislik'd, and they are signs of a deficient Concoction, and so of greater danger. 58. So an Equality of the thing Containd, and not Severd gives the sign of Concoction wanting, as the Ʋn∣equal and Disjoind of a Concoction to be feard. 59. That we may now address our selvs to the Cure of the noted Harms, the Separation of Ʋrin deficient because of the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys obstructed may be restor'd, by Medicins that cut, attenuate, and make Glutinous Phlegm fluid; anon with Diuretics, and such things as send forward Urin. 60. The Medicins that cut and make Phlegm fluid, are already oft before mentiond, amongst which they here excel, which are also call'd Diuretics, wherby they may use their force sooner, and more easily, such are the Roots of Smallage, Fenel, Eringo, Parsley, &c. Leavs of Chervil, Rue, Nettle, Agrimony, &c. Seeds of Hart-wort, Gromwel, Saxifrage, Parsley, Fenel, &c. Berries of Juniper, Elder, Dwarf-Elder, &c. Peach-Kernels, Bitter-Almonds, &c. Spirit of Salt, and Ni∣tre, &c. any Volatil Salt, of which effectual Medicins may be prepar'd and given in a different Form accor∣ding to the pleasure of the Sick, and his divers Con∣stitution.
61. For Example the following Decoction may be us'd somtimes a day to ℥ ii or iii. ℞. Smallage, Erin∣go-Roots, of each ℥ i. Leavs of Water-Agrimony, Chervil, f each M. i. Juniper-Berries, new and beaten ℥ ii. Boil hem in pure Water, adding to ℥ xx. of what is straind, Syr. of the Five Roots ℥ iii. Sp. of Nitre, or of Salt, what suffices for a grateful Acidity. M. 62. They who esteme a Medicin to be taken in less quantity, may use the following Mixture. ℞. Parsley, Fenel-Water, of each ℥ ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or he Antinephritic Amsterdam Water ℥ i. Sp. of Salt Ar∣moniac xx drops. Oil of Juniper-Berries x drops. Syr. f the Five Roots ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take a Spoon∣ul oft in a day; and if watchings, or pains molest, dd iii Gr. of Laudanum to the Mixture. 63. By these Medicins will Glutinous Phlegm ob∣structing the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys not only be cut, but by the same means it being again made Fluid, will be mildly driven to their Funnel. 64. If the Voiding of Urin procede more slowly, after either of the mentiond Medicins has been taken for several hours, the Sick may commodiously drink a good quantity of the Mineral Diuretick Waters, (such as are of the Spaw, Sualbac, and others) whether they be us'd pure, or the 4th or 5th part of old Wine and also DiureticalOr rather dropping a little of his Oily Volatil Salt in the Waters. be mixt with them. 65. When plenteous and glutinous Phlegm are to∣gether in the Body, then it being so prepar'd and loo∣send with convenient Phlegmagogues, of which we oft made mention before, may be diminisht and carri'd out. 66. If external Cold ill affect the Region of the Loins, and therin the Fleshy part of the Kidneys, their ill Con∣stitution may be amended again by Aromatical Sudori∣fics
and Volatil Salts, but rather us'd at repeted times then together and once only; for so Sudorifics do no only carry out the fluid Humors, but besides alter, an amend the Containd Parts. 67. The Acidity of Lympha, and the Juice of th Pancreas howsoever encreasd may be again corrected and diminishd by a frequent taking of Volatil Salt daily to be us'd in a small quantity. 68. But when this encreasd preternatural Acidity is occasiond by external Cold, endeavour must be made again, that the Harm entred through the Pores of th Skin into the next parts, and the Blood it self, and chiefly both Glandul's be again allayd, or removd by the fore mentiond Sudorifics us'd prudently and a times. 69. But when the same is done by great and unex∣pected Sorrow or Terror of Mind, the Mind is to be freed from both Passions, and besides to be corroborated and fen∣ced against such assaults, and that by solid Reasons ruling the Mind. 70. As oft as the encreasd Acidity of Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas follows the abuse of over-sowr Food, Sauces, or Medicins, so oft they are to be abstaind from, at least their use is to be much diminisht, and those things that temper, dull, and allay, or weaken all Acidity are to be us'd, which we have oft propos'd be∣fore. 71. A more sparing Separation of Ʋrin as it owns somtimes the same Causes that its Defect owns but lighter; so it may be Cur'd by the same but likewise milder Remedies to be us'd in less plenty, or in a shor∣ter time. 72. But when the Separation of Ʋrin is more spa∣ring because of a plenteous Loosness, or Sweat, the same may be Cur'd either, or each of them being cur'd: of
which we spake before, and shall speak more anon. 73. A more plenteous Separation of Ʋrin causd by he vitious Constitution of the Fleshy parts of the Kid∣eys according to their Chanels, or Substance, may be ur'd by Medicins that straiten the slackness of their hanels, and amend the harm of the Substance of the leshy parts. 74. External things appli'd in the form of a Pla∣er to the Region of the Loins, where the Kidneys re, and made of more mild corroborating and astrin∣ent things will most opportunely straiten the slackness f the Chanels in the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys: By he help of which Medicins the harm of those Fleshy arts may be corrected and amended. 75. The Blood more fluid by Volatil Salts and other Diuretics taken in too great a measure, and being ill-affected to a more plenteous dismission of its Serous part may be restor'd partly by abstaining from farther abuse of those things noted, partly by using more temperd art Things. For Example; ℞. Plantane Water ℥ iii. Cinamon-Water ℥ i. Sp. of Alume xx drops. Syr. of Myrtle-Berries ℥ i. M. Let the Sick take one Spoon∣ful of this Mixture twice or thrice daily. 76. The wonted Sweats, or a Serous Loosness sup∣prest, may be sufferd, as long as they do not harm the Sick, who suffer no inconveniency by a more sparing voiding of Urin: Otherwise several Diuretics ac∣cording to the divers Constitution of the Humors that are in the Body, wherby a greater plenty of the Serous part may be reduc'd to the Kidneys, and other harms be shund. 77. A Watry Ʋrin made a little after Food, and chiefly after more plenteous and Diuretical Drink ta∣ken in, seeing that for the most part it portends, or breeds no harm, requires no Cure.
78. The Watry Ʋrin which is a sign of Crudity that is, of a Concoction deficient in the Humors of the Blood, as oft as that Voluntary Concoction is expecte in vain, or coms too late by Nature, so oft it is to b promoted by Art, and that by Medicins mildly temper∣ing all, and chiefly the Acid Acrimony of the Humors, (whence coms to pass that more intire mixing of the Humors in the Mass of Blood) and again loosening the close union of the Humors. 79. The fixt Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals ex∣alted to their highest perfection do before all others mildly temper all and even the Acid Acrimony of the Humors: next to which Oily Volatil Salts come, and Aromatics next to these: by the force of which pre∣dently us'd exceding Mans capacity in many thing not only an Effervescency of somwhat-contrary Hu∣mors most agreeing to Mans Nature is bred in the small Gut, and Heart; but the preternatural growing together, and uniting of the more sharp Humors, but first moderated by them is again dissolvd in the Blood. I speak these things of great moment in the Practice of Physic by experience, and commend them to the truly Studious of Physic. 80. A red, and thin Ʋrin arising from Choler more volatil, and sharper, or such a like external Cause may be corrected beside the shunning of external Causes en∣creasing heat in the Body, by Medicins that temper the Volatilness and Acrimony encreasd of Choler; which all the somwhat Tart and more benign Acids us'd oft and for some time in a small quantity perform. 81. A red and thick Ʋrin befalling the Sick in Burning Fevers, as it signifies a Concoction begun, so ought it not to be troubled or chang'd by Medicins; yea rather, when this Work of Nature goes on slow∣ly, it is to be helpd by the Medicins mentiond in
Sect. 79, to be selected according to the Diversity of the Symptoms and Humors. 82. Ʋrin of a dark red and somwhat thick, deno∣ting the Jaundice, is of its own accord amended the Jaundice being Cur'd. 83. Bloody Ʋrin, testifying a Vessel of Blood harmd in the Kidneys, Urin, or Bladder, or its Neck, or pas∣sage through may be amended, the wounded part be∣ing heald and consolidated: To which end the fol∣lowing Mixture oft taken by Spoonfuls may avail. ℞. Parsley, Plantane-waters, of each ℥ is. ss. Cinamon-wa∣ter ℥ ss. Dragons-Blood ℈ ss. Laudanum ii Gr. Sp. of Nitre dulcifi'd x drops, or distild Vinegar ʒ ii. Syr. of Myrtle-Berries ℥ i. M. 84. Ʋrin Clear, and more or less Red, or becoming Tur∣bid a little after, as it certainly testifies a Stoppage in the Head, and a Catarrhal Fever, so requires that the Cure of it be instituted, and that being absolvd is re∣stord. 85. The Odour of Ʋrin variously chang'd by seve∣ral things taken in, the same being omitted it returns to its natural state. 86. Ill-smeld Urin by a corruption of the Blood communicated to it with purulent Matter may be cor∣rected, the corruption of Blood being corrected, and the Ulcer breeding Purulent Matter being Cur'd. 87. Ʋrin Insd, when it is also Vnconcocted, may be corrected the Crudity of the Humors in the Blood being remov'd: of which see Sect. 78, 79. 88. Bitter Ʋrin may be corrected by more abun∣dant deducing Choler by Stool with Cholagogues: of which we have oft spoken before. 89. Acid Ʋrin may be corrected by a moderat use of any Volatil and chiefly Aromatic Salas continu'd for some time, being very conveniet for Melancholic People.
90. Gravel every-where occurring in Ʋrin, and testi∣fying that the Conglobated Glandul's are ill-affected by a frequent external Cold, or sowr things taken in, will disappear the Disease of the noted Glandul's being cur'd, and that by more temperd Aromatics and Volatil Salts us'd long enough; seeing this Evil is wont to be bred, and encreasd in length of time. 91. But when greater Gravel coms forth, falling to the bottom, and beginning and cherishing the produ∣ction of Stones, those things that dissolv Stones are to be us'd, beside Oily Volatil Salts; amongst which we deservedly attribute the first place to Spirit of Nitre, seeing Stones are so easily and manifestly dissolvd and broken in two. 92. The Spirit of Nitre may commodiously be mixt in ordinary Drink, Beer, Wine, Broths, &c. to a light acidity, and be long us'd; whose excellent Ef∣fect all may admire. 93. Fat swimming on the Ʋrin, most commonly the individual Companion of a more grievous Scurvy may be remov'd, the more sharp Humor Salt like pickle being amended, by any Volatil, but chiefly Oily and Aromatic Salts to be taken at Dinner, and Supper in a Glass of Wine to some drops. 94. Froth remaining in the Superficies of Ʋrin, when it arises from Wind, which is evident besides by other signs of Wind, will depart, the Wind being cur'd, of which before in Chap. 14. Sect. 56, &c. and elswhere. 95. If Froath be a sign of Catarrhs in the Head, which also ought to be concluded from other signs compar'd, the Cure must be directed to them, both by things altering the Humor vitious in quality and strengthening the Head, and by Hydragogues that re∣move and carry out the Humor peccant in place. 96. A Mealy, and Bran-like, or such-like Sediment
observd in Burning Fevers, these being cur'd, will by little and little cease to come forth. 97. Little Threds voided with Urin will yield to Volatil Acids cautiously us'd, such as are the Spirit of Nitre, of Salt, &c. 98. We said a little of the Cure of Gravel and Stones in Sect. 91, 92. which may be seen there. 99. The Cure of Fleshy parts setling in Ʋrin de∣pends on the Cure of an Ʋlcer that is in the Kidneys; which may perhaps be more happily absolvd by daily taking in Balsam of Sulphur made with the Oil of Amber, or of Juniper to iii or iv drops, then by any other Medicin hitherto known. 100. We have already in Sect. 83. set down the Cure of Ʋrin Bloody, and having Clots of Blood falling to its bottom. 101. Purulent Matter will cease to settle in Urin, the Ulcer wherever it is being Cur'd; to which pur∣pose the Balsam of Sulphur mention'd in Sect. 99. may serve; till Oils prepar'd of the Sulphur of Antimony by distillation be expos'd to public Sale. 102. All things contrary to Corruption serv to Cure Worms, both Aromatics chiefly the Bitter, and more mild Acids long us'd: among which they are here to be prefer'd, which are also Diuretical. 103. Amongst the more ordinary things Containd, a plenteous Cloudiness and inclining to redness or blackness; as it demonstrates the Excrementitious and more fat Part of the Blood, so it requires Medicins that correct and diminish it, to wit, somwhat-sowr Things and Diure∣tics, or more weak Sudorifies. 104. A Plenteous Enaeorema hanging in the mid∣dle of Urin, somwhat red, or black, and Ʋnequal, and Separated, teaching us that an excrementitious Humor of a middle nature being begun either to abound, or to
be concted, yet more slowly corrected, indicates its Al∣teration, and hence Separation, and Excretion by Stool, Ʋrin, or Sweats: which may be done by somwhat-Acid things joind to Volatil Salts, or more mild Aro∣matics, and hence by Purgers diversly mixt according to the diversity of the Diseases and Symptoms, as Cho∣lagogues, Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues; and also Diuretics, or Sudorifics likewise mixt, or temperd. 105. Lastly, The Sediment falling to the bottom of Urin, and likewise Plenteous, inclining to redness, or blackness, unequal and separated, as it witnesseth an Excrementitious Humor more earthy and glutinous, as well to abound in the Blood, as to Depart more slowly from it; so it requires that the same should be corrected by cutting and attenuating things, especially Aroma∣tics and Volatil Salts, seldom to be corrected by somwhat swr things, and to be prepar'd for its Separation, yea afterward to be diminisht by Phlegmagogues, and to be driven forth slowly, and mildly chiefly with Ʋrin, somtimes by Diuretics, and Sudorifics, not by force, but taken at several times. CHAP. LVI. Of the Descent of Urin from the Kidneys through the Ureters, and Passage into the Bladder deprav'd. 1. THe Ʋrin Separated in the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys by the Blood returning and straind into the Funnel descends naturally through the Ʋreters into the Ʋrinar Bladder thence call'd. 2. This Descent and Passing of Ʋrin into its Blad∣der out of the Kidneys is somtimes hindred, and chiely
by a straitness in the Ʋreters, as well where the Ure∣ters are continu'd to the Funnel, as where they are im∣planted in the Bladder between its double Coats. 3. A straitness hindring the passage of Urin through the Ureters is oft an Obstruction by a Stone sticking in the Funnel and stopping the entrance of the Ʋreters; seldom by the same filling their joining with the Blad∣der: somtimes Urin is stopt longer in the Ureters by one great Stone, or many mean ones filling the Cavi∣ty of the Bladder; by which I have oft seen the Ureters then by degrees enlarg'd and distended, oft admitting a thumb, and containing in them Urin up to the Kid∣neys. 4. I scarce think this passage of Urin can ever be hindred, at least long by a Stone sticking in the Ʋreters, seeing I have found somtimes in the middle of the U∣reter enlarg'd more there then elswhere, a Stone near the bigness of a Dovs Egg, by the sides of which U∣rin descended freely; which was thence evident, be∣cause that no Urin was containd in the same Ureter, no where, unless where the Stone stickd, was the Ureter distended. 5. This Passage of Urin may also be hinderd by any Tumor filling the place of the Ʋreter with the Blad∣der, and more straitning its entrance there according to Nature strait enough. 6. Seeing all this straitness proceding both from a Stone and Tumor, cannot be cur'd unless they be cur'd; its Cure must be expected from their Cure: although all great Tumors there are more seldom cur'd, both because Men soon die the Urin being supprest on both sides, and because Medicins keeping their efficacious∣ness cannot be directed thither without difficulty.
CHAP. LVII. Of the Retention of Urin in the Bladder, and its Excretion through the Passage call'd Ure∣thra deprav'd. 1. URin is for some time gatherd according to Nature in its Bladder, till being grievous in plenty or quality it stir it up to unload it self through the Passage. 2. The Sphincter Muscle plac'd round about the Orifice of the Bladder and binding it servs for this vo∣luntary Retention of Urin, as the Fibrous Coat of the Bladder servs for its Excretion wrinkling its whole Substance and straitning its Cavity, and so pressing forth the Urin containd in it through the Passage. 3. This Retention of Ʋrin is deprav'd, when it flows out involuntarily in Incontinence of Ʋrin; its Excreti∣on is deprav'd, when, 1. it cannot be voided although the Sick most endeavour it, in Ischuria and a Suppres∣sion of Urin; or 2. it is expeld plenteous enough not withut great endeavour, heat and pain in Dysuria and Heat of Ʋrin so call'd; or 3. though a continual provocation to make Water doth urge, yet coms Ʋrin away only by drops and by little and little in the Drop∣ping of Ʋrin, or Strangury; or 4. It is pourd som∣times into the Cavity of the Abdomen, somtimes out of the Body, not through the Passage, but another way, a Wound, or Ʋlcer being in the Bladder, or Passage. 4. An Involuntary Voiding of Ʋrin owns oft for its Cause a Palsie, or great Wound of the Sphincter; whence the Sphincter ceases to be contracted, and the Orifice of the Bladder to be shut; wherfore Urin di∣stils
of its own accord, or is driven forth by the Blad∣der contracted. 5. The same coms to pass somtimes in grievous Di∣stempers, as the Epilepsie, Apoplexie, Syncope, Astonishment, as also Drunkennes, in which al the Senses, especially the Internal, are so troubled, or weakned, that no Animal Spirits, or those only troubled are carri'd to the Sphin∣cter of the Bladder and its Fibrous Coat; wherfore Urin is either not retaind, or only confusedly and in∣ordinatly, and so involuntarily then retaind, and again voided. 6. Urin is wholly supprest in Ischuria, 1. When the Orifice of the Bladder, or Channel of the Passage is straitned by an Obstruction, Compression, or Growing to∣gether. 7. Each is Obstructed oft by a Stone sticking in it; seldom by Phlegm thickend or Clots of Blood, or an excrescency of Flesh out of the bottom of the Bladder through the Passage, and stopping it; (as several years ago I saw a stupendous example of that thing at Am∣sterdam in a Woman at length miserably deceas'd of this Disease by reason of a conjoind loss of Blood) oft by a Fleshy part growing in the Chanel of the Passage and filling it. 8. The Orifice of the Bladder or Chanel of the Passage is prest by a Tumor, and that chiefly hard next it, by an Inflammation, or Scirrhus, &c. as also by bands binding the Yard more closely. 9. As well the Orifice of the Bladder, as Chanel of the Passage grow together, where they have been woun∣ded or fretted, both by more sharp Stones, and by more sharp Humors. 10. 2. The Voiding of Ʋrin is Supprest, when there can be no Contraction of the Bladder, and because of the Palsie thereof, and because it is extreamly Fild and
Distended by Ʋrin too long held in; which doth not only happen to such as Rave by Drunkenness, or a grievous Disease, but somtimes even to People of Rea∣son, or to an Infant for shame, and to its harm so long stopping Urin preposterously, till the Bladder being too much distended by it, cannot be further contra∣cted to Expel the Urin. 11. In the Dysurie Urin is voided in a quantity large enough by a great endeavour, but with heat and pain accompanying, by reason of the Orifice of the Bladder, or the Ʋrinar way wounded, or ulcerated, but affected with burning pain at the Out-let of Urin, and not letting it out unless with difficulty. 12. Those parts are wont to be Corroded or Ʋlce∣rated both by sharp Humors joind to the Urin and corroding them, and by more great sharp Stones cut∣ting it in a difficult passage, and occasioning an Ulcer anon to follow of its own accord. 13. In the Strangury there is a perpetual irritation to extrude Urin scarce voided in the least quantity by the internal Superficies of the Bladder corroded or ulcerated, and not enduring to be touchd of any thing coming to it unless with an exceding pain and notable trouble, yea continually stirring up, and for∣cing the whole Body of the Bladder to contract it self, and anon expel what is receivd in though never so little by drops and slowly. 14. The Internal Superficies of the Bladder is fret∣ted, and Ʋlcerated by sharp Humors carri'd thither, and by Stones, the sharp especially sticking there, and by degrees cutting it upon a vehement motion, agi∣tation and concussion of the Body. 15. Uri flows out of its Bladder through unwon∣ted ways, when it is either burst asunder, or otherwise wounded, or perforated with an Ʋlcer.
16. It is easily burst asunder by Chance into the Belly, when the Bladder is turgid with Urin. 17. The same is Wounded by accident, or endeavour and art. By Accident by a Sword, Knife, Gun, &c. and that maliciously or by chance. By Endeavour by a Lithotomists Knife. 18. Ʋlcers either succede the preceding Wounds, or procede from the corroding Acrimony of the Hu∣mors, or a Stone cutting it, or an opend Inflammation. 19. As oft as Wounds or Ʋlcers pierce through the Bladder, so oft Urin flows into the cavity of the Belly. 20. So oft as Wounds or Ulcers are in the Neck of the Bladder, and they are not open internally, but ex∣ternally, so oft the same Urin is effus'd without the Bo∣dy; as also when there is a Wound, or Ʋlcer in the Passage piercing through it. 21. As for the Cure of the mentiond Evils, it shall be taught elswhere, when the Palsie, or a Wound of the Sphincter ought to be cur'd. 22. So also we will not in this place, but elswhere set down the Cure of the Epilepsie, Apoplexie, Syncope, Astonishment or Drunkenness. 23. Stones stopping the Orifice of the Bladder are either to be repeld with a Squirt, if more great; or are to be expeld forth by Drink, and that Diureti∣cal being taken more freely. 24. The same sticking in the Passage, it being s ft∣ned and enlarg'd by a convenient Fomentation, they are to be movd forward by Diuretic Drink largely ta∣ken; or if the Stone be more great, it is to be opend, and the Stone drawn out, the Wound thence arising be∣ing consolidated. 25. Phlegm grown together and sticking to the Ori∣fice of the Bladder ofter, then to the Channel of the Pas∣sage, is to be cut and attenuated by a convenient Li∣quor
squirted in, wherby it may be the easier voided together with the Urin. 26. To this end Aromatics boild in Water or Wine may conduce; to which Volatil Salts may commodi∣ously be mixt. 27. Clots of Blood may be dissolvd by the same; if endeavour be together us'd, that new Blood be not continually effus'd; which may be done by those Me∣dicins that hinder the efflux of Blood, and Consoli∣dat Vessels harmd: such as we oft prescribd before, and in special in Chap. 55. Sect. 83. 28. An excrescency of Flesh out of the bottom of the Bladder is hard to be Cur'd, unless by squirting a con∣solidating Decoction into the Bladder through a Sy∣ringe. 29. A Compression as well of the Orifice of the Blad∣der, as of the Chanel of the Ʋrethra by any Tumor will of its own accord be Cur'd the noted Tumor be∣ing Cur'd: as also that compression made by bands, by untying them. 30. When the Chanel of the Passage call'd Ʋrethra, or the Orifice of the Bladder is grown together, it must be bored, a fit Instrument being mildly thrust in; and the same, if hollow, is to be left there so long coverd with a Consolidating Ointment, or Plaster, till the fear of a new closing be remov'd. 31. The Palsie and slackness of the Substance of the Bladder may be cur'd by Medicins to be prescrib'd in the following Book. 32. An extreme Distension of the Bladder by Ʋrin too long held in, may be Cur'd by thrusting in a Wax Can∣dle, being first oild, through the Ʋrethra to its Cavity, and again anon by drawing, out the same; or if the Matter do not so succede, by thrusting into the Blad∣der a Silver, or Leather Squirt, or one made of Whales
Fins more truly to be call'd then Bones, and also oild, and letting out the Urin through it. 33. In a Dysurie the Orifice of the Bladder, or Ʋri∣nar Passage fretted or ulcerated, may be Cur'd as well internally by the Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Anise, Amber, or Juniper taken to 2 or 3 drops twice or thrice daily in a convenient Liquor, Metheglin, Spa∣nish Wine, or in a Vulnerary Decoction, as exter∣nally the same being Syring'd in to several drops in such a like Decoction, and for some time kept in the Bladder, or Passage harmd, the hand being prest abut the Nut of the Yard, and that often renewing it daily. 34. If the Humors corroding, and Acid or Salt like Pickle be still carri'd down into the Bladder, they are to be Corrected with Crabs-Eyes, Pearl, &c. and chiefly with Volatil Salts often daily us'd in a small quantity in a convenient Liquor. 35. The same in part at least temperd, if moreover they abound in the Body, are to be diminisht, and eva∣cuated with Hydragogues. 36. The Medicins before mentiond, may also con∣duce in the Cure of the Strangury. 37. The Bladder burst asunder, or Wounded, or Ʋl∣cerated in its inner parts is Incurable. 38. The Bladder Wounded, or Ʋlcerated from with∣out, may be Cur'd by Medicins appropriated to conso∣lidat Wounds, and cleans Ulcers, to be propos'd els∣where. Which is also to be understood of curing a Wound, or Ʋlcer of the Ʋretha.
CHAP. LVIII. Of a deprav'd Excretion of Sweat. 1. AS Vomiting, so also Sweating seems not to me a Natural Excretion, but either Non-natural, or Preternatural, or Physical; and that either Artifi∣cial, or Critical. 2. I do not judg Sweat to be a Natural Excretion, because in Healthy People moderatly using the Non-natural things I have not hitherto observd any Sweat breaking forth. 3. I judg the Excretion of Sweat to be Non-natural, as oft as a Non-natural thing exceding the Golden Mediocrity mov's it, as hot or rainy Weather, much Meat, or Drink, and chiefly hot; a more vehement Motion of Body, a great and burning anxiety of Mind, &c. which ceasing Sweating ceases again. 4. I judg a Sweat Preter-natural, which is raisd by the Humors corrupted, or by Poison taken in, wea∣kening or killing a Man. 5. I call a Sweat Physical, which is either Critical driven forward for the profit and health of the Sick of its own accord by the Humors that are in Man, or Artificial by Art by Medicins taken within the Body or us'd outwardly as a Bath, Rubbings, &c. 6. This Excretion of Sweat is to be thought deprav'd, 1. when a wonted and neither troublesom nor hurtful Sweat to the Party is wholly, or in part hindred whence∣soever. 7. 2. When a Non-natural Sweat is suddenly stopt. 8. 3. When a Physical, or Critical, or Artificial Sweat is more, or less hinderd. 9. 4. When some of these Sweats is so urg'd and en∣creasd, that a Man is worse by it.
10. 5. When a Sweat breaks forth much weakening a Man with, or without a Fever. 11. 6. When an Insipid Sweat, which is wont to be most usual and not in the least hurtful, breaks forth Salt, or Bitter, or Sow. 12. A wonted Sweat not hurtful befals a Man in a neutral state, and so to one that is less healthy, and it follows (at least in my esteem) such a Constitution of the somwhat-contrary Humors departing from a lauda∣ble Mediocrity, by which an Effervescency producing a useful Sweat may be raisd, and so preserving the Blood from a corruption that might breed a notable Dis∣ease: seeing that it being hindred, or remov'd, the same Man is easily overtaken by a grievous Disease: which is hindred wholly, or in part by more grievous or lighter Causes to be propos'd in the following Sect. 13. 2. A Non-natural Sweat is suddenly stopt both by the external Cold of Air, Water, a Shirt, Bed, or other Coverings, or Cloaths entring into the Body running down of a Sweat, and every where open through the Pores, and not only binding them, but moreover bringing a notable Change, to wit, a Coa∣gulation, or some other hurtful thing to all the Hu∣mors much mov'd every way through every Vessel; and by the alone removing of Coverings, or Cloaths and making the Body naked; and by a sudden rest of the Body much mov'd before; and by an unthought-of Ter∣ror stopping, or at least troubling any motion of the things Containd. 14. 3. A Physical, and as well Critical, as Artifici∣al Sweat is more, or less hindred by the same external Cold imprudently receivd into the naked Body, or by a grievous and unexpected Motion of Mind, chiefly by an astonishing Sorrow or Terror. 15. 4. Any Sweat of it self hurtless or useful may
be too much urg'd, and encreasd by Air more hot by Nature, or Art; by Food, especially such as may be drunk, taken plenteously, or hot; by a vehement mo∣tion of Body; by molesting Anger and Care; by Cloaths almost oppressing the Body, and by potent Sudorifies imprudently us'd. 16. 5. A Sweat coming forth of its own accord with or without a Fever, and weakening a Man, and therfore preternatural, seems to arise from a vitious Effervescency of the Humors flowing together to the small Gut, and breeding a dissolving, and cutting Li∣quor; by which carri'd to the Heart the universal Mass of Blood is so chang'd, and dissolvd, that its Serous parts do easily separate from the rest and break forth through the Pores of the Body in the form of a Sweat. 17. I judg that this Liquor doth most resemble a somwhat-Acid Volatil Salt, seeing that Sweat is easily sent forth by one like it. 18. 6. A Salt (but like Pickle) Sweat breaks forth from such a like Serous part being in the Blood: as a Bitter Sweat from Choler keeping its bitterness, and mixt with the Serous part of Blood: but an Acid Sweat from Lympha, or the Juice of the Pancreas more sowr, and keeping its taste in the Serous part of Blood. 19. A Diminisht, or Supprest wholly harmless, or useful Sweat may be encreasd, or restord, 1. By remo∣ving all its Causes. 2. By stirring up Heat in the Air. 3. By covering the Body with warmd and sufficient Cloaths, or Coverings. 4. By giving Food, and chiefly such as may be Drunk, both plenteous and hot, as Broth, Wine, Beer, and such-like. 5. By moving and stirring the Body again (preposterously given to rest) as much as strength shall permit. 6. By driving out of the Mind great Sorrow and Terror by effectual reasons. 7. By using Sudorifies, especially the liquid, and spiritous.
8. By using a moist, or dry Bath, when the Matter permits. 20. A Sweat too much encreasd, or of it self hurt∣ful, and more and more weakening a Man may be les∣send, and at length remov'd, 1. By keeping the Body meanly coverd, yet not naked; 2. By bewaring of the Volatil, and also Spiritous Acid Salt; Yea, 3. By u∣sing those things that fix an Acid Salt, Chalk, Coral, &c. 21. By this means I prescrib'd the following Con∣serv, or one like it oft-times this year 1670. to several Sick cast by the Epidemic Fever so mortal to this Ci∣ty the year before into a daily Sweat, and especially troublesom in the Night, and daily more and more weakening them; by which taken twice, or thrice a day to the quantity of a Nutmeg, they were by de∣grees freed as well of the unseasonable Sweat, as of the Quartan Fever, and any other, if any remaind, and so recoverd strength. ℞. Conserv of Red Roses ℥ ii. Confection of Jacinth ʒ i. Diascordium ʒ ii. Red Coral prepar'd ℈ ii. Syr. of Myrtle-Berries what suf∣fices. M. for a Conserv. 22. But instead of the commonly sold Diascordi∣um call'd Fracastors, seeing it is wont to be given to ʒ i. and ℈ iv. and is therfore loath'd by several Sick People, whilst I lay weak the former Winter, I in∣vented another Preparation and Form of Diascordium, and causd it to be made; the Dose of which, is from Gr. xv. to ℈ i. and so much less then the Dose of Fracastors, but of much greater efficacy and effect in all cases: as all that use both may experience with me. Wherefore I freely add here for an Overplus the Description of Mine, (which is commonly us'd both in Holland, and in the most noted Cities of England; as also all his other Prescriptions in this Book.)
The Diascordium of Sylvius. 1. ℞. Gentian-Root ℥ ss. Angelica-Root ʒ ii. dried Leavs of Scordium ℥ ii. of Carduus, of Dittany of Crete, of each ℥ ss. best Saffron ʒ ii. the true Acacia ʒ i. ss. These being cut and grosly bruisd, pour on them the rectifi'd Spirit of Wine till it be three or four fingers breadth above them. Let them stand 24 hours in a warm place, then pour out the Tin∣cture, and so oft pour on, digest, and pour out more Spirit of Wine, so oft as need requires to extract all the Tincture and Vertue. All the Tinctures being put together after the dregs have setled, if there be any, may be pourd out slowly clear, and pure from them, and the Spirit of Wine should be separated and drawn from it again in a B.M. to the consistence of a more liquid Extract or Julap. Which may serve for the like use, or be happily mixt with other Medi∣cins instead of an Aromatic Spirit. 2. ℞. Opium of Thebes as much as you please; to this mildly dried pour on distild Vinegar till it be four fingers breadth deep. Let it stand in a warm place so long, till a red Tincture be drawn; which is to be pourd out, and kept apart, till in like manner the rest of the Tincture be extracted out of the rest of Opi∣um. Let all the Tinctures growing clear after a setling be pourd out from the Dregs setling, and be likewise deduc'd with a slow Fire to the consistence of a more soft Extract, or more fluid Syrup. 3. ℞. Masterwort-Root ℥ i. Cassia Lignea▪ best Cina∣mon, of each ℥ ss. Nutmegs ʒ iii. M. to be a most thin Pouder. 4. ℞. True Bole Armoniac ℥ i. ss. beat it alone and sift it, then smooth it into a fine Pouder on a Marble Stone.
5. ℞. Gum Arabic wrinkled like a Worm ℥ ss. Dis∣solv it in Fenel Water ℥ i. or i. ss. 6. ℞. All the first Extract. Of the Extract of Opi∣um ʒ ii. Both Pouders. Mix these together, adding by degrees the Gum Arabic dissolvd. Beat them well toge∣ther, and if its Consistencie seem too solid, add Syr. of Myrtle-Berries as much as sufficieth. M. to be an Opiat according to Art. 23. If any please, they may reduce part of this Opiat with a most gentle Fire in a Tin or Glass-Ves∣sel to the Consistencie of Pills, and keep it apart so prepar'd, wherby three or more Pills may be made of xv Gr. or there-about to be swallowd; which many greatly desire in moving a Sweat. 24. But any prudent Physician may easily reduce the Opiat it self tough enough into Pills, some Grains of Mineral Bezoard, Diaphoretic Antimony, or of any other Sudorific Pouder being added, and so give them to their Patients. 25. A Sweat salt like pickle breaking forth may thus far be amended by Medicins that Correct the Salt like Pickle, oft propos'd before, and somtimes by such as will Carry it out by Stool. 26. A Bitter Sweat requires that Choler should be Diminisht by Cholagogues oft mentiond. 27. The Matter of a Sowr Sweat may be Concen∣trated or Temperd by Coral, Chalk, Crabs-Eyes, and such-like, and after that be Carri'd out and Lessend by Hydragogues downward by Stool. FINIS. Advertisement. HAving experienc'd the Authors so fre∣quently extold Oily Volatil Salt, how efficacious it has prov'd in several Desperat and Chronic Diseases; I thought it conveni∣ent to signifie to the Reader, that the Author, beside what he says of it in this Book, com∣mended it in his public Readings in Curing the Small Pox, Kings-Evil, Palsie, Apoplexie, Convulsive-Fits, Falling-Sickness, Worms, Green-Sickness, Difficult Travel, &c. in which two last I have experienc'd it stupendious; which may also be farther confirmd by seve∣ral other Physicians in London that buy this medicin of me. I have expos'd it to Sale at Mr. Brabazon Aylmer, Bookseller, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, and at Mr. Thomas Burrel at the Golden Ball under St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet, in Ounce and Half-ounce Bot∣tles, the Ounce at 6 s. the half at 3 s. Seald with a Lion Rampant, and no where else in London.
