T1156 R6990 12527986 62699
Crums of Bread FOR The DOVE in the Clefts of the Rock, and the secret places of the Stairs, Cant. 2.14. Or HELPS to MEDITATION, On Conversion, Mortification, Sancti∣fication, the Christians daily walke, Communion with God, &c. With Directions for profitable Reading the Scriptures, and good practicall Books; For a Friend, By J. T.
My Friend, ACcording to your de∣serts and desires, I here present to you some broken Thoughts, di∣rections, remembrances, references, for the better improve∣ment of your Solitudes and retire∣ments for Meditation and Reading. I have ranked them under severall heads, given you but briefe hints, leaving the enlargements to your own thoughts; what more might be required, you may supply from the Scriptures, your Sermon-Notes, and those good books, to which I have re∣ferred you: Each SECTION (after that you have perused the whole) af∣fords you matter enough for one So∣litary season at the least; and when
you have done with this, you may have more, as God gives opportunity. I begin with the subject of Conver∣sion, Regeneration, and the first work, if it suit not your concition, you may commend it to such as you love and know may need it. I leave it with you as a token of my respects for you and your Spirituall concernments. God give his blessing to it, and if it any way help you in your Meditation and Rea∣ding, I shall desire no more then your remembrances of me at the throne of Grace. J. T.
SECT. I. Of Conversion, Regeneration, &c. IT is to be presupposed in order to the improvement of the following Sections, that as you have been un∣der the meanes of Grace, so, you are indeed in a state of Grace; if you are not, Con∣sider, 1. That Conversion, Regeneration, a state of Grace and interest in Christ by faith are of absolute necessity unto salvation. The Scriptures do abundantly prove it, turne to read, and take these few for a triall, John 3.3 &c. Heb. 12.14. Mat. 18.3. Joh. 3.16. &c. All good Reason is for it. 1. Without an interest in Christ thou hast no title to sal∣vation. 2. Without regeneration thou hast no fitnesse for it; And 3ly, Eph. 2.12. Heb. 12.14 Pro. 3.3. Hab. 1.13. Without such termes God is resolved that he will not. 4. His nature is such in Wisedome, Holi∣nesse
and righteousnesse, that he cannot give it: resolve then for it, and set about it speedily, seriously, and to the purpose, sue and seek to God for the grace, and ap∣ply thy selfe to the use of the meanes, with hungrings, and thirstings after righteous∣nesse, with humility, faith, prayer, and di∣ligence; Prov. 1.7. In order to it take these Dire∣ctions. 1. Math. 16.26. Heb. 1.13. Rom. 10. Rom. 7. Joh. 5.28.29. Rom 3.23 Gal. 3.10. Eph. 2.1, 2.3. Eph. 2.12. Pro. 15. 2 Cor. 5.18. 1 Tim. 1.15. Rom. 3.25. Heb. 10.15, 16, 17. John 3.16. Mark 1.15. Consider, Thou hast a precious and an immortall soule, there is a God that is Ho∣ly, Just, and Good, he hath given thee his Law, and Gospell; Heaven, and Hell, in endlesse eternity are before thee, death and judgment hasten a pace, a world of sin both of nature and of life may be char∣ged upon thee, the law is against thee, the curse and wrath of God is over thee, thou hast no hope nor helpe in thy selfe, nor in all the creatures, and without a Christ and Grace, and a changed state thou wilt be undone for ever. For thy encouragement to thy duty, understand and believe, That God is in a way of grace and mercy; Christ Jesus came into the World to seek and save sinners; as a surety and sacrifice he hath died, satisfied Gods law and Justice; established a Covenant of Grace and sal∣vation on termes of faith, repentance,
and new obedience; Heb. 5.9. Prov. 12. makes the ten∣ders of grace, and reconciliation in the mi∣nistry of the Gospell to thee; hath along time been calling upon thee; 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. Prov. 1.23. is still wai∣ting, woing, and beseeching thee to accept of him and grace: his spirit is ready to help thee; there is nothing wanting, but thy free and full consent, Heb. 3.8.12.15. ô continue not (as too long thou hast done already) in a state of sinne and enmity, unbeliefe and unrege∣neracy, to the disappointments of Grace, 2 Cor. 6.1. the abuse of the Gospell, Heb. 2.3. Heb. 10.29. Mark. 16.16. 2 Thes. 1.8. the griefe of the spirit, the reproach of the blood of Christ, and the remedilesse destruction and damna∣tion of thine own soule: Repent and be∣lieve the Gospell, receive Christ and Grace, apply thy selfe unto thy duty in faith, re∣pentance, and new obedience, and thou shalt not miscarry: Pro. 3.16. Rom. 8.1, 2, 3. thy sinnes shall be par∣doned, thy person shall be justified, thy nature shall be changed, thy soule shall be saved, John 3.36. 2. Understand what is required of thee, and expected from thee, in the termes of the Gospell, faith, repentance, and new obe∣dience: in short 'tis thus: John 17.3. Pro. 3.33. Rom. 10.10, 11. Rom. 1.5. 1. By faith thou art 1. To apprehend. 2. To assent unto. 3. To apply unto thy selfe, and 4. To improve the disco∣veries
made unto thee, 1. Of sinne and wrath in the Law of God. 2. Of Grace and mercy through Christ in the Gospell of Salvation. 2. Lam. 3.40. By Repentance thou art, 1. To search and find out the sinfulnesse (in some good measure) of thy nature, and of thy life; Rom. 7.13. 2. Through the consideration of the sinfulnesse of sinne, which is the greatest evill in it selfe, as against God and the grea∣test good; Eph. 2.2, 3. the consideration of thy sad condition, because of sin according to the Law of God, the greatest judgment in this life and that to come; Ezek 16.60, 61. Jer. 3. and the consi∣deration of the abundant grace and mer∣cy set before thee in the good will of God to thy salvation. 1. The death of Christ, the blessings and promises of life and of salvation tendered to thee, Ps. 51. to Humble thy soule with griefe of heart and broken∣nesse of spirit. Drt. 9: 3. To cast thy selfe at Gods feet before the throne of grace, in free and full confession, in earnest prayer and sup∣plication for grace and mercy through Jesus Christ. 4. Rom. 7. Ezck 33.11. Is. 1.16. Ezek. 18.31. To set thine heart against all manner of sin whatsoever, to hate it and abhorre it, in the strength of God to resolve the utter destruction of it in thy nature, the
avoidance of it in thy life and Conversati∣on, Rom. 7. together with all the temptations and occasions that lead thee to sin from with∣out, and all the corrupt motions, disposi∣tions, workings of it that are within, ac∣cording to the prohibitions in the word, the convictions of the spirit, and the checks of thy conscience, and this both in thought, word, and deed. 5. Thou must be sure to give proofe of all in the course of thy life and conversation, Matth. 3.8. Mat. 3.8. and if through weaknesse and infirmity, thou beest at any time overtaken, to reflect upon thy selfe, Ps. 51. and renew these actings of repentance with particular application to that transgression, And 7. Every day, whether sin be known or not known to be searching, humbling, confessing, praying, resolving, labouring to root out and de∣stroy the remainders of thy Corrup∣tion. Ps. 19.12. 3. New obedience calls thee 1. To Con∣sider the obligation that lies upon thee by nature and grace to know and to doe the will of God. 2. Rem. 12.1. Rom. 14.9. To acquaint thy selfe with the mind and will of God revealed in his word as the rule of thy dury. 3. Ps. 1. Psal. 119. Acts 9.6. Deut. 39: Is. 56.8. To give up thy selfe in the sence of thy duty and Gods mercy through Christ in a Co∣venant
of sincere, free, full, universall, and constant obedience: 4. Making Christ thy strength, and the Word thy rule, Gods Glory and thine own salvation thine end, and the spirit thy guide, and a good con∣science thy principle, to apply thy selfe to the exercise of every grace, Psal. 50.4. Rom. 6.12. and the performance of every duty, which God requireth of thee, towards himselfe, thine own soule, and others in thy place, conditi∣on, Phil. 3.8. 1 Pet. 2.5. and capacity. 5. Making up thy de∣fects (when sensible of them) by presenting thy person and thy duty to Gods Gracious acceptance, according to the Covenant of of Grace, through the mediation of Jesus Christ: In so doing, for thy Comfort under∣stand, that God will accept, and Christ will help, grace shall be thy state, God, Christ promises, pardon, peace, priviledg shall be thy portion whilest thou art here; death, judgment, hell, curse, wrath, and reall evils shall not come nigh to hurt thee; Heaven, blessednesse, and glory, eternall life and joy shall be thine inheritance, and posses∣sion, to all eternity. And if thou wouldest not miscarry in this great work, Caut. Luk. 19.42 Mat. 11.6. take heed (1) of delaies, de∣murres, put offs, 2. of taking offence, at
the strictnesse of duty, at the low condi∣tion of Christ and Christians, and the scan∣dalous lives and actions of Hypocrites and professors, who shall beare their burden. Acts 2.40. 3. of evill company. 4. Of discourage∣ments from carnall friends. 5. Heb. 3.12. Of an evill heart of impenitency and unbeliefe, 6. Of Temptations from Sathan, 7. Acts 26.28.29. Of being but almost a Christian, resting in con∣victions, confessions, humiliations, vowes and promises, profession, partiall change and reformation, good esteem with others; till the work be perfectly done, and thine heart subdued unto God in Christ, in faith, repentance, and new obedience, according to the Gospell and the directions now set before you. 8. Rom. 14.1. Of troubling your selves with needlesse disputes and questions about things of small moment in Religion, or above your reach. 9. Of Spirituall pride upon the one hand, or unnecessary calling in question your condition upon the other, where this work is sincerely done, or Gods Grace and mercy for your pardon, and ac∣ceptance in Jesus Christ. 10. Take heed of Apostacy and backsliding in whole or part, to corrupt opinions and errours upon the one hand, or to sinfull practises and courses upon the other.
When this work is done, give grace the glory, 1 Tim. 1.14 Mat. 18.3. adore its freedome, and magnifie its power, believe its constancy, and live upon its fulnesse till brought to glory. 2. Be daily practising and perfecting this blessed work, and think not that all is done till thou getst to Heaven. 3. For further direction and thy better progresse be much in Holy exercises, Acts 9.11. pray∣ing, hearing, meditating, conferring with good Christians, reading the Scriptures, and Sermon notes, and good books, espe∣cially about Conversion and Regene∣ration. Some Sermons I have purposely prea∣ched on this Subject in Abington on the se∣verall instances of conversion in the new Testament: in Exeter on Joh. 3. at Petrocks on Acts 26.18. at Mary-steps and Edmonds on Matth. 18.3. at Mary-moores &c. be∣sides collaterall applications: had I been more in this work and method, successe would have been through grace propor∣tionable. These following are choice Books, though not all that may be read upon this subject, get and read what you can of them. Bax∣ters Call to the unconverted, Baxter Of Conversion. Baxters Directions to prevent
miscarrying in conversion. His Saint or a Brute. His Sermons on Death and Judgment. His Everlasting Rest. Whately of Regenera∣tion. Hooker's Soules preparation for Christ. Soule's Humiliation: with severall other Treatises of his, contracted in Ambrose his prima, or first things. Dike, of Repentance: morning Exercise at Giles, London. Mor∣ning exercise at Cripplegate, the Sermons in them on this Subject. Ob: Sedgwick on Rev. 3.20. his treatise of faith, &c. SECT. II. Of Mortification. HAving seen the Conversion of the Sin∣ner, let us proceed to the worke and exercise of the Saint: and the first thing that presents it self to our consideration, for the improvement of his conversion, is the Mortification of his corruption: and therein note, 1. That there is an indwelling Body of sin and corruption that remaineth in the con∣verted and regenerated person. It is perfe∣ctly pardoned, but not perfectly purged out, and destroyed, while in this body of flesh. See Romanes 7th. per tot.
2. It is the duty and property of every truly converted and regenerated person, to proceed in the mortification of corrup∣tion, and to endeavour through grace the compleat destruction of that body of sin that is about him, and every branch and member of it. See Rom. 6. & 7. & 8. Col. 3. Gal. 5, &c. throughout. R. 1. Remaining sin is remaining enmi∣ty to God and to the Christian himselfe, Rom. 8.7. 1 Pet. 2.11. Gen. 17.1. and must not be let alone. 2. Conversion and true Repentance is only sincere and true, as it intends perfection. 3. It must be perfectly done by Grace upon us, 1 Cor. 15.50. ere we can be fit subjects of the Kingdome of Heaven. Rom. 6.6. 4. The Death of Christ intends our perfect freedome and deliverance, by degrees, and in due time: as from the guilt of sin, and the punishment of sin, so from the dominion of sin in our conversion, Rom. 6.12. Rom. 7.25. Gul. 5.26. the abiding power of sin in our progressive mortification, and at last the presence and being of sin in our dissolution: what Christs death intends in its Merit, Example, Argu∣ment, and Influence, the same should we intend in our purpose and progresse for communion with him, and conformity to him, in his death and crucifixion. Take these Directions for it, 1. by way
of COnsideration: 2. by way of Operation and Practise. 1. Ps. 16.8: Ps. 119.11 Gen. 39.9. Ps. 18.21, 22. Rom. 7.13. Set before thine eyes continually (especially upon the motions of sin and temptations unto sin) the Holinesse of God in his Name; Nature, Word, and Will; his Holy Eye, his Holy Law. 2. Set before thine eyes the sinfulnesse of sin, and that especially in its own nature, as most contrary to God, his nature, his will, his works, his designes, his glory. For this see at large Burroughes treatise of the Evill of Evils, or the sinfulnesse of Sin. Dr. Reynolds of the Sinfulness of sin. &c. 3. Set before you the evill effects and fruits of sin, upon the fallen Angels, Man∣kind, thine own person; Rom. 6.22. and those either already felt, or that hereafter may be fea∣red. 4. Set before you the Bloud of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. Rom. 6.1, 2 Psal. Rom. 7.24. that pretious bloud, which is the price of your Redemption from the least of sins. 5. Set before you the sad complaints of the Saints and servants of God because of sin, and against their sin. 6. 2 Cor. 7.1. Set before you the gracious promises for your encouragement in the mortifica∣tion of your corruption, Ezek. 36, 26, 27. together with the promises in the covenant of Grace for your
assistance in this undertaking. 7. Set before you your own resolutions and vowes against it in your first convicti∣on and conversion, Rom. 6.3. Ps. 119.106. renewed in times of af∣fliction, and in Sacraments, and in Prayers put up to God for peace and pardon. Practicall and operative Directions. 1. Ps. 4.4. Lam. 3.39. Acquaint your selves, as with the ge∣nerall corruption, so with the particular corruption in your nature: search and find them out. Examine your hearts and lives, your dispositions, and conversations, by the rule of the Word, and Law of God, in its purity and perfection, and by the light of the spirit of God in its teachings and convictions: Job. 34.32 pray to God to discover you unto your selves: improve all ordinances and providences also to that purpose: con∣sider your Constitution, Education, Cal∣ling, Company, and Condition in this pre∣sent world: make use of the wholsome ad∣monitions of others skilfull, and faithfull, and acquainted with you, and their obser∣vations on you; the daily motions and wor∣kings of your hearts upon carnall and sen∣suall objects, and upon the approaches of temptations, will discover much unto you, if but well observed: the failings and the falls of others read or heard, and discerned
by you, may give you occasion of reflecti∣on on your self: and strict enquiry may find out more then otherwise might have been suspected. 2. Be much at work about the root of sin, and digging it up. Rom. 6.6. Jer. 4.14. Content not your selves with the particular branches, the lop∣ping them off, or cutting down the trunk it self; the root will be every day new sprouting. 3. Spare not at all your beloved sin, of which Divines speak much. It's found, Ps. 18.23. they say, and known, by our speciall respects unto it, and favour for it, our impatiency of reproof from Minister, or private Chri∣stian on that particular: we most wish and desire that it were not accounted a sin: and are apt to find out reasonings for it, to de∣fend it, or at least to lessen our apprehen∣sions of its sinfulnesse: it returns most often upon us, with observation above any other in particular; but not without fre∣quent checks of conscience, and convictions of the Spirit: it much follows us in our re∣tirements, and when alone, the mind will work upon it, though perhaps we are not willing to be found in the actings of it: some say it lies down with us in our beds, converses with us in our dreams, and rises
with us in the morning: if it distract us not in our holy duties, we owe the more to Grace restraining: severall others depend upon it, to feed or serve it. O down with this. 4. Neglect not the little creepers: they may grow bigger: Rom. 7. Ps. 19.12. their number may prove not only formidable, but fatall: the least is sin, in its nature evill, and according to Gods law, without repentance and faith in the bloud of Christ, is damnable. They will certainly make way for greater; and if not destroy, yet disturb your soules &c. 5. Ps. 19.13. Infirmities, Incursions, Imperfecti∣ons, must be bewailed &c. but scandalous evils, and presumptuous sins may not so much as be thought upon without an hor∣rour; how much lesse in their temptations entertained, and least of all committed. The smallest tincture of them must be spee∣dily washt away in the bloud of Christ; otherwise your soules and consciences will not dare to come into God's presence. 6. 1 Cor. 5. Contract not upon your Souls the guilt of nationall transgressions, either past or present, by not mourning for them; much lesse by commission of them, and communion in them: it would staine our Paper once to name them.
7. Find out and destroy the Achans, Job. 34.31 &c. the sins for which in an especiall manner God now or at any time may strike and enter into judgment with you: the Lord direct you in that Enquiry, and assist you in that Undertaking. 8 Let spirituall sins, 2 Cor. 7.1. though least discer∣ned and enquired after, have their discove∣ry, humiliation, repentance, and crucifixi∣on: as spirituall pride, self love, Ps. 77.10. Heb. 3.12. wordly mindednesse, estrangement from God; and more especially your Gospell sins, as Unbe∣liefe, Impenitency, hardnesse of heart, unthankfulnesse, &c. 9. Whatever they be, intend not only the knowledge of them, humiliation under them, restraint upon them, correction, Rom. 8.13. or suppose some signall punishment. but com∣pleat destruction and abolition. And for this purpose, 1. Ps 119. get deep im∣pressions made upon your spirits by the foregoing considerations. 2. Ps. 119.11. Especially let the word of God be hid in your hearts, and written upon them. 3. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Gal. 5.16. 4. 1 Cor. 9.27 Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but rather keep it in sub∣jection. 5. Jer. 17.9. Job. Be alwaies jealous of your de∣ceitfull hearts. 6. Keep a tender consci∣ence.
7. A narrow watch over your sen∣ces. 8. Take heed in things lawfull, lest you be unlawfully insnared. 9. Improve affliction to the mortification of corrupti∣on: and 10. call in the influences of the Covenant of Grace, and of the bloud of Christ by faith and prayer. 11. Improve every Ordinance according to its nature and tendency to mortification. Eph. 6.12. 12. Stand out stifly and resolutely in the hour of Temptation, and the stirring of corrupti∣on: then call in all your strength about you, then urge your considerations from reason, and Scripture, Law and Gospell. Set your selves under the eye and sight of God, let God's terrors make you afraid to sin against him: suppose that Death and Judgment were at your heels, and that you heard the shreekings of the Damned for those very transgressions. Behold Christ Jesus upon the Crosse as bleeding, dying, for those very sins. Urge home the grace of God, and the love of Christ, your holy Profession, your Baptismall vowes, your Sacrament-renewed-ingagements, the mer∣cies received, the Glory expected, and all to shame you from it, if there be any thing of holy ingenuity to be found upon you: at least what sin hath cost you in re∣pentance
and affliction: and that you may farther suffer, though Hell be not your fi∣nall portion. Then call in by saith and prayer the help of God, and all the vertues of the bloud of Christ: maintaine your ground against its first assaults, and you have more then overcome. 13. If at any time it have surpriz'd you, Ps. 51. play an af∣tergame of Repentance, recruit your strength, improve your skill and strength, and deliver your souls. O lie not under it, much lesse subject your selves unto it, and renounce thereby as by an after-free and full consent your Soveraign and Saviour Jesus Christ. 14. Watch the more against it, and fortifie your selves for the time to come. 15. When one corruption or tem∣ptation is over and disappointed, conclude not your work is done; there are innume∣rable more behind, and while life lasteth, there will be no end of this warfare. 16. Ro. 7.24. Be alwaies groaning under the invincible remainders of the body of death, and long for your deliverance 17. Take heed of Apostacy and backsliding; a sin not alto∣gether unpardonable, but dangerous, Hos. 14. and that may cost you dear e're you recover. 18. Rom. 7.25. Give all the glory of your Conquests to Jesus Christ, and to the power of grace.
19. Enjoy the comfort of Believers that keep their ground and conquer. Rom. 8.1. For 1. you are in a state of pardon and salvation. 2. Rom. 7.20. No corruption of nature, no transgres∣sion in your life is imputed to you to your particular condemnation, when disowned, resisted, repented of, and carried by saith to the bloud of Christ. 3. The old domi∣nion of Sin, Rom. 6.14 once truly broken, shall never be recovered: you are not under the Law, but under Grace. 1 Tim. 4.8. 4. Your particular Conflicts shall be rewarded, if through Grace they proceed to Conquest. Eph. 5.26. 5. At length the body of Sin and Death shall be destroyed. 1 Cor. 12.1. 6. In the mean time the grace and strength of Christ is sufficient for you, and when sought by faith, humility, and prayer, 1 Cor. 15.50. &c. it shall not be denyed. 7. In Hea∣ven there will be no sin, no sorrow, but perfect holinesse and purity, with everla∣sting songs of Joy and Triumph. Rev. 22.20. Therefore (20) pray, believe, and look, and long for the comming of Christ: even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Much of this was preached at Mary Arches, on Rom. 6 6. Read more in Dr. Owen of Mortification. Burroughes Evill of Sin. Love of Mort. Morning Exercise at Giles and Crypplegate.
Ambrose Media. Goodwins works, &c. Reyners rules, &c. SECT. III. Of the Exercise of Grace, Spirituall activity, growth, progresse, and perseverance in san∣ctification, and holy conversation. WE have seen the Convert in his ex∣ercise and progresse of Mortifica∣tion, in the next place it is meet to consider him in his exercise, progresse, and perse∣verance in Sanctification, and holy conver∣sation. For in that also the Word which is accordng to Godlinesse doth represent him to us. See Gen. 17.1 Eph. 2.10. Eph. 4.20, 21, 22. &c. Eph. 5.8, 9. &c. Phil. 1.27 2 Pet. 3. 1 Cor. 15. Rom. 2.7. Heb. 12.14. Rev. 22.14. and reason good; Eph. 1.4. Titus 2.14. Eph. 2.10. Gal 5.15. Rem. 8.1. 1 Pet. 1. Rev. 22.14 &c. Eph. 1.4. Heb. 8.10. Eph. 5.25. for to this he is elected, redeemed, called, anew created, and made partaker of the spirit of holinesse. This is the evidence of his Justi∣fication, the quality of his Adoption, his way, and walke towards the Kingdome and Salvation. This is the designe of the methods of Grace towards him, the cove∣nant of Grace established with him, the means of Grace bestowed upon him, the
word of grace without him, the principle of grace within him. Gal. 5.15. 1 Pet. 1.14. Eph. 5.1. Rom. 6. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Rom. 12.1. Heb. 12 10 Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Cor. 6.17 Ps. 119. 1 Joh. 3.3. 1 Joh. 1.5, 6. This, the Relations where∣into he is entred, the Profession he hath made, the sacraments of which he hath been partaker, the mercies he hath received, the miseries that he hath felt, the pangs of the new Birth which he hath past through, the tokens of Divine Love vouchsafed, the separation of his soule from Sin and Sinners, the dedication of his person and all to God and Godlinesse, the hopes and promises of everlasting life and blessednesse, the tenor of the Gospell, all his priviledges, and par∣ticularly his union and communion with Je∣sus Christ by faith, do call for all at his hands. Is. 6.3. Besides, Holinesse is no lesse lovely then necessary. It is in its originall the glo∣ry and perfection of all the Divine Attri∣butes, essentiall in each person of the holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Character of the name, Gen. 1. Eph. 4. Psal. 15. Rev. 21. 2 Cor. 1.12 1 Joh. 4. 1 Joh. 1. be∣gin: Is. 56. nature, will, word, and works of God; the beauty of mans first Creation, the intention of the second; the delight of God, the state of Heaven. Adde, the blessed fruits, effects, and comforts of it are no lesse desireable; as the evidence of the love of God, the grace of Christ, and the communion of the holy Ghost. How doth it fit us (through Christ) for accesse to
God, converses with him, Ps. 50. u. &c. Joh. 14.21. Rev. 2. more abundant tokens and testimonies of love and favour from him: the peace of conscience, the joy in the holy Ghost, and the foretasts of bles∣sednesse and glory that do attend it, who is able to expresse them? but we may not en∣large in such discourses on it. It is to be supposed, that our Regenerate person is abundantly convinced of its necessity, Ps. 110.3. Cant. 1.4. and that he hath felt its powers, and tasted its sweetnesses, and been attracted by its beau∣ties, and is resolved for its exercises here, and full enjoyments hereafter, and needs only some directions for it. Accordingly these that follow may be improved in ge∣nerall, and in particular 1 Get the Habit of Grace and Sancti∣fication (infused in regeneration,) 1 Pet. 2.2. Ps. 42. & 84. & 63. the new creature to be fed, nourished, and preserved: by the use, and blessing of God on the use of the meanes of grace, by removing out of the heart whatsoever might afflict or hinder it, weaken it or disturb it, 1 Pet. 2. Math. 13. Rev. 12. much more what hath immediate tendency to murther it and destroy it; and that is Sin, the World, and Sathan. Adde faith, and earnest prayer to the God of all grace for the renewed influences of the spirit of grace, Ps. 119. the accomplishment of the promises
in the covenant of Grace, Is. 35. Ezek. 36.26. Joh. 1.18. and a liberall communication from Christ Jesus the fulness and treasury of grace. 2. Be well acquainted with the compass of the activity of Grace: Eph. 5.17. what is expected from you in your capacity, both in heart and life, towards God, and man, and your own souls, Tit. 2.12. the severall waies of duty, and the exercises of grace, in every relation, condition, Ps. 119 calling, time, and place, &c. es∣pecially, set the law and word of God, as the rule of life and of the new creature before you, that it may direct you; seeking ear∣nestly withall to God for his Holy spirit to guide you, Ps. 43.3. Rom. 8.14. and lead you according to his word into waies of holynesse and obedience which are well pleasing to him, and in his sight. 3. When you have sound out the will of God, Math. 6.10 Exod. 20. 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Cor. 7.1. and the way of duty, and the work of grace, resigne your selves both soule and body, and all that you are and have, to God, and to his pleasure: conside∣ring his authority over you, his love to you, and his promises before you, for acceptance, reward, and help: and as soules devoted to his pleasure, inflamed with his love, and overpowred by his spirit, apply your selves to the exercise of graces, and the perfor∣mance
of duties, without delaies, demurres, Psal. 119. Ps. 110.3. Gen. 17.1. Ps. 119.6. Epp. 5.15. 2 Pet. 1.5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 10.31. Gal. 6.16. Gal. 5.15. 2 Cor. 7.1. Rom. 12.2. reluctancie, exceptions, reasonings, most freely and readily, most sincerely and faith∣fully, most fully and unreservedly, most exactly and accurately, most diligently and industriously, most reselvedly and constantly. 4. In every undertaking, remember the end Gods glory, the rule Gods word, the principle Gods Spirit, the encourage∣ment, Gods promise, the manner, as unto God well pleasing; and in a word, the all in all Christ Jesus, to direct and strengthen you, Col. 170. Col. 1.28. Joh. 15.5. and to render perfect and acceptable to God, both your person and performance in his own mediation and intercession, without him you can do no∣thing. 5. In the exercise of Grace, these fol∣lowing are Especially to be intended, though none neglected, As 1. Pro. 17.3. The vitall and fundamentall graces towards God and Christ, as knowledg, faith, love, repentance, Mal. 3.16. obedience, &c. Act and exercise your knowledg, in holy and honourable, Ps. 1.2.3. right and reverentiall, Rom. 4.20. 1 Pe. 1.24. filial and fiduciall thoughts of God; your faith on the truth of his being, the greatnesse of his power, the fulnesse of his blessednesse, the treasures of his mercies; the infinitenesse of his wisdome, but especi∣ally
his Grace in Christ, with the freenesse, fulnesse, Joh. 14.1. Ps. 23. firmenesse of his promises; the ex∣tent, power, and tendernesse of his provi∣dence, and so towards Christ. Your Acts knowledg and Faith in thoughts on him, Gal. 2.20. choice of him, resignations to him, dependance upon him. Ps. 84. Ps. 37. Ps. 40.8. Ps. 73. Ps. 77. Ps. 19. Ps. 31. Luk 15. Fsal. 119. Lords ray∣er. 1 Sam. 15. Luk. 22. Brov. 4.23. Act your love, desiring his pre∣sence, his blessings, his honour and glory; devoting your soules to him, and delighting in him and in his service, &c. Act your repentance, in Griefe for sin (yea even of infirmitie, and imperfection, and that in your very graces.) Abhorrency of evill, Humiliations in the sence of vilenesse and sinfulnesse, renewed and that howerly Con∣versions to him. Act your obedience in fre∣quent subjections unto his will revealed in his word or works. 2. Have a speciall heed to the Government of the severall powers and faculties of your soules, Heb. 9.12. their Dispositions and their operations; that all may be regular. 1. In the sight of God, the searcher of the heart. Rom. 7. 2. According to the rule of the Word, which commands not only the outward, but the inward man. 3. Within is the principle seat of all sancti∣fying grace, and from thence gives it forth its commands and influences throughout the whole man. It is an excellent subject,
and but little insisted on, the government of the understanding, conscience, will, memory, affections &c. their proper actings in a way of grace and duty. For your help in this, See Ball of Godlinesse, something also there is to this purpose, in Penner on Conscience and the Affections, and as I take it, in Reyners Rules, think well upon it. 4. Rom. 6.19. What if we adde to this the government of the sences, and to them of the whole man, and all the members. 4. Look to the acting of those graces, which are next to the vitall and fundamen∣tall Graces; or, if you will, Col. 1.10. Col. 2.6. the branches of them, and attendants upon them, that so you may abound. 1. In every Grace; 2. In the various actings of the same Grace. 3. In the connexion of graces, and 4ly, Their actings in severall cases. as Humility, Meekness, Patience, Heaven∣liness, Charity, Selfe-deniall, Hope, &c. Give all and every grace its place and order, its time and season, its life and power, it's measure and manner: Cant. 2.14. Cant. 4.7. this makes a beauty spirituall and glorious in the Countenance of the Christian, whether in the frame with∣in, or in the forme of the life and conver∣sation without; That within to the eye of God, that without to the eye of God, Angels, and men.
5. Eph. 9. Rom. 13. 1 Pet. 2.12. Titus 2.10. Next to this, have a speciall respect to the proper Actings of the Graces in your relations, publique or private; these are your duties, these will be your ornaments, will set forth the Gospell, and returne unto you a gracious entertainment (through Christ) with God, as well as man. 6. Act your graces in Common converses, those particularly between man and man in dealing and trading, 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Pro. 3 See Loves table of buying and trading. buying and selling, and all transactions: few consider the ex∣tent of the second table, with the obliga∣tion that it laies upon them, and how strait∣ly its bound on by Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament, as by Moses and the Prophets in the old. 7. Mat. 0.0. Look to your selves and the actings of grace even in your lesser matters, Rom. 13. as your eating, drinking, sleeping, &c. apparell, recreation, &c. learn not only, in these to do nothing sinfull, but also to Act your Graces, and to Glorify your God, and to approve your selfe a Christian. 6. 1 Cor. 10.31. Dir. Labor not only to preserve grace, and exercise it, but to grow in Grace and to Abound in it, both for the habit of grace, and for the exercise of grace, by this you will more abundantly glorify God, enrich your evidences, encrease your comfort, and grea∣ten
your reward: 1 Cor. 15. 2 Pet. 3. Pro. 15. 2 Pet. 1. Isa. 35. 1 Pet. 2.2. Pro. 1.18. For this you have pro∣mises in the Gospell, advantages in the or∣dinances, and helps from Christ; there's a fulnesse with him, you have interest in him, you may apply your selves to him, and there need no question, but you shall re∣ceive abundantly from him: only you must enlarge your desires, and heighten your faith, and use the means: chrishing the spirit, weeding out corruptions, and exerci∣sing your graces. Be much in prayer, Mat. 25. put in suit the promises, beg for influences; take heed of pride, and be humble, take heed of worldly mindednesse, and be heavenly, Phil. 3.20. be not careless in duties, but servent in spirit, serving the Lord: Rom. 12. Converse much with the Scripture; warme, and enlarge your hearts with the sence of the love of God and Christ, 2 Cor. 5. Rom. 5.5. Heb. 11. lock often towards the pro∣mised reward, keep in your eye the exam∣ples of the best Christians, Heb. 12.1.2. but especially Christ Jesus, as your great example; rest not in measures, Phil. 3.10. intend towards perfection and the state of the resurrection from the dead: Neglect the improvement of no grace, Jude 20.21. but especially lay out in vitall gra∣ces; and for others, be most carefull for the most needfull, in your capacity and condi∣tion; the like where you are most weak:
Be nothing in your selves be all in Christ: Rev. 3.2. Phil. 4.13. This is the way to encrease it in the habit; only further know, Eph. 1.21.22. that as grace abounds in the heart, so it need to do in the life. 1. In the frequent actings of the same gra∣ces, Eph. 4.7. as they are required. 2. In the di∣verse actings of severall graces, as the case may command it, Col. 1.10. And in the lively and vigorous actings of all. You have a re∣ward enough to encourage all, 1 Cor. 15. you have waies enough to put forth all, you shall have grace of influence to furnish all: Heb. 13.20, 21.  Thes. 1.11, 12. you have ingagements enough from the love of God, the grace of Christ, the gift of the spirit, the promises of the Gospell, the pri∣veledges of Grace, the hopes of glory to provoke to all. Such things considered, and such meanes used, will also serve to keep up your hearts in a lively frame of spirit, and readinesse for duty and service, this will quicken you when dull, enlarge when straitned, and set all the wheeles of your soules on going. Lastly, Look to your standing and perse∣verance: 1 Thes. 3.8. Pro. ep. Heb. 6. Rev. 2. Heb. 10. Ps. 51. Apostacies are dangerous; some are desperate, the least is too bad though you loose not your crown, yet loose not your comfort, your communion with God, your evidences, your earnests, no nor your
graces themselves, Ps. 51.29. thougst in the least de∣grees: you may loose your Jewels, though not your crown; and the sparks of dia∣monds the shings of gold, and the minute degrees of grace are too precious to be lost. Therefore reglect not the meanes, Rev. 3.1. tak hea of omissions, watch against your temptation, sit  loose from Christ, abate not in your exercise: here withall remem∣ber, that you stand not by your own strength, Rom. 11. 1 Pet. 1.25 3, 4, 5. but by the love of the father, the blood of the , the power of the spirit, and the performance of the promise. For this reflect on Srmons of regenera∣tion, John 3. at Petrocks; Walking in the ligh at Mary-Moores on Joh. 12.35. and on Phil. 3 2. last v. and Noahs walking with God on Gen. 6 at Mary Arches, &c. you may find much more in Ball, of Godliness: Love, of grace; Burges his Spirituall refinings: Burroughs gracious spirit: Burroughs Conversation becoming the Gospell, and his Heavenly Conversation. Bolton's Walking with God. T. Taylor circumspect walking, and Bishop Taylors Holy living. Gouge Of Relative duties, whole duty of man. Ambrose Media. Goodwins growth in grace, &c. Cripplegate Exercise, Reyner, Henner. Rey∣nolds life of God.
SECT. IV. Of the Christians daily walk. EVery day hath its duty in Common and ordinary, Heb. 3. and some daies in extraordi∣nary actings of grace, and performance of duty; to the Glorifying of God, and to the working out of our salvation: for this take and practise these directions following: the word be your rule, the spirit be your guide, and Christ Jesus be your strength. 1. Psal. 5.3. In the Morning, when you awake, lift up your heart to God; be thankfull for the mercies of the night, desire the gui∣dance, grace, mercy, and providence for the day; send up some Holy Ejaculations: Consider what may be most likely the duty and temptation of the day, set your spirituall watch, ingage your hearts with God, and warme it with the thoughts of his love, and the hopes of his kingdome. 2. Psal. 1.2. Season your hearts with some por∣tion of his word, read first what may next come to your hands, proceed then in your ordinary course for your morning reading of the Scriptures: work what you have
read, upon your heart, Ps. 5.3. by serious medita∣tion, and then address your selfe to God, as you have place and opportunity in so∣lemne prayer: from thence in fit season (ere the occasions of the world fall in) dis∣charge the duties in your family, 3. Rom. 12.11. Eph. 6.7. Apply your selfe with diligence to the duty of your Calling, in the fear of God, with a good Conscience, depending on his presence, favour, and blessing. 4. Keep upon your hearts, Gen. 17.1. the sence of the eye of God, that sees all, the ear of God that heares all, and the hand of God that records all, especially the word of God that is to rule all, and his providence to blesse all: do nothing that may displease him, do every thing according to his will, and to his glory. 5. In temporall employments and secu∣lar occasions act spirituall graces, mind eter∣nity, your spirituall concernments, Phil. 3.20. send frequent, holy ejaculations towards Heaven, and so maintaine Communion with God throughout the day, and in the midst of your employments. 6. Watch against the temptations of the day, the occasions to sin, and the first mo∣tions and stirrings of corruptions, and those either rooted in thy disposition, 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.11. or
occasioned in thy calling: 1 Pet. 5.8. & 2.11. Take heed of sin∣ning. 7. Take not only care of sinning, but be found (as occasion is offered) in all well∣doing. Is. 1.16. Tit. 2.12. Mica. 6.8. Adorne the Gospell, and approve thy self a Christian by acts of Righteousness, Justice, and Equity in all thy dealings, and withall of mercy and charity, as it lies before thee. 8. Take care of thy words; let none be profane, Math. 12.36.37. 1 Pet. 3.10. sinfull, frothy, uncharitable, but true, and seasoned with grace, admi∣nistring grace to the hearers: use not too many words in buying and selling; hear few stories that little concern you, and tell less. Think before you speak; remember there is an account to be made of words, by these also thou shalt be justified, Math. 12.37. and by them thou mayest be condemned. 9. 1 Cor. 10.31. Tit. 2.12. In all refreshments of food, or recre∣ation, be sober, serious, and spirituall. 10. Upon rovings and wandrings call in thine heart, Eccles. Prov. and let not thy thoughts be too far dispersed, or too long disingaged from communion with God, soul-concern∣ments, and matters of Eternity. 11. Eph. 4.26. Take heed of passions, rash anger, sudden surprisals or provocations, that may be offered. Do no wrong: take notice
of little, forgive much, forbear retaliation in words or actions: in great affronts be not too much disturbed, and commit e∣vents and returns to God. 12. Eph. 6.1. Eph. 5.22. Fill up Relations with relative du∣ties, whether as superior, or inferior, or equall: be obedient to the commands of Superiours according to the will of God; be respectfull, kind, and friendly to equals; be moderate, tender, and gentle to inferi∣ors. Do evill to none, but good to all. 13. Beware of your company: Eph. 5.7.11. Ps. 15. have no more to do with wicked persons, then of ne∣cessity you must: let their presence be your burthen, and their profanenesse your ab∣horrency: let them know that you do not like them. Let the good be welcome, enter∣taine them as Christians; receive from them or give to them what may be spirituall. Let your time be pretious, Eph. 5.16. and little or none be wasted; fill up all with necessary duties that belong unto it, or find out some∣thing good and commendable to improve it. On moments of time depends eternity: let not spirituall and temporall duties in∣terfer, but let each have their proper sea∣sons; run not from thy particular calling to exercises of the generall, when unsea∣sonable; neglect not the generall for the
particular, when thou hast thy freedome. 15. Let not the world, or the things of the world be too earnestly desired, eagerly persued, 1 Joh. 2.15 Phil. 4.11. affectionately imbraced: be thank∣full for, and content with necessaries; what's more, let it be improved in the chearfull service of God, in works of piety and cha∣rity. Keep thine heart at a distance, and loose from all, and be contented to part with all, Heb. 10.34. when called to it; knowing that Heaven is thine inheritance, and God him∣self thy portion. 26. Observe the waies and methods of God's providence towards thee from day to day: consider the graces to be exercised on such occasions: Live the life of dependance on God's providence, and subjection to his will: be thankfull for his mercies, and en∣dure his chastisements. Let extraordinary dispensations have extraordinary observa∣tions. 17. Remember to walke with God hum∣bly, Mica 6.8. Tit. 2.12. cheerfully, obediently, and believingly. Carry your selves to men respectfully, righ∣teously, friendly: demean your selves sberly, gravely, prudently: bear all injuries patient∣ly, receive all Kindnesses thankfully, do all Courtesies readily. 18. Suffer no guilt contracted to lie
long upon you, but be often examining your selves; Ps. 19: Ps. 32. beg. on sence of sin renew your re∣pentance, and faith on the bloud of Christ, and returne to Duty. 19. Tit. 2.13. Doe something every day towards the last, in mortifying corruption, strength∣ning graces, increasing knowledge, fur∣thering your assurances, drawing nearer to Heaven in thoughts on it, desires after it, preparations for it. 20. In the evening of the day, Ps. 4.4. reflect on what hath past, cast up accounts, be humble for defects, repent of transgressions, be thankfull for mercies, renew your ac∣quaintance with God as you have oppor∣tunity in solemne duties of praier, medita∣tion, and reading the Scriptures, or some good Books: performe these duties, as also your family duties, in good season. Ps. 3.5. Ps. 4. ult. see Ps. 1 & 42. & 16. When all is done, remember Mortality and Eter∣nity. Act repentance and faith, and com∣mit your soules, and bodies, and family to God, and to his keeping.
SECT. V. Of Communion with God. THE Convert may no advance to a more especiali  God; and that not only as  i∣viledge, See 1 John 1.3. &c.  20. Job 22.21. R For such as have int  God, Rom. 5.1. accesse to God, accepta ith God are beloved of him, may , and derive from him. This  partly presupposeth, and partly requireth what we have in these following particulars, and it may be in some other. 1. Heb. 10.19, 20. It presupposeth reconciliation with God through the mediation of Christ, ap∣prehended by faith, answered in repen∣tance, pursued in obedience, and maintai∣ned in walking before him. 2. It immediately followes union with Christ, Eph. 2.18. relation to God, and inhabitation of the Spirit. 3. It supposes the qualification of the person in conformity to God, Ps. 15. and assimi∣lations to him. 4. Joh. 14.21. It is maintained, on Gods part, by
teachings of the Spirit, influences of grace, Rev. 3.20. Cant. 5.1. Ps. 25.14. testimonies of Love, and earnests of his glory. On the Christians part, by what here fol∣loweth. 1. Addresses to God in holy duties, Ps. 73.28. Ps. 100. so∣lemn or occasionall, through Christ, and by the Spirit. 2. Apprehensions of God, his glory, Joh. 17.3. his grace, love, and goodnesse revealed in his word through Christ, and applied by the Spirit. 3. Adorations of God, high thoughts of him, with humble worshippings, praises, Ps. 100.4. and acknowledgments. 4. Affections to God in Christ, Ps. 42.1. Ps. 63.1. running out in love, desire, delight, and joy. 5. Ps. 36.7. Cant. 8.5. Affiance in God through Christ in his grace, goodnesse, truth, faithfulnesse, power, and providence. 6, Activity of grace in holy duties, Cant. 4.16. proper, in times seasonable, in manner spi∣rituall, in measure fruitfull. 7. Ps. 16.8. Cant. 2.7. Actuall intentions of God and of his glory, and of being well pleasing to him, in the frame of our hearts, in the course of our lives, and especially in our holy duties. 8. Applications of his love, Cant. 1.2. &c. Rom. 5.5, 6 &c. upon the dis∣coveries of it in his word; the shedding of it abroad in our hearts by his Spirit, the e∣vidence
of it in his graces, and the experi∣ence of it in his mercies. 9. Acquainting him with our necessi∣ties, Phil. 4.6. Cant. 2.14. desires, cases, and conditions from day to day: provided it be humbly, heartily, believingly, it may be freely, and with holy familiarity, as a friend with his friend, a child with his father, and the spouse with her husband: and this whatever be our di∣stresses, and dangers, troubles, and sorrows, wrongs and injuries wants and weaknesses, temptations and infirmities. 10. Attendance to the methods of his providence, Job. Ps. 8. Cant. 5.4. and the motions of his spirit; with the observation of his works, and the opening of our hearts unto his word, heark∣ning to his whispers, sensible apprehensions of his approaches to your soules, not suffe∣ring our selves to be unmindfull of him, estranged from him. 11. Attributing all our mercies, and re∣freshments, Eph. 3. ult. spirituall and temporall, with the hopes of eternall, to his free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ: giving him the glory of all that's done before us, or upon us. 12. Acquiescence in him as our God in Christ, Ps. 116.7. our God in Covenant, our All in All: resting our selves in our relation to him, Ps. 73.25. enjoyment of him: whatever else we want,
and whatever our condition be, Ps. 17. ult. Ps. 16. ult. 'till we come to glory, to see him as he is, to be perfectly like unto him, and for ever with him. Read Mr. Strong of Communion with God, and Dr. Owen of Communion with God. Brinsly. SECT. VI. Of Assurance. THat you may not want any needfull directions for the hightning of your Comfort, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, excuse the brevity, and take these notes of Assurance. 1. It is the ordinary, as the desireable priviledge of holy persons, mortifying cor∣ruptions, exercising graces, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ps. 36.7. Rom. 5.5. walking daily before the Lord, and in communion with him, to have comfortable assurance of the love of God, interest in Christ, 1 Pet: 1.3, 4, 5, 6. pardon of sins, state in grace, title to the promises, and their inheritance in the Kingdome. 2. If it be otherwise with any, 'tis pro∣bable, Ps. 51. Cant. 5.2. there are some unmortified corrup∣tions, neglected graces, disordered conver∣sations, estrangements from God, or some∣thing extraordinary in the way of God's dis∣pensation, Is. 50.10.
the prevalency of temptation, distemper in constitution, which are to be enquired after. However it be, 1. 2 Pet. 1.5. Practise the methods in the former Directions with care and diligence, in truth and in sincerity. 2. Ps. 51. Rom. 16.16. Eph. 1.17, 18. Beg the spirit of Adoption to enlighten our understandings, shine upon our graces, and make the application. 3. Reflect upon your selves, your state, and your exercise, Rom. 16.16. 1 John 3.19, 20. Gal. 2.20. and comparing them with the word in the light of the spirit, your consciences bearing witnesse in the holy Ghost of sincerity upon the tryall, accor∣dingly passe the sentence for your Assu∣rance, and make the application, cast off your doubts, give glory to grace, and make progresse to glory. 4. Where things are doubtfull upon en∣quiry, Hab. 2. Is. 50.10. Cant. 5. the best way is to put it out of doubt by practice, in the actings of the graces, and performance of the duties; waiting God's time, and keeping his way, and trusting in his mercy through Christ Jesus, till he be pleased to answer your doubts, to rebuke your temptations, to give his spirit, and to cause the light of his countenance to shine upon you. 5. Learne moreover not to question the
goodnesse of the father, the merits of the son, the power of the spirit, 1 Joh. 5.11 12. the truth of the promises, the probability of your inte∣rest (if any way likely) much lesse the hopes of arriving safe to glory, being found in the sincere discharge of duty, Cant. 8.7. leaving the wildernesse of the world and sin in our affection and conversation, and leaning on our Beloved. 6. Expect not considerable measures of comfort, but in proportions of Duty, Ps. 84.7. and some progresse made in practicall Christia∣nity. 7. 2 Cor. 1. beg. 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. There are speciall seasons for speciall Assurances: as entrance upon, of discharge of some great undertakings in the life of Religion, or some great tryall and exercise (suppose) of suffering: and the best is al∣waies reserved for the needfull and proper season. 8. Having gotten it, keep it, and that with humility, thankfulnesse, and diligence, Jude 20, 21. Cant. 5.2. with progresse in the way where in you got it. Take heed of abusing it by security, wantonesse, or worldlinesse. 9. Look and long for heaven, Rev. 22.20. there all is perfected. Most Sermons have somewhat to∣wards this in their Ʋses of Examination and Consolation: and some more especially on this
subject; search out your Notes and study them. Besides these there are diverse Treatises: a Baxter's Directions. Bolton's Instructions, Sibbes his Soules Conflict. Symonds desert Soules case and cure. Roberts Evidences. Ambrose middle things. Ford of Adoption. Cripplegate Exercise. SECT. VII. The Life of Faith. 1. IN the life of Faith are considerable 1. the purposes: 2. the object: and 3. the actings of Faith. 1. The purposes of it are usually for ju∣stification, mortification, sanctification, consolation, and salvation. 2. The Objects are God's love, truth, power &c. Christ's person, relations, offices, life, death, resurrection, and ascen∣sion &c. 3. The Acts of faith are, apprehension of the object, assent to the truth, consent to the gift, application of the whole, with affyance and working in love and obedience, as at first in closing with Christ. 2. Rom. 4.20. The life of faith is highly acceptable with God, comfortable, honourable, and necessary to the Christian.
1. Gal. 2.10. Phil. 3.9. Act. 3.19. To live the life of faith for justifica∣tion. 1. Renew thy repentance daily, for commissions of sin, and omissions of duty: in sorrow, confession, and supplication to God in Christ. 2. Rom. 3.25.26. Rom. 5.12. &c. Let Faith first appre∣hend the grace of God; and look on Christ as thy Second Adam, Head, Surety, and Sa∣crifice, meditate his perfect obedience, and his death; therein, Gal. 3.13. the pacification of wrath, the satisfaction of Justice, the re∣movall of the curse, Dan. 9.24. Heb. 10.16. Heb. 9.24. 1 Joh. 2.2. Luk: 22. Rom. 3.25. Gal. 2.20. Joh. 3.3. sin taken away in its guilt, everlasting righteousnesse brought in, and a Covenant of Grace established: see this pleaded in his intercession, and tendered in the Gospell, sealed in the Sa∣craments, and to be applied by faith. 2. Apply it. 3. Assent unto it. 4. Rest upon it. 5. Speak peace to thy conscience. 6. If the sence of it make thee thankfull, cheerfull, and fruitfull to God and Christ. Rom. 5.1. Heb 10.2. Psal. 103.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.14. &c. Ram. 8.34. &c. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. Acts 3.19. Rom. 7.13.14. 7. Reject the temptations of Sathan to un∣beliefe, silence the accusations and condem∣nations of thy conscience, lay aside the sla∣visn feares of the wrath of God, the ter∣rors of death and judgment. And 8. Long for the publick and solemne declaration of all in the last day. 2. Live the life of faith for Mertification of sin. 1. Set home upon thine heart the
sinfullnesse of sin, Rom. 7.13, 14. and the necessity of its destruction. Be willing to it, and resolved for it. 2. Be sensible of thine own weak∣nesse and inability to performe it. Rom. 7.24. Rom. 7.25. Rom. 6. beg. 3. Act faith on Christ for it. 1. Let faith bhold Christ Jesus upon the Cross, procuring and purchasing thy freedome, Rom. 7. Ezek. 36.26. from the do∣minion, power, and presence of sin, in Gods time, and Gods way. 2. Let faith see the promises of Mortifying and cleansing grace in the blood of Christ established. Rom. 6.9, 10. Psal. 51.7. Rom. 6.12. Rom. 8.34. Gal. 5.25.26. 3. Let faith apply them. 4. Let Prayer sue out Mortifying influences from the death of Christ. 5. Let faith set thee in the way, wherein those virtues are to be experien∣ced, as before in the Section of Mortification. 6 Let faith consider, the guilt removed, the dominion broken, Heb. 12.14 2 Cor. 3.5. the power restrained, the rest not imputed where not allowed, strength against sin vouchsafed, and in conclusion the destruction of it. 3. Gal. 3.13, 14. Let faith for perfect sanctification. 1. Affect thine heart with the considera∣tion of the necessity, Eph. 2.5. excellency, and beauty of it. Rom. 6.4.5 2. With the sence of thine own in sufficiency, for the acting, continuing, ever∣easing of it. Eph. 4.7.8. Eph. 1.22.23. 3. Act faith on Christ. 1. Let faith look upon Christ in his word prescri∣bing in his life directions, in his death pro∣cuting,
whatever might be needfull for it, Gal. 3.13, 14. Eph. 2.5. Rom. 6.4, 5 Eph. 4.7, 8 Eph. 1.22.23. 1 Cor. 1.30 in his resurrection arising as your head, to quicken your soules to newnesse of life; in Heaven possessing all gifts and graces, and having the fulnesse of the spirit, with power to dispence it. 2. Apply it. 3. As∣sent unto it. 4. Make it your choice. 5. Sue it out by Prayer. 6. Look up to him by faith, for virtue. 7. In the expectation of his influences, apply your selves unto the exercising of your graces. 4. Live the life of faith in Temptations 1. Let faith look upon Christ as having been tempted, though without sin, and knowing how to compassionate. 2. Heb. 2.18. Look on Christ in his death, taking away the foundation of your temptations, Heb. 2.14. and breaking the ser∣pents head, purchasing your redemption from his dominion, though not disturbance, establishing the promises for your reliefe: Gen. 3.15. In Heaven look on him, as interceding for you, and exalted in power to help you. Phil. 2.9. 2. Apply it. 3. Assent to it. 4. 2 Cor. 12.8 Rest upon it. 5. Eph. 6.12, 13, &c. Sue out the virtues of Christ by Prayer. 6. In his strength resist your temptation, in the way of his direction, and putting on the spirituall armour, using it in its place and season. 7. So doing, doubt nothing of your acceptance, assistance,
deliverance, Rom. 16.20. reward, and triumphs. 5. For Worldly troubles do the like. 1. John 16.33. 1 Joh. 5.4. Gal. 1.4. Let faith see Christ in his death removing the evill, which is the sting of trouble, as the guilt of sinne, the curse of the law, and the wrath of God; procuring the graces and comforts in the promises, providence and spirit of God: Eph. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. in his resurrection and as∣cension, look upon him above all trouble, as your head, assuring you of conformity to him in his exaltation hereafter, Hos. 6. beg. as you have with him in his humiliation here: To this ad the comforts from the same, 1 Cor. 15.55. Heb. 2.14. Is. 26.19. Zach. 1.12. Phil. 2.9. Is. 54.5. 1 Pet. 1.5. in Christ, a∣gainst death and the terrors of it—mutatis mutandis: the like for the Church of God in her distresses. Follow it to his intercession, and his government of the world by his power and providence, having a care of his spouse in all troubles, intending only proba∣tion, Ps 73.23. Ps. 28. ult. Gal. 6.14 &c. at most correction, not at all de∣struction. 2. Let faith Apply this and the like. 3. Assent. 4. Rely. 5. Performe the duties of such conditions. 6. Confidently from Christ expect acceptance, assistance, and deliverance. 6. Live the life of faith for eternall life. 1. G. l. 3.13. Look on Christ in his state of Humilia∣tion as removing the hindrances, sinne, law, curse and wrath, death and Hell. 1. Pur∣chasing
the title and all advantages; Heb. 9.15. esta∣blishing the covenants and all the convey∣ances: in his exaltation advancing to∣wards it, entering into it, Joh. 14.1. Heb. 6.18. Col. 3.1. and taking posse∣ssion of it, not only for himselfe but for all believers, as their forerunner; keeping it for them, appointing their mansions, secu∣ring their title, Gal. 4.4. and taking order for their Adoption, qualification, preservation, Joh. 17.24 Rev. 22.20. Heb. 11.1. Heb. 10.34 com∣fort here, and at last their assumption, that according to his desire, Prayer, and promise, they may be for ever with him, &c. 2. Let faith apply it. 3. Assent unto it. 4. Rely upon it, And 5. Carry out to duty and waies of Holinesse. And 6. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Resol∣vedly passe through your trials, difficul∣ties, dangers, and deaths, according to the will of God: Committing your soules unto him, nothing doubting, but in the end, you shall receive the end of the faith, 2 Cor. 4. ult. 2 Cor. 5.1. &c. the salvation of your soules. 7. Live much upon it and the fore-thoughts of it, it is Glorious, it is yours, it is certaine, it is safe, it will be Eternall. Christ hath pro∣cured it, Christ doth possesse it, 2 Cor. 5.5. Eph. 1.14. Phil. 1.23. the pro∣mises assure it, the sacrament seale it, the spirit is the earnest, your graces are the evidences for it, and all your dangers and deaths do but prepare you for it, or enter you into it.
7. Live the life of faith on Christ Je∣sus for faith it selfe: Heb. 12.2. 2 Thes. 1.14. take his directions, fol∣low his example, bottom on his his under∣taking; depend upon his fulnesse, yeild to his methods, and expect his influences. This life of faith is necessary, comfortable, sure, practicable, influentiall, honourable. Study it, use it; and for further directions, I commend you, besides your own meditati∣ons and sermon notes on Gal. 2.20. or other Scriptures, to the reading of these Books. Balls Life of faith. Lawrence life of faith. Cuiverwell Life of faith. Ward life of faith. Ambrose his Middle things about the life of faith. Psal. 9.10. More particularly acquaint your selves with the Attributes of God, the offices of Christ, the relations wherein he standeth, his severall states of Humiliation and ex∣altation, 1 Cor. 2.3. with the intentions of all and their improvements: for this, I referre you to Sermons, on Gods Attributes and providence, and to good Books, as Preston Of Gods Attributes, and particularly his All-suffici∣ency. Stocke, Of Gods Attributes. Wil∣kins on Providence. Gearing of Providence. Obad. Sedgwick on Psal. 23. and Providence. Dike on Gods Name, &c. and for that of Christ to T. Goodwins Works. Especially Christ exalted as the object of Faith. Study
it throughly with the peece of Christs heart in heaven, &c. Ambrose his looking unto Jesus. Robinsons Similitudes, your Sermon Notes on Christ, &c. the Lectures, on the four Evangelists in harmony on Christ. 2 Sam. 23.5. Study likewise in order to this life of faith the Covenant of Grace, the na∣ture of it, the contents of it, the foundation of it in the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. the confirmation by the oath of God, and by sacraments; the severall dispensations of it, Heb. 1.1. gradually revealing Christ and Grace. First to Adam Gen. 3.15. then to Noah Gen. 6. then to Abraham severall times, Gen. 12. and 15. and 17. &c. then to the Patriarches, to Moses, Exod. 3. to Israel on the mount Exod. 20. and 24. to David, 2 Sam. 23.5. and in many of the Psalmes, Ps 89. &c. Psal. 2. Ps. 110. &c. after that enlarged in choice promises in the Prophets. For Israel in captivity, Jer. 31. Jer. 32. Ezek. 11. and Eze. 36, &c. So in Zach. 9. &c. and at last the New Testament by Christ, Heb. 8. Heb. 10. read your Sermon Notes upon this subject and those Scriptures, many of them at M. Arches and other books, as Ball of the Covenant of Grace, Bulkly, Rutherford, Morning exercise, Giles: Roberts, Cotton, and others. Leigh, promises.
SECT. VIII: Of Temptations: THe best of Gods Saints and Servants may be subject to Temptations, Gen. 3.15. and those of all sorts, not only to doubtings sinnings, Luke 22.30.31. and such sometimes the most abo∣minable and diabolicall. For Sathan is their enemy; because they belong to God, are gotten out from his Kingdome, and are irreconcileable enemies to his interest; Sathan is an Old, Malicious, Subtle, Power∣full, 1 Pet. 5.8. Cruell, and deadly enemy to them, their graces, their comforts, and their persons: and God suffers it so to be, for his own glory, and his peoples good; in the exercise and evidence of their graces, in the sup∣ports of their soules, and experience of his favour; for their conformity to Christ, and in order to the reward, when they overcome. Their comfort in, that their Temptations without their consent are not their sinnes, Heb. 2.18. 2 Cor. 12.5. Rev. 2.10. Christ himselfe hath been tempted; God and Christ compassionate them, God is with them to help them; their temptations are limited; Sathans
head-plot is broken; Heb. 2.14. their soules shall be∣saved, and their conquests rewarded. Their duty is to be acquainted with the nature of temptations, 2 Cor. 2.11 Eph. 6.12. &c. to watch and pray against them, to resist them, to put on and use their spirituall armour, to live upon Christ by Faith, and to look and long for their deli∣verance. Remember Math. 4. and discour∣ses on Christs Temptation. Bishop Hall: Capell of Temptations: Downams Warfare: Gouge, Robinson, and Gurnals Spirituall armour: Dr Owen of Temptation, and Bridges, Brooks, &c. Ball of Faith, &c. SECT. IX. Of Divine Desertions. GOds people may be sometimes for a time and in part deserted, Psal. 22.1. Is. 63.17. 2 Sam. 11. Ps. 51. as to illu∣minations, influences, and comforts: they may not see their way, may fall into sin, loose much grace, want comfort, Ps. 88.6. be sorely tempted, Ps. 8.9. and feel sensible impressions of Gods fatherly displeasure. This is some∣times for the punishment of their sins, Ps. 7.7. Cant. 5. Cant. 3. and sometimes for the triall of their gra∣ces; God hath also therein a designe for
his own glory and their good; in preventing and mortifying of sin, provoking to duty, enriching their experience, and for the discovery of the freedome of his grace, the worth of his love, and the necessity of his presence, Psal. 22.1. Jer. 31. Heb. 8. John. 10. &c. Their comfort is, they are not alone, they are never totally nor finally rejected, God is still their God in covenant, and Christ is their head in union; and the Spirit their sanctifier, supporter, if not actually their comforter in Com∣munion; Cant. 5. beginning. Christ leaves sweetnesse behind him, and though absent yet drawes them towards him, in good time will be found of them, and in Heaven at last abide for∣ever with them. Their duty is to shake off security, Cant. 5. throughout. to enquire into the causes, to hear Christs voice, to rellish his sweetnesses, to desire his favour, to follow after him in all good meanes, to speak well of him, to cleave to their Choice, to take Gods way, and to wait Gods time for their comfort and recovery; and when they find him to be more carefull to please him, Cant. 6. and for ever to beware of wandring from God, parlying with Temptation, Spirituall pride, and security under Gospell enjoyment. Read Symonds Deserted soules case and Cure. Sibbes Soules conflict. Boltons Instructions:
Rutherfords Christs Dying, &c. And for Church-desertions in the visible tokens of Gods presence: Read Sermons on Luk 19.42. Rev. 2.4.5. Rev. 3.1, 6. John 12.35.36. and Cant. 5.2 &c. The Epistles in the Re∣velation to the Churches of Asia: Brinsleyes Watch, Burroughes on Hosea: Cripplegate Exercise. 26. and apply to them the fore∣going comforts and counsels. SECT. X. Of Afflictions, and Trialls. AFflictions and Troubles, Joh. 16.33 are the lot of Gods chosen: for correction or pro∣bation, or purification, or testimony: Heb. 12.6. or it may be altogether. Zach 13.9. &c. 1 Pet. 4.12.17. 1 Pet. 1.5 6. &c. Rev. 2.10. Psal. 42. Psal. 102. Heb. 12.6. They may be ma∣nifold great, lasting, and sometimes inward and outward both together. Their Comfort is; They are from God, their God, their Father, in love though with displeasure: their good is intended together with Gods glory; in purging out sinne, Is. 26. trying and ex∣ercising their Grace, weaning them from the world, and conforming them to Christ: 1 Pet. 4.13. they have speciall promises; God orders
them, Mal. 3.3. 2 Cor. 12.9. Rom. 5.5. 1 Pet: 5.6. proportions them to strength, gives sufficient grace, sheds abroad his love, is present with them, will preserve them, deliver them and bring them home to Glory, 1 Cor. 4. latter end, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6. Rom. Lam. 3.39. Ps. 51. 8.17. Phil. 1.29. 2 Thes. 1.8. &c. Their duty is (if for sin) to enquire the cause, to humble themselves, to justify God, to re∣turne to him, 1 Sam. 15. to submit to his will, and to seek his favour, to mind their duty, and to live by faith. And for trials, to expect them, prepare for them, and approve themselves in them, giving glory to God by the ex∣ercise of grace, and submission to his will. And in Testimonies to Truth; 1 Pet. 4.12. Cant. 8. Matth. 16.24. Heb. 12.2. 1 Pet. 4. ult. 2 Cor. 4. ult. 2 Cor. 5. be. Heb. 10.38 2 Pet. 1.1. &c. Prov. 142. to strengthen their faith, to inflame their love, and to manifest their obedience, to deny them∣selves, to take up the Crosse, to look to Christ their example, comfort, and strength, and to referre all to God, committing their soules to him in well doing, and to live by faith, Heb. 11. Heb. 12.1. &c. Read Cases, Correction, instruction: Burroughes Moses choice and selfe deniall and courage. Hughes dry rod. Strongs Submission to Gods will: Histories of the Church. In sufferings see 1. That you have a good cause, and suffer not as evill doers in Church or state see 1 Pet. 2.20. 1 Pet. 4.15,
2. A good call, Math. 10. 3. Exercise a good conscience, Mark 5.43. and 4. keep then a good courage, Math. 10.28. SECT. XI. Of Spirituall Retirements. REtirements are sometimes from neces∣sity, through the providence of God, Cant. 2.14. Is. 26. ult. the rage of Sathan, and the malice of the World, Rev. 12.6, 14. and sometime from choice, for privacy in duty, and freedome from distraction: Math. 6.5, 6. Improve such for meditation, prayers, reading, and maintaining communion with God. Leave the world behind you, desire God's pre∣sence, and believe his promise. SECT. XII. Of Meditation. MEditation is necessary, comfortable, but difficult. Take these Directions for it. 1. Make conscience of the duty, Ps. 1. Ps. 119. not on∣ly occasionally, but solemnly, and frequently. 2. Take the fit and freest times for it. 3. Lay
aside for that time worldly occasions and thoughts. 4. Set your self in God's presence. 5. Begin with Prayer to God for direction, presence, and blessing. 6. Pitch your thoughts on some suitable and seasonable heart-affecting subject: as the excellency and use of the Scriptures: the Attributes of God: the state of Innocency, Sin, state of na∣ture, covenant of grace; Christ his Offices, ex∣cellencies &c. death, satisfaction, &c. the love of God, the love of Christ, faith, and other particular graces &c. Meditate often of the sinfulness of sin, the vanity of the creature, the love of God, the excellency of Christ, death, the resurrection, judgment, heaven, and hel sometimes. When you would meditate on these, understand first the doctrine of them, and what is considerable in them: for that purpose read in some doctrinall book on such a subject: and after that, by meditation, consider and work upon your hearts to affect them: without this help you will be able to do little on most subjects. For subjects, and books on those subjects, Dr Wilkin's Ecclesiastes, may direct you for this use, as others for another. 7. Observe, if you can, a good method: for which see directions in books. If you cannot follow their methods, follow Da∣vids
in the Psalms. Ps. 116.5. Ps. 42. Sometimes let it be prayerwise, sometime by way of Soliloquie, or discourse with your selves: or take some good bock, and work what you read upon your heart, 'till you have discerned the truth, tasted the sweetnesse, and felt the power of it. The briefe Notes in these Se∣ctions are intended for your help on those heads, and are left to your inlargements on purpose: or take the Scriptures, and medi∣tate on what you read. 8. Keep your hearts to the work, quicken them when dull. 9. Intend heart-work especially in this exercise, the quickning of grace, strengthning of faith, and stirring of affe∣ctions. 10. Close up with prayer, and as opportunity is afforded, solemne, and with respect to the subject of your meditation. Read Bp Hall's directions for meditation, and Baxter in his Everlasting Rest; and Whites, and Ambrose in his Middle things. SECT. XIII. Of Prayer. I Need not set before you its necessity and excellenny; Rom. 8.15, 16. the spirit of Adoption will reach you to cry Abba Father. Gal. 4: 6.
1. 1 Thes. 5.17. Be frequent in prayer, often in solemne, and even constantly in ejaculatory, and oc∣casionall. 2. Be fervent and spirituall. Rom. 8.26. Rom. 15.30. 3. Be humble and lowly. Gen. 18.27. Ezr. 9.6 4. Believing. 5. Importunate. Luk. 18. More particularly. 1. Keep your hearts in a praying frame. Eph. 6.18. Ps. 5.3. Math. 6.9. 2. Mind the occasions and opportunities. 3. Prepare your selfe to it by meditation. 2 Sam. 7.27. 4. Take right apprehensions of God: as your father in heaven, as a spirit, great and glorious, but your God and Father in Christ: take up suitable apprehensions to your occasion, as God shall direct. 5. Humble your soules in sence of sin to be confessed. 6. Affect your hearts with the mercies to be desired. 7. Jacob. Hos. 12.3, 4. Wrestle with God with Arguments pro∣per. 8. Content not your selfe with the bare performance, without affection of heart, and enjoyment of God. 9. Keep close to the duty, as near as you can, with∣out distraction. Math. 6.7. Eccl. 5.2. Rom. 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Math. 6. Eph. 6.19. 10. Affect not words, nor length. 11. Joyn praises with praiers. 12. Be not private spirited in prayer, but re∣member others, especially the Church of God. 13. Take delight in this duty. 14. rest
not in prayer, but in Christ, Eph. 3.12. John 14.13 through whom present your person and prayers unto God, with faith. 15. Look after your prayers, Ps. 5.3. and God's answers to them. Read Cobbet of Prayer Gee of Prayer. Ambrose his Directions ia his middle things. T. Goodwins return of prayer. Ford of A∣doption. Cripplegate exercise. 14.17.19. SECT. XIV. Of Sanctification of the Lords day. 1 BE setled in the doctrine of the Mo∣rality of the Sabbath. 4th Comm, For this purpose read Sermon Notes and books, espe∣cially Cawdry and Palmer. Shepheard and Whites appendix to his directions for reading the Scripture. 2. Prepare for it, desiring the day, Exod. 20. com∣posing your worldly affaires, and laying them aside in the evening before, set your heart in order towards a Sabbath, and de∣sire God's presence and blessing for the day approaching. 3. In the morning awake with God, pro∣ceed to private and family duties, be more large and solemne in them then at other times, spend intervals in meditation, holy
conference, reading, and prayer. 4. Is. 2.3. Ps. 122.1. Ps. 100. Hasten to publique ordinances, lay a∣side prejudices, and take care to give God your hearts. See Burroughes of Gospell wor∣ship, and other treatises of that Nature. 5. Lev. 26.42 If you want publique opportunity, en∣quire into the cause: if sin be in it, humble your soules, justify God, and accept of the punishment of your sin, pray for pardon, act repentance with faith in the bloud of Christ: lament after the Lord. 1 Sam. 3. Ps. 42.84.63. 6. Rev. 12.14. Ps. 42. Make up your want in private wor∣ship 1. Begin with prayer, confession of sin, and supplication for a blessing, with praise to God. 2. Read much of the Scripture, Psalmes, Old and New Testament. Meditate upon it, draw your observations, and worke them on your hearts, observe Gods teachings, and impart them to any with you. 3. Pour out your hearts more largely in prayer. 4 Take some good Sermon Notes, or some choice book, and spend a Sermon time in it; and suppose you were hearing it in the pub∣lick congregation. 5. Close up with prayer and praises, desi∣ring a blessing.
In intervals of time take refreshments na∣turall with spirituall affections, thoughts, discourses. Let the rest of the time be spent as in the morning, in meditation, reading, Is. 56.6. Is. 58.13. confe∣rence, and prayer. In the afternoon, at the solemn time, do a∣gain as in the morning. After that, as in the intervals, reflecting on what you read, observed, and were taught of God that day, renew your fami∣ly and your closet duties, as in the mor∣ning; and be much in Thanksgiving. Let the day be improved for God, and with him. Keep out the world. Get some spe∣ciall acquaintance with God, with Christ, and Heaven. Do good to the soules and bodies of others, as you have opportunity, especially in your family. Blesse God much for Christ, and the worke of Redemption, and look and long for Heaven. See Good∣win of sanctifying the Sabbath. Expos. or 4th Comm. Shepheard, &c.
SECT. XV. Of Fasting and Humiliation. 1. AS necessity requireth, and oppor∣tunity is offered, be often in the duty of self-examination, soul-humiliation, with fasting and prayer. 2. Improve publick daies for that pur∣pose. 3. Keep some private in your family, and in your Closet, because of family and per∣sonall necessities. Zach 12.12. And for direction in it, (having considered your necessities, set a fit and free time apart, put your heart into a posture, and sought God's presence,) set about the work. 1. Jach. 12.12. Dan. 9. Lam. 3.39. Let your private and family duties, of daily course look towards it. 2. Sit down and examine your hearts and lives, and find out your speciall sins and transgressions in every age, in every rela∣tion, place, &c. 3. Dan. 9. Having found them out, set them home upon your hearts, in the considerati∣on of their nature, number, and aggrava∣tions. 4. Draw up against your selves the sen∣tence
of the law of God. Gal. 3.10. 5. 1 Joh. 1.9. Put your selves into the presence of God, and make large free and ingenuous confessions of sins, both of nature and life. Ps. 51.17. 6. Get your hearts humbled under them in God's sight, and desire him to work you to it. 7. Dan. 9.7, 11. Acknowledge your deserts of death and damnation, and of your particular af∣fliction. 8. 2 Cor. 7.11 Worke your hearts to hatred and ab∣horrency of your sin, and expresse it sincere∣ly. 9. Look upon God in Christ as gracious, Exod. 34.6 and mercifull, willing to pardon sin. 10. Dan. 9.19. Plead hard for pardon in the bloud of Christ. 11. Present Christ Jesus as your sacrifice, Levit. Rom. 3.25. once offered upon the crosse, ever presen∣ted in Heaven; let faith apprehend it, ap∣ply it, and present it unto God. 12. Ps. 51.7. Beg God's cleansing and sanctifying grace. 13. Ps. 51.13 Renew your covenant for better obe∣dience in the bloud of Christ, with a sincere heart, and desire God's acceptance and grace. 14. Pray for the removall of the judg∣ment, with submission to Gods will: Dan. 9.16. effectu∣ally
pray for the sanctification of it, and for support under it, with patience to bear it: pray then too for the blessings to be desired, as it may be for your good and God's glory. 15. Remember then your family relations, friends, those that have desired your pray∣ers; the needy, sad, tempted, and afflicted servants of Christ. 16. Ps. 51.18. Dan. 9. Ezek. 9. Enlarge in your prayers for the whole Church, for the Land, King, Magistrate, Ministers, and People. Confesse Nationall sins, considering your share in them, mourn for them, strive with God for mercy, &c. wrestling with God in Christ. 17. Towards the close, confesse your fai∣lings in the present duty, John 14.13, 14. beg acceptance through Christ, and conclude with bles∣sings. If it may be, continue in this order, while strength lasteth, but be sincere, fer∣vent, and affectionate in all. 18. Then read some portion of Scripture to the purpose, Ezra. or as God shall direct, spend some considerable time in so doing, with reflection and meditation upon what you have read. 19. Proceed again to Prayer, bewailing your defects in the duty of the day; looking over your confessions, and making them up
in renewed acknowledgments. The like in the other parts of the duty. Ex. 33.4, 5, 6. Jona 3.6. Joel 2.15, 16. 20. Abstaine from ornaments, accomo∣dations, and refreshments, as long as you are able, to help you in Humiliation, or to ex∣presse it, and to quicken you to prayer. 21. Is. 58.7, 10 In the close devote your selves to God; and give something, as you are able, to the poor. 22. Be often in such duties, Dan. 10.2, 3. as occasion requireth, and while God is afflicting you or his people, walke humbly, and lay aside your ornaments, and abate your refresh∣ments, and be much in prayer. SECT. XVI. Of Spirituall feasting on Christ. CHrist Jesus his body broken, and his bloud shed, affords spirituall nou∣rishment, with plenty, life, and sweetnesse to the soule, that is interested in him, Joh. 6.51, to 63. and lives upon him. There is a Spirituall and a Sacramentall feeding on Christ. For the Spirituall, see Joh 6.54. for the Sacramen∣tall, see 1 Cor. 11.23. 1. As often as you can, receive and im∣prove the Sacrament. There are many good
and Books to direct: as, Roberts, Dike, Bolton, Pemble, Bradshaw, &c. 2. When you cannot Sacramentally, see that spiritually you feed on this body and bloud of Christ. For Directions take these. 1. Rom. 3.2, 3. Consider your necessities, sins, wants, and weaknesses, to sharpen Hunger and Thirst for Christ. Joh. 17.3. 2. Call forth at solemne times for that purpose your know ledge of Christ, especially in his death; Zach. 12.10. Is. 53. tot. Ps. 22. Math. 27. 1 Cor. 2.3. 3. Let aith set a dying Christ before you in your thoughts and meditations, with your sins, and God's wrath upon him. 4. Put in practice by godly sorrow what is set before you, Zach. 12.10 Zach. 12. while you look on him whom you have pierced: let sin then appear exceeding sinfull, because be∣smeared with the bloud of Christ. 5. Apprehend and apply by faith the love of God, and the love of Christ in dying for you. Gal. 2.20. Rom 5.6, Gal. 2.2. and John 3.16. and 1 Joh. 3.16. 6. Look upon Christ in dying as your surety, Heb. 7.22. Eph. 5.2. and as your sacrifice in your name and steed. Rom. 6: 7. Gal. 3.13. Rom. 3.25. Dan. 9.24. Look on Christ in his death as answe∣ring the Law, satisfying justice, taking a∣way sin, bringing in everlasting righteous∣nesse, establishing the covenant of Grace,
and making a purchase of grace and glory, Heb. 9.15. Eph. 1.14. Rom. 6.6. giving a deadly stroke to sin, and breaking the Serpent's head &c. Heb. 2.14. 8. Draw by faith all manner of virtues from him, to mortify sin, to quicken grace, to strengthen faith, and refresh your souls. 9. Eph. 1.3, 4. Be much in thansgiving to God for his Son, and adore the Love. 10. 2 Cor. 5.14. Improve all to Argument against cor∣ruption, temptation, and the world. See Rom. 6.3. Titus 2.14. 2 Cor. 15.14. 11. 1 Cor. 6.20 Give up your selves again in an ever∣lasting Covenant to be the Lords, to live to him, and if need be to dy for him. 12. Depend upon the satisfaction of Christ, Heb. 9. ult. and expect the vertues of his Death, till he come again in glory, and take you up with himselfe, that you may be for ever with him. Long for his immediatee presence, and hasten to it. See Bp Taylor, Rev. 22.20 latter end of his treatise on the Sacrament. SECT. XVII. Of reading the Scriptures. 1. SEttle your faith in the Divinity, 2 Pet. 1.19 Au∣thority, and Ʋerity of the Scriptures. And for that consider 1. that God is: 2.
that God in his name, 2 Tim. 3.16. Joh. 1.1. &c nature, and will can∣not be known, without revelation of him∣selfe: 3. such is his goodnesse (not to say his justice) that he will not expect that we should know him, believe in him, worship and serve him, not having given the world a sufficient discovery of himselfe. 4. there is no other, Act. 4.12. but this of the Scriptures, suffi∣cient for that purpose. Heb. 1.1. 2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. 5. This hath been delivered from God, from time to time: and 6. is a sufficient discovery of God, and of his will. 1. The Scriptures affirm it. 2. No∣thing rationall can be objected against it. 3. The Contents prove it, it carries selfe-evidence with it, and all divine characters necessary to it: Heb. 2.4. 4. It hath been sealed from heaven by a continued series of Providence; by miracles, by the powers of the Holy Ghost upon the first writers and publishers, Heb. 4.12. by spirituall and divine operations on Hea∣rers, some to Conversion and Consolation, on others to Conviction and Confusion. 5. It hath been confirmed and sealed by the bloud of Christ and many thousand Mar∣tyrs. Heb. 9.15. 6. It is wonderfully preserved in the world; 1 Tim. 3.15 and handed in the Church from one generation to another, and is still the same, notwithstanding all attempts to deface it. 7. 1 Joh. 5.10 Every true Believer hath the witnesse to
it within himselfe, lives upon it, Rev. 12.11 and would dye many a death rather then deny it, loose it, or the comforts of it. 2. Be conversant with it, Psal. 1.1, 2. and much in rea∣ding it, hearing it, and meditating upon it. Ioh. 5.45. Ps. 1. & 19. & 119. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Tim. 3.15. Rev. 1.4. &c: with faith, love, humility, diligence, obedience, constancy. 3. Read sometime occasionally, Act. 8.28, 29. for your instruction and consolation, as you shall be guided to it by God's spirit and provi∣dence, and your best understanding: but often solemnely, have your set times for it in your retirements, besides the family and publick opportunities: sit close at it, be not long absent from it. Read for spirituall re∣freshment as God shall direct you: be much acquainted with the Psalmes, Esay, the N: Test: Read for particular purposes on speciall places: Read for the generall know∣ledge of the Scripture, the Bible in order; and for quantity at a time, as your oppor∣tunity will give leave. 4. when you are to read solemnly, 1 Pet. 2.1. lay aside sinfull lust, and worldly thoughts, quicken your affections to the duty, set your self in Gods presence, beg his spirit, take the Book in hand with reverence, read with faith, fear, diligence, and understand∣ing:
and that you may the better under∣stand it, Act. 8.30, 31. use such helps as God hath affor∣ded. 1 Consider the connexion and scope, comparing it with other places: 2. Refer it to an enquiry, when you meet with a good Annotator, or an able Minister: 3. Passe on to what you may more easily under∣stand, and remember, that places concer∣ning salvation, and the necessaries to it for saith and life, are generally plaine, and easy to be understood. What you understand, consider, Ps. 119. that it may affect your heart, and take place in your memory, and give you such obvious observations, as it naturally affordeth for instruction or consolation: take speciall notice of what may increase your spirituall knowledge, rebuke your corruption, direct and quicken you to du∣ty, answer temptations, and refresh your soules: and more especially, of what the spirit of God in reading sets home upon your hearts, with evidence and power. If you would not willingly loose the observa∣tions, set a note upon the place, and if need be refer it to your Note-book for that pur∣pose. When you have done, reflect upon the whole by meditation, and commend it to God in prayer, bringing forth the fruits of it, in an holy life and conversation.
Helpes to the understanding of the Scrip∣tures may be such as these. 1. Read books directing you about the Scriptures, as Ambrose Middle things. Whites Directions for Reading. Roberts Key to the Bible. 2. When you meet with a difficult place, Note it, referre it for an enquiry when you meet with an able Minister, or a good Ex∣positor. 3. Have some choice Annotations on the whole Bible, and on particular books: if the English Annotations in Folio be costly, Get Bishop Halls Paraphrase, or Deoda∣tes Annotations: For the perticular books; there are severall, as Caryll on Jobe. Bur∣roughes on Hosea. Greenhill on some part of Ezekiel. Hutchenson on the lesser Pro∣phets. Dickson on the Psalmes. 1. Dixon on Matthew and Hebrewes, and all the Epi∣stles. Hutchenson on St Johns Gospell. Man∣ton on James and Jude. Jenkins on Jude. Sclater on Thessalonians. Baine on Ephe∣sians. Bifield on Collossions, &c. Ains∣worth on Pentatench, Psalmes, and Canti∣cles, with many others: if you cannot get all, get such as you can. 4. Acquaint your selves with the Generall Contents of the severall books. In Scritpure the Five Books of Moses, shew the
Creation of the World, and the foundati∣on of the Church; at length setling it on Abrahams family, with Gods proceeding with them in Egypt, and the wildernesse, under the conduct of Moses, &c. Jo∣shua, and other Historicall Books shew the progresse of God and his providence to∣wards the Church, in severall waies, and persons, and times. The Psalmes are full of spirituall Meditations: Proverbs full of instructions for Holy Wisdome. Ecclesiastes shewes the vanity of the creature. Canticles communion between Christ and his Church, and that as some think Prophetically. The Prophets containe not only Prophe∣cies, that concerned the Jewes and other Nations, but many promises of Christ and Grace, &c. The Evangelists give you the History of Christ his person, doctrine, mi∣racles, life, death, resurrection and ascen∣sion. The Acts shew the foundations of the Christian Church, among Jewes and Gentiles. The Epistles are for the edifi∣cation of those Churches, and our instructi∣on, occasioned mostly by Heresies and per∣secutions. The Revelations, Prophetically set forth the state of the world in generall, and the Church in speciall, from St Iohns daies till the end of the World.
Be most conversant in plaine and practi∣call Scripturess neglect not others Doctri∣nall, or Historicall. For the propheticall, especially Daniell, and the Revelations, they are beyond the reach of famous Divines, much more common Christians: Provi∣dence is the best expositor on Prophecies: and to a good understanding in them, there needs much knowledg of History and Chronology, yea the most profound and abstrusest parts of learning: only some∣things in generall may be easily under∣stood, as that such and such places con∣cerne the description and condition of the Church, in her pure or degenerate, in her prosperous or suffering condition; and such and such the enemies of God and of his people: and so may be read with pro∣fit. In summe, believe the truth of the Scripture, Adore the Majesty of God in them, acquaint your selves with their mat∣ter, make them the ground of your faith, and the rule of your life and practise, blesse God for them, and wait till Heaven give an absolute and perfect understanding of the whole.
SECT. XVIII. Of Reading good Books. IT hath been Gods wonderfull care of his people to provide, as the Scriptures, so good books for them; there are many such, both doctrinall and practicall. Get and read the best, but in a good method, and with diligence. 1. For Books Scriptu∣rall: they are such as these. 1. Expositors as before: Sermons, of them make choice. Concordances: Newmans and Cottons are large but usefull, Downhams are briefe, and it may be may serve a private Christian. A Book of Scripture references perhaps in English may be wanting, the Catechisme in quarto with the Scripture references may be a present supply till a larger may be had. Directive, for reading of the Scrip∣tures you had in the former Section, as Ambrose and Bifield, &c. And for the rea∣ding of expositors; some, as the briefe An∣notations must be consulted on difficul∣ties, others, as larger expositors may be read in order throughout, as other choice books.
Doctrinall, Bishop Ushers Body of Divini∣ty. Downhams sum. Leighs Body of Divinity. The morning exercise at Giles, and the Assem∣blies larg Catechismes with other Catechismes, will be a good introduction, to them you may referre your other reading. From some good Catechisme understand the principles of Religion, and then having gotten a knowledg of the heads in Divinity, proceed to other books: observing the point of doctrine, with its proofe from Scripture, and sound reason, It's severall branches for Amplification, and it's uses in Appli∣cation. For sentences and illustrations, you may look upon them as profitable or pleasant, but not so necessary. For Controversall you need not trouble your selfe with most of that nature: get advice for such from an able minister. For practicall, there are many on particular subjects: I have referred you to not a few. Others are on mixed subjects: get and read the best. Such as these I would commend, besides others you may meet with, and at present I may let slip. Shep∣heards sound convert and believer, and o∣thers of his. Hookers works. Baxters, Gurnhalls, Loves, Preston, Sibbes, Perkins, Downham, Harris, Tomas Goodwins
VVorks, Reynolds, Symonds, Mori Exercises both Ball. Read well Ambro looking unto Iesus, &c. In reading practicall books, observe these directions. 1. Acquaint your self with  best books. 2. With the generall conte of the book. 3. Then read it over in ∣der; for time, as opportunity gives lea 4. Observe the principall heads more  enlargements. 5. Incorproate the ma∣ter into your understanding. And 6, the get it wrought into your hearts, and upon your affections by meditation. 7. take speciall notice of what particularly con∣cernes you, especially what is set home upon your hearts by the spirit of God in your reading, either by way of conviction, instruction, or consolation. 8. make an end with one good book before you begin with another in your ordinary course. Let your books be few, choice, sufficient and read them well. Get a well chosen and composed closet of books: A faire Bible, Deodates Annotations: a Concordanc Ushers Body of Divinity: and for practic Books, as you can procure them. FINIS.
