T231 12627508 64679
OSTELLA Or the FACTION OF LOVE and BEAUTY RECONCIL'D. By I. T. Gent. LONDON Printed for John Tey, at the White-Lion in the Strand, near the New EXCHANGE, 1650.
To the deservedly Honoured, and highly accomplished Sir Richard Hastings. Baronet. SIR, I Am no stranger to your worth, though I am to your Person; The fame of the one makes me Ambiti∣ous to be known to the other. It hath been the goodnesse of all Noble Souls, to Communicate their Virtues to the feeble, by taking them into their Protection; The light of which leads me to the boldnesse of shel∣tring these Poems under your Patronage. And though (Sir) this Presumption may justly Merit your Check, yet when your Judgement shall dis∣cover their Nakednesse, and find how much they
need your fence against the storms their own weaknesse may draw upon them, your Native Sweetnesse (doubtlesse) will intercede for, and open the Sanctuary to Sir, Yours in all hum∣blenesse devoted. JOHN TATHAM.
To the truly Ingenious, and promising fulness of Gallantry, Kimsmel Lucie. Esquire. SIR, W'Orthy Presents are received for their own value; mean ones (if at all) for his sake that bestows them: I will not then dispair of kind Enter∣tainment from you, since you have been pleased not to account me unwelcome to your self. The favours from your Noble Father, and your self Oblieges me to this dutious offering: And if you deny not it what you have vouchsafed to me, it shall be my care to render my self gratefull by a more worthy Pre∣sent.
In the mean time, these may serve as Sallats, to provoke the Appetite of a young wit: I dare not commend them to you to feed on, since the smallest fragment that falls from the Banquet of your Fancy, the nicest Pallat may feast with. And therefore be pleased to admit me, if for no in∣trinsique worth of my own, yet in regard I have the virtue to admire yours. Your ever Honourer▪ I. T.
The Book to the Reader. I'M troubled with no lesse Than the Plague of the Press, you see the Spots are on me: Yet, I would not be crost, Lest my Author be lost; but I'd have—MERCY VPON ME. ERRATA. PAge 8. line 3. for orment read torment. p. 9. l. 23. for loves r. eaves. p. 10. l. 4. for heart r. tears. p. 2. l. 19. for hold r. held p. 26. l. 21. for if it be r. if't be. p. 35. l. 19. (the) too much. p. 38. l. 8, for the r. thy. l. 29. for best r. blest. p. 43. l. 1. for wes r. was. p. 44. l. 1. for insection r. infection. l. 18. for votury r. votary. p. 47. l. 8. for doth r. doe. p. 48. l. 4 for 'tis r. to's. p. 51. l. 9. for with r. which. l. 3. for All r. He. p. 55. l. 15. for nubrown r. utbrown. p. 61. l. 6. for sweetnes r. sweets. p. 79. l. 4. for its r. it p. 92. l. 18. for the r thy. p. 97▪ l 14. for not r. our. l. 20. for as r or. p. 98. l. 5. for Lortes r. Lutes. l▪ 22. for Milk r, Meat. p. 100. l. 20▪ for sight r. sight. p. 103 l. 16, for which r. with. p. 104. l. 24. for draw r. drown. p. 106. l. 12. for just r. mist. l, 19. for enjoy'd r. envy'd.
OSTELLA: Or The Faction of Love and Beauty Reconciled. Upon my first sight of OSTELLA. IN what dark world have I entomb'd my sight thus long, till now, I ne're saw perfect light: The Sun his common favours doth dispense, aswell unto the Peasant as the Prince. Each Ploughman whistles forth Aurora's ray. and proudly vaunts, an interest in the day; The Moon we know doth slender light maintain, she's scarce in the full, before she's in the wain: The Stars (those petty instruments of light,) seldome appear, but in a frosty night. These lights do rule by turns. Nor can One take, anothers time on; or All one light make.
When here is one whose lustre doth excell all naturall causes; heaven on her brow doth dwell. Her glori's still the same, and ne're declines, but with the self-same Majesty still shines. Sure did those Negro's that adore the Sun: but feel her temperate heat they soon would shun That Heresie, and offer sacrifice to the Celestial vigour of her eys. All share not in this blisse, she hath the sence to curb by want the common insolence: Her beams are lasting such a heat is pure, for though her light be sparing, it is sure. My Resolution. REturn me not disdain, for if you do, By all those nimble Fairies wait on you I will indict you for a witch; and tell how you do hang on er'y hair a spell. Your brows are Magick circles in each eye, where fools think Cupids lodge, do spirits lie. That in unseen Flames issue forth and kill such, your hate pointeth out slaves to your will; That in the Dimples of your Cheeks we may, discern chain'd hearts, kept for your sport, who pay Each hour a death, yet die not; that your breath darts more infection than the spleen of Death. That 'twixt those two round hills (now to our view,) lie buried all those hearts your Anger slew. That slaughtered hearts you make your chiefest Fare, whose dying Groans speak musick in your ear: That for your drink y'ave Lovers bloud and tears distilled through the Limbeck of their fears. That when you kisse you Traytor like betray,
or with it some strong Philtre do convey. Yhat after once poor man hath seen your face, your Devils will not suffer him to raze It out on's memory; but 'twill appear, to terrifie him, his Hell er'y where. That you can walk unseen and so torment, poor man he shall not have grace to repent. And if these accusations will not take with potent proofs, and you a Circe make, I must conclude for 'tis part of my fear, you have bewitch'd the Judge and charm'd his ear: And if the Iury find you not, Them too: yet I will stand it out with them and you, Then be advis'd and bribe me with a kisse, not of a Killing temper but of blisse. For which Il'e change the scene and will acquaint the World, you are no Devil but my Saint. Ostella discribed. LEt others search for Metaphors to raise unto their Mistress Pyramides of praise If mine deserve it, shee in time may have it, in the mean time 'tis labour and 'ile save it, Onely without the help of Art as nature, hath ornamented her behold her Feature. Her hair is lovely brown, her Face is fair, Her eyes are black, her cheeks such colours wear. As Art may imitate, but not excell, her forehead high, composed passing well; Her nose of modest size, her mouth the like, her lips are full and red, the veins do strike; Into Meanders, down her Neck and Breast; her Brest round, plump, and white; her skin the best That Nature ever blanch'd; her fingers small;
Hand, long and white; of Person something Tall, Her waste of just proportion for a span, straight shap'd; her feet (for there's the last I can Discover) slender, instep somewhat high: you have the full of my discovery. Each Painter thus may take her Outward part, But he must needs have skill, can take her Heart▪ In the Morning: A FLAME. FRom the deep sense of hope and fear, rais'd by the vigour of desire, which of it selfe's all fire, Blown by the issues of our grief, who break their Pison for relief, A flame is kindled in my breast, pure, as the Vestals ere possest, Whose mild heat receives welcome there. The Sacrifice. FRom the sweet hopes that doe arise From a safe faith of joys to come in loves Elizium; From the chast incense of each Thought Pil'd up, and into matter wrought, And from that Sense seems to Divine A glory to't by being thine. my heart's become a Sacrifice; And if thou bee'st as just as fair, Smother it not, but give it ayr.
To Ostella, an Advise before she send an Answer. LEt loose your reason first, and then exile those Enemies to love; Those flattering Thoughts, that in your Sex do reign, as Self-Conceit, Pride, and Disdain, Which do such desp'rate Tenets move, That you can live without us Men, So to your selves you do injurious prove, A losse to Nature, Hereticks to Love. Let not your glass abet your will; for though it speak you fair, It bids you not to hope to raise a Fame out of the Reliques of a flame; Nor think your Beauty is not rare, Unless it hath the force to kill. So Tyrants lest their names forgot should be, Do some Grand Act to scare Posterity. Ostella smiling. VVHo would not think those Rising Beams So temp'rate were, that no extreams Attended Them to cloud our Day, and our Credulity betray, Who could be such a Slave to Fear, to think a Tempest could be near So Fair an Omen? Who'd not dare Danger it self, and Anchor there?
Who would not think himself secure, and safety to himself assure, When such a mild and gentle Ray, doth smooth the wrinckles of the Day. But (oh) it takes the Lightnings form, and I'm betray'd into a Storm. To Ostella upon the pain of her Tooth-ach. REvengefull Love thy Cruelty to fit, in Throngs and Pangs did use his wit How he might hit some secret part, whose tenderness might ad edge to his dart: and make the Grief far greater than the Smart. Knowing thy Brest's of such Materials made, no Force could enter, though invade It might, in labour was his Brain; to bring't about, but finding 'twas in vain, he fret, and sweat himself into a pain. The which his Tenderness could not endure, and to his Mother sought for Cure; Who madly Anger'd seem'd to be, and curst that Burning Torment into Thee, not half so bad as Those which flame in me. But I to Love will pray an ease for Thine. so by Thine own thou'lt learn to pitty Mine. To Ostella upon the lamenting the death of her Sparrow. WHat from a thing so mean, could raise so much delight in thee,
That for its losse so soon thy Rays: with storms should covered be? A Bird that wanted Natures layes, nor Beauty had, nor Worth. Whom Nature never meant for praise; but tongue-ti'd sent it forth. That 'tis a wonder strikes my heart, and seems my sence to mock, From whence it should achieve an Art to draw tears from a rock. But if the death of such a vain thing, so much troubles you. What for the heart your scorn hath slain ought you in soul to do? Vpon the Sparrow. VVHat time hath been tan up for thee, in play and pleasure fine, When scarce a Glance could come to me so great a bliss was thine: When thou didst tipple at her lip, and swil▪d in drink divine, My Thirsty Soul one Heavenly sip, her hate would not assign. Oft have I envied thy poor life, and could grasp'd forth thy Breath, And now my Genius is as rife to envy this thy Death.
Since from the Treasure of her eye, such plenteous tears do fall; That should my soul in torment lie, none would be seen at all. But though in life and death I seem so much to envy thee, Yet art thou rais'd with more esteem, from Death to Life by me. A Summons to a Seige. COme thou Paphian Engineer, since there is no human Art, can redeem my captiv'd heart; Oh come and plant thy Canon here. In you Cittadel there is a Female wonder, that doth own a Brest of flesh, but Heart of stone: Nay sure far more relentless 'tis. With my Heart here she thought fit; to retire secur'd 'gainst war; but I know thou'lt find it far More hard to Conquer her than it, What no human force could do, in the conquest of her breast, my hopes are with faith possest, That, Love, thou mayest in time subdue.
The Retreat. REtreat, Retreat, do you not see as fast as you Granadoes throw; she quencheth them in Pits of snow. Intrencht about with Ivory. And when you Vndermine, you are, by cunning Countermining crost, and all your Pioneers are lost Nay, all your Treaties are but Air. Your Cannons do no terrour sound; for she with Penetrateles strength Repells them: then Retreat at length E're your own Weapons give you wound. Ostella's Kisse. WHen you Ostella grac'd me with a Kisse, it was conceiv'd, it could not wound my Blisse Or discompose the quiet I possest, e're Love usurp'd the freedome of my Brest. But this I find, such Blisse, such Torment too, I ne'r had felt, had I not fanci'd you. That welcom'd kiss shot fire through ev'ry part, till it had seiz'd the Chamber of my Heart; And there surpriz'd the Virgin of Content that ne'r knew Love before or Detriment▪ The Bee so loves her Sting, yet doth not know, mistaking thus where she hath hurt or no.
Then when with sighs and tears I strive to kill, the raging heat, they but augment my ill. The more I breath, the more the Flames aspire Love turns my heart to Oyl to Feed the fire; And when to you my Griefs I would impart, Fear ties my Tongue, and Love Enthrals my Heart. Licence my love Ostella then, and give A Cure to that, els must not hope to live, Nor glory in this conquer'd heart of mine, Pitty will make your Beauty more Divine. Soften your Heart like mine that dotes on you, or teach me how to make mine Marble too. Returning to my Chamber at night to the Taper. HEnce Feeble light, I will not have thee burn near me, go and attend some needy Vrn, Until 'its Damp undo thee I retain a stronger Flame in my Ostella's name; Which Fate cannot expire, not yet the Breath of Furies which hate Light, nor envious Death. It is a virtuous flame, and shall aspire to Heaven, when the whole world speaks but One Fire. Wilt not henceh Hw officious do'st thou grow, I've known the time Thou would'st not serve me so, E're this time of thy self thou hast gone out, when I did need Thee most, thou went'st about To help me least, go weep thy self away, I want thee not, 'tis madnesse to burn day: This service is not welcome, then begon: there are more ways to wast thy self upon
Than by thy tedious waiting, and pretence of service, to become a meer offence: It were more Charity to watch the Dead, the thought of Love shall light my Soul to Bed. To Love. IT is no marvel, Love thou liv'st so long, and though exactly Old, art perfect Young; To all mens sense thou hadst consu'd and di'd, had not our kinder heat thy want suppli'd. Thou dost extract thy Comfort from our Hearts; our Feebleness thy Nutriment imparts: Thou suck'st us dry, and leav'st us ne're a Vein unsearch'd, that may thy Youth and Pride maintain At their luxurious height, In that poor we are tortur'd sev'ral ways to nourish Thee: And yet thou (cruel) ne're art satisfi'd, but to support thine doth our States divide. By weak'ning us, thou do'st renew thy strength; by shortning of our lives thine receive length. Thou tak'st thy Beauty from our Cheeks; thy Youth from ours; and thy Decrees are from our Truth Originally fram'd; though young, art sage, and Thou deriv'st thy Youth from others Age. Sure thou extract'st the very Quinte sence of Life from Hearts, for Mine left me long since. After this rate Thou may'st for ever live, since Our decaying's Thy Preservative. To Ostella's Brother. IT is not now, as when my Soul was free, and could contract my time to Mirth and Thee;
Meet the lov'd Sack with lips as resolute, as Merchants in the heat of their pursuit, Ofth' Virtue on't, when our exacter taste to make their Wits secure, Our own did wast; When our Succeeding Cups, did Musick send through eithers ear, in health to eithers friend: When, our Comptrolless, Mirth her Voice did fit, and laugh'd ev'n Melancholly out on's Wit; When ev'ry Brow was clear, and ev'ry Heart unthrall'd, shew'd Friendships Concord without Art: Then was the time of times! But now (alas) I have not so much Heart will break a Glasse My Soul is out of tune as well as I, I'm a meer Eunuch to Society; Fly all things but my Passion, and do stalk along the Thames sides Melancholly walk, As though I meant a Wedding with the Willows, bidding adue to Sack, Mirth, and Boon-fellows. This was thy fault then blame thy self not me: had I ne're seen thy Sister, I had been I. This is a Metamorphosie, as true, as Ovid ere in's strength of Fancy drew. Ostella visiting me in time of Sicknesse. BLest be that Tongue that whisper'd in your Ear, my Sicknesse: Heaven did surely send you here, Upon some Angels Wing to give repose to my Distracted Thoughts, this Pitty shews You are ally'd to Heaven, I was but now, cold as the Morning Air, or Deaths chill Brow: And now a soft Heat steals through ev'ry Vein, and warms my Heart, thus you revive the Slain,
The Dark Cimmerian that hath seal'd his eyes up in continuall sleep, would rouze and rise To blesse this happy Omen, so from far the Kings rejoic'd when as the Eastern Star Appeard to them; like Comfort You do bring: for when good Works are done Angels do sing. My Scorn to Cupid, or Cupid ungodded. A God! some jugling Gypsies Brat that silly People wonder at, Whose faiths thou hast abus'd with lies, And fortune-telling fopperies▪ No more assume the title God that fitter art to have the Rod: But use thy Quiver and thy Bow, to kill Iack-Daws, or fright the Crow, Nor boast thy Parentage or Power th'ast lost thy Godhead in one hour. Henceforth in scorn thy Figure shall, be plac'd on ev'ry Potters Stall. Or on the Tester of some Bed; thy Altar be some Cup-boards head, No fumes of Sacrifice shall rise, less from the Mists of Childrens eys; When in their Play they Ruine Thee, and thou the Sacrificed be. No, No, thou shalt abuse no more our Faiths, with thy huge Deeds of Yore, Fame lies to prate so much of thee, could'st thou so great a Conquerour be, Or'e Gods themselves, and now want'st wir, sufficient Power, and Strength to hit
A Heart of Flesh, and not of Flint? odd's death, I think the Divels in't. Loves melancholly. I Live in th'World, but how? in such deep Woe, as though I were not made 'its joys to know: I eat, yet feed not; from the choisest food, I can't extract that goodness doth me good. I drink, and often, still my Sorrow's dry, and to chase sadness keep much company. Them I disturb; for when their Mirth flies high, damp't with a fit I break Society. Retir'd vnto my Chamber, I converse with some known Author either Prose or verse; In my Survey, if any joys I find, conferr'd on any, I am strucken Blind; If any Mans hard Fate be queintly shewn, I straight Compare his Torments with mine own; And finding mine exceed, leave off to Read, the Weight of Sorrow, bears me to my Bed: There if I sleep my troubled Soul doth Walk, and just as Mad-men use, to 'its self doth talk. Awake, my Fancy wanders too and fro, as though I knew not where to rest or go. In such distracted Passions I am thrown, I'm neither well in Publick nor alone: I'm young and apt for Pleasure single too, Objects enough that may my fancy Wooe, And yet not Helens Beauty can delight my eye or raise in me an appetite: Nor is this Miracle I do impart, And yet I breath, live, move, without a heart.
Ostella's Scorn. HAd I not Lov'd thee Cruel fair, thou had'st not priz'd thy self so high: And thou had'st mist the title Rare, had'st not receiv'd it from My eye. The Flames that from my Heart did rise, wrought by the fuell of Desire, To seek the Glory of thy eyes hath rais'd in others brests a fire. And I that first did blaze thy Name; that long before Obscured lay, Am left Consuming in my Flame whilst others Pitty find their Pay. Thus by my Love, thou wert made Great, and by thy Pride my Hearts cast down▪ Ingratitude is the worst Cheat, and Prides more infamous then Clown. But oh fond Love, thou didst my Pen subborn to make her Proud, now Pride doth make her Scorn. To Ostella. VVOuld'st thou live, and have thy Name, stand glorious in the eys of Men, And fixt above the common aym, make thy Sex Emulate thy Fame. And Treasur'd up in Story be an ever-living Fame to them?
Or would'st thou to example thee, raise Flames in all Posterity? Then let thy Lenity reseat My Heart, late Captiv'd by thy power; Raise it, to make thy own more Great: they best can save that can Defeat. So Caesar's setting up of Pompey's Name, Made his own stand secure with brighter Fame. A Tempest. HElp Love, or els I sink; (for know, he best can help that causeth Woe.) Help , and with thy smoother Palm, the fury of my Passion Calm▪ Succeeding tears in Billows rise, as there were Seas met in my eyes, My Sighs united, proudly groan, as the four Winds combin'd in one. Hark how they roar! my Sighs and Tears sure have conspir'd to tempt my fears. See how they swell! now they are met, and even a Tempest do beget: It shakes my Bark, her Ribs do Crack, and now my hopes expect a Wreck. Help Love for Pity, then I pray, cre my poor Heart be cast away. To Death. THou Grand Physitian to a troubled Brest, thou that both kill'st, and cur'st, in one exprest
Thou Terrour and thou Comforter no less then Messenger of Hell and Happinesse; Thou Conquerour of frai Humanity, who yet t'imprisoned Souls giv'st liberty. Why come not I within the benefit, of thy Decree? thy lingring doth beget My Jealousie: say, for my life to me is hatefuller then thy Grim shape can be. In ev'ry Street Mottality appears, and yet I live though drowned in my Tears: Kill me, and make me happy in my Death, that living draw but discontented Breath. I thus invok'd in Wrath, He made Reply Lovers were made for Torment not to Die. A Bird presented to Ostella. FAir Bird thou art design'd to be a Messenger from Love and me, An Embassy though not so high as that which from the Ark did flie Yet such as Nice Divines admit and Loves Religion Warrants it. Go, and those sadder Notes of thine which so improv'd by Discord mine, Unto the Soveraign of my Heart Peal forth in a confused At, Sing out my sigh, chatter my Groans: imperfect speech best breaks our Moans. Strike all Hearts sad that hers may know How much of pitty she doth ow To mine: pursue her day, by day, Let her not eat nor drink nor pray
Till for her own safe ease and rest, her bosom does become thy Nest, Where if th'art Martyred by her eys, Thou shalt from thence a Phaenix rise. Imagination. HOw pleasingly doth thy Deceit insinuate into our Sense, Where having taken up a Seat, what 'tis we wish thou steal'st from thence, And to thy self thou form'st the Shape which represented to the Mind, Doth on its Peace Commit a Rape, leaving our Fancy unconfin'd: That time that for our Rest is lent imploy'd our thoughts awake to keep, Is priz'd to be the sweetest spent, although it doth exile our Sleep: What Numerous Joys do'st thou beget to flatter each inclining thought, As seem t'exceed the Appetite, whose subtilty the Wonder wrought! But (oh) the falsenesse of thy Charms, that such bewitching joys prepare, That when we think th'are in our Arms, Ixion like, we grasp the Air. Ostella saying she pittied me, but could not help me. PItty without Relief is just one on a sleevelesse Errand sent:
That wanting what should Shape his trust returns more simple than he went. For, Naked Pitty brings but Cold and heartless Comfort on his back, It onely guilds the grief is told and make us worse in what we lack. Compassion bears a Sense with it, as though it felt th' afflicted'st Grief, Loves Messenger it's tearmed fit, It never comes without relief. But th'Pitty that proceeds from you, adorns my Temples and my Eyes With Wreaths of Roses mixt with Rue, deckt onely up for Sacrifice, And in the sweetnesse of that breath You do but Musick forth my Death. Reason. REason and I long time known friends, in all things did comply, Till suddenly for unknown ends It shun'd my company: And whatsoe're I said or did, It still did flie the Sense, As though some Sophistry lay hid, Or Errour came from thence. At last admiring at the Cause of its so strange Neglect, I Conjur'd it by it's own Laws, to yield me more respect:
And to resolve me speedily why We at difference were, Since first a solemn League did tie us, to a Sense more fair, Knowing I was in Love, it answered me, Reason and Madmen never could agree. Ostella saying, she would not say she did, could, nor would not Love me. I'm wrapt in such a Mist, Reasons cleer light can't lead me through lost betwixr; Day and Night: ▪Twixt Doubt and Joy my faculties do rise, and War with in me, and my sense dispise, One while I'm lifted to the Throne of Blisse, straight Ponierd by my Fears and struck to th' Abiss. Now I am sinking, now, I Tryton like ride on the Neck of Danger and do strike With my strong hopes my fears into the Main; now I'm a Prince, and now a Slave again. And thus my fainting joy 'twixt hope and fear, doth Ebb, and Flow▪ now Wing'd, now Clog'd, in th' Air, Mockt with the shadow of thy Love, which I seeking to catch at, my pursuit doth flie. Why did'st not say, thou did'st not, nor could'st Love me? but those are spoken plain enough to move me: Yet why that nimble close then? though thou could'st not to sweeten it thou wouldst not say thou would'st not? If thou nor do'st, nor canst▪ what hope can I assume thou ever wilt? oh Destiny! So flattering Oracles did tell Mens fate and yet in th' Mistery conceal'd their hae,
To Ostella my Choice. I Would not Wed the Creature that desires to know the secrets of the Marriage Bed, And to repell the fury of her fires, forsooth in all haste must be Married. Nor she who by her Parents Cruelty is made to loath her self, and cares not how Shee is bestow'd to Joy or Misery, ne're minding Love nor marrriage strickt vow. Nor she that hath to any been a Stale, and now with frantick Resolution swears, The next that comes to Court her shal prevail: Oh such a Piece would lug Love by the Ears. Nor she that would be Wed to be made fine, thinking Content should her Attendant be, Beleeving not to want what ere was mine: faith such a Piece doth love her self not me. Nor your half, Matron of some thirty five, whose in good law, and good-sooths have worn out Her lips and teeth, whose Heart is but a Sive, as fast as Love creeps in, it goeth out. Nor the Green-piece that weds for the Ring sake, and other pritty things belonging to't That man that hath her must her Babies make, and have a sool and thousand Plagues to boot,
Nor yet the serious Soul that doth imploy her whole day at her Work, or pries into The Cooks affairs, in her there is small joy: Shee'l Love me when sh'as nothing else to do. Now, some will say I can't find such a one that are from one or all these follies free To such I answer, that they are unknown unto thy Worth and ignorant of Thee. Ostella Confessing She loved Me. A Blest confession, for which expect (though you have justly merited Neglect From Love and me,) an Absolution for all your past ills against us, since that War Brought on this happy Peace, This Truce doth give me more than hope, assurance I shall live▪ Nay live to joy in You the onely sum of all my hopes, from whence my Blisse must come. The Gods will recompence you for this Deed, And amplifie your Glory in your Seed; But I admire you hold me in suspence so long▪ knowing my Loves pure innocence; That though with Love I seem'd to be all fire, yet was a Stoick to impure desire; But I have found the Reason, and you know it, The cleernesse of this Truth doth plainly shew it, "The longer growth Diseases do indure, "The more the Grief, more famous is the Cure So from your Patients Tortour you would raise an honour, and by Curing him, a praise. And by that Weaknesse I'm more hearty grown Than if my Strength had never Weaknesse known.
'Twas pretty Policy which I commend, that Sorrow's sweetn'd that doth find an End▪ Your Answers pli'de me as you'd beat back fire not to suppress the Flame, but raise it higher. Ostella as king why: I loved Her. NOt because thy face is fair, though the Colours be thine own, and their Paralel unknown: Nor for all thy All that's rare, Which perhaps others may prize Less, than IIdolatrize. Nor for that th'art perfect good, which few of your Sex can claim as a title to their Name; Or a sweetnesse to their blood. This to others to may seem Not so great as I esteem. No, nor for thy love to me, though it strongly may perswade, and my Manhood much invade. In this none can judge of thee But my self, to which i'le swear, Never Turtle lov'd more deer. Yet I love thee and pray why? in Obedience to my Fate, I should love though thou didst hate: Yet I would not have thee try.
This Womans Reason I'le give you troth I love you cause I do, The Nut to Ostella. THou hast my Heart and I have thine a blest Exchange is this! They seem to part, yet ne'r dis join. and when they meet they kisse. Though they in severall Beds do lie two Rooms do not them severe, So that they may with safetie flie and mingle blisse together. My Heart breaths freshnesse on thy Rose that else would droop and wither My Brest had wanted its repose had not thy Heart come hither. Replanted Plants do prosper so, in other Soils far better Then in the fist, and  do shew to'th Gods we're  a Debtor. Oh may my Heart so thrive with thee and thine with me so dwel, That they may knit and  to be two Kirnels in one shell.
To Ostella. I Sent my Heart ev'n as my Child to thee, to be brought up, as thine shall be with me: Be carefull os't as th' Apple of thy eye, so shall I be of thine, or may I die, Let mine not sorrow, I shall comfort thine; in this we prove our Amity Divine. But if mine droops, thine holds not up the head; as mine doth fare, thine shall be cherished. Mine's of a softly Nature, and may be wound like a twig, ev'n any way by thee. But thine more stubborn was, until in tears I bath'd it supple, ev'n with Cares and Fears: It would not stoop: But Heaven to Crown the end of my sad toyl, at last, did make it bend. And now it proves a greater joy to me, than did mine own before it came to thee. The FACTION. To OSTELLA. BEauty glorious as the Light that unveils the face of Day; Think it is her proper Right, that all Hearts should her obey: And in Competition stands with All▪Conquering Love, who try By eithers power which most Commands, and best deserves the Diety. Loves inviting oylie words on his party many gain.
Beauties beams wound worse than swords, strongly do her side maintain. Eithers strength 'ginning to waste streight they unto Reason fly, Who well season'd bids them taste of this sharp Antipathy, Love not linckt to Beauties Rays is Majesty in disguise And looseth its reverent praise 'cause 'tis clouded from our eyes; Beauty without Love declines as the Heart that wanteth heat, Or the Flowr that droops and pines, when the Sun should it repleat: And so wisely did Decree Love and Beauty should agree; And least the Union should undo, sends them to reside with you. Ostella asking me how I liked a painted Lady came to see her. VVHy I will tell thee: Is that face her own, she makes so much on't, or takes't up on Loan? I promise if it be so, she doth deserve to have it lent again, she doth preserve It with such care, but this is jest. I know she is a painted cloath, a Puppet show; I must confesse when she unvail'd, I stood in such amazement as though made of Wood: Perhaps she did conceive as much, just so when Persius did uncase unto his foe
Medusa's head, they were transform'd as I beholding her strange Metamorphosie. I'm sure my Heart was Marble; I forgot all civill manners, and saluted not: I might have prejudic'd her, if I had, kist off her colours, then she had been mad: And I did ow such dear regard to thee, because she was thy friend so Wise to be. Shee was thy foil, O stella, for, when I, compar'd with hers thy Native Livery, Finding hers false, and she to Art was more, beholding, than Nature for that poor Decaying Pride, which the least Air doth vade, I blest my fortune that by thee was made: 'Twere Sin to doubt her inside cause, with thee she doth converse the Soul of Piety. Yet be she what she wil, this joyes my Heart, Thou art the Pride of Nature not of Art. Vpon my assurance of OSTELLA's Love. ANd do'st thou Love indeed, in very deed, Ostella? prithee speak, and yet take heed: 'Tis requisite my Question be deni'd, lest I do surfet e're I'm satisfi'd: So from that sweet receive my ban▪ and be as slow in thanks for Love as Cruelty. Yet be not Cruel neither, 'tis not just thou should'st be so, and worse I should mistrust Thy spotless Faith: I would not have thee hate, nor would I have thy Love become my Fate; For the excess of each may dang'rous prove, and seeking to preserve, may ruine Love.
Lightning is swift, as soon it doth retire; let our flames softly burn, and not expire, By whose kind heat our hearts may warm, not burn: there's safetie in't, we may out, last our Urn. Tell me, do'st Love? Yet do not tell me so: and yet I know thou do'st; for on thy Brow I read it, 't can't be hid by all the skill thy Art can purchase; Yet delight thy will As I shall mine. Answer me then, and prove by Paradox, thou do'st not, yet do'st Love. Ostella veiled. OStella, thou do'st injure me by this Veil of Modesty. Thou the Sun of my Delight thus obscur'd, I am in night, I would not shew thee sweet to sell but to be admir'd is well; For from thee by others praise I to my self a Trophie raise, 'Tis my Pride the World should be in Love with thee, as thou with me: Which adds a glory to my Fate; that they for thee me Emulate. Open thy Beauty to the Day give thy Cupids leave to Prey; Enflame all Hearts, make the World thine, I have the glory thou art mine.
Ostella shewing me Verses sent to her by a friend of mine. VErses to thee! is he so Love-some grown just on a sudden, are the lines his own? Or doth he Court by Proxy, and hath paid dear for his wit to one whose need hath made Him a prost Poet, that he should be guilty of Wit, Condemns himself and me. Miracles may chance to walk, and light on him he's empty enough, and may receive to th'brim. But yet why should I doubt this, since thy eye can make a Spark a Flame in Poetry, And were not I as confident of Thee as Saints of Heaven are, a Jealousie Would work into my Faculties, thy Love might leave my Sphear, and in anothers move. Women are Charm'd, when praises do perswade, for then harmonious Spels their Ears invade. Ostella advising me to leave off drink▪ ing Wine. HOw dearest! art thou weary of thy Fame, that thou would'st banish that preserves the same? When I would write on th' Vigour of thy eye, a sprightly Glasse of Sack I've standing by, From whence my Pen takes life and speed; that Smile of thine, thou ow'st to Sack for my fair Guile, That lively Colour of thy Cheek and Lip, from the rich Claret did my fancy sip, And from the mantling sparks which thence arise I Metaphor'd the Cupids in thy eyes.
From the Lov'd Grape I can create Conceit, enough to raise Dejection to the Seat Of Honour, 'tis the Nepenthean Spring about the which the jolly Muses sing Thy praises from my Verse. Oh let me lack all things else usefull, so thoust give me Sack. Thou maiest as well go bid me leave to live, as have me leave the means which life doth give: Faith leave my Wine, and farewel Poetry, forgetting which none will remember Thee. To one asking how he should know my Mistresse. THou maiest know her by her dresse both of body and of mind; Where so many Graces press as just Heaven had assign'd her the Glory of her Kind. Thou maiest know her by the flame which proceedeth from her eye. But (oh) who can see the same who can see it and not die: 'tis so full of Majesty. Thou maiest know her by her Balm, the blest issue of her breath, Which in Passion is so calm, it gives life instead of Death: such a virtuall power it hath.
Thou maiest know her by a Heart full of Love and Constancy; More of Pitty then of Art. but all this thou canst not see, 'Less my Fate did govern theee. My Vow to Ostella upon her doubting my faith. BEleeve me Love by those fair eys, that blesse the World with Light, and to the blind give sight; By this chaste kiss, this pretious breath That rescu'd my poor heart from Death, It still remains thy Conquer'd prize. By virtues self enthron'd in thee: for other Beauties wear but th'bare figure of whats rare. No thoughts of change disturb my Rest, Whose heats consume not, warm the Brest; there's no Content like Constancy. But should'st thou not continue mine, as firm as when I first Love in my Bosom Nurst? I should the Bastard banish thence, (Though yet the Child of Innocence,) and prove him humane, not Divine. Did not thy fires preserve my flame, it should dispersing fly in Sparks at ev'ry eye,
With Wanton Liberty should range, And ev'ry minute covet change, 'till it dissolv'd Loves hallowed frame. But till thy Fancy change thy Mind, (if I without offence may doubt such Innocence,) My Love shall be so purely free From loose thoughts of disloyalty, it shall teach Turtles to be kind. Vpon an occasion; to Ostella, Of Jealousie. THe Day that's lost et'e scarcely shewn, might rule Eternally. Did not th'Prerogative of Night insinuate a Sovereignty. The Spring and Summer cropt e're blown with all their gaudy Train, Might ever season our delight, did not intruding Winter Reign. The Sea whose often Shipwracks strike a fear into the advent'rers mind Would safely harbour did no Storm engage its nature to the wind. All things in goodness would be like did not the ills their diff'rence shew Beauty in freedome as in form, and nature no decaying know.
Youth dwell for ever on our Cheeks▪ did not the Iron hand of Age Imprint a Ruine, or Disease invade our healths, and life engage. Man might possess as soon as seek the Pleasures that do so entice, But his own Nature doth displease, else Earth had been a Paradise. So had not cruel Love crept in, my Heart had been from Passion free, And my Content had been mine own, Not slav'd to sottish Jealousie. But Love hath rais'd such Wars within, they do disturb my Peacefull pores, And Tyrant-like (alas) have thrown my Rest and Quiet out of Doors. Ostella forth of Town: To my Heart. HEart be Content, though she be gone, let Reason govern thee: Thou hast so much of Pleasure known, 'tis fit a season'd Misery should temper thy Prosperity. Absence doth whet the Appetite, which Presence dull'd before, There is no Pleasure truly great, nor sweet of such effectual pow'r, 'till season'd with a little Sow'r.
He cannot truly prize Delight, that ne'r knew Misery; Nor deem the glory of the Light, untili by wanting it, he be sensible of its purity, Think this the time of thy lost health which when restor'd to thee, Ev'n from the Ruine of thy Wealth it brings a perfect Remedy, to double thy Felicity. To the worst of Passions: THou that destroi'st our Peace, giv'st Liberty to fury, ruine; Thou, grand Enemy To man; Thou, whose unlimited pretence deposeth Reason, and confounds our sense. Thou, whose Tyrannick Cruelty extends to th' separation of long linked friends. Thou, that art all irregularity, rash, inconsiderate, madly bold and free, A foe to goodnesse, Author of our ill. thou, that art Wisdoms inconsistent still. Thou, who can boast thou ne'r wert overcome, and slav'dst so many gallant Hearts at Rome. Thou, that didst vanquish Caesar, know I'le prove greater than He, and Conquer Thee with Love.
The Iealous Lovers, A Dialogue. Thirsis. SAy, Daphnes say, for I desire to know The cause from whence these sad effects do grow▪ Art thou in Love? Dap. O yes. Thirsis. With whom? confesse. Daph. With my Murderess. Thir. Love baits on easie hearts; is thine so tame To hugg thy Ruine, and appear his Game? Who is the Shepherdess? Dap▪ Doest ask her name? Have not the Winds whisper'd her Beauties fame Through ev'ry Ear? do'st not observe each Tree Wears on it's Brest her name? My misery. Thir. Did she e're love thee, Daphnes. say, Daph. She did, Thir. Are those flames now extinguisht, or but hid? Daph. Extinguisht as my Jealousie, which made Her leave this walk, which now appears a shade, Wanting her Beams to warm it, and my Heart Cold as the Deaths Dart. Thir. Didst thou abuse her Love? Daph. I cannot tell, Unless it were by loving too too well, Excessive Love, and her exceeding Grace Supplanted Reason, and gave Passion place. Thir. Such was my fate. Daph▪ Too cruell mine. Thir. It may be so. But there is no example of my Woe.
Chorus. Since we derive our heat both from one fire▪ let thy Heart mix with mine▪ and so Expire, That to her Glory from us may arise, in one pure flame a double Sacrifice. To my Thoughts. VVHen fortune flatters you, beleeve her not, she then upon your safety hath a plot; And if she threaten, be the same you are, and seem the fulnesse of her spleen to dare. Though all the World should in division be For emptie glories, golden Slavery, Be you united; let not their disease Poison the sweet Contentment of your Peace. For while you keep together, and be true unto your selves, the World cann't Conquer you. In this y'exceed the happiness of Kings arm'd still against the Tide, and change of things. That neither hopes of Honour can dissolve, nor Misery with sad dispair involve. Thus be your selves, and tread upon the Neck of Danger, and dispise Dame Fortunes beck. Let her to you be held but Air, or Name, not worthy to deserve from you a Fame. "None is so worthy to be envi'd at, as such as whose content is wonder'd at▪ So in th' midst of th' Worlds strife and debate your cheerfulnesse doth soar above your Hate.
To Ioy. UNconstant as a smile, uncertain as beauty, or life, or a reflecting Glass. Shorter than the dayes glory, that brings on a tedious win ters night t'exact upon The virtue of our Patience; Or the tears of Widdows, which but serve to drown their fears. Oh had I not acquainted been with thee, I'd been insensible of misery, And comforted my self in my first State, with th' thought that all men suffer'd the like Fate▪ Better 't had been still to have liv'd in Woe, than once thy happinesse and sweets to know: He that ne'r tasted of Delicious fare, thinks his own Cates the best and primest ware; His Water is his Wine, which he doth drink with greater Pleasure from the fountains brink, Than ev'r the Epicurean Roman found, when in variety he did abound. Such unto whom Nature denies a sight can make no difference betwixt dark and light, But to have known the day, and suddenly, by some sad accident deprived be Of th' Vertue of th' splendour, he inward finds a greater Torture than whom Nature blinds. So had'st thou not apted my Heart for thee, I had not found how great thy want would be. Unkind in thy departure, th' amorous Wind though swift in course, doth leave a Sweet behind On its lov'd Flowrs, but thou in taking leave giv'st us a kiss, as meaning to deceive,
Yielding us up into the hands of Grief, whence there is scarce redemption or relief. Yet while th'art with us, thou do'st act thy part with such delightfull and reviving Art, That dead Hearts are stir'd up to life by thee, but violent things do seldome last we see: Thou art but here to day, and gone tomorrow▪ the Scene is past, now enter Tyrant Sorrow▪ Ostella's Welcome to Town▪ VVElcome Ostella with thy Beams more bright, Than those that brought the Chaos, form, and Light: Welcome, as is a timely season'd Spring, And the kind tokens it with it doth bring: Welcome, as are the Seasons of the Year Unto the earth, or News unto the Ear Of him that hath long time lain doom'd to die; A pardons brought for his Delivery: Welcome, as health to the afflicted Sense, Or wealth in its intended innocence: Welcome, as Ransoms to poor Captives are, Or as deliv'rance to the Mariner: Welcome, as peace to a Distracted State, On which a tedious War hath quarter'd hate: Welcome, as is the end to all my fears, And welcome, as the Musick of the Sphears To a departing Soul, or Angels sing A Message to't, which heavenly Comfort bring: Welcome my Dearest unto me, as joy To the sad Heart, whom Love sought to distroy: Welcome, as is loves best fruition to The longing Souls of them did long time Woo.
Welcome, as is my fancy to my Pen, When it is rich, and fit for fight of men: Welcome, as is restored Roses to The Checks, the hand of sickness would undo: Welcome, to me thou Sum of earthly good: Welcome, as honour to deserving bloud: Welcome, as Conquest to the valiant mind: Welcome, as Restauration to the blind: Welcome, to me as is that holy fire Into the Vestals Brests Heaven doth inspire: Welcome, as is their blisse, when they resign Their Clay to earth, and do become Divine: Welcome, as is Divine untainted Love, And welcome, as a blessing from above. A Dialogue between Love and Honour. Honour. WHy Fli'st thou me, I never knew, Honour was shun'd before. Love. I've heard that none but Madmen do thy slippery State adore. Honour. The Gods from such they hate, conceal the virtue of my Name, To such they Love, they do reveal the Glorie of my Flame. Love. But I have known in climbing up to reach thy Starry Crown, That who was raised to the top, was suddenly cast down.
Honour. Those had no reverence to me, but Fortunes Wealth made great, And they being as blind as she, did tumble from their Seat. They did but at my Title aim, of me were ne're possest, And onely wore me in their Name, and not within their Brest. My way unto the Stars doth lead, where Gods do keep their Court, Where no unhallowed foot must tread, there Virtuous souls resort. Love. The Virtuous, who are they frail Man? conceivs the prosp'rous so? The Miserable needs must than have nought with it to do. Honour. The Captive that in Dungeon lies, if he but virtue own, When all the world doth him despise I'le raise him to a Throne. Love. Then Honour thou, I fear'd thee much I now from it am free, Honour. And Love thy purity is such, I needs must honour thee. For we are both ally'd to Heaven, and from the Gods receive Those speciall Glories that are given us, to Desert to give.
Chorus. Then let us joyn and Crown Ostella's name, whose Virtue doth excel the voice of Fame▪ That in her choice she may so happy prove, Heaven may applaud her Merit, and his Love. Ostella weeping for my Imprisonment. WAst not those precious tears for me, Since Jnnocence cannot be free▪ They sin that live at Liberty. I boast a freedome more Immense Than he that is in ev'ry Sense A Pris'ner to his Conscience▪ Weep not Ostella; for I'm sure Whil'st thou this Passion do'st endure, Thou rather help'st to kill than cure. Should they Ecclipse my eys the sight Of Day, and shut me up in Night. Those eyes must then afford me Light. Should the chill Earth appointed be My Bed. Content should Cover me; And I would laugh at Misery. For how can I be dispossest Of weet Repose, when in thy Brest My Heart securely takes its Rest.
The ruin'd Walls would seem to me Rich as the Tyrian-Tapistry, So they deprive me not of thee. Should I with Bread and Water dine, To make the Miracle Divine, Thy Lips would change the last to Wine. Know then Ostella, I am free In ev'ry part, enjoying thee, The onely Soul of Liberty. Ostella questioning of me concern∣ing Clarinda, a former Mistress. TWere sin to lie, Ostella, and to thee the greatest piece of Wilfull Treachery That Wickednesse can gloze: That she whom You do stile Clarinda, I did own is true. So may the Babe suck Venom from the Tet; and so the Dew may blast the Violet. Such was my Innocence abus'd by her: the Wisest in their Loves do soonest erre. But I, that hardly could judg black from white, mistook my Day, and wrapt my self in Night. The little Bees, unskil'd, so may in flight, mistake the Rose, and suck the Aconite: Shee Courted me with such destroying tears as th' Crocodile, or the curst Hinbane wears; And like the Spider, wove a curious Net of her enticing Hair my Heart to get;
A Bird of Paradice wes thought to be, but she a Bird of Rapine prov'd to me. In th' Summer of my Fortunes she did sing much like the Swallow; but the Winters sting Poys'ning my Hopes; she, like the Licorish Fly, follows the next Sweet 'til sh' as suckt it dry. The Morning dew so leaves the Violet, when the Suns prouder Beams exhaleth it: And this decreed Truth I've bought with smart, that there's most danger where appears most Art. These were my Childish Errors, for which I have oft distill'd my Sorrow from my eye The blind Man so in darkness walks, and yet discerning not his want, nev'r questions it: But You have form'd me new, and giv'n a sight to my dark Judgement, I know now the Light: And I will prize it Dearest as my Soul, Which thou hast partly Cleans'd, once sadly foul. As by the Suns infusive heat, the Earth receives the Virtue, to give Gold a Birth, Out of its sordid Womb. So from your eys my Heart receives the Joys of Paradise: Which I was losing. Am refined now. by your pure fires: rejoycing Angels owe You thanks for my reclaiming which Create new Joys with Them, which bear a lasting Date. Thus I'm become thy Convert (Dear) and will pay all the Good I've forfeited for Ill. Clarinda's Name shall like the Shaddow be forgot ere Night; Thine to Eternity Shall last. Oh I could Curse that wretched Pen that wrote her mine, the common Stool for Men, May all those Books as fast as bought, have flame: may she as they Consume, Burn with the same;
That so th' insection of her name that fils the earth with loosenesse and the Air with ills, May die with her, and from her Grave shall rise, as from a Load of Dung, Maggots and flies. Pardon (Ostella) this unusuall rage wrongs hid, stirr'd up, in Man new Wars do wage. Goodness perverted troubles a Calm State, and Love abus'd grows desperate with hate▪ Look on me Dear with that compassionate Sense as you would on betrayed innocence, Cloath'd in a Robe of Penitence from your eye gratious Ostella let my pardon flie. Confession and Contrition may win from Heaven forgiveness for the greatest sin. Your Saint like temper doth my faith perswade; Your Mercy can Out-vy the faults I made. Deceive not then my confidence I am your votury now; and in my Heart a Flame Burns with Religious Duty, and when I Extinguish it may I unpitti'd die. The fervent Light shall sooner leave the World, (which through the darkest Roab that ore it's hurl'd By night shoots forth some Splendor,) and the Air, the holy Vestals breath in frequent Prayer, Become infectious Saints from Heaven shall fall into Perdition. All now righteous shall Become Apostats▪ and this Globe receive by its own weight its Tomb and Nature leave To Propogate her kind ev'r my Faith wasteth for know Ostella Love 'bove Nature lasteth,
To Ostella upon her Reproving me and Councelling me from some Inconveniences. THe Breath of Winter that doth Curd the Earth to give the Season free and timely Birth Comes not so sharply violent as this, from you to me, 't hath nipt the budding Blisse In me, your Beams of Goodnesse cherisht. All the Comforts I receiv'd from this sweet Gall Is this, that I to You may be more Pure, you pierce my Heart to make a way for Cure. It is a stinging Salve, a tickling Smart, a pleasing Potion, that doth turn my Heart Into faint Qualms, to clear and set it right, a bitter Prologue to a sweet Delight. A sharp Reproof brings Mercy in the end, so Iudges Chide when Pardon they intend. Unskilfull Surgeons may the Vlcerous place: make, by false Applications in worse case And when they see the Vertue of their Skill extends not to a Cure, make hast to Kill. But thou, Physitian-like, wisely do'st give Cor'sives where needed, and the Lenitive In its due place, that the afflicted Sense may gather something Cordial from thence. Thy Councel to my Ears did cruel seem but the effect on't did my Heart redeem, From the loose humours that were gath'ring to a Head, its prim'tive whitenesse to undo So Physick when Diseases do abound, doth make Vs sharply Sick e're perfect Sound,
Musick in the dead Season of the Night. OSTELLA hark! how sweetly doth the sound of Musick in our Ears resound! How 'tis advanced by the Night! whose silence adds to the Delight▪ Our Senses dead as Night, are by the Virtue of it's Harmony Stirr'd and reviv'd, who frisk and play like wanton Kids in th'dawn of Day. One Voice doth now more Comfort bring then the whole Quire of Birds in th'Spring, It comes to vsit us, like that rare thing in Man so wond'red at, Friendship, to set our Spirits free, when thrall'd in Fortunes Slavery. Ostella commanding my absence for a time. REvoke that Doom, Ostella, call it back, it is so heavie that my Heart doth Crack Under its weight; thou maiest as well Command my Soul to leave its Mansion: 't shall not stand. How can I live, Ostella, when that I do want the vertual Influ'nce of thine eye? Suppose Ostella, that that glorious light thou now enjoy'st by th'virtue of thy sight Should be hid from thee, would not th'sudden Change depose thy Comfort: and thy hopes estrange? The Memory of what you once possest, Would Tyrant-like strike Daggers to your Brest a
Danger once past bring to our Memory, a kind of a delight when we are free: When safely we may tell what shelves▪ or Rocks compos'd for Ruine we have scap'd, what Shocks Our Barks received by some rude Waves, and how, we cousen'd Ruine of of its sport: this now Might reassume content, But when we think On our lost happinesse, our souls doth sinck Beneath the hope of Remedy, or Relief. nothing is then so powerfull as our Grief. Mans Misery doth so much more distroy. by how much more he was depriv'd his Ioy. And were I blind (not absent) and coul'd hear thy voice 'twould send Loves harmony through my Ear Unto my Heart, and so restore that Sense that was defective: thus thy Excellence Would so unite my thoughts that discontent durst not approrch ne'r my Hearts Continent. But so exil'd the very sum of Blisse enthron'd my soul would prove my Extass. But 'tis your wise Apologie to say, 'tis but a fortnight you enjoin my stay: When know each minute is n Age to one whose Love in all transcends comparison. How is his heart afflicted with the shape of jealous fears when they commit a Rape, Upon his Reason, and what he admir'd, he now suspects; his faith almost expir'd Thinks on his former and his present State; examines to his own by others Fate, Concludes his Mistresse glorious, then dispairs with th' thought of his own Indigence, and in's Prayers He weeps to think that other men may be deserving of her favours more then he.
Minuts produce this, what will hours do then and days, and weeks, oh call that back again That cruell imposition and set free my exil'd Heart 'tis ancient liberty And I'le confess to me thou life do'st give since without thee it is a death to live. To Time. THou that ev'n from thy infancy natures Surveyour hast been, And with a curious searching eye her choicest wares hast seen. As she to a perfection grew in strength and skill to frame, Thou did'st encrease in judgement to commend her works to fame. Tell me, for thy Propriety is to discover Truth And not by subtile Sophistry to paint or blemish Youth. Did ever Greece or Rome afford a Mistress like to mine Whose breath is Balm whose ev'ry Word 's a Mistery Divine. And if the Ages past did ne'r produce her like, then we May with the self-same safety swear Her like shall never be.
A Dialogue between Nature and Art. Nature. COntend with me! Art, th'art too bold. Am I not Empresse of this Mould? The Rose from me its Red receives; The Lilly whitenesse, Trees their Leaves. Am I not Former of all things, Who give both birth and life to Kings. Art. The former true I were to blame Not to confefs't but know I am Reformer and that bears a Name As large in the expanse of Fame What thou in framing Careless wert Is both suppli'd and helpt by Art▪ The Tawny are made fair by me, The crooked Streight as Cedar-tree, The Pale Cheeks I suppli'd with Red, To which thy Rose doth look as dead; And not a Creature comes from thee But I can draw more Buxomly. Nature. By this thou shew'st thou ha'st the fame To imitate but not to frame: Canst thou unto the Rose give sent; Or breath a Vertuall Ornament In Flours or Fruit, or Man or Beast, Or yield a vitall to the least? If so, I'le yield my self to thee, And wee'l be friends undoubtedly.
Art. First tell me if thou canst preserve What thou do'st frame, and do not swerve From Reason, Silence renders no; Then be not troubled to know I can, and by that consequence Ought to have the preheminence▪ For he that can preserve from Death, Can without doubt give more than breath: The Rose and Lilly I can keep Fresh as in Iune, from Death or sleep: And if my Pencil fall, my Pen. Can keep alive the acts of men That life is nothing worth forgot Ev'n shadow like where I am not For I can do more than I've said, By powerfull verse revive the dead, Nature. Then Art. Art. Then Nature. Both. Let's oh let's agree, And keep alive Ostella's Memory, That wheresoev'r Nature and Art doth Rest, Ost ella may with Glory be exprest. To Ostella upon her saying she wonder'd how one S. B. got into preferment, and not I. HE is not worth your Wonder, what in Place he is? Plusht to the Ears, dawb'd o're with Lace. His fingers some superfluous Diamonds wear, at which the Drawers and the Fidlers Stare. His Ladies Chamber Maids perhaps do take upon them much his Love for his Stones sake.
Ne'r wonder how the slave his Tallent imps, let him be damn'd, he's one of Fortunes Pimps. To Ostella, commending meeknesse of Spirit. IT is not safe to be too soft of Spirit, a sottish patience hath a Cowards Merit: It gives occasion many times to ill, and Cruell Natures, whose harsh Custome still Seeks not out whom deserves, but who will bear, the most, to wrong the easie hearted Hair, It draws on injuries, with Pronsethean hearts repell with flames of courage, the Minds Darts, This is a Maxime we ought all to know, he that will bear the weight sha'nt want the Wo, All that's besotted to his fear or ease, doth make his Patience prove his worst disease. The Swallow. MArk Ostella when the Spring, hath dissolv'd the frosty King, And reseats her self on Earth; giving Flow'rs and Plants a Birth; When the glorious Sun doth shine full of heat as doth thy eyn, When the feather'd Songsters do seem the Princely maid to Woo, Then, oh then, to us will come to our Cottage to our home An amorous guest, who will salute you from the chimney top with Flute.
Like Notes; when you least need the same to sing to you 'twill be on leme▪ But when the tedious Winters night comes on, that wants both heat and light, And that his pretty musick may with pleasure pass the time away, Which else perhaps might sadnesse bring; your Guess is hoarse and cannot sing Acquaintance so leaves Men in Misery, who did adore him in Prosperity. Vpon my Departure. GIve me a parting kiss▪ oh why in store kept you this bliss, ravish me with oue more; Come let my Sighs dry up the Dew doth make thy Roses to look pale, thy Lillies quake Into cold fear, keep in those tears a while, for I have heard Water will Diamonds spoil: Seal on my Lips my licence to depart, one kiss more and I'm gone: how sweet thou art? And leav'st behind such an effectuall power, all sweets to thine hereafter will be sour. Heaven send us happiness to meet agen, my lips will never sweetness taste till then; But I must hence, Fame calls me to the field, Virtue hath set her Standard up, the Shield Of Honour's wav'd at me, and I must hence; but what on th'sudden doth enlarge my Sense Tells me I need not further go, for here Virtue and Honour rest as in their Sphear, And may be purchas'd with less danger, (oh) that, that, alone inflames my Soul to go
For Man conceives that Honour slightly bought, that's not through danger, and with hazard sought, I goe, but leave a sadder heart behind, than e're thou mad'st it glad by being kind: How Reason flies me! what brave Act can come into his hands that leaves his heart at home? But if Ostella thou wilt give me thine, I by my Flames will make it Masculine, DAPHNES. 1. WHen as the soft wings of the Day had fann'd the Clouds of Night away, The early Light did soon discover where lay the Embleme of a Lover. 2. On a Banck Grief had made Grey: born down with sorrow Daphnes lay; His Cheeks like Roses ravished, his Lips like Cherries withered. 3. Clouds of woe his eyes benight, swelling tears entomb their sight, Which pursu'd like fleeting rain, made each Channel seem a Main.
4. The Brooks his Sorrows had drank dry, replenisht were from either eye. Untill his fighs made up one Flame Malie'd by Fate, and parch'd the same. 5. His many Griefs of sense deprive him, his weight of Griefs to sense revive him, That his troubl'd Soul would force from a Heart of Flint remorse. 6. Striving with his Fate he riseth, hope of Comfort he despiseth; Since that blessed means should joy him, was converted to destroy him. 7. Quoth he, you Pow'rs whose Brest did ne'r know Pitty, now Exhaust a tear At your own Cruelty, yet give, as great a Plague to let me live. 8. Not that one minute can revive my Sense or keep my Heart alive, Dead to all joy; to you I'le pay, my life for th' poor use of one Day. 9. Which I will waste as fast as breath to tell a Story e're my Death,
Shall out live me, and be to Swains a sad example: thus he plains. 10. Before these sad Trees were bereav'd their Virgin-issue, and dis-leav'd, My Pipe was known to Musick forth Ostella's Beauty and her worth. 11. Ostella's! she! that was the Flame of ev'ry heart, whose blessed name As though some Mistery were hid in it, rejoic'd each Lamb and Kid. 12. Then Apollo did inspire with Phaebean touch my Lyre, That Labouring Bees did from my Laies, at their work rehearse her Praise. 13. Lovely Nut-brown was her hair; her forehead full as smooth as fair; Her eyes black, shot Beams more bright then doth the Empress of the Night. 14. When Cupid did intend to stray, he made her Cheeks his Rosie way, In whose dimples he lay hid 'till by his Power discovered.
15. Soft and white as Curds and Cream were her Limbs; as rich a Theam As ere Shepheard chose to write Sonnets on, to Charm the Night. 16. Young and sprightly as the Morn when the Spring doth it adorn Active as the vein of life; full of mercy, foe to strife. 17. Innocence and spotlesse Truth were the Jewels to her Youth; That stainlesse Turtles might envy the glory of her Purity. 18. Not a Tongue that knew her Name but were Heraulds to her Fame, And their Hearts as full of Flame, each resolv'd to win the Game. 19. 'Mongst those Swains my self was one. at the which brake forth a Groan, Like the Winds long lockt in Earth, cracks the Ribs e'r't can have birth. 20. He stood and did erect his sight as though his Soul had ta'ne her flight.
In that sad Gaole recovering breath, he seems the Conquerour of death. 21. And then he moans: At that blest time, I had the glory to be prime, My Pastures full, my Flock did wear, as rich a wool as any bear. 22. Harmelesse mirth did Crown the Cell where my Pipe and I did dwell: Which invited many a Swain, that Ostella hop'd to gain. 23. There they tun'd their Reeds by mine Pan's musick ne'r was more Divine Sonnets roundly past the throng, still Ostella grac'd my song. 24. Such as did that favour see, did, yet durst not envy me: For Love to enjoy his sport had design'd my Cell his Court. 25. When we tript it on the Green, if Ostella were but seen. Not a Shepheard there was Lame danc'd as though from Court he came.
26. I that had small Mind to Dance, bequeath'd my senses to a Trance; Till from the Godhead of her eye, my Soul receiv'd its liberty. 27. Then with measur'd speed I shew'd, what the Swains in duty ow'd To Ostella; which! poor they with their store could never Pay. 28. And then I enter'd to my Bliss, My Guerdion was Ostella's kiss, Whose strong fires, as soon did aw my heart, as theirs to softness thaw, 29. When I did kiss, she kist again, as though she would not count in vain, Sure, Numberless they were, and yet we told, and did as soon forget. 30. Such soft kisses on the Rose gentle Zephirus bestows: Nor can th' early sun discover Chaster heat from his fam'd Lover. 31. Then in th' language of our eyes we convers'd, and did surprize
Eithers Heart, yet neither could Boast of Conquest if we would. 32. When I joy'd she was content, When I moan'd she did lament, At my sadnesse pin'd away, Joylesse of her life a Day. 33. When some Crosse had me molested, it seiz'd her, her Heart arrested. Did I look pale, the Native red of her fair Cheeks, forsook their Bed. 34. Nothing that I said or did, But Ostella favoured, And those favours I did prize more than Vesper Cynthia's eyes. 35. Were I sick she lost her health, my Hearts welfare was her wealth, And my pain, her pain increas'd; as mine did, so hers decreas'd. 36. Thus like Twins, whose lives sad Date, doth depend on eithers Fate, We did live, as from one breath we deriv'd our lives, our Death.
37. Joys we had ev'n such as made us boast belief, they could not fade: Pleasures Phoenix like did waste still renewed by our taste. 38. Turtles never could rejoice, more in one anothers Choice: Palms so prosper when together, sunder'd they decay and wither. 39. Such my wounded heart receiv'd, so did hers when as deceiv'd By th'credulity we had of our Fate grown too too bad. 40. Oh'tis dangerous to trust, to smiling fortune, shee's unjust. For the end she seldome shapes, like th'beginning with her Rapes, 41. When she flatters she intends to destroy, and hath her ends: When she threatens we have lesse cause to fear, arm'd 'gainst distresse. 42. Deep security we know doth turn tail and overthrow:
Joys uncertain as our States: Ours they are not, but our Fates. 43. This experience I too late bought, and at too dear a rate: Yet the sweetnes that I did reap made me deem their price to cheap. 44. We foresaw no Pendent Storm o're our heads, to Menace harm: But we were of our delight confident as day of light. 45. But (oh) Fortune that e're while blest our union with a smile, Clouds her Brow, and with the noise of shrill war, severs our Ioys. 46. Peacefull Tempe is become deaf with th' jarring Fife and Drum: Blood doth stein her snowy Brest; to our cares, hope gives no rest. 47. Ruine doth pursue our Stocks slaughter seizeth on our Flocks, Plenty suffers with increase, banishment cause friends to peace.
48. 'Stead of Pans soft laies, our Ears are inchanted with our fears: And the surly Cannon knels sadder farewels than our Bels, 49. Not a Bird dare keep her bough, nor a He ifer guide the Plough; Nor a Lasse to daunce, or run: all their dancing dayes are done. 50. Thus our Tempe chang'd is quite: "such pow'r hath Envy o're Delight▪ And so sad a place is made, As where Sun ne'r blest with shade. 51. All our sports are spoil'd, and he now's the onely Man dares dy, He that friezeth to the Earth, he whose scars give life a birth. 52. He that will not flinch his ground till all's body be one wound, He, He's the Man, that shall out▪ live his Fate, and to Time Trophies give. 53. This is that, which makes the mind of man, as vent'rous as the wind.
Honour glorifies that breath, that her Champion is, in death. 54. Return'd with Conquest is't not brave One can say, he past his Grave? Nay, the very sons of fear, love of glorious Acts to hear. 55. I exalted with Desire, (fill'd with more than common fire.) That Ostella, to her Name might have Honour, sought out fame. 56. See my Errour, Fools so may bring their Torch-light to the day: For (alas) could she have more than her own worth own'd before? 57. "Great things many times arise from small beginnings, be men wise: Acts I've read in Honours Story 'gun with danger, end with glory. 58. These great hopes made many a Swain, to forsake his er'st lov'd Plain, To lay Hook, and Tarbox by, And with a sword their room supply.
59. When so many Ladds do roam 'twere Cowardize to stay at home: And my thoughts did soar as high as the proudest Shepheards eye. 60. But Ostella! she that knew no other Blisse than what she drew From me, (alas) and I. that ne're drew breath, but from her Sovereign air. 61. She (alas) could not dispense with my so soon parting thence. Sorrow'd, then advis'd, quoth she, thy parting sure will murther me. 62. My life doth depend on thine as I hope thine doth on mine: Should Death seize thy nobler part alas, alas, where were my heart. 63 Ne're like cruelty was shown when two lives are lost in one: And with that her sad heart tries to have passage through her eys. 64. Then I kist, to stop that grief, Mine did need as much relief:
As we sought to Cure each other Sorrow did our Comfort smother. 65. Her eyes over-flowing showres, might have drowned her Cheeks Flowers, Had not my sighs dry'd up those tears, then each Rosie-Bank appears. 66. United to her Sense, at last quoth she, why dost thou make such hast To thy own sad Fate and mine, what have I that is not thine. 67. Or what can there be more dear, to thy self, than thou hast here? Love no other prize regards than it self, it, it, rewards. 68. Sure I am thou once did'st prize no prize dearer than my eyes: Those thy worth hath made thy own, can'st thou leave thy joys so soon? 69. Thou by hazarding thy life mak'st me Widdow e're a Wife. Such keen fears my heart do goe, that I ne're shall see thee more.
70. But, (alas) I sadly doubt that thy flame of Love is out: Fires that fiercely burn do waste e're they warm, such was thy haste. 71. Blame me not, my Love is such, that it cannot fe too much. Love is subject to suspect where it finds the least neglect. 72. And as apt is to believe things which many times deceive▪ Confidence (alone) betrayes like a Theef, us from our ways. 73. Soft suspicion keeps the Road brings us safe to our aboad: 'Tis a Lecture Love doth read that credulity's the fools Creed. 74. If I erre in doubting thee 'tis a pleasing fault in me. And a joy to be deceiv'd when my fears are not believ'd. 75. But to think that thou wilt go re-assumes again fresh woe
But thy will disposeth mine, I'le refer my good to thine. 76. Fain my heart would give consent, that thou might'st receive Content: But my fears do check my will; "thus Love Passions Combat still. 77. When I would say go, my Tongue Tels me I would do thee wrong. If stay, I should Cloud that same might Eternize thy Lov'd Name. 78. Thus poor heart Her love Contends with her reason who pretends A claim to love and now agree onely for the good of me. 79. And at last, as though she meant to breath her last she spake consent Go, and what Fate follows thee, assure thy self shall govern me. 80. We kist, and parted. Oh (quoth she) ne're shall this be tan'e from me, 'Till Deaths rude Lips ravish it, or thy breath revive the heat. 81. With such sadnesse the lov'd Vine divested of its pride doth pine.
Birds so feel the sense of smart when they and their Summer part. 82. Our Hearts with grief like vessels grow, so full they cannot vent their Woe▪ Who could part with so much Blisse on such cruel tears as this. 83. But the Will of Fate must be obeyd, none flies his Dstiny; And my thoughts pursu'd the worst, that Heavens Anger ever curst. 84. Parting my promoting hope gives my mind a glorious scope, And presents such shapes of joy, that my former Griefs destroy. 85. Loves forgot, and now I crave either Honour, or a Grave: Fortune hears my wish, and shews that she must be won with blows. 86. No attempt I leave unsought, danger hold a thing of nought, Which I spurn, and take a Pride in the Bloud falls from my side.
87. Courage makes that wound a scratch; Streight at Honours lock I snatch; For unlesse I have another, that same wound doth want a Brother. 88. Which I win from the stern foe as my Heart had will'd it so. All the prize in this I gat, was th' honour to be envy'd at. 89. In the heat of these sad Wars fame to breed at home fresh jars, Id'ly rumour'd of my Death, which was ta'ne by ev'ry breath. 90. Not a Lasse, but did give o're their mirth, and my sad loss deplore: And the home▪kept▪Lads do strike Passions Discord much alike. 91. This Ostella's mother hears, sweeter Musick to her Ears Never came from Brook or Dale, but she fear'd 'twas but a Tale. 92. While I absent was, there came A Shepheard great in Purse and Name;
Who sollicited my Dear breathing Poison through her Ear. 93. But she long before had ta'ne an Antidote against that bane, As fervent was her flames to me as the light to Day can be. 94. But her cruel Brested Mother long had practis'd how to smother Her old flames, and to invest new thoughts where mine were possest. 95. Now again assaults the Prize, and withall the subtilties Mothers power, or Womans skill can invent, she tempts her ill. 96. Twits her with her duty then, tells the choice she'ad made of Men The very best, rich of cleer bloud what he wants wealth can make good. 97. But Ostella that could ne're to such sor did thoughts adhere In Loves name stands to her guard and her constancie's her ward.
98. Though in th' conflict Nature strove to defeat the force of love, Yet her thoughts bring fresh supplies, arm'd against all Batteries. 99. Which when her spleenfull mother saw, nor fair means win, nor threatning aw, Knels my Death, as though from thence she might Warrant her offence. 100. But Ostella th'truest made that e're at Loves Altar laid A broken heart, faints and doth die each minute, fore her Mothers eye. 101. Now they wail, but oh too late, they have kil'd her with my Fate 'Tis vain to Court or waste their breath shee's become a Bride for Death. 102. Her bloud hath forsook her face and cold dew usurps the place; In her Agony doth rave, fetch my Duphnes from the Grave, 103. Would he die unkinder he, but hark he hath summon'd me,
And I must hence, you do me wrong, in keeping me from him so long. 104. Thus in pain poor Soul she lay with Snail▪like▪speed she did decay, And wasted like a slow soft fire, that's dead to sight ere't doth expire. 105. I come (quoth she) and bring with me my Hearts unstein'd Virginity, Unblasted and unpluckt so lay, and sighing sent her soul away. 106. She parted hence as pure and white as the chaste Primrose, when no light▪ Rude-hand hath crop't it, doth return making what was its Womb its Vrn. 107. Near this time the Wars did cease, I arriv'd with Love and Peace, Near Ostella's home, where I expected her Lov'd Company. 108. But I found in ev'ry eye Sorrows profuse Livery: My poor Heart was at a pause doubting 't was some generall Cause.
109. This sad Story I have told, I did hear: but oh! how cold It struck my Heart; there's none can guesse, but such whose Cause speaks little lesse. 110 This was her Walk, and here I'le end my life and Woes, then be my friend Good Fate, now thou hast let me tell my own mishaps, ring thou my Knell.
Occasional Copies upon several SUBJECTS. To a Mistris that told me, I could not live without her Love. TEll me not that I die, or live by thee, and as thou point'st my Doom so it must be: Or that my life, did'st thou but leave to love, would like a long Disease as weary prove: Since he whose Md is proof against his Fate, makes himself happie at the worst Estate, 'Tis vanity for Man to build his Bliss, On the frail favour of a Womans kiss, And most un-manly to enthral his eye, When Heaven and Nature gives it liberty; For womens fancies with their fashions change, And love for fashion, to each face that's strange. I know the humour of thy Sex is such, They ne'r could value any one thing much, Forshould thy Brests with constant flames be fir'd, 'Twere more than I expected▪ though desir'd;
Then think me not so fond, although I love, But as thou steer st thy course, so mine shall move. He that hath Wealth and can that Wealth forgo, is his own man, not slav'd to any wo, So arm'd with resolution I am free, and still ore-comer of my destiny: Yet know I love, though I can leave that state, he best knows how to love, knows how to hate. To a simply Coy Mistress. WHat though I did swear your eye, had enough to take a heart, Yet from mine I will not part. I have read Loves sophistry: for know proud, I nere was born, To endure your sexes scorn. Though I you a Lilly swore, yet the Violets azur'd hue, is for use more priz'd than you: Nor will I those lips adore, since the Cherries, trees do bear, Are far sweeter than yours are. Though I prais'd your swelling Brest, yet the Grape or Gooseberry, yeild a juyce more savoury: Nor will I again protest to an Out-side, 'till I know, 'Tis for tast as well as show.
To an imperiously proud Mistress, swell'd with my Praises. FRail Beauty, boast not of that Face, to which I gave the perfect'st Grace: For leaving me, thou must resigne, That Glory which I made Divine. Thou art no longer fair, than thou art mine. Though Nature might thee lovely call, I made thee super-natural; Set on thy Face so pure a form, That neither Age, nor Death by storm, could ever do the virtue of it harm. Our knowing sense, tels us the Grave, shall swallow what e'r Nature gave; Her own Philosophy hath said, She cann't preserve what she hath made, for which her self, her self she doth invade▪ When I that did such Beauty give, by the same pow'r can make it live, My praise out-did thy Mothers care, No Art but mine, could make thee fair, the pow'r of Love then made my Fancy rare▪ Prize me, I will reverse thy Doom, and bring thy ruin'd Beauty home To that Supream Felicity, Affection first conferr'd on thee: Love me, and live to all Eternity.
Vpon the acquaintance of a Gal∣lant Gentlewoman. To my self. SHe is exactly glorious. On her eye Lovers may read better Philosoyhie Than e're th' Athenians taught, she's high in Name, higher in Beauty than the reach of Fame. But highest in her Virtue, and her Mind, and yet she wants not Nature to be kind, But ev'n unto the meanest Creature she shoots Lustre through a sweet humility. Shee's great, but yet not greater than my Love, nor higher than my Flame: then on, and prove The temper of her Brest; try if it be arm'd against Love, and his Artillery. But (oh) I feel my heart consume like fire, that wasts it self in seeking to aspire▪ Crying and Laughing. PHelicia wept. and from her eys. the Pearly show'rs did fall Upon her Cheeks, and straight did rise the Sun, and drank up all. If Women are so quaint to cry, and laugh too in one breath, He's mad will keep them company, they'l jeer a horse to death.
To Meritricia. POx take your tempting face, with its illusive grace; Men ought to be arm'd 'gainst your Venery, Which pierceth Buffe, or Coat of Mail, there's no such terrour as your Tail. I boast no greater Wealth than that I am in health; Nor would I be in debt to Surgery; For thy Adulterate sweets so rot, there's scarce a man can 'scape thy Pot▪ Curse on this frail desire, it set old Troy on fire: Many have bin burnt since for the same sin: And yet we do not dread the flame, but ev'ry minute Court the same Why should we deem that Fair, each minute wants repair? Or Colours gay, as often kist away? For though above thou art Heaven in shew, he's blest that 'scapes thy Hell below.
To Mistress S. W. SHoot not so fast your scorching Beams, lest they do burn that should not harm: Or like to Fire in its Extreams, consume and dy e're scarce it's warm. Yet t'be a Martyr to thy Eye, who would not run with eager speed? And offer up himself to die, and at thy Altar freely bleed. That Act alone would Crown with Fame the trivial Deeds his Life had done, And raise his Soul above his Flame, whose brightnesse might out-brave the Sun, For know he that thus Phoenix-like doth burn, Must needs derive a Glory from his Vrn. To Silvia THou tak'st a wrong course to be rid of me, void both of Wit and Pollicy. 'Tis not thy surious hate can do't, and take thy Pride and Scorn to boot: Who ever knew one angry Flame the fury of another tame? The youngest fire that's fiercest blown, spreads widest, and most flame doth own. Opposed Winds do fiercest blow, and Streams rebated highest flow. The more thy Hate seeks to suppress my Love, the more it doth encrease, and stronger prove.
Those things that hardest are to be come by, brave Spirits soonest after fly: Things that are easie to be bought, are by the common People sought. What ever seeks to shun us, we wing our Desire the most to see. What is denied us to know, our Inclination's aptest to: When we're prohibited from meat, we have the greatest mind to eat; And thus thy hate doth but enlarge Desire, the more represt, the more it doth aspire. But 'cause I love thee, I will shew to thee an easie way t' be rid of me. Let me first Sate my longing Eye on thy fair Shapes discovery; My hands may next offencelesse Rove, and want on in the shade of Love. Then let my Ears receive Content in Words that speak a free Consent, From thence thou breath'st forth Frankincense, to open my obstructed Sense. Next let my Appetite be pleas'd, each Sense being sated, I'm appeas'd. Thus having known All I desire to know. Surfeit may soon effect what Hate would do. To a timorously willing Mistress. LIke Summer bringing in a Dearth, or Beauty blasted in its Birth▪ Such is thy Love to me, that fils but expectation 'till it kils.
Thy Smiles no sooner warm my Heart, but Frowns dart Death through ev'ry part, And the choice pleasure of thine eyes invite me but to Tantalize. When thirsty Grief desires to sip Life from the Cherries of thy lip; The Root of Life by which they grow, declares my Death by answering No. Nor can I guess why it hath bin, unlesse to love be held a sin; If so, the Gods themselves must be in such a sort as deep as We. Oh think not (Dearest) 'tis in vain to hope for pleasure without pain: Whil'st equal Love and Joys attend us, Both Faith and Silence shall befriend us. Could'st thou my Heart Anatomize, wherein thy perfect Figure lies, There should'st thou find what neither Fate nor envious Time shall violate, Such Constant Truth my Love doth bear, in all thy Fortunes I will share; And of each Misery will boast, wherein my self shall suffer most.
Thus dare I boast my Love to thee, beyond our frail Humanity: For he whose Love transcendeth mine, must not write Mortal, but Divine. And should thy Cruelty extend this loathed Life of mine to end, Th' Arabian wonder shall not die more glorious in her Flames than I. Vpon my Noble friend, Richard Lovelace Esquire, his being in Holland. An Invitation. A Song. COme Adonis, come again, what distast could drive thee hence, Where so much delight did reign, sateing ev'n the soul of sense? And though thou unkind hast prov'd, never Youth was more belov'd. Then lov'd Adonis come away. For Venus brooks not thy delay. Wert thou sated with the Spoil of so many Virgin-Hearts, And therefore didst change thy Soil, to seek fresh in other parts: Dangers wait on forreign-Game. we have Deer more sound and tame. Then lov'd Adonis, &c. Phillis, fed with thy delights, in thy absence pines away;
And Love too hath lost his Rites: not one Lasse keeps Holi-day. They have chang'd their Mirth for Cares. and do onely sigh thy Airs. Then lov'd Adonis, &c. Elpine, in whose Sager Looks thou wert wont to take Delight, Hath forsook his Drink and Books, 'cause he cann't enjoy thy sight. He hath laid his Learning by, 'cause his Wit wants Company. Then lov'd Adonis come away, For Friendship brooks not thy Delay. All the Swains that once did use to converse with Love and thee, In the language of thy Muse, have forgot Loves Deity: They deny to write a line, and do onely talk of thine. Then lov'd Adonis come away, For Friendship brooks not thy Delay. By thy sweet A's voice we conjure thee to return; Or we 'l rob thee of that choice in whose Flames each Heart would burn: That inspir'd by her and sack, such Company we will not lack. That Poets in the Age to come, Shall write of our Elizium.
To a Mistresse that thinks the sight without other enjoyment is Love sufficient. IF thou intend'st onely to try the silent Courtship of the eye, Without the sense of what is Good, which by Loves fires are understood, Command those Cupids to retire, Whose Darts are headed with Desire. Forbid the Vnion of our Hands, each Amorous touch a heat commands: Forbid our Lips to meet and melt, where the pure Sense of Love is felt; Forbid thy Tongue to whisper love, That very word hath power to move. Whose ardent Breath infused, can raise Courage in a dying Man; And through each Vein fresh heat restore, that had been scar'd with cold before: So from thy Air such Vigour came, It curl'd my Heart into a Flame. Forbid thy Cheeks to shew their Spring; forbid thy Nightingale to sing; Forbid thy All and ev'ry part, to shew so much their Mistress Art: For 'less thou keep'st those Baits within, They'l tempt an Anchorite to sin.
Yet should those Excellencies be depriv'd their proper use in thee, Men would be apt their Faiths to pawn; th'art but a Picture lively drawn, On which each rude presumptuous eye Admiring, feasts as well as I. So I confesse my flames may end, and thou, a Shaddow, lose thy Friend: Unless my Fancy raise Conceit, thou art my Mistress Counterfeit. And so surveying each fair part, I paint her Figure in my Heart. To a vertuous Lady, on whom Envy had thrown a Scandal, for which she Mourned, and hung her Chamber with Blacks. LEt not the Sables so benight your eys, nor yet entomb your Beauty ere it dics; Envy doth from this Sorrow gather strength, and grows more huge and monstrous in length: He gluts himself upon your Discontent, and raiseth from your Sighs his Merriment. The giddy people, that nought understands▪ Strangers to Truth, will▪ like to firebrands, Kindle a hot suspicion in each other, till they your Honour and your Fame do smother. A Stream that may be stopt at the Springs head, if let alone may over-flow a Mead, Nay drown a League of Earth. Now Envy sings; and t'paint his Falshood like to Truth, he brings
This inference; Sorrow doth Guilt imply, and your offence makes you so often die. Then Madam tear those Death-like-Sables thence, in th' stead set up your Flags of Innocence: And brave Desiance that Truth's light may be no longer hid by Envtes Trechery. Thus re-assuming your Hearts jollity, Envie will want his food, so starving die. Spying Splendora through a Casement. 'Twas late and dark, and yet the early Day in her Springs pride, ne're shot a brighter R Than met my eyes. So doth the Queen of light dart through the Ebon Casements of the Night Her comfortable Splendor, to redeem The world from darknesse, lost in our esteem. If You shoot such Beams through Obscurity, how full of Glory would your Presence be? My Friend Paul Squire. THou lent'st me twenty shillings, (true) and ten, which thou would'st have me pay thee back agen; And for the speed of it thou bid'st me baul, and borrow, or rob Peter to pay Paul. Rare Christian Counsel, I commend thee now, I'l gang about it,—but—I ken not how: Comfort thy self with hopes. I prithee do; I have a Friend will do't,—I—ken not who; Perhaps he's at the Indies with his Ware, Constantinople,—or—I know not where:
Yet I an honest mind bear, thou feest then, and thou art like t' be paid—I—know not when. Take this y Paul in the Exchange of thine; I'm confident it is far better Coin. Seeing a Lady— OH she is fair: Fair as the Eastern Morn▪ when she is pleas'd the Summer to adorn With her Springs Glory: Sweet as— Leave begging-Muse, thy praise gains no Relief, since from her glory I derive my grief. An Occasional Frolick to an unknown Friend. SIr, By my life I know not what to write: Iack Ager swears your wit is infinite; As boundlesse as his praises, or the seas, or our swell'd Cups that Elboe-in with these. Of such a fervent Fancy it might win an Anchorite to fall in love with sin. Our Healths, that clip Times wings, and swifter passe than his dwarff-Minutes, or his spacious glass Disburthens her big Womb of Pigme-sands, to you we dedicate: whil'st our Commands As weighty as our Liquor, sais on's head, that dares but hope that he can grope to Bed. As our Gorge fils, we give our bodies ease. and gush forth Flouds, as Seas do combat Seas: That as an Inundation plaies its pranks, we make the Ioraanes to o'reflow their Banks. If any Nod under fell, Morpheus weight, our waking Iustice takes him Napping straight;
And in Contempt we let the Stinckard sink in his own puddle, though we swim in drink. To stand is out of use; to walk upright doth savour too much of the Hypocrite. But, like mad Greeks, we fight upon the knee, 'till to the chin in blood of Grapes we be, And him we count a most Herculean Asse, that wants the Art to multiply a glasse, That so our Opticks may with little trouble, take quarts for pottles, and see all things double. If any shrink 'cause money he doth lack, wee'l drown his Hogshead in a But of Sack. But by th' addition of my Cups, I feel my Muse is drunk, and now my Verses reel; I'm sure they have the Staggers; then (Sir) think what I have done amiss was in my drink. Your Healths our Healths preserve, and hearty Sack is Belly-food, and Raiment for the Back: Nor want we Musick to maintain the Season; our Pottle-pots do keep their Diapazon. Thus much as I am Mortal; but the sire that Courts your Knowledge of me, reacheth high'r, And cannot be less powerfull than the Flame circled Prometheus, till I meet the same. I rest, as you please to stile I. T. To a Gentlewoman that Loved me, and I not her. DArt, dart thy Beams at one who is a Subject fit to receive fire; Thou sooner mai'st turn me to Ice, than kindle in me a Desire.
The Sea may sooner flame than I who am a Sea of liquid woe, Ev'n dead I am, before I die, and my heart's Coffin'd up in Snow. Loves pretious Oyl and Sacred fire, which in the Lamp my brest did burn, Have left it empty, and retire to wait upon Ostella's Urn. That now a Vault it is become and retains nought but holy Air, Where Damps of Sadnesse take up room, and Ghastly sorrows do appear. How canst thou then hope heat from me, whose Sorrows like to Damps, destroy All Flames of joy, but what may be kindl'd by thinking of her joy, Another upon the same. NOt but thy Beauty may Command, an Hoast of armed Cupids rise, Each with his flaming Dart in hand ta'ne from the Storehouse of thy eyes. And having vigour gain'd from thence may with huge Courage, Sword and Flame Lay Seige to beat down my Defence, inchanted by Ostella's Name. But when they think my faith to shake, and all their force and strength do try,
They'l find it difficult, to take a Brest so Mann'd with Constancy, A Dialogue. 1 TEll me fair Nymph, canst thou love me? 2 No, 'tis a breach to Liberty: I yet enjoy a free Estate, Neither a slave to Love nor Hate. 1 Thou art mis-inform'd in this, For without Love, no Ioy there is. 2 Alas we know, you Men have skill, To guild the poyson of the Pill; But 'tis beyond your utmost Art, To make the practise on my Heart. 1 True, not in mine; but his that can Aw ev'n the heart of Mighty Pan, Soften the rigid Satyres Brest, And to each troubled Soul give rest: To Discord he can Concord give, And teach Society to live; For wheresoever he doth come, The Place is made Elizium. 2 What place is that? 1 The place of Rest, Where Love's in every Sense exprest; There dying Hearts he doth revive, And makes them All their Cares survive. There are no Sighs, nor sign of Tears, No jealous thoughts, nor panting fears. But such a lasting Spring of Ioy, That Age nor Death cannot destroy. Oh that I might those joys possess! Love me, and here thou It find no less.
2 I would, but know not how. 1 That's fine; Come warm thy softer Palm in mine, Now meet a kiss. 2 I'm all one slame. 1 'Tis in Loves pow'r to quench the same. 2 Say Shepherd, say, Canst thou love me? 1 No, 'tis a breach to liberty. 2 Oh do not mock me, 1 Oh do not mock me. 2 Indeed I love. 1 And so do I. Chorus There's nothing like Loves liberty. To which wee'l win the heart of many a Swain, who knowing not his sweets, their good refrain: And flinty brested Nymphs soften, till they by our Example, learn who to obey. Since Love hath the instinctive Pow'r alone to tie and fasten thus two Hearts in one. To— I May revoke each Vow I made to thee, without the guilt of wilfull Perjrary. I swore I'd Wed thee, and I meant no lesse, had'st thou but prov'd the same thou did'st profess: But being not what thou did'st seem to be, it were a sin to keep my Faith with thee. Our Fancie's ost deceived by the sight of some far Object, some exhaled Light,
That seems a Star, but falling to the Ground, the falsenesse of th'admired thing is found. So though thou didst mislead my eyes, thoul't find thy fair illufion cann't my Judgement blind. I'd rather marry one resembles Night, that hath an Inward part can make her bright. For Lapidaries value not alone the make, but secret Virtue of the Stone. I care not for the whites of. Shape or Face: a black Heart's oft hid in a Christall Case, A Rose, whose Virgin Beauty casts a sent, passing through many hands, is quickly spent: So is a Picture, though as neatly Limb'd as Art could fancy, breath'd on too much dimm'd. Sure that man then is void of Reason quite that binds his faith unto a stale delight, Thus Hellen like a Cancel'd bond I leave thee, the Date is out, thou shalt no more deceive me: For thou hast wasted so thy Youthfull fires thou canst not thaw the Ice of my Desires. Then Glow-worm know, I'le not admire that light cann't yield me Comfort in the frostiest Night. To a Mistresse that bid me make another Choice. KNow Dearest't was no easie Art, could have Conquer'd me: My Breast was proof against the Dart of any foe but thee. And had'st not wounded me with smiles, then Cur'd me with a kisse.
I had contemn'd thy Sexes Wiles, as Enemies to Bliss. But having caught me in the Snare, I cann't with ease return: Had others harms made me beware, I might have left to burn. But greedy of my misery. I Courted so my Fate, The Object spake all love to me, but the Effect on't hate, No Beauty but thy own shall make me sensible of Woe: For when I do the same forsake I must my bliss forgo. My Heart shall never yield it self a prisoner but to thee; For no respect to Praise or Pelf shall bribe my Constancy. When thou shalt from thy Throne of Bliss look down on my sad Heart, And know for whose dear sake it is appointed so to smart; When thou shalt find I prize thy joy, more than my own Content, What heart but thine could so destroy a heart so innocent.
When thou shalt find my Youth to waste, my Loyalty endure, And I no other Ioys do tast than what thy Hate doth sour; When thou shalt find I take Delight in nothing, save in thee, If Pity won't my love require, be kind to murther me. Till when my Soul when 'tis most sad, shall find the way to sing, There is no Comfort to be had, but what thy Love must bring. And if thy Glories think it meet, I must their Martyr be, When Natures Watch hath left to beat, Parewell fair Cruelty. To my self. ANd why love I the thing that hates me? Reason won't admit of this: Rather prize the thing that baits me, there a promise is of Blisse, Though the effect of it perhaps we misse. For what appeareth good or great to our Eys, our Hearts so deem; The Taste directs the Appetit, Sweets are made as We esteem: But Reason thral'ld to Love who can redeem.
To the Deceiving Mistress. THine eyes shall be my Stars no more, they have deceived me, He madly doth his Death implore, that seeks from them Security. I thought they had been fixt on me, but wand'ring Lights they prove: The more they are admir'd in thee, the more they love to gad and rove. As though they would out-vy the Light, contracted to the Day, Until the Glory of the sight, some simple Hearts like mine betray. Yet boast not of that cruel Art, that so out-witted mine: For sure thou ne're hadst got my Heart, had I not more than hop'd for thine. I see there's Pollicy in Love: the slower Men come on, The faster your Desires do move, 'tis Madness You to dote upon. For this sad Truth I boldly tell, Experience finds it such, That had not I lov'd half so well, Thou hadst not hated me so much.
To Cupid CVpid to Arms, or th'art betraid, there is a Cold Complexion'd Maid, That teacheth to ascribe to Thee a Deity is Heresie; That thou art made of Wood or Stone, set up in Fairs, admir'd by none But Children, who do Idolize thy Golden Locks, and smoother Thighs; And at a slender rate may buy thy Godhead and Artilery. Cupid lest thou should'st not know her, these are tokens that will shew her: Her Beams are such, though blind they say thou art, thou need'st not grope thy way: An awfull Brow, a piercing Eye, presaging Signs of Sovereignty. Her Language smooth, of weighty Sense, which seems as fair as her pretence; Whose specious Beauties do infer, There is no Sweetnesse but in her. And this assumes her Virtual Breath hath pow'r to send us Life or Death: Which will be credited by all, and Thou, thy Fame, and Altars fall, Unless thou dost by force beat down these rising Evils 'gainst thy Crown, Arm then thy self, and thou wilt get by wounding her more Praise than yet Tradition ere pil'd up for thee; Be now One, or no Deity.
Pursue the Game, and thou shalt prove the force of Beauty, I of Love. Lycoris a Rapture. IN vain thou striv'st Lycorice to defeat my purposes, thy blushes may retreat, But not my Love, nor can they easie flight pass unpursu'd, or scape the Eagles sight; Thou canst not fly my Love, for it hath wings swifter then Swallows, so the Falcon sings, When he hath seiz'd the Dove, and vainly she with feeble force strives her poor self to free. Art thou not mine? did not my Love surprize, thee and thy Faith, and didst not thou devise; An equal Snare for mine? since they agree, why should not pleasures then at difference be? That I do love thee, I must needs confess, and I am confident thou thinkst no less: But he that loves to talk and not to do, looseth his Time, his Oyl and Labour too. What man can love the thing hee'd not possess as by his mind express his willingness, Who spares to speak must never hope to speed The heart that seeks not help may ever bleed: Who onely look's, and loves but to admire, smothers his flames ere they imbrace a fire. The Face is but the Index to invite our Eyes to view the thing of more delight; So Painters set their peeces forth to win us to survey their better works within, And I could be content with all my heart to give my judgement on the inward part.
'Tis not the Face (alone) that men adore, Love softly whispers, 'tis for something more, And hath so well that secret-sweet exprest; we ought to love that part amongst the rest. Who values Lories, but for the Ayres they make? or who the Grape but for the Iuyces sake? Who slaves himself to love, not to enjoy surrenders up his Freedom for a toy. And she that out of simple modesty denies Love Tenets, can no Lover be. Love answers Love, and in that Language best, when he is truly by himself exprest, Nor put me off with such your queint delayes, as heretofore, to hope for After-dayes. Delayes are dang'rous, and my hopes may be like Physick mis-apply'd to poyson me. What thanks can she deserve that shews us meat, with this proviso that we must not eat? He must be Mad-man, or a Fool at least, that starv's himself with hoping for a Feast. And he recorded be a Fool at last, that stayes for Milk until his Stomack's past. Or shall against Gods Benefits repine, and drink cold Water when he may have Wine. What pleasure can there be in this or this? we use to flatter Children with a kiss. And sure more flames do from my heart arise, when I salute those sweet Babies thy Eyes. Thou smil'st, but like the Sun before a storm, so violent fires decay ere scarce they warm. Thou lett'st me kiss thy hand to raise my flame, then leav'st me to be ruin'd in the same.
Can this be judged Love, or can there be, 'twixt Love and Beauty such Antipathy? How should I know my Friend from Enemy, but by the secrets he intrusted me; But thou art so severe none can discover, whether thou writ'st thy self, or Friend or Lover. Happy were they that liv'd in Ages past, when nature ty'd both Love and pleasure fast: Blest were those Dayes, when Brest with Brest did meet, and the stol'n sweets of Love not held unmeet. When Man had Licence given him with his Eyes, to search into Loves profound Mysteries. When I do court thee to't thou plead'st a sin, so putt'st a period to't ere I begin. Tell'st me that Chastity's as cold as Snow, and by that Metaphor you must be so. But says Experience when the Sun appears, he straight dissolves its Body into tears. To mourn its own Condition, and it turns by often handling, so you'd think it burns. Think me the Sun my Dear, and by my Art, I'le thaw the Snow congeal'd about thy Heart. For know Lycoris there's no greater Vice, in Woman, then to be so over nice. What though the Fruits forbidden and the Tree, Points death to others? it speaks life to me. Our fears deceive us, he whose poor heart dare not stand the peril must not hope to share I'th prize or profit: So the Merchants gain doth recompence his Travel and his pain. That thing that is with greatest danger won, brings greatest pleasures when the doubts are gone. So's fame and Honour purchas'd, and by this We make our Acts the Authors of our Bliss.
For ne're would Souldier any Siege begin, did not his hopes perswade him he should win. Nor ere did Army (onely) lye before a Fort to look on't, and to give it o're, If there were hopes of Batt'ry, and all know long Siege the strongest Fort doth overthrow; For violent Outward storms the In works break; and Confidence may make the strongest weak. Thou art but Woman dearest, and canst do no more then what the strength directs thee to, Thou hast endeavour'd strongly to resist but still the Seige continues, all things mist Thy aime, thou shot'st in vain, thy force is spent, yield on Free-quarter then, no Treason's meant. No noise but such as Turtles sigh shall fill thy Eares my dear, and I thy victor will Become thy Captive, then who'd shun to be o'recome by such a loving Enemy. The Bed shall be our Field, and our Alarms shall be soft kisses, though we sight in Arms; Which I will sow faster then thou canst reap, who would no purchase Amity so cheap? They say Love Conquers all things if't be true, 'tis possible that mine may Conquer you, And if no Fable that accounted be I will oppose my Love 'gainst destiny. I'le steal the Frnit from the Hesperides spight of the watchful Draggon, when I please, And more, to further our Content I'le charm those Argoes Eyes about thee, no Ear harm Our whispers by a listning, nor a light but thine shall lead me to that blest delight That pure Elizer, that All happyness whose Sweets none can but he that tasts express.
Nor think it desp'rate to be undergone the Will doth make the difficulty none. She that yields up her Reason to her Fear, looseth her Ioy, and finds her Ruin neer. For when thy coyness hath me Murdered, thy Pitty proves bad Physick to the dead. Or could that Pitty me to life restore, it cures but one wound to make thousands more, Unless it carry with't express consent, and liberty to warrant my content. Then he so merciful to let me be o'recome in Love by my o'recoming thee. And let your understanding reach at this, none hunts the Game but when the Season is. Make use of Time, Flow'rs ne're so fair decay, and Love may turn his course another way. Then while our youths do last and Loves agree, let not our Pleasures at such difference be; The Sweets whereof will lengthen out our time, and never fade, but still be in their prime: The breath of Love shall make our kisses sweet, till we conceit our very souls do meet. And as our Limbs do lovingly entwine, we'le grow together like the am'rous Vine; And want only our fancies shall invent fresh Pleasures, when our old grow stale or spent. We'le fright Age from us, and force Nature to supply our wants, till sheher self undo; Revive our Pleasures with each Breath, and taste the sweets as often, and yet find no waste. Thus we will build an Altar, to delight on eithers lips, and with a flaming sp'rit, Our Actions shall be offer'd full of fire, first kindled from a mutual desire;
That Poets now and in the Age to come, shall fancy ours the true Elizium. Lycoris weeping. WEep not Lycoris, 'tis not meant thou should'st for this one Act repent; For, where such constant Love hath bin, it were a Crime to think a Sin. When sin doth bid thee love, love not at all, but Love to bid thee sin is naturall. A Smile. WHo would not think to see that Glance the sprightly Genious of a flame, But from the heat of Love it came; and meant some dead Heart to advance With warmth to Life? but oh! the ill it onely shews its power can kill. Who would believe, that hath the Eye of Reason to direct his sence, A Hill of rigid Ice could fence the Sun, and so dissolveless lye So neer the torrid Zone? but oh, that is the frigid one below: So eithers Natures works upon excess, as they excel in either more or less.
To Mrs. J. H. upon my recovery of a fit of sickness. Song. 'TIs true I did receive a life from you, for he's unjust, That shall deny the Miracles thou do'st. when my poor heart Was ready to depart This air, thou cam'st to visit me, And brought'st me heav'nly Surgery, in either eye. But see This Mercy's full of Cruelty; for I had paid But one poor life, had then my frame decay'd: When now to please Your Pride is a disease past Cure, for which each minute I Suffer a death, yet cannot dy; 'tis Tyranny. My Heart, Whereon you practice all your Art, you'l say's your own: So Surg'ons torture er'e their skill be shown if you'l devise Mine to Anothomise, that so you may advise your skill, First be so kind as throughly kill my Wish fulfil.
To Mrs: I. H. upon the sight of a Marble Cover∣ture or Statue in the Church. OBserve Ostella how it weeps, As though it griev'd for what it keeps, And seems a pitteos sense to owne Because its empty guess hath none, Or that it should not be the same, In sense it seems to be in Fame, And can thy Brests be harder far Then Rocks of Flint or Marble ar? Is't not a shame thou shouldst be known To have less pitty then a stone; But since thy Heart of flesh Tears can't perswade My prayes shall be to have it Marble made. A Frown. INdeed I am the same I was last night, My wit's as safe, and have a heart as light As Air in'ts subtlist Motion, and I swear I have not wrong'd the least Curl of my hair With violence, nor hath my manly Brest with any thumps (ridiculous) been oprest My Buttons and my Button-holes are firm, so is my shirt: my Eyes did need no term Of Art or Charm to close them: but soft sleep did in her bosome safe my sences keep, I wak'd this Morning in so good a mind, I would not draw my self, and have design'd
This day for Mirth, not to fright Sorrow hence, That should from thee have any Influence Upon my free▪ born soul; 'tis not a Frown Can my aspiring Heart kill, or cast down; Should ev'ry Frown your Sex casts, slay man Pat, He'd need of Ninety nine lives more than a Cat. Vpon my leaving off the Company of Hellena. I Go from thee with a more willing Heart, than Pris'ners from their shackles can depart: Or Camels from the Burthens they lay down, or Men to fly Infection leave the Town. I go from thee as from a house of Sin, a Saint doth fly h'had been betrayed in. I leave thee, as I'd leave my Robe of Woe, or as I would my Misery forgo. I leave thee with as hearty a Desire as Sinners do there sins, when th'holy fire Of Grace doth Beam into their Brests. Or they when mounting Heaven-ward leave their Gaol of Clay. I go (shame to thy Sex) I do, nor shall Oceans of tears, or Gaoles of sighs recall Me or my vows, the Crocodile I'le trust, sooner than thee, and yield my self to dust; I, and will first at the Hyaena's call return to Death, with life end woes and all. Yet i'le not leave behind me any Curse. on thee, least I anticipate a worse Which the just Gods intend to showre on thee, forth' violation of thy vows to me
My Charity not love bidds thee repent; the Gods, though slow, throw home their Punishment. Songs in a Masque. 1 Song: Fortune Descending. SAy, say▪ ungratefull Mortalls, why do you so much at Fortune rail Since there's not any can deny, but by her power they do prevail, Or in their Love or Chivalry. Chorus. Then you that are from envy free Come and make up a Simphony. The Souldier and the Amorist the Courtier, Clerk, and Clients Case, Each had their severall purpose Just, if fortune had not been in place To make them happy as she lift. Chorus. Then you that are from envy free Come and make up a Simphony. 2 The poor Schollers Song. VVHat Creatures on Earth can boast freer Mirth Lesse enjoy'd and loved than we. Though Learning grow poor
We scorn to implore a gift but what's noble and free. Our freedome of mind, cannot be confin'd With Riches are inwardly blest; nor Death, nor the Grave, Our worths can deprave, nor malice our Ashes molest. When such Moals as you, your own Earth shal Mew, And worms shal your memory eat: our names being read Shall strike envy dead and Ages our worths shall repeat. 3 Song. The Country-life. VVHo can boast a happiness more compleatly sure than we; Sincarmless thoughts we dress ipure simplicity: And ast nature doth dispense here her Beauties Innocence. Envy is a stranger here. blest Content our Bowls do Crown. Let such Slaves themselves to Fear, on whose Guils the Iudge doth frown:
We from evil Actions are Free as uncorrupted Air. With the Turtles whisper Love, with the Birds we practise Mirth; With our harmlesse Kids we move, and receive our food from Earth: Nor do we disdain to be Cloath'd with the Lambs Livery. 4. Song. Ambition. HOw deceitfull is the State of that Greatness we adore, when Ambitiously we soar, And have ta'n the glorious height; 'tis but Ruine painted o're To enslave us to our Fate; Whose false Delight is easier got than kept; Content ne're on it's gaudy Pillow slept. Then how fondly do we try with such Superstitious care, to bulild Fabricks in the Air; Or seek safety in that Skie, where no Stars, but Meteors are, That portend a Ruine nigh: Where having reach'd the Object of our Aim, we find it but a Pyramide of flame.
5. Song. HAng up this delaying devise, since I am resolved to roam: I hate things so peevishly nice, and will frolick it e're I go home. Thou tell'st me thou lovest me best, how am I assured of that? Thou sufferest me to dandle thy Brest, but debarr'st me the thing thou know'st What. Hang Lipolove, and such foolish toys, they do but augment our Desires: Let Kisses be nourish'd by Boys, 'tis Action that shews Manly fires. Wherefore thinkest thou I came hither, but to tickle thee into the Mood, 'Til with striving we do melt together? such Surfeits do our Bodies most good. Then I prithee tell me thy mind, if thou to the Feat be willing; If not, I shall find one more kind though lesse fair, shall do't for a shilling. For the times you know are barely made, Men cannot much Money disburse: And 'tis fit Women should live by their Trade, light gains make a heavy Purse.
A Prologue spoken at the Cock-pit, at the coming of the Red Bull Players thither. I Am amaz'd! So one long kept from Light, 'Twixt Joy and Wonder, trembles at the sight; The Blind that's cur'd by accident, doth pay In such Distraction, Duty to the Day, As we present to you: 'tis long since here So many Glorious bodies did appear, Whose Beams gave Life to Action, as the Sun Gives growth to th' Infant Plants he Smiles upon. Then flourisht here those Roscio's of the Age, That trod the perfect measure of the Stage, Who from your eys took Motion; such as dew Encouragement to them, Content to you. Yet▪ those so exquisite in Comedies, Have Acted since their own sad Tragedies. Who could have di'd more bravely? Yet we must Leave to Opinion that; our onely Trust Is in your Favours: Nor think cause your share Of Sweets are gone, that all things bitter are. If you'l shoot equal Beams on us▪ wee'l strive 'I'o make you think that They in Vs survive▪ Imagination's strong; but if your eye Dart a dislike, 'tis time to yield or die.
A Prologue spoken at the Red-Bull to a Play called the Whisperer, or what you please. NOw bless my eye-sight! what! the house so thin, And we upon preparing to begin! Whence comes this strange Neglect? have you injoy'd Of late so much variety y' are cloi'd? Or do you think you pay too dear for Wit, And so would grosly take your leave of it. Grosly indeed; for hither you do come, Like so many Chuls, and leave your Wives at home, Our Author likes the Women well, and says, You do'em wrong to hinder 'em from Plays. And therefore wishes you to be more kind, And on his Day to leave them not behind. The more the merrier, rather than come alone For once make use of what is not your own, And bring your Neighbours Wife, which if you do 'Tis ten to one hee'l do as much for you; And if our Mirth cannot your Anger smother, You may go home, and Laugh at one another. If what we fancy, you like in the Play, 'Tis a good sign that good Wits jump, you'l say. But though Detraction's become a Disease, In spight of It, you shall have what you please. On the Report of Master William Lawes his Death. VVHo says Will Lawes is dead? had not his breath Virtue enough to charm the Spleen of Death?
He that to Discord could pure Concord give, instructing all Society to live, Doth't come within your Reason he can die, who bears a part in Friendships Harmony? Let not such thoughts abuse you; for the Earth receives no Musick but what was his Mirth. He dead, the melancholly World must be brought straight into a general Lethargie: Yet this I guesse, finding his Health impair, He made this change but for a better Air. To my Mother, Mris. Dorothy Tatham, one of the Daughters of Christopher Percy of Manson in the County of Dorset, Esquire, then Iustice of Peace and Quorum, and High Sheriff of that County. SEe the inconstancy of things, the Revolutions of this life, That ev'n appears in th' State of Kings, and nothing's constant but our Strife. The Court, the Ages wonted Pride, hath put her Beauty off, and now, Her very Glass doth her deride, and shews the wrinkles on her Brow. Then though y' are not so great as good, yet far more happy than y'are poor; None can defile your Name or Blood, then let that Comfort Guild thee o're. At first or last, alike all People sares. And Kings themselves are not exempt from Cares.
Vpon the Death of my Father. THe youthfull bloud that beat the winding Maze Within your veins, gave length unto my daies; The active heat distil a crimson Dew Through those warm Limbecks, and made Me of You: That to such full proportion I am grown, People do still Me for Your figure own. Then since I have deriv'd a part from Thee, Thou canst not die whil'st Thou hast part in Me. Song. DEfine a Woman! who can do't? 'less you put the Divel to't. He that first she yeelded to, best knows how with her to do. To their treacherous smiles he's known, and promotes them as his own: They can turn as he can do Divels into Angels hue. When they prattle he directs them, when they Raunt it he protects them: In all points of Sophistry They are skill'd as well as He▪
When they make themselves so trim, what do they but ev'n Act him? Not for Air their Brests are bare, but some poor Soul to ensnare. For the Spots upon their Faces, tell you what the tother place is, And when for some prey he watches, he lies sculking in their Patches: Since then they so well agree, Pitty they should parted be. To Cupid. SEt me to tame a Tyger▪ melt a Rock, Number the Sands, Plough up the Seas, or knock Both Poles together, I with as much ease Dare enterprize these Wonders, as to please A Woman. Lay thou any Plague on me, But to Love them, I'le deem it Clemencie; For they are Riddles past Mans finding out, No task so difficult to go about; For in that one Act I have labour'd more Than Hercules did in his twelve before.
To the— Song. DEep as the Earth Decline your Ray, your Glories burie there; It is not meet the Guilty Day should ever wear a Vestment cleer. Since what should make it fair leaves to appear. But from the Center of your Souls, draw forth your Griefs and die, He still his Enemy Controuls, that makes his Death his Remedie; For Resolution slights Extreamitie. Or in your Closets mould away, where there is onely Room Enough, to raise your selves a Tomb there, leave your Epitaphs to pray The Day the Night may overcome, To welcome your Deliverance home. FINIS.
