T2618 R21366 12360494 60216
A True COPY OF A Letter of CONSOLATION Sent to NAT. the Printer, Near the POPE's Keys in Fetter-Lane, from the Meal-Tub Mid wife, in New-gate. Printed to prevent False, Seditious and Lying Reports. Dear Nat. I Have with great Sorrow heard the News of Thy Bumbasting, by our Here∣tical Enemies; But now under Thy own Hand, and Composing, I have Read, That they did not Beat thee enough—to send Thee to our Holy Father for a Consecrated Martyr and Saint. Alas! may Thee and I say, That we are (deservedly) made Sufferers for so good a Cause, that we have now for some years so vigorously Served. But indeed (poor Rogue) I would not have. Thee Angry with Me, as though I Flattered Thee, when I Commend thy Industry in our publick Calling [of Lying] for I cannot but Observe (notwithstanding Thy late wholsome Chastisement) Thou holdst that good old Princi∣ple firm; since in thy last Relation of the Hereticks making a Bon-Fire of our most Dear Father the Pope, Thou bast altogether left out the true Story of the Popish Printer Riding with his Face to the Horses Tail, all to beset, and bedeckt with Ly∣ing Intelligences, least the people should have taken it to have been Thine own Pi∣cture; being so exactly like Thee, as few could discern any difference: Next, Thou didst like Our Party too, omit the Suborners and Suborned on the Pillory; for though we Love Hugg and Carress them with Huzzah's to the Brim, yet it would be Mad∣ness in us to let the People know them, and suffer such a conceit to run in their Noddle, as if we made great use of them. In reality Nat. badst thou (when thou wast last here) foreseen this Thumping, Bumping Disaster; my Stone Jacquet, if the Keeper would have Lent it Thee, had been freely at Thy Service, however my Head-piece, (that kept off the Stone of twenty pound weight at my Exaltation) is wholly at Thy Command, least next time Thou peepest out of White fryers, some Bold Protestant Heritick should Ring the second Part to the same Tune on thy empty Noddle, and make the uncapable of Serving the Catholick Interest any longer. However chear up, for whilst the Fathers of this Colledge can Write a LIBEL, Thou shall not want the Honour of being the Catholick Printer; and, if thou canst Believe Me, (who gave a true Account of Racking of Mr. Prance in Newgate, though he was a Sleep all the while and never felt it; and who hath sent to thy Forge so many useful LIBELS to our Cause) I say, if, Thou canst confide in Me, pull up thy Courage, Write, Swear, Print, Lye, as Bold as a JESUITE, and ten times worse: Curse, and Ruin Thy Native Country, if Thou canst, by Sowing and Fomenting DIVISIONS; all these Services for our CAUSE, and ten times as Much, if Thou canst do, shall Eter∣nize Thy Name in Golden Letters in the Holy Vatican, and keep Thee ten thousand Years out of Purgatory. Salute our Fellow-Sufferers, Madam Joana, alias Monsieur Observator; together with the Most Oblieging, Seigneur Heraclitus Ridens: To Conclude, We earnestly wish Thy good Campany here; where Thou woudst be as well Guarded as in White-fryers; Fare-well, and do Well, and thou wilt greatly O∣blige her, whose Motto is, I NEVER CHANGE, Eliz. Cellier.
Post-script. THE Muses of Our Colledge being got Tipsy in Drinking the old HEALTH, they have (Dear Implement) Composed a Sonnet, for Thy further Consolation, and in Memory of Thy Basting, which They desire Thee to send to Monsieur He∣raclitus Ridens our Regester, to be by him Published among his Odes and Ballads, which we Compose for him, when our Pension comes fresh in, and that we Drink Sack with an Huzza, Farewell E. C. The SONNET of the CANE. To the Tune of, To prevent False, Seditious and Lying Reports, &c. COme be not dismay'd, Tho' Thou wert well paid, We swear by the Soul of King Arthur, In spite of the Smiter, Or Jack the Presbyter Thou shalt be put down for a Martyr. Our Father the POPE Without Tyburn or Rope, Since thou art so known a Transgressor: With thy own black Paint, Shall Print Thee a Saint, When we have a Romish Successor. Thou hast the Popes Keys As every one Sees, They 're hang'd up at Thine own Door, For what use? can't you tell? To ope Heav'n and Hell, Dear Nat, what wouldst Thou have more? The Authority is good, If well understood, And in it, Thou well mayst Glory, You may abuse whom you please, Of all Sorts and Degrees; And make a Damn'd Saint of a Tory. Tho' we're now in our Drink, We cannot but think, What Laughter, what Jest, and what Sport there's, To see Thee give an hint Of Thy Sufferings in Print, To Vile, Care, Janaway, and others, Take Courage, we say When we get the Day, Thou shalt be well Paid for Thy Basting; And in the mean time, Accept of our Rhime, To make a Knaves Name everlasting. London, Printed for W. Johnson, 1681.
