T276 R10772 12590860 63916
THE FAITH OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND CON∣CERNING GODS WORK ON MANS WILL. PVBLIKELY CON∣FIRMED BY THE SVB∣SCRIPTIONS OF ALL the Famous Martyrs, and Divines thereof. Faithfully gathered out of the Authenticke Records of the CHVRCH. By Francis Tayler B. in D. and Rector of CLAPHAM in SVRREY. LONDON. Printed by I. L. for Nicholas Bourne at the South entrance to the Royall Exchange. 1641.
TO Sir EDWARD DERING, of Surenden-Dering, in the County of Kent, Knight and Baronet; and one of the Knights chosen by that County to serve in the Commons House of Parliament. SIR, THat little interest I have in Kent, was the first motive that incited me to desire your worships acquaintance. And the report of your zeale, for the establishing of Religion, and our lawfull liber∣ties, encreased this desire. The courteous entertain∣ment and familiarity you have since vouchsafed me, hath made me bold to present this ensuing Treatise to the view of the world under your protection, whom God hath enabled to judge truly of it & to defend it. The truth is, that of late years, the Law and the Gos∣pell have bin so dressed, both in the Pulpit & in the Presse, that we neither knew what we beleeved, nor what we had. Our interest in heaven and in earth, were like to be both alike unknowne unto us in a lit∣tle time. The Proverbe is, Evill manners beget good Lawes. So our good God can bring good out of will. The Mystery of Babylon hath wrought
among us by upholding the Arminian tenets under colour of pulling downe Puritanes, to take away the faith of Protestants. Andrews, Bilson, Whitakers, Perkins, Calvin, Beza, have beene strange names. Peter Lumbard, Thomas Aqui∣nas, Bonaventure, have bin too familiar in our Vni∣versities and Pulpits. The silence enjoyned in Pul∣pits and Presses, hath burst out on the wrong side, while the right side might neither speake nor write. Our hope of correcting these disorders next under our great God, and our most gracious Soveraigne, is in the two Honourable Houses of Parliament, Of one of which your Worship is a member. My suit then is, that your last workes may be better then your first, and that as you have been a meanes to discover our by-paths; so you will be an instru∣ment to reduce us to our first love. Let us know what we have beleeved, that know not what wee doe beleeve. If you please to move the Honourable House, that the Records of our Church may be sear∣ched by certaine grave Divines, and the writings of our elder and soundest Writers now out of date, may be reviewed, and a summe of our Religion ever since the reformation professed, collected out of these; I suppose it will be a great meanes to quiet our troubles, and appease our differences at home, and to regaine us a good opinion with other Churches abroad; Some of which have thought so ill of us, as that they have forbidden their young Students to come into England, as I have heard from a young man of excellent parts, who adventured to come hither, being sent from Berne into Holland: I
have endeavoured to give some light to this busi∣nesse in this Treatise, wherein I shew the judgement of our Church in one maine point, upon which, all, or the most part of Arminianisme depends. I could wish I might be a shoing-horne to draw on men better able to doe the like, against all new opinions of Arminianisme, Socinianisme, and Popery, which are thought to grow secretly among us, and shew themselves by fits in Preaching and Printing. I beseech Almighty God to incline the hearts of all to whom he hath given parts, to further this great work, of setling the grounds of our Religion by a sweet Harmony. This will be for Gods glory, the honour of our Church, the good of our posterity, and the stopping of the mouths of our Adversaries, who trumpet out our dissentions for their owne advan∣tage. Sir, my request is, that you would favourably accept this small Present, and that God would blesse it to the furtherance of the publike good. So praying for the true well-fare of you, and all yours, I rest, Clapham Febr. 20. 1641. At your Worships service in the Lord, FRANCIS TAYLOR.
Fourteene books publikely al∣lowed, out of which all these proofes are taken. 1. The Book of Common Prayer. 2. The Book of Ordination. 3. The Book of Articles with the Commen∣mentary of Mr. Thomas Rogers Chaplain to Archbishop Bankcroft. 4. The first Book of Homelies. 5. The second Book of Homelies. 6. The Catechisme allowed by authoritie. 7. Prayer on August. 5. 8. Prayer on November 5. 9. The thanksgiving for the ceasing of the plague, 1604. 10. Prayers for ceasing of the rainy wea∣ther, 1613. 11. Prayers on the Kings day, March 27. 12. Prayers in the Fast, 1625. 13. The thanksgiving for the ceasing of the plague that yeere. 14. Prayers in the Fast, 1626.
Fourteene heads to which all the proofs in this Treatise are to be referred. 1. Our owne insufficiency to any good. 2. Gods omnipotency shewed in our conversion. 3. Gods speciall grace. 4. Gods working in infants. 5. The giving of internall grace to men. 6. The receiving of grace. 7. The internall effect of grace. 8. The purification of the heart. 9. The externall effect of grace. 10. Gods governing us. 11. Gods preserving us in godlinesse and from sinne. 12. The progresse of the regenerate. 13. The prayers of holy men. 14. Gods grants.
To the Reader. WOnder not (Christian Reader) that so much paines hath been taken to search the authenticke records of this our fa∣mous Church of England, for the worke of God upon the will of man. That over-large power given by the Adver∣sary to the will of man hath been the navell-string, whereby the misbegotten bratts of Armi∣nianisme have beene nourished, while they lay lurking in the wombe of nature. It is in vaine to talke of predestina∣tion out of faith foreseene, if there be no power in mans will to beleeve. It is as if a Physitian should foresee, that a man mortally sicke would of himselfe recover, but give him no∣thing to recover him. How can God foresee, that such a man mill beleeve who hath no power to doe it, unlesse God give it him? Gods generall intention to save all men by Christ will not serve the turne, unlesse there be in every man a power to apply Christs death unto them. Otherwise it is like Physicke prepared for a dead man that cannot take
it. To say that faith is wrought in us onely by Gods morall swasion, is ridiculous if it be not in our power to doe as we are exhorted in all things. To teach that Gods work in mans conversion is such as may be frustraed of the saving effect by mans will resisting, when God hath done as much as he nseth to doe in regenerating men, is absurd, unlesse it be left every way indifferent to man to beleeve or not to be∣leeve, and he have power indifferently to doe either. It seeme as strange to affir me that the regenerate may totally fall from grace, unlesse he be left altogether to his own will, and made his owne onely keeper. To dreame of attaining to a perfect keeping of Gods law here on earth without a great power in mans will, were to set a man quite beyond the Cape of all good hope. It is not then an unnecessary labour to play the midwife and to cut this navell-string of free-will, and send these Arminian impes abroad into the wide world to cry for foode. Vndermining was ever held a more sure and lesse dangerous way to overthrow cities; then the tempest of Canons. If the foundation of Arminianisme berased by the plaine doctrine of our Church, the walles of it must with Dagon fall downe before the Arke. The proofes are all upon record. The words are therefore set downe, least the Adversary should complaine of forgery, or the reader be to negligent to search them out himselfe. The Lord guide us all to the knowledge of his truth, dispell the mists of er∣rors, confirme his servants in love and peace on earth, and bring us to glory in heaven. Thine in Christ Iesus, FRANCIS TAYLER Clapham.
The faith of the Church of England concerning Gods worke on mans will. The Preface. IN all disputations the first thing to be done, is to set out the right state of the question. Which if it be misunderstood, men fight with their owne shadowes. We agree of∣ten in words, when we differ in the sence. Our conclusion that we must drive at throughout the whole worke must be this, that God works alwayes powerfully and ef∣fectually upon the will of man in the regeneration of a sinnner. No∣thing is difficult but the terme of effectuall working, whereby we doe not understand onely in a generall sence, that some effect or other follows upon Gods work: nor yet that regeneration fol∣lows after Gods worke oftentimes, for so it may though it be not an effect of it. Neither do we intend, that God so takes advantage of the time, place, affection, and disposition of a man, that he offers grace to him in such a point of time, as he knowes that mans will is inclined to receive it, for this were to com∣mend
Gods wisdome in regenerating of us, but to deny any worke of his power in it, and to make regeneration not Gods worke, but the worke of mans will. Our meaning plainely is, that in the worke or regeneration, God works so powerfully upon mans will, that regeneration infallably followes, as an effect of it, and that this kind of working powerfully is onely found in such as are elected before, and all in whom God works thus, are by that powerfull work of his regenerated. So that the cause of their regeneration is not any way their own will, but Gods powerfull working in them by his spirit. Neither doth God work thus in any other, but such as prove converts, for if he did work so powerfully in others, they would have been regenera∣ted also. In a word there is a particular powerfull work of Gods Spirit in his elect only, whereby they all, and onely they are truly regenerate. In others there may be illumination, and some weak motions to goodnesse in their wills, but alwayes in effectuall, because they are left to mans will, and God doth not so work in them, as he doth in his elect. Where God powerfully works, there regeneration necessarily follows, where he doth not, there it cannot follow. We will reduce all to fourteen heads, all which confirme the former conclusion against the power of mans will, and demonstrate Gods powerfull work. The proofe of each is the words of the records. Sometimes we shall make use of the title in some prayers given to God, because we doubt not, but the wisdome of the Church in her prayers would give such titles to God, as were most answerable to the things in those prayers desired of God. The conclusion is, let the Reader well weigh the heads themselves, and the arguments brought to prove them, and conclude in his own soule, which is the doctrin of the Church of England.
CHAP. I. Of our own insufficiency. WE will begin with our own insufficiency to any good, and shew what matter the books allow us to set it out, so farre forth as arguments may be taken from thence to prove an effectuall work of God upon the will of man in the work of regenera∣tion. Where in generall I observe, that the books put no difference in unregenerate men, but make all their wills alike dead in sins and trespasses, unable to be∣leeve untill they be quickened by God. Which takes away the new Arminian conceit, that where the Gospel is preached, there is a power given to all that heare it even before rege∣neration, to beleeve if they please, by the use of which power some do beleeve, & others that have as much power will not use it to beleeve in Christ. The books that make all alike dead in sins, auke to goodnes, till they be actually regenerate acknowledge no such difference. This is but a trick to avoyd the odious names of naturall power in the will, and Pelagia∣nisme. It is a monstrous opinion in nature, that a thing should have a naturall inbred motion wrought in it, before any life be wrought in it, so is it in grace, that their should be a power wrought in mans will, whereby of it own free
inclination it should be able to live spiritually, or not to live as it list, yea which is more absurd, be able to move it self in the highest spirituall action that can be, before it be actually regenerate, or have in it any true spirituall life. Now let the words of the book declare mans insuffici∣ency, and let every one collect from thence Gods-power∣full operation in mans conversion. FAith giveth life to the soule, Sermon of good works. Part. 1. and they be as much dead to God that lack faith, as they be to the world, whose bodies lack souls. Sinne is come into the world, Sermon two of the Pas∣sion. and so come that it cannot be avoided. It cannot be chosen, but we must needs fall often. That which is born of the Spirit, Hom. for Whitsunday Part. 3. is spirit: as who should say; Man of his own nature is fleshly, and car∣nall, corrupt and naught, sinfull and disobedient to God, without any spark of goodnesse in him, with∣out any vertuous or godly motion, onely given to wicked thoughts, Sermon for Rogat. week. Part. 1. 2 Cor. 3.5. Sermon of Repentance. Part. 1. and evill deeds. Paul brings in his beliefe, we be not (saith he) suf∣ficient of our selves, as of our selves once to think any thing: but all our ablenesse is of Gods goodnesse. We must beware and take heed, that we do in no wise think in our hearts, imagine, or beleeve, that we are able to repent aright, or to turn effectually unto the Lord by our own might and strength. Ioh. 15.5. For this must be verified in all men, without me ye can do nothing. 2 Cor. 3.5. Again, of our selves we are not able as much as to think a good thought. We are all by originall corruption of our nature, Now. Cat. quest. 69. of such blindnesse, wickednesse and frowardnesse,
that we can neither understand, nor are able or wil∣ling to do our dutie required by the law. We by nature are so unwary to foresee, Now. Cat. quest. 224. and so weak to resist temptations, that we cannot but be over∣come, unlesse God do assist us with his grace, and arme us with his strength. The corrupt inclination of man was so much gi∣ven to follow his own fantasie, Sermon of good works. Part. 2. that all the admoniti∣ons, exhortations, benefits, and threatnings of God could not keep him from his inventions. Neither could the notablenesse of the place being the beginning of Gods law make us to marke it, Hom. a∣gainst perill of idolatry. Part. 1. nor the plain declaration by recounting of all kinde of similitudes cause us to understand it, nor the oft re∣peating and reporting of it in divers and sundry pla∣ces, the oft reading and hearing of it could cause us to remember it, nor the dread of the horrible penal∣tie to our selves, our children and posteritie after us, feare us from transgressing of it, nor the greatnesse of the reward to us, and our children after us, move us any thing to obedience and the observing of the Lords great Law against idolatry. So that if either the multitude or plainnesse of the places might make us to understand, In the same Hom. or Gods earnest charge that God giveth in them, move us to regard, or the horrible plagues threatned to idolaters; might ingender any feare in our hearts, we would forsake this wickednesse. When God leaveth us to our own wit, will, Sermon of falling from God. Part. 1. Part. 2. and strength, then he begins to forsake us. When God gives us over, he suffers us to bring forth such fruits as we will, all naughtinesse and vice,
and that so abundantly, that they shall cleane over∣grow us, choke, strangle, and utterly destroy us. They that live not after God perceive not this great wrath of God towards them, Part. 2. that he doth let them alone to themselves. When thou art called to repentance, Hom. of Repentance. Part. 3. neglect not the good occasion, that is ministred to thee, least when thou wouldst repent, thou hast not the grace to do it. Sermon for Rogat. week. Part. 1. Hom. of in∣formation of them, that take offence at some pla∣ces of Script. Part. 2. For to repent is a good gift of God. In the power and vertue of the holy Ghost we are made meet and able to receive Gods gifts and graces Godly men when they fall into sin, through Gods great grace and infinite mercy rise again, and fight a∣gainst sinne. CHAP. II. Of Gods Omnipotency shewed in our Conversion. THis Argument is one of the strongest: for if God use his omnipotency in converting of a sinner, then there is no question, but God doth more then perswade, and that the work must needs be effectuall, unlesse any mans will can resist Gods omnipotency. Let us therefore heare the books pronounce sentence and agree to it. God which declarest thy Almightie power most chiefly in shewing mercy and pitie, Collect. 11. Sunday af∣ter Trinity. give unto us abundantly thy grace, that we returning to thy pro∣mises
may be made partakers of thy heavenly trea∣sure through Jesus Christ our Lord. From Satans rage and filthy band, Lords pray∣er. By D. Coxe. Serm. of Sacrament. Part. 1. Hom. for Whitsun∣day. Part. 1. In the same place. Defend us with thy mightie hand. We are marvellously incorporated into Christ, by the operation of the holy Ghost. It is the office of the holy Ghost to sanctifie, and regenerate. Which work the more it is hid from our understanding, the more it ought to move all men to wonder at the secret and mighty working of Gods holy Spirit, which is within us. Did not Gods Spirit miraculously work in David, Matthew, Peter, and Paul? Such is the power of the holy Ghost to regenerate men, and as it were to bring them forth a new, so that they shall be nothing like the men that they were before. The Apostles rejoyced, In the same place. that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ. This was the mighty worke of the Holy Ghost, who because he giveth patience and joyfulnesse of heart in temptation and affliction, hath therefore worthily obtained this name in holy Scripture to be called a Comforter. Let us humbly beseech God so to worke in our hearts by the power of his holy Spirit, In the same place. that we being regenerate, and newly borne againe in all goodnes, righteousnesse, sobriety, and truth may in the end obtaine eternall life. To new create a man from a wicked person to a righteous man is a greater act (saith S. Augustin) then to make such a new Heaven and Earth, Serm. for Rogat. week. Part. 1. as is al∣ready made.
God is able to doe abundantly beyond our desires and thoughts according to the power working in us. Part. 3. Almighty God give us grace that we may cast a∣way the works of darknesse, Coll. 1. Sun∣day in Ad∣vent. and put upon us the ar∣mour of light. Lord of all power and might graffe in our hearts the love of thy name. Coll. 7. Sun∣day after Trin. Coll. on All Saints day. Song before Even. pray∣er. Almighty God which hast knit together thy elect in one communion and fellowship in the mysticall body of thy Sonne Christ our Lord. Praise yee the Lord which gives all grace, for he is a Lord of great might. CHAP. III. Of Gods speciall grace. THe doctrine of Gods speciall grace overthroweth the foolish conceit of some common grace wrought in all those that heare the Gospel, whereby they may beleeve if they will, yet of∣ten doe not. It is a speciall and effectuall grace, that workes in our regeneration, that workes not in others, that are not regenerate. Heare therefore the words of the bookes. BY thy speciall grace preventing us thou dost put into our hearts good desires. Coll. on Ea∣sterday. Exhort. to such as come negligently to the Com∣munion. Article. 10. These things if ye earnestly consider, ye shall by Gods grace return to a better minde: for the obtain∣ing whereof we shall make our humble petitions, while we shall receive the holy Communion. The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such
that he cannot turne, and prepare himselfe by his owne naturall strength, and good works to faith and calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to doe good works, pleasant & acceptable to God with∣out the grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good will. Adversaries unto this truth, Mr. Rogers commenta∣ry on it. Prop. 2. ere such as hold that men beleeve not, but of their owne free-will: and that it is in a mans free-will to beleeve or not to beleeve, to obey or disobey the Gospel of truth preached. They which be indued with so excellent a benefit of God (that is predestination) be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season, Artic. 17. they though grace obey the calling, they be made like the image of Christ. In Christ Jesus of the meere will and purpose of God some are elected, Mr. Rogers comment. Prop. 5. and not others unto salva∣tion. Adversaries unto this truth. Hereby is discovered the impiety of those men, Mr. Rogers in the same place. which think that God beheld in every man, whither he would use his grace well, and beleeve the Gospel or no, and as he saw a man affected, so did predesti∣nate, chuse, or refuse him. Such as be ordained to everlasting life, Expos. of Prop. 6. if they live long in this world, they one time or other be called unto the knowledge of salvation by the preaching of Gods word: they obey that calling through the ope∣ration of the Holy Ghost working within them. The predestinate are both justified by faith, Prop. 7. san∣ctified by the Spirit, and shall be glorified in the life to come.
Divers be the effects of mans predestination, Expos. of Prop. 7. but chiefely it bringeth to the elect justification by faith in this life, and in the life to come glorification, &c. as testify all the Churches in their confessions. The word of God is the savour of life unto eternall life unto all those, Hom. of in∣form. of such as take of∣fence at some places of Script. Part. 2. Hom. of almes deeds. Part. 2. whose hearts God hath purified by true faith. God of his speciall favour toward them whom he hath appointed to salvation, hath so offered his grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that the spirit of God mightily working in them now un∣to obedience to Gods will, they declare by their life and good deeds (which cannot come, but of the Spi∣rit of God, and his especiall grace) that they are the undoubted children of God appointed to everlasting life. All spirituall gifts and graces come specially from God. Sermon for Rogat. week. Part. 3. Faith is the gift of God, and by his power we are kept through faith unto salvation. We shall never be able to avoyd sinne without the speciall grace of him, Sermon of Repentance. Part. 2. Ioh. 15. Now. Cat. quest. 150. that doth say, without me ye can do nothing. All those whom God hath chosen, he hath resto∣red unto holinesse of life and innocency.
CHAP. IIII. Of Gods work in infants. IT is evident out of the first Chapter, that men are as dead to God by nature as infants, and as unable to repent and beleeve: Now chil∣dren are not spiritually quickned by power of any morall swasion, but by an effectuall divine operation, as the books in sundry places affirme. SAnctifie these children and wash them with the holy Ghost. Publike Baptisme. Prayer. 1. We call upon thee for these infants, that they com∣ing to thy holy Baptisme, Prayer. 2. may receive remission of their sins by spirituall regeneration. O mercifull God grant, The short prayers af∣ter the pro∣mise made by the sure∣ties. that the old man in these children may be so buryed, that the new man may be raised up in them. Grant that all carnall affections may die in them, and that all things belonging to the Spirit, may live and grow in them. Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our office and ministry, may also be endued with heavenly vertues.
CHAP. V. Of the giving of internall grace to men. THose places that affirme, that God gives grace, as faith and repentance and the like, prove that God doth more then perswade ex∣ternally, or give some power, that men may beleeve or repent, because they say, that God gives the things themselves. God is not the giver of that which we attain to only by his perswasion, nor chiefly to be commended for it, but he that attains to it: as on the con∣trary, the devill was not the authour of Adams sinne, nor chiefly to be condemned for it, because he did but perswade him to it, Adams own will did it, and himself was most to be blamed for it. So in all Logick and Law the actour is the principall, the Counsellers are instruments and acces∣saries. And Kings were ever held above their Councell, and more praise worthy for doing well, then they for advi∣sing. Now that God gives us those graces, let us heare out of the Records. Lord from whom all good things doe come. Collect. 5. Sunday af-Easter. Collect. 7. Sunday af∣ter Trinity. Sunday 23. Prayer. 1. in Matrim. Lords pray∣er by D. Cox Lord which art the author and giver of all good things. God the author of all godlinesse. O eternall God giver of all spirituall grace the au∣thor of everlasting life. Thine Holy Ghost into us poure with all his gifts most plenteously. See more to the same purpose in the Homily for Roga∣tion
weeke, Part. 1.2.3. Now. Cat. quest. 249. O God from whom all holy desires, Even. pray. Coll. 2. all good coun∣sailes, and all just works doe proceed. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Councell, and all the Nobility with grace. The Letany The Letany Also, Coll. 13. after Trin. That it may please thee to give to all thy people encrease of grace to heare meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. Thou in thy gifts art manifold, Come holy Ghost eter∣nall God. whereby Christs Church doth stand: In faithfull hearts writing thy law, the finger of Gods hand. Wee beseech him to grant us true repentance. Absolution. Short pray∣after the Creede. Coll. Quin. sunday. Coll. 7. sun. after Trin. Prayer for Church mil. Reason 2. of Confirm. Indue thy Ministers with righteousnesse. Send thy Holy Ghost, and poure into our hearts that most excellent gift of charity. Graffe in our hearts the love of thy name. Inspire continually the universall Church with the Spirit of truth, unity and concord. Confirmation is ministred to them, that be bapti∣sed, that by imposition of hands, and prayer they may receive strength, and defence against all temp∣tations to sinne, and the assaults of the world and the devill. Arme and make strong thy feeble hoast, Lords pray. by D. Coxe. with faith, and with the Holy Ghost. Every good and heavenly gift, as faith, hope, Hom. of fast Part. 2. cha∣rity, cometh onely, and solely of God. God give us grace to follow Christs example in peace and charity, in patience and sufferance. Pass. Ser. 1. Thou hast received Christs body to have within Resur. serm.
thee the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost for to dwell with thee, to endow thee with grace to streng then thee against thine enemies. By the assistance of Gods holy Spirit we be re∣plenished with all righteousnesse, In the same place. by his power we are able to subdue all our evill affections. God is present in his chosen all whole in Majestie together with all his power, In the same place. wisdome, and goodnes. From God as from a giver, In the same place. Hom. for Whitsun∣day. come these graces and gifts, kindnesse, meeknesse, patience. Some men will say, How shall I know, that the Holy Ghost is within me? As the tree is knowne by the fruit, so is also the Holy Ghost. The fruits of the Holy Ghost are love, Part. 1. joy, peace, long suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faithfulnesse, meeknesse, temperance. Of our selves we be crabbe-trees, Hom. of mans mise∣ry. Part. 2. that can bring forth no apples. We be of our selves of such earth, as can but bring forth weeds, nettles, brambles, bry∣ers, cockle and darnell. Our fruits be declared, Gal. 5. We have neither faith, charity, hope, patience, chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of God, and therefore these vertues be called there the fruits of the Holy Ghost, and not the fruits of man. We ought first to crave things that properly be∣long to the salvation of the soule, Hom. of prayer. Part. 3. as the gift of re∣pentance, the gift of faith, the gift of charity and good works, patience, lowlinesse, hope, joy, love, peace, which things God requireth of all those that professe themselves his children. This holy company (of Saints in heaven) confes∣seth constantly, Rogat. serm. Part. 1. that all the goods and graces, where∣with
with they were endued in soule, came of the goodnes of God onely. It is meet therefore to thinke, that all spirituall goodnesse cometh from God above onely. We must needs agree, In the same place. that whatsoever good thing is in us of grace, nature or fortune, is of God onely, as the onely author and worker. Let us confesse that of our selves cometh all evill and damnation, Hom. of mans mise∣ry. Part. 2. Rogat. serm. Part. 2. and of God all goodnesse and salva∣tion. If we confesse that all grace of the soule is of God, and is his gift onely, it will teach us to thank God for them: it will abate our pride, when we perceive, that nothing comes of our selves, but sinne and vice: it will keepe us from despising such as have fewer gifts: it will make us to have recourse to God for all grace. CHAP. VI. Of the receiving of grace. IF by another speciall grace of God, we doe re∣ceive the grace and favour, that God offers us in his holy word, then there is no question, but God doth worke effectually, where he doth regenerate. Let us therefore heare, what the Church teacheth us in that behalfe. ALmighty God give us the grace, Coll. Sund. 2. after Easter. Coll. S. Andrews day. that we may al∣wayes most thankfully receive that his inestima∣ble benefit, to wit, of the death of Christ. Almighty God which didst give such grace unto
thy holy Apostle S. Andrew, that he readily obeyed the calling of thy Sonne Jesus Christ, and followed him without delay: grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy word, may forthwith give over our selves obediently to follow thy holy commande∣ments through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Grant us grace to follow thy sonne Jesus Christ. Coll. S. Matthews day. Prayer for Church militant. Prayer 3. in Confirm. To all thy people give thy heavenly grace, and specially to this congregation here present, that with meek heart and due reverence they may heare and receive thy holy word. Let thy fatherly hand we beseech thee, ever be over these children, let thy holy Spirit ever be with them, and so lead them in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may obtaine the ever∣lasting life. Send thy heavenly blessing so upon these thy ministers, Prayer last in ord. of Priests. that thy word spoken by their mouthes may have such successe, that it may never be spoken in vaine. Grant also that we may have grace to heare and receive the same, as thy most holy word. By faith given us of God we imbrace the promise of Gods mercy, Serm. of Salvation. Part. 3. Hom. for Whitsun∣day. Part. 1. and of the remission of our sinnes. Let us humbly beseech God so to worke in our hearts by the power of his holy Spirit, that we being regenerate and newly borne againe in all goodnesse, righteousnesse, sobriety, and truth, may in the end obtaine eternall life. God of his great mercy so work in all mens hearts by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, Part. 2. that the Gospell may be truely preached, truely received, and truely followed in all places.
By the worke of the Holy Ghost we receive this grace of God, whereunto we are restored. Now. Cat. quest. 149. CHAP. VII. Of the internall effect of grace. THE books attribute the internall effects of grace to God also. For howsoever that grace that is given us in regeneration have some power to produce spirituall thoughts; yet because our spi∣rituall life is not so compleat, as our naturall life, and is much hindred from good inclinations by the corruptions of our flesh remaining, so that it cannot do that good it would without a fresh supply of Gods assisting grace, therefore the help of God is still implored, and the praise of the effect given to him. Now if in a man regenerate there be need of more grace to help that act, which he hath already, then certainly the first work of grace, whereby a dead man is made alive spiritually, must needs be the only effectuall work of Gods Spirit. For if he cannot thinke what he would, now he hath grace, at all times without further help, then certainly before he had grace, he could do no∣thing pleasing to God. This head of the internall effects of grace is the largest of all the rest. We will therefore di∣vide it into two parts. First, we will treat of the inter∣nall effect of Gods grace in generall in the regenerate. Secondly, of the particular effects of it. For the First. The effect of grace in generall is set down in these places. O God from whom all holy desires, Collect. 2. Even. Pray. all good coun∣sels and all just works do proceed.
That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Counsell, Letany. and all the Nobilitie with grace. That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, Letany. to heare meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. O God from whom all good things do proceed. Coll. Sund. 5. after Ea∣ster. Sund. 7. af∣ter Trin. Sunday 13. after Trin. Coll. Sund. 23. after Trin. Prayer 1. in Matrim. Veni Crea∣tor. O God the Authour and giver of all good things. Almightie and mercifull God, of whose onely gift it cometh, that thy faithfull people do unto thee true and laudable service. God our refuge and strength, which art the au∣thour of all godlinesse. O eternall God giver of all spirituall grace, the authour of everlasting life. Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christs Church doth stand: In faithfull hearts writing the law, the finger of Gods hand. Thine holy Ghost into us poure, Lords pray. by D. Coxe. with all his gifts most plenteously. Whatsoever is good proceedeth from God as from the principall fountain, Rogat. Ser. Part. 1. and the only authour. All good things come down to us from above from the Father of light. The Title of the Sermon is, That all good things cometh from God. In Christ God the Father doth blesse us with all spirituall and heavenly gifts. Part. 3. God is the giver of all good things. Now. Cat. quest. 249. The particular effects of grace are seene either in mor∣tifying of vice, or exercising of vertue in the heart. I will
begin with those places that speake of mortifying of vice. Almightie God mortifie and kill all vices in us. Coll. Innoc. day. Cat. in the Common Prayer book quest. 15.18 Complaint of a sinner. A Sacrament is an externall and visible sign, of an internall and spirituall grace given unto us. This grace in Baptisme is a dying unto sinne, and living unto righteousnesse. Now let those drops most sweet So moist my heart most dry, That I with finne replete May live and sinne may dye, That being mortifide This sinne of mine in mee, I may be sanctifide By grace of thine in thee, So that I never fall Into such mortall sinne, That my foes infernall Rejoyce my death therein: But vouchsafe me to keep From those infernall foes, And from that lake so deep, Whereas no mercy growes. Make us to follow the doctrin of Iohn the Baptist, Coll. on S. Iohn Bapt. day. Prayer 1. added to Set. Fast. 1625. Prayer. 4. Thanksg. for ceasing plague, 1604. that we may truly repent according to his preaching. Give us thy heavenly grace, that we may truly and earnestly repent. As thou gavest the Ninivites repentance through thy grace, so now visit the hearts of thy people in this land with thine heavenly grace and holy Spirit, that they may speedily and soundly return unto thee from all their wicked wayes, in true repentance and a li∣ving faith in Jesus Christ.
See the like in the Evening prayers set forth in the rainy weather, 1613. Homily of falling from God. Part. 2. Homily against wilfull rebellion. Part. 1. Collect. 1. in Thanksgiving. Novemb. 5. and the next prayer there: Grant us the true circumcision of the Spirit, Collect. on Circumcis. of Christ. that our hearts and all our members being mortified from all worldly and carnall lusts, may in all things obey thy blessed will. Grant us so to put away the leaven of malice and wickednesse, Coll. on Ea∣ster tuesday. that we may alwayes serve thee in pure∣nesse of living and truth. Grant that we forsaking all worldly and carnall affections, Coll. on S. Iames day. may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments. To withstand Satans invasion Give power and strength to every age. Lords Pr. by D. Cox. Prayer to the holy Ghost before the Serm. Coll. before Epis. Fast. 1625. Thanksgi∣ving follow∣ing. Coll. 1. Prayer. 2. There after the Gospel. Prayer a∣gainst rebel. in the Hom. Cain Com. Pray. book. quest. 24. O holy Ghost visit our coast, Defend us with thy shield: Against all sinne and wickednesse, Lord help us win the field. Create and make new hearts within us O Lord. Give unto us such effectuall grace, that every one of us beholding the plague of his own heart, we may abhorre our corruptions, and turn our selves away from our evill wayes. Give us grace that we may not any more provoke thine indignation against us by our transgressions. Make soft and tender the stony hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy truth. Our soules are strengthened and refreshed with the body and bloud of Christ, as our bodies are with bread and wine.
By the strength of the holy Ghost sinfull flesh is subdued and tamed, Now. Cat. quest. 144. and corrupt desires are brideled and restrained. We pray that God will with the moving of his ho∣ly Spirit, Quest. 208. so change and fashion all the wils of us all to the will of his Majestie, that we may will or wish nothing, that his divine will misliketh. Thus much for the effects of grace in mortifying of vice, now follow those that belong to the execu∣ting vertue in the soul. That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, Letany. and diligently to live after thy com∣mandments. By thy speciall grace preventing us, Collect. on Easter day. Sund. 4. af∣ter Easter. thou dost put into our hearts good desires. Almightie God which dost make the minds of all faithfull men to be of one will, grant unto thy peo∣ple, that they may love the thing, which thou com∣mandest, and desire that which thou dost promise. Grant us thy humble servants, Coll. Sund. 5. after Ea∣ster. Sund. 3. af∣ter Trinity. Sund. 6. af∣ter Trinity. that by thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be good. Lord to whom thou hast given an hearty desire to pray. O God poure into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving thee in all things may obtaine thy promises. That thy servants may obtaine their petitions, Sund. 10. af∣ter Trinity. make them to aske such things as shall please thee. Grant we beseech thee, Sunday 13. that we may so run to thy heavenly promises, that we raile not finally to attain the same. That we may obtaine that which thou dost pro∣mise, Sunday 14.
make us to love that which thou dost com∣mand. Grant thy people grace with pure heart and minde to follow thee the onely God. Sund. 18. Grant we beseech thee unto thy Church to love that he beleeved. Coll. on S. Barthol. day. Coll. on Sim and Iudes day. Prayer at begin. of Commande∣ments. Prayer af∣ter each command. After the last com∣mandement. Prayer of the Priest in the name of the commu∣nicants. Prayer. 2. after receiv∣ing the communion. Prayer. 2. in the short ones after the commu∣nion. Prayer. 3. Grant us so to be joyned together in unity of Spi∣rit by their doctrine, that we may be an holy Temple acceptable to thee. Cleanse our hearts that we may perfectly love thee and worthily magnify thy holy name. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keepe this law. Lord write all these thy lawes in our hearts we be∣seech thee. Grant us therefore gracious Lord so to eate the flesh of thy deare Sonne Jesus Christ, and to drinke his bloud, that our sinfull bodies may be made clean by his body, and our soules washed through his most precious bloud. We most humbly besech thee O heavenly Father so to assist us with thy grace, that we may continue in that holy fellowship. O Almighty Lord and everliving God, vouch∣safe, we beseech thee to direct, sanctifie, and govern, both our hearts and bodies in the wayes of thy lawes, and in the works of thy Commandements. Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that, the words which we have heard this day with our out∣ward eares, may through thy grace be so graffed in∣wardly in our hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruit of good living.
Sanctify and wash these children with the Holy Ghost, Prayer. 1. in Baptisme. that they being delivered from thy wrath may be received into the Arke of Christs Church, & being stedfast in faith, joyfull through hope, and rooted in charity, may so passe the waves of this troublesome world, that finally they may come to the land of e∣verlasting life. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, Cat in com∣mon prayer booke quest. 13. who is the giver of all goodnes, to send his grace unto me, and to all people that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to doe. Daily increase in these thy servants, Prayer. 1. in confirm. thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdome and understand∣ing, the spirit of counsaile, and ghostly strength, the spirit of knowledge and true godlinesse, and fulfill them, O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy feare. Almighty and everliving God, Prayer. 3. which makest us both to will and to doe those things, that be good and acceptable unto thy Majesty. The Lord so fill you with all spirituall benediction and grace, that you may so live together in this life, The Bless∣ing in mar∣riage. that in the world to come, you may have life ever∣lasting. Send thy blessing upon these thy servants, Prayer. 2. in Matrim. that they obeying thy will, and alwayes being in safety, under thy protection, may abide in thy love to their lives end. Grant that this man may love his wife according to thy word, Prayer. 4. and also that this woman may be a fol∣lower of holy and godly Matrons. Almighty God poure upon you the riches of his grace, sanctifie and blesse you, Prayer. 5. in Matrim. that ye may please
him both in body and soule, and live together in holy love unto your lives end. Give this thy servant grace so to take thy visitati∣on, Prayer 2. in visita. of the sicke. Prayer 3. that after this painfull life ended, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting. Renew in this thy servant (most loving Father) whatsoever hath been decayed by the fraud and ma∣lice of the Devill, or by his owne carnall will and frailenesse. Thou most worthy Judge eternall, Sentence. 4. in the buri∣all. Last prayer in buriall. suffer us not at our last houre for any paines of death to fall from thee. We meekly beseech thee (O Father) to raise us from the death of sin unto the life of righteousnesse. O Holy Ghost Visit our mindes and unto us, Veni Crea∣tor Spiri∣tus. thy heavenly grace inspire: That in all truth, and godlinesse, we may have true desire. To us such plenty of thy grace, In the same bymne. good Lord grant we thee pray: That thou mayst be our comforter, at the last dreadfull day. Grant we pray not with lips alone, Lords pray. by D. Coxe. Prayer last in order Deacons. But with the hearts deepe sigh and grove. Make these Deacons to be modest, humble, and constant in their ministration, to have a ready will to observe all spirituall discipline, that they continuing ever stable and strong in thy Sonne Christ, may well use themselves in this office. Almighty God our heavenly Father, Prayer. 2. in Consecr. of Bishops. who hath given you a good-will to doe all these things, &c.
Governe us by thy holy Spirit to frame in us a newnesse of life therein to laud and magnifie thy blessed name, for ever, Prayers in the fast. 1625. Coll. 1. and to live every one of us according to the severall state of life, whereunto thou Lord hast ordained us in godly feare, and trembling before thee. Grant us grace, and true repentance, stedfast faith, Prayers in the fast. 1625. Coll. 1. and constant patience, that whither we live or die, we may alwayes continue thine, and ever praise thy holy name, and by thy great mercy be pertakers of grace in this life, & eternall glory in the life to come. Grant us a due care and conscience in our selves to use all good meanes of recovery: Prayer. 6. added to the Letany. that neither we tempt thy Majesty by presumption in contemning of the contagion; or neglecting of the meanes of avoid∣ing, removing and repressing the same: neither de∣spaire of thy goodnesse, or murmure against the pro∣vidence (if we be not so soone eased and delivered as we desire) but that we may (submitting our selves, in all things to thy good will and pleasure) seeke thy mercifull favour for our release and succour, by true faith and repentance: use the meanes for ease, which thou givest us with care and diligence: helpe the af∣flicted and preserve the whole with compassionate pitty and charity: and finally depend upon thy provi∣dence, and waite for thy gracious deliverance with constant hope and patience. Send us light in our understanding, Prayers in the fast. 1626. Pray. 1. added to Letany. Art. 10. readinesse and obedience in our will. We can doe nothing pleasing to God without Gods grace through Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have a good will.
In the man that is born again the understanding is inlightned, Rogers on that Art. Prop. 3. and the minde wholly changed, and the body is made able to produce good works. They that are predestinated are both justified by faith, Prop. 7. on Art. 17. and sanctified by the Spirit, and shall be glorifi∣ed in the life to come. Grant that the King may through thy grace in all honour, Prayer for March 27.1. Pr. added to Letany. Last prayer save one. vertue, and godlinesse, continue his glori∣ous reigne over us many yeers. Blesse the Kings royall allyance with the dew of thy heavenly Spirit, that they ever trusting in thy goodnesse, and protected by thy power, may after death obtain eternall glory. The Scriptures have power to turn through Gods promise, Hom. of ex∣hort. to read Script. Part. 1. In the same place. Part. 2. and be effectuall through Gods assistance. In reading Gods word he profits most, that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the holy Ghost. Read not the Scriptures without daily praying to God, that he would direct your reading to good effect. In the same place. Ser. of Salu. Part. 1. In the same place. Serm. of Truth. Part. 1. Sermon a∣gainst adul∣tery. In the same place. Let us pray to God, that we may speak, think, be∣leeve, live, and depart hence according to the whol∣some doctrin of the Scriptures. True faith is not ours, but by Gods working in us. A true and lively faith is the gift of God. God gave the Fathers then grace to be his chil∣dren, as he doth us now. We are sanctified and made holy by the blood of Christ through the holy Ghost. God grant that these words against adultery may not be spoken in vain.
God by his holy word indueth his people assem∣bled in his Church, Hom. of right use of Church. with the effectuous presence of his heavenly grace. God doth indue his people assembled in his Church, Hom. a∣gainst perill of idol. Part. 1. with the effectuall presence of his grace by his word and promises to the attainment of worldly commodities, and all heavenly gifts, and life ever∣lasting. God vouchsafe to purifie our minds through faith in Christ, Hom. of in∣form of such as take of∣fence at some places of Script. Part. 2. & to instill the heavenly drops of his grace into our hard-stony hearts to supple the same, that we be not contemners and deriders of his word, but that with all humblenesse of minde and Christian re∣verence, we may indeavour our selves to heare and to read his sacred Scriptures, and inwardly, so to di∣gest them, as shall be to the comfort of our soules, and sanctification of his holy Name. Man is first made good by the Spirit and grace of God, that effectually worketh in him, Hom. of Almsdeeds. Part. 2. Hom. of Almsdeeds. Part. 2. In the same place. In the same place. and afterwards bringeth forth good fruits. The grace of God worketh all in all. Whatsoever can be named good and profitable for body or soule, comes only of Gods mercy and meere favour, and not of our selves. God attributes that unto us, and to our doings, that he by his Spirit worketh in us, and through his grace procureth for us. God grant that we may alwayes shew our selves thankfull for Christs death, Passion. Sermon. 2. abhorring all kinde of wickednesse, and applying our minds wholly to the service of God, and the diligent keeping of his com∣mandments.
It is Gods Spirit which ingendreth a burning zeale towards Gods word. Hom. for Whitsun∣day. Part. 1. In the same place. In the same place. Nicodemus knew not the power of the holy Ghost in this behalfe, that it is he which inwardly worketh the Regeneration, and new birth of mankinde. It is the holy Ghost and no other thing that doth quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and god∣ly motions in their hearts, which otherwise of their own crooked and perverse nature they should never have. The fruits of faith, In the same place. charitable and godly motions, if man have any at all in him, they proceed onely of the holy Ghost, who is the only worker of our sancti∣fication, and maketh us new men in Christ Jesus. The Spirit of Jesus is a good Spirit, Part. 2. an holy Spirit, a lowly Spirit, a mercifull Spirit. If any man live up∣rightly, he hath the holy Ghost within him. If the Saints in heaven were asked, Serm. for Rogat. week. Part. 1. who should be thanked for their regeneration, justification, and sal∣vation, they would answer with David. Not to us Lord, but to thy Name give all the thanks. If they be asked, In the same place. whence came all their glorious works, they would say with Esay, O Lord it is thou of thy goodnesse, that hast wrought all our works in us, not we our selves. They be justitiaries and hypocrites, In the same place. which rob Almightie God of this honour, and ascribe it to themselves. Let us confesse, Serm. for Rogat. week Part. 2. that all spirituall graces behove∣able for our soule come from God, without whose goodnesse no man is called to faith or stayed therein. God grant us all grace so to heare his word that we may fulfill it. In the same place.
God give us grace to know those things, Part. 3. and to feele them in our hearts. This knowledge and feel∣ing is not in our selfe: by our selfe it is not possi∣ble to come by it. Let us therefore meekly call upon the Holy Ghost, that he would assist us and inspire us with his presence, that in him we may be able to heare our salvation. For without his lively and secret inspiration we cannot so much as name Christ. Much lesse should we be able to beleeve. In Gods Spirit shall we be meet vessels to receive the grace of Almighty God: In the same place. for it is he that purgeth and purifieth the minde by his secret working. He sitteth in the tongue of man to stirre him to speake his honour. He onely ministreth spirituall strength to the powers of our soule and body. It is Gods Spi∣rit, that maketh us to hold the way, which God hath prepared for us, and to pray boldly to God. If any gift we have, whereby we may worke to the glory of God, and profit of our neighbour, all is wrought by this Spirit. The holy Spirit will confirme us in all things. In the same place. Hom. of Matrim. Married persons must crave continually of God, the helpe of his holy Spirit so to rule their hearts, and to knit their minds together, that they be not dis∣severed by any division of discord. It is God that worketh in us both the will, Serm. of Repen. Part. 1. and the deed. Phil. 2. For this cause although Ieremy had said before, If thou returne O Israel, returne unto me, saith the Lord, yet afterwards he saith, Turne thou me O Lord, & I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord try God. Ier. 6. And therefore that holy writer and ancient Father Ambrose doth plainely affirme, that
the turning of the heart to God is of God. Ambros. de vocat. gent. lib. 8. cap. 9. As the Lord himselfe doth testifie by his Prophet, saying, And I will give thee an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, for they shall returne unto me with their whole heart. God vouchsafe by his holy Spirit to worke a true and unfained repentance in us. In the same place. If we repent, Hom. a∣gainst wil∣full rebell. Part. 1. Next pray. after Coll. Nove. 5. Now. Cat. quest. 43. quest. 128. God will either take away evill Prin∣ces, or of evill make them good. Make us now and alwayes truly thankfull in heart, word, and deed, for all thy gracious mercies, and this our speciall deliverance. We must on the Sabbath rest from our own works, and yeeld our selves wholly to Gods governance, that he may doe his workes in us. From Christs resurrection cometh unto us an en∣deavour, vertue, and strength to live well and holily. Christ indueth us with strength by the vertue and power of his resurrection to rise from the deadly workes of sinne, quest. 129. and live to righteousnesse. The Spirit of God is called holy, quest. 142. for that by him the elect of God and the members of Christ are made holy: for which cause the scriptures have cal∣led him the spirit of sanctification. It is onely God which strengthneth man and by whose grace the sinner conceiveth this hope, quest. 164. minde, and will. Christ with the inspiration and vertue of the Holy Ghost doth regenerate and newly forme us to the endeavour of innocency and holinesse, quest. 173. which we call newnesse of life.
Faith is the gift of God, quest. 180. and a singular and excel∣lent gift. The Holy Ghost hath wrought faith in my heart by the preaching of the Gospel. quest. 249. CHAP. VIII. Of the purification of the heart. MOrall perswasion goes before any intent in man to purifie his owne heart. If then this latter act of purifying the heart, which must necessarily follow the intention of purg∣ing be attributed to God, then must he needs doc more in the cenversion of a sinner then morally to perswade him to purge his owne heart. Now that this act is ascribed to God, the bookes can witnesse. O God make cleane our hearts within us. Short pray∣ers after the Creed. Letany. From all blindnesse of heart, from pride, vaine∣glory, and hypocrisy, from envy hatred and malice, Good Lord deliver us. Grant us the true circumcision of the Spirit, Coll. on cir∣cumcision of Christ. that our hearts being mortified from all worldly and car∣nall lusts, &c. Create and make in us new and contrite hearts. Coll. 1. day of Lent. Coll. 3. on good Fri∣day. Coll. on Tuesday in Easter. Have mercy upon all Jews, Turkes, Infidels, and Hereticks, and take from them all ignorance, hard∣nesse of heart, and contempt of thy word. Grant us so to put away the leaven of malice and wickednesse, that we may, &c.
Grant that we may be presented to thee with pure and cleane mindes. Collect. on the Purif. of the virgin S. Mary. Coll. on S. Matthews day. Coll. on S. Lukes day. Hom. of In∣form. of them which take offence &c. Part. 2. end. Serm. for Rogat. week Part. 3. Grant us grace to forsake all covetous desires, and inordinate love of riches. May it please thee by the wholesome medicines of Lukes doctrine, to heale all the diseases of our soules. God therefore for his mercies sake vouchsafe to purifie our mindes through faith in his Sonne Jesus Christ, and to instill the heavenly drops of his grace into our hard stony hearts to supple the same, that we be not contemners and deriders of his infallible word. In Gods Spirit shall we be meet vessels to receive the grace of Almighty God. For it is he that purgeth and purifieth the minde by his secret working. CHAP. IX. Of the externall effect of grace. IF the externall effects of grace come not alto∣gether from the spirituall power put into us at the first, nor from the perswasions of the Mi∣nisters, but God is said to worke in us the deed as well as the will to doe well, and we taught to pray to God for such effectuall grace, as may pro∣duce good effects outwardly, then it follows that the grace it self cannot be wrought in us onely by morall perswasion, but must be wrought in us by divine operation. Now whither the outward effects of grace be wrought by Gods assisting spirit or no, let the authentick records of our Church speak.
O Lord open thou our lips, Short pray∣ers after the Lords Pr. Letany. and our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. That all Bishops, Pastours, and Ministers of the Church, may both by their preaching and living, set forth and shew true knowledge and understanding. That it may please thee to give the Magistrates grace to execute Justice, and to maintain truth. Letany. That it may please thee to give us an heart dili∣gently to live after thy commandements. Letany. That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace to heare meekly thy word, Letany. and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. That it may please thee to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, Letany. to amend our lives according to thy holy word. Grant that we evermore serve thee in holinesse and purenesse of living. Prayer in the Letany before the prayer for the King. Prayer for the King. Prayer for the Bishops. Coll. on 1. Sund. after Epiph. Coll. on 5. Sund. after Epiph. Coll. on 1. Sunday in Lent. Coll. on Sun. before East. So replenish the King with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may alway walk in thy way. That Bishops and Curats, and all Congregations committed to their charge may truly please thee, poure upon them the continuall dew of thy blessing. Grant that thy people which call upon thee, may have grace and power faithfully to fulfill what they know, they ought to do. Lord we beseech thee to keep thy Church conti∣nually in the true Religion. Give us grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we may ever obey thy godly motions. Mercifully grant that we both follow the example of Christs patience.
Receive our prayers, 2. Coll. on good Friday that every member of thy holy Congregation in his vocation, and ministry may truly and godly serve thee. As by thy speciall grace preventing us, Collect. on Easter day. thou didst put in our minde good desires, So we beseech that by thy continuall help we may bring the same to good effect. Grant that we may daily endeavour our selves, Coll. on 2. Sund. after Easter. Coll. on 3. Sund. after Easter. Coll. on 1. Sunday af∣ter Trinity. to follow the blessed steps of Christs most holy life. Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fel∣lowship of Christs religion, that they may follow all such things as be agreeable to their profession. Because the weaknes of our mortall nature can do no good thing without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy commandments we may please thee both in will and deed. Grant us Lord we beseech thee, Coll. on 9. Sund. after Trinity. the Spirit to think and do alwayes such things as be rightfull, that we which cannot be without thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy will. Almightie and mercifull God of whose onely gift it cometh, Coll. on 13. Sund. after Trinitie. that thy faithfull people do unto thee true and laudable service. Because the frailtie of man without thee cannot but fall, Coll. on 15. Sund. after Trinity. Coll. on 17. Sund. after Trinity. lead us to all things profitable to our salva∣tion. Lord we pray thee that thy grace may alwayes prevent, and follow us, and make us continually to be given to all goods works. Lord we beseech thee to keep the Church in con∣tinuall godlinesse, Coll. on 22. Sund. after Trinity. that it may be devoutly given to serve thee in good works.
Grant unto us all, Coll. on S. Andr. day. that we being called by thy holy word, may forthwith give over our selves obedient∣ly to fulfill thy holy commandements. Grant that we may follow thy holy doctrin that Saint Paul taught. Coll. on Convers. of S. Paul. Coll. on S. Barn. Let us not be destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of grace to use them alway to thy honour and glory. Make us so follow the doctrine, Coll. on S. Iohn Bapt. and holy life of Saint Iohn Baptist, that we may truly repent, and con∣stantly speak the truth, boldly rebuke vice and pati∣ently suffer for the truths sake. Make we beseech thee all Bishops and Pastours di∣ligently to preach thy holy word, Coll. on S. Peter. and the people o∣bediently to follow the same. Grant that we forsaking all worldly and carnall af∣fections, Coll. on S. Iames. may be evermore ready to follow thy com∣mandements. Grant us grace to follow thy holy Saints in all ver∣tuous and godly living. Collect. on All Saints. Prayer af∣ter every command. Ser. against perill of idol. 2. Part. Serm con∣cerning Pr. 1. Part. 1. Part. of Serm. for Rog. week. In the same place. Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this law. Let us beseech God that we may flee from all ido∣latry. God for his great mercy sake so work in our hearts by his holy Spirit, that we may alwayes make our humble prayers unto him as we ought to do. Let us call upon the father of mercy, that we may be assisted with the presence of his holy Spirit, and demeane our selves in speaking and hearing to the salvation of our souls. If we should aske the Saints in heaven, whence
came their glorious works which they wrought in their lives, Esay saith, O Lord it is thou of thy good∣nesse, that hast wrought all works in us. Grant that this thy rod, Prayers for the Fast. 1625. 2. Prayer added in the Letany. Thanksgi∣ving. 1625. Collect. 1. In the same book. 3. Prayer after the Gospel. may by thy heavenly grace speedily work in us the fruit and effect of true repen∣tance, unfainedly turning and converting unto thee, and perfect amendment of our whole lives. Give us such effectuall grace, that we looking eve∣ry one of us into the plague of his own heart, may abhorre our own corruptions, and turn from our evill wayes. We most humbly beseech thee to poure thy heavenly grace into our hearts, that we may learn to turn unto thee from our wicked wayes. CHAP. X. Of Gods governing us. SEeing after we are regenerated and have spi∣rituall life wrought in us, we still need Gods help to govern us, it must needs follow that being spiritually dead by nature, we could not be made alive by a morall swasion, but by a powerfull work of God. That we still need Gods governing grace, appeares by authorised books. GRant that our doings may be ordered by thy go∣vernance, Morning Prayer. Coll. 3. to do alwayes that is righteous in thy sight. We beseech thee, Coll. on 5. Sunday in Lent. that by thy great goodnesse thy people may be governed and preserved ever∣more both in body and soul.
Lord from whom all good things do come, Coll. on 5. Sund. after Easter. grant us thy humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy mercifull guiding may performe the same. Lord make us to have a perpetuall feare and love of thy holy name, Coll. on 2. Sund. after Trinity. for thou never failest to help and govern them, whom thou dost bring up in thy sted∣fast love. Grant that the course of this world may be so or∣dered by thy governance, Coll. on 5. Sund. after Trinity. that thy congregation may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietnesse. O Almightie Lord everliving God vouchsafe, Short Pray. after Com. Prayer 2. we beseech thee to direct, sanctifie and govern both our hearts and bodies in the wayes of thy laws, and in the works of thy commandements. Defend, O Lord, Prayer in Confirm. Hom. of Matrim. this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever Married persons must crave the help of Gods Spi∣rit so to rule their hearts, that their minds be not de∣severed. Use oft prayer to God, In the same Hom. that he would be present by you, that he would continue concord and chari∣tie betwixt you. We pray that God by his holy Spirit would illumi∣nate and govern the hearts of all such, Now. Cat. quest. 206. as be of his Cuurch, wherein he reigneth specially, as in his king∣dome. As thou hast by Gods guiding, quest. 251. first conceived this minde and will, so shalt thou by his grace attain to a happy end of this thy godly study and indeavour.
CHAP. XI. Of Gods preserving us in godlinesse, and from sinne. AS the power of God manifests it selfe at first in regenerating us, so may it evidently be dis∣cerned afterwards in resisting Satans temp∣tations and keeping us in the wayes of piety. If an effectuall worke of God be sometimes needfull to keepe us from grosse idolatry in heavy tempta∣tions, then is it much more needfull to keepe us from evill thoughts, and in pious meditations with delight. Our flesh is quickly weary of good wayes and easily inclining to evill after we are regenerate. If now besides the strength of that working grace, which God put into us at first there be need of an effectuall helpe of grace still: then was there at first, when we were able to doe nothing, need not of a stocke, that we might use well or ill, but of an effectuall work of grace, to worke faith and repentance in us. Now what need we have of Gods preserving helpe let the bookes speake. VOuchsafe, Te Deum. O Lord, to keepe us this day without sinne. From all evill and mischiefe, Letany. from sinne, from the crafts and assaults of the devill, from thy wrath and from everlasting damnation. Good Lord deliver us. From all blindnesse of heart, from pride, vaine∣glory, and hypocrisie, from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitablenesse.
Good Lord deliver us. From fornication, and all other deadly sinne, and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devill. Good Lord deliver us. That it may please thee to keepe and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee in righteousnesse and holinesse of life thy servant, Letany. Charles our most gracious King and Governour. Lord make us to have a perpetuall feare and love of thy holy name. Coll. Sund. 2. after Trin. Sund. 7. Nourish us with all goodnesse, and of thy great mercy keepe us in the same. Lord we beseech thee grant thy people grace to avoid the infections of the devill. Sund. 18. Lord we beseech thee to keepe thy houshold the Church in continuall godlinesse. Sund. 22. Almighty God confirme and strengthen you in all goodnesse. Absolv. at the Com∣munion. Cat in book of Com. Pr. quest. 13. Pr. 3. in vis. of the sicke. Veni Crea∣tor. I pray unto God, that it will please him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keepe us from all sinne and wickednesse. Preserve and continue this sicke member in the unity of thy Church. Strength and stablish all our weaknesse so feeble and so fraile, That neither flesh the world nor devill against us doe prevaile. In the same hymne. And grant, O Lord, that thou being our leader and our guide: We may eschew the snares of sinne, and from thee never slide.
Onely thy grace must be my stay Humble suit of sin. least that I fall downe flat, And being downe, then of my selfe cannot recover that. Lord keepe our King and his councell, Prayer to the Holy Ghost before Serm. Hom. of faith. Part. 3. Hom. of In∣form. of them which take offence &c. Part. 1. In the same place. and give them will and might To persevere in thy Gospel, which can put sinne to flight. It is God that must be our defence and protection against all temptation of wickednesse and sinne. Noah and Lot godly men, which otherwise felt in∣wardly Gods holy Spirit inflaming them in their hearts with the feare and love of God, could not by their owne strength keepe themselves from com∣mitting horrible sinnes. We must therefore acknowledge our owne infir∣mity and weaknesse, and pray more earnestly to God incessantly for his grace to strengthen us and to de∣fend us from all evill. It is of the goodnesse of God, Serm. for Rogat. week Part. 3. that we faint not in our hope unto him. It is verily Gods worke in us, the charity wherewith we love our brethren. If after our fall we repent, it is by him that we repent, which reacheth forth his mercifull hand to raise us up. If a∣ny will we have to rise, it is he that preventeth our will, and disposeth us thereto. Pray God to defend and maintaine you in marri∣age, Hom. of Matrim. Now. Cat. quest. 206. that ye be not overcome with any temptations. We pray that God would strengthen the members of his Church with his aide and power, as his souldi∣ers, that they may earnestly fight against and subdue the devill, the world, and the lusts of the flesh.
We pray God not to suffer us to be overcome with any wicked temptation, but that he will deliver us, quest. 224. and save us from all evill. Direct our steps in thy word, Psal. for Even. and so shall our feet be kept from falling, and no wickednesse shall have dominion over us. Deliver us from the power of wicked spirits, Even. pray∣er there. and from all sinne, the workes of darknesse, and from all other perils bodily and ghostly. CHAP. XII. Of the progresse of the Regenerate. THe servants of God that are regenerate though they be able to doe spirtuall actions by vertue of that grace they have received, yet so unperfectly, that they cannot make a∣ny great progresse in godlinesse without fur∣ther helpe of Gods grace, they acknowledge that they have of Gods assistance to bring into action their good cogitati∣ons, so violently are they opposed by the remainders of fleshly corruption. Now if the regenerate have need of Gods grace to make a progresse, how much more have they need of his effectuall grace, that have no power to regenerate themselves, as we say, or at least not so much as the re∣generate have to proceed, as our adversaries must say, un∣lesse they will put no difference betwixt spirituall death and spirituall life. Let us now heare the testimony of the bookes in this particular.
Grant that we being regenerate, Collect. on Christmas day. and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renued by thy holy Spirit. Nourish us with all goodnesse. Sund. 7. af∣ter Trinity. Sunday 14. after Trin. Prayer 3. in Baptisme. Prayer in priv. Bapt. Almightie and everlasting God, give unto us the encrease of faith, hope, and charitie. Encrease this knowledge, and confirme this faith in us evermore. Give thy holy Spirit to this infant, that he being born again, and being made heire of everlasting sal∣vation through our Lord Jesus Christ, may continue thy servant, and attain thy promise. Daily increase in these thy servants, Prayer 1. in Confirm. thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of ghostly strength, and true godlinesse, and fulfill them, O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy feare. Defend O Lord, Prayer 2. there. this childe with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, untill he come unto thy everlasting kingdome. O Lord increase our faith in us, Prayer to holy Ghost before Ser. Prayer 3. in order of Priests, and love so to abound, &c. We humbly beseech thee, by the same thy Sonne to grant unto all us which either here, or else where call upon thy name, that we may shew our selves thankfull to thee for these and all other thy benefits, and that we may daily encrease and go forwards in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Sonne by thy holy Spirit. Almightie God accomplish in you the good work, Prayer. 2. in Consecr. of Bishops. which he hath begun, that ye may be found perfect, and irreprehensible at the latter day.
Regard not the horrour of our sinnes, Prayer in fast. 1625. Coll. 1. but our un∣fained repentance. Perfect that worke which thou hast begun in us. Give unto us every day more earnest and unfeign∣ned repentance: Prayer 6. added to Letany there. plant in our hearts by the grace of thy holy Spirit a setled feare of thy name, and full re∣solution to lead the rest of our life in the carefull o∣bedience of thy holy will in our callings, and faithfull hope of a better life to come. Lord we beleeve, but do thou encrease our faith, Prayer for season. wea∣ther there. our devotion, our repentance, and all Christian ver∣tues. Thou didst most graciously accept our undeserved repentance before thee: Prayer a∣gainst pestil. in the fast. 1626. we beseech thee to give us the grace of greater humiliation, and to shew as yet further mercy. Neither doth the holy Ghost think it sufficient, Hom. for Whitsunday Part. 1. inwardly to work the spirituall and new birth of man, unlesse he do also dwell, and abide in him. Whether the Prince be good or evill, Hom. a∣gainst wil∣full rebel. Part. 1. Thanksgiv. Nov. 5. Pr. after 1. Coll. let us pray for him, for his continuance and increase in good∣nesse, if he be good; and for his amendment, if he be evill. Increase in us more and more a lively faith, and fruitfull love in all obedience.
CHAP. XIII. Of the prayers of holy men. SVch as are indued with true grace already, yet pray to God still for grace. By which grace they do not entend a power to do well if they please, for this they have already, yea, they had it before they did actually beleeve, and by vertue of this power did beleeve as our adversaries say. The grace then that Gods servants pray for, that they may obey God, is an actuall inclination of their will already regenerate, to the effecting of those good desires, that are in their souls. Neither must we suppose that their prayers aime only at an indefinit power of doing well, but at a cer∣taine event of spirituall power given them by God, as ap∣peares by those frequent expressions of the end of their de∣sires in such phrases, as these, That we loving that thou requirest may obtain that thou promisest. That we may continue thy servants, and attain thy promises. That they may so please thee in this world, that in the world to come they may have life everlasting. And many such like. Their prayers do seek more for the further∣ance of the will, then for the illumination of the under∣standing. And of such a will, as is made good already. They must needs then aime at a greater power of the will to good, and a more effectuall direction of good thoughts to good actions, because they seek for a certain effect, which they aske in faith, and God gives in mercy. If they then yet pray for effectual grace, then could they not be converted at the first without it. What they pray for, let us now observe.
HOwbeit ye cannot have a minde and a will there∣to of your selves, Order of Priests Ex∣hort. for that power and ability is gi∣ven of God alone. Therfore ye see, how ye ought and have need earnestly to pray for his holy Spirit. Let us earnestly call for grace, Hom. of Swearing. Part. 2. that all vaine swear∣ing and perjury set apart, we may onely use such oathes as be lawfull and godly, and that we may true∣ly without all fraud keepe the same according to Gods will and pleasure. Let us pray that Kings may ever in all things have God before their eyes, Serm. of obedience. that they may have zeale to Gods glory, that they may rightly use their sword and authority, that they may most faithfully follow the Kings in the Bible. Let us pray for ourselves that we may live godly in holy and Christian conversation. In the same Hom. Let us beseech God that we being warned by his holy word, Hom. a∣gainst perill of idolatry. Part. 2. Hom. of Prayer. Part. 3. forbiding all idolatry may flee from all idolatry. It is needfull daily to pray for the ministers, that they may effectually preach the Gospell to the peo∣ple, and bring forth the true fruits thereof to the example of all other. The confessing that all grace of the soule is Gods gift onely, Hom. for Rogat. week Part. 2. will make us to have recourse to God for all grace, as the wiseman did for chastity, Wisd. 10. saying, After I knew that otherwise I could not be chast, except God granted it, I made hast to the Lord, and earnestly besought him from the bottome of my heart to have it. Now if the aide of prayer be taken away, Hom. of Matrim. by what meanes can marryed persons sustaine themselves in
any comfort? For they cannot otherwise either resist the devill, or yet have their hearts staid in stable comfort in all perils and necessities, but by prayer. If thy wife be wicked, In the same Hom. chafe not in anger, but pray unto Almighty God for her. By prayer we may obtaine Gods helpe, In the same Hom. his grace, and defence, and protection to continue without dis∣cord in marriage to a better life to come. Which grant us he that dyed for us all. These things being considered let us earnestly pray unto the living God our heavenly Father, Serm. of Repent. Part. 1. that he will vouchsafe by his holy Spirit to worke a true and unfained repentance in us. We pray that Gods name may be called upon with pure mind by men of all ages, Now. Cat. quest. 203. quest. 209. &c. We pray that whatsoever betides us, we may re∣ceive it with contented and gladsome hearts, and that we may in all things be serviceable and obedient to God, and that we rebell not, nor repine not against Gods will. I being of my selfe most weake and unable there∣unto, quest. 249. must continually and earnestly sue by hearty prayer to God the giver of all good things for increase of faith, and grace to please God. CHAP. XIIII. Of Gods grants. WHat God grants unto his people, that he doth not permit them to doe, or give leave that they doe it themselves by strength of nature, or some former grace received without any further help of God, for God
not hinder us from doing any good, but give us free leave in his word: So that there needs no new grant of leave to do well, or to use well the strength we have received. But Gods granting is giving some new spirituall strength or grace to use well the grace we have received. If such grace be yet effectually granted to good men, then could they not at first be made good without Gods effectuall operation. We shall be briefe in this last point, because all the prayers we have ci∣ted before are but expressions of Gods peoples desires, and of Gods satisfaction, which he gives unto the same. GRant O most mercifull Father, Confession. that we may hereafter live a godly righteous and sober life, to the glory of thy holy name. Amen. Grant this day that we fall into no sin, Coll. 3. Morning Pray. Coll. Sund. in Advent. neither run into any kinde of danger. Blessed Lord God which hast caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning. Grant us that we may in such wise heare them, read, marke, learne, and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy word we may imbrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou hast given us in our Saviour Jesus Christ. Lord we beseech thee mercifully to receive the prayers of thy people which call upon thee, Coll. Sund. after Epiph and grant that they may both perceive and know what things they ought to doe, and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same through Jesus Christ our Lord. Receive our supplications and prayers, Coll. on good Frid. which we offer before thee, for all estates of men in thy holy congregation, that every member of the same in his
vocation and ministery may truely and godly serve thee through our Lord Jesus Christ. Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christs religion, Sund. 3. af∣ter Easter that they may eschew those things that be contrary to their profession, and follow all such things as be agreable to the same. Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, Coll. on Ascens. day. that like as we doe beleeve thy onely begotten Sonne our Lord to have ascended into the heavens: so we may also in heart and mind thither ascend and with him continually dwell. Grant us by thy Spirit to have a right judgement in all things, Coll. on Whitsun∣day. and evermore to rejoyce in his holy Comfort. Grant we beseech thee that we which have S. Coll. on con∣vers. of S. Paul. Pauls wonderfull conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine that he taught, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grant that we may with pure and cleane minds be presented unto thee by Jesus Christ our Lord. Coll. on Pu∣rif. of virg. Mary. Gen. confess. before re∣ceiving the Commu. Grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newnesse of life, to the honour and glory of thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Conclusion. THus have I shewed out of the authentick records of our Church, what is the judgement thereof about the power of mans will, and Gods effectuall work upon the same in mans regeneration. True it is, many of these places speak of men already regenerate. Which is so farre from weakning the argument, that it makes it the stronger. For if that man
that in the judgement of the Church is alive in grace be so imperfect, that he have often need of new and effectuall grace, and help of God to go forward, how much need had he then of an effectuall work of Gods grace in regenerating him, who by the judgement of the same Church was dead in sinnes and trespasses before, yea as dead to grace (for so are the words of the Homilies) as they are to the world, that want souls. It may be thought superfluous to collect so ma∣ny testimonies, divers whereof differ but in words and agree in sence. This have I done because of the weight of the cause, and the rather because the publique doctrin of the Church is by some said to be on the other side. It may be some few testimonies might have been slighted, but such varietie, out of so many severall records, must needs shew to every indifferent person the constant doctrin of the Church which way it runs. It may also stop the mouthes of such as pretend a few seeming and misconceived places to the con∣trary. I might have made a world of Syllogismes, if I would have proceeded scholastically. But I had rather lay down the naked doctrin of the Church for learned and un∣learned to peruse, reduced to divers heads all tending to one end, and that for the ease and better understanding of the reader. If it be said, that I have sometimes set down the same words in severall places, the answer is at hand. I did it for sundry reasons. One while the place was fruit∣full, and out of divers words did afford divers reasons be∣longing to severall heads. Another while the place could not well be understood without coherence, so that I was compelled to set down the words precedent, though I had made use of them elsewhere. Lastly, sometimes the words were doubtfull to which head they did belong, or rather see∣med to me to belong to both, and so have I placed them ac∣cordingly.
If any yet object further, that the places may ad∣mit of another interpretation, and may at least some of them so be understood, as they may make for the adverse part. I answere there are many of them plaine enough, that cannot easily be misconstrued. Other places must be interpreted by them that are plaine. The Scripture it selfe the voyce of our Father is wrested daily to a contrary sence, and no mar∣vaile if the voyce of our Mother the Church may be so a∣bused also. Let the Reader by that reason and grace, that God hath given him, endeavour to understand which is the right sense of the words. I have added nothing of mine owne, save the state of the question at first, and the relation that every argument or head hath to the question in the be∣ginning of every Chapter. Lesse I could not adde without injury to the cause. More I would not, least I should be tedi∣ous to the Reader, or lie more open to the exceptions of such as are otherwise minded, who cannot now except against my words without wounding the Church, whose words I have faithfully reported. Thus I commend the cause to God whose it is, and to the Church of God whom it concernes, beseeching God so to worke in every member of it by his effectuall grace, that we may consent in judgement, and agree in affection on earth, till we come to perfection in heaven. FINIS.
