T3381A 11962817 51613
A POEM upon Their MAJESTIES Speeches to the Nonconformist Mini∣sters. OUr Churches Ark o're Troubled Waters rode, Like that blest Ship whose burden was a God; In vain we judg'd the Card or Sailers Cares, Our Peters Faith, or our Apostles Prayers: But when our Mighty Saviours came on board, The Stormy Winds and Waves no longer roar'd; At whose Approach the gloomy Shadows brake, And of the Light all Humane kind partake: No home-bred Jars or Pious Frenzy burns, But wild Confusion into Order turns: We bless our Ears and Eyes, and all Admire, Queen Mary's Voice tun'd by King David's Lyre; The Glorious Pair in equal Sounds agree, And Subjects Joys compleat the Harmony. Let Levi's Tribe to Ergo's Bid adieu, Or still their Metaphysick Toils persue, Thro' Senseless Labyrinths the People draw, Confound the Gospel, and perplex the Law. Our Royal Pair a safer passage lead, And in the paths of Truth and Love do tread. Hail Mighty Two! our common Votes approve; You are the God of War and Queen of Love. As the Sun's Beams replenisheth the Earth, Purges the Flood, and gives to Seasons birth; So your bright Ray diffus'd within our Sphere, Gives Vital Warmth to every Creature there: Our Heats you cool, and moderate their Force, And of our Passions stop th' unruly course; By great Examples, you our Love provoke, And reconcile the Cassock to the Cloak: Beneath your Shadow we in safety sit, And all our former Toils and Scars forget. By you the Tyrant Monsters are undone, And all the Force of Hell and Rome o'rethrown; Religious Freedom all our Saints enjoy, No more shall frantick Zeal the Church annoy, Nor shall it dread a fatal Shipwrack more, In Stormy Adria or Melita's shore; When charm'd to Sense, the giddy Priesthood yield, And all destructive Errors quit the Field. What tho' we did by Sion's Waters mourn? The Golden Age and Golden days return. The Pristine Ages now we imitate, We imp their Grandeur, and we wish their Fate. VVhen God appointed Kings with his own Voice, And joyful people blest him for the Choice; Then Kingly Vertues set the Monarch forth, And not Succession Crown'd him, but his worth. Such is thy Fate, blest Isle! and may'st thou be A Blessing to thy Prince as He's to thee! May he thy Altars build, and Temples rear, And late a Crown of Glory may he wear. By John Tutchin
