w105a 09653640 43923
MEMENTO MORI border with skull and crossbones and other emblems of Death AN ELEGY ON That Grand Example of Loyalty, Valour, and Conduct, Sir Edward Spragg. Unfortunately Drowned (after Incomparable proof of Hrock Gallantry) in the late ENGAGEMENT, WITH THE DUTCH. August the 11th. 1673. LONDON. Printed for Phillip Brooksby at the Hospital-gate in West-Smit field 1673.
AN ELEGY ON Sir Edvvard Spragg. TO Scenes, where Death doth with most horror look, And Cowads ae by safety qite fosok, Where Valour is most nakd, and whee hams Know no Resistance, nor defensive Ams Where Heaven's Mask'd, and the Suns gli'rig Rays Are Choak'd in Fogs, which Sulphurous Vapours tae, My flutt'ring Muse, addrest her humble flight, Through the resembling shades of dolesome Night: Where meeting FAME, upon that path of way. With flagging Wings, I courted her short stay; Unto a lovely Bank we both retir'd, With expectation beyond patience fir'd: Whom with a Breast big as a Billow swel'd To these sad Accents, I at length compl'd. BRAVE SPRAGG IS GON, (quoth she) which haig sd, Down dropt the Wreath which o're his Valiant Head She long, as his just meit, hoveing held: His Head, whose matchless Valour so excell'd: Whose mighty deeds were Eccho'd heretofore, From Lybian Sands, to the Batavian Shore: His dreadfull Name striking with equal fears, The Infidels of Holland, and Algiers: Those Barbarous Mid-land Rovers he made bow, As suddenly as with commanding Brow Old Neptune's wont to still the unruly Waves, And having Charm'd at Bugia those Slaves: With full-blown Sails doth as in Tryumph come, To Quell Mighty Usurpers nearer Home: Tell me Audacious Dutch, did ye ere know, An Earth-quake shake your Quagmire before now: Like to his fatal strokes, or that dire Thunder,
That made of late your Hogan Mogans wonder. And think the dreadful day of Doom was come, When Thetys op'd her too too Loveing Womb: To Receive this her dear and best bred Son: E're half the wonders of his days were done; T'was kind, yet at that Kindness we must weep, To make her Darling, in her bosome sleep, But Narrow-Seas, hold not him, whose great mind Was like the spreading Ocean, unconfin'd: For the loud Thunder of his Cannons Roar, Wakned his Fate, and made him rise once more. So great a Soul could not but Conqueror dye, And when he fall, bequeath us VICTORY. How wilt thou, Fate! Excuse this great mistake, That thou dost still thy vow with merit Break? Did Clouds of Smoake so darken thy dim Eye, That for D' Ruyter Valiant Spragg must die: Should'st thou now offer Him it were but Vain. And still there's cause against thee to complain: But let us not Eclipse so brave a Fate, By whining Language, rather Celebrate: Sprage's Glorious fall, whose valour being Try'd To a full Height in, Honours Be he Dy'd: If Advocates gain Honour in a Cause, Of paltry Trespass  the Common Laws: What merrits He  pleads with dint of Sword, And Dares be Kill'd, or Kill at ev'ry word; By whose sccss or Kingdoms  or stand The Fate of Empires  on his Hand: Such, such, was Valiant Spragg, whse Fate being heard, A general sadness through the Fleet appea'd: The Loving Seamen grown dect, ore The Tatter'd Bitts of Sails and did deplore: More than their wounds, His  Lamented Death, Whilst their Eyes Bled, and Brea  sighs want Breath, Amongst whom, one less tongue ty'd than the Rest, Thus passionately his kind Respects Exprest: "Thus far we are beholding to that Wave, "which gives the Earth, the honour of his Grave, "And since salt Waters did his life surprise, "Wee'l leave no moisture in our Briny Eys: "Though his Lov'd Life, our Prayers could not save: "Weel make with Tears an Island of his Grave. S. W. FINIS.
