W2948 12416690 61687
IERICHOES DOVVN-FALL, As it was Presented in a Sermon preached in St. Margarets Westminster, before the Honourable HOUSE of COMMONS At the late Solemne Fast, Septemb. 28. 1642. By THOMAS WILSON Preacher of the word at Otham in Kent. Published by Order from that HOUSE. LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, and are to bee sold at the Gilt Cup, near to S. Austins Gate, 1643.
Die Mercurii 28. Sept. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that M. Hollis, and Sr Robert Harley are appointed to returne thanks, from this House, to M. Hodges, and M. Wilson, for the great paines they have ta∣ken in the Sermons they preached this day at St. Margarets Westminster, at the intreaty of this House. And that they desire them to print their Sermons; And that no man pre∣sume to print them but such as they shall appoint, untill the House shall take farther Order. H. ELSYNG Cler. Parl. D. Com.
To the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT. THE Great God, the Lord your God, God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, in pity to his people, and mercy to this Land, hath raised up (in our great distresse) Micah 5. 5. seven shepheards and eight principall men, out of the seve∣rall divisions of the Kingdome; when the enemy would come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord hath lift up a Sandard against him. God hath called you for such a thing as this, at such a time as this, to this Great Court, your call is high, your work is hard, you know why you are borne, for the benefit of many, as Bucers Physitians said to him, non sibi se, sed multorum utilitati esse natum; You are our deliverers from hea∣vy burdens, our reformers of great corruptions, You
find Church and State bruised and diseased. You are our healers, . Sept. li∣gator vulne∣ram. Chirurgus & Reip. medi∣us.  ab , medela Cornl. à Lap. in Isai. 3.7. What though Israel fret? shall Moses faint? when men of renown murmure at the instruments of good, the Lord will shew who are Gods; no man suf∣fers so much injury as God doth contumely, as Me∣lanchthon said, nullum hominem tantum sustinere malorum, quantum contumeliarum Deus. It is not strange that some preferre Egyptians Onion to Cana∣an, and its dainties; yet their Caleb (a noble spirit) fully followed the Lord. Bucer and Melanchthon fra∣med a form of reformation, with approbation of the Peeres and States, but the Clergy in the Colledge of Colen (wherein were some stood right affected, but more were contrary)  in alta omnia iverunt. Melchior A∣dam. vita Bu∣ceri. p. 217. rejected with slander, and af∣firmed they had rather live in Turky, then under such a reformation, sub imperio Turcico malle se vivere, quàm sub Magistrat qui reformationem illam se∣quatur. Nehemiah, when he was in the Lords work, was scorned, resisted accused, threatned, and by Nobles in Iudah, (sworn unto Tobiah) deserted, yet hee builds and prospers, desists not his work, defieth his adversa∣ries factions, dreads not words, nor letters: Mens Furere istic & emere re∣ges, principes, populos, ad∣versus Chri∣stum Domini: foelix Omen puto, ac meli∣us, quam si blandirenur, &c. Id. vita Lutheri. p. 158. fury against Christ (is a good Omen) is better then their flattery, they laugh at him, (weep not for it) God laugh∣eth at them. Gods infinite providence (the seven eyes upon ne stone, Zechar. 3.9.) is upon the Churches foun∣dation, all things below are wheeled about, as the rngs full of eyes, infinitâ Dei providentiâ, Iun. in Ezek. 1. 18. Build you, God will prosper your work, make up the hedge, (God hath sought you for it) stand in the gap before the Lord, that he may not destroy the Land, who now visits our ingratitude, as Luther to Melanchton, valdè cupio ut sint adversus Satanae furores inaesti∣mabiles
aliquor reliqui, qui se pro do mo Israel mu∣ros opponant, in hoc die furoris Domini visitantis nostram, sicut dignum est, ingratitudinem.Id. vita Melan. p. 358. You love our Nation, your acts are nationall, execute judge∣ment and seek the truth, (thus love our Land) and the Lord will pardon, Ier. 5. 1. Doe men hate him that re∣buketh in the Gate, and abhorre him that spèaketh up∣rightly? it is knowne by it, it is an evill time, you con∣tend for peace and truth, be constant, and confident, your warre is peace, as Zwinglius de bello Helvetico, writing to his friends,Id. vita Zwing. p. 36. Bellum cui nos instamus, pax est, nonbellū, they strove to preserv verity & liberty of the Gospell. Men may (may be not) hurt the body, but they cannot reach, not touch the soule that spirituall sparkle, as Zwinglius his heart was whole (cor illaesum) when his body was turned into ashes. Luther warmed Me∣lanchthons spirit by a letter about the common cause then molested by Pontificall rage and Caesars fury, I (saith he) about the publike cause have a quiet mind, assured it is just, true, and unappalled, I feare not the fierce and cruell Papists,Id. vita Luth: p. 138. if we be overthrowne, Christ shall be overthrowne with us, and come what can, ma∣lo ego cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare, I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar. You fast, you pray, you consult with the God of heaven, who will answer in due time with good and comfortable words, Zechary 1.13 Pray (as Tanta reve∣rentia aliquid petit ut cum Do, tanta spe & fide, ut um patre & amico se loqui sntiat. p. 142. Luther was wont to doe) with revernce as to a God, and with confidence as to a friend and father. The day of fasting allowes no ornaments in lesser things then Sermons, it was only my purpose to speak something pertinent to the day; fasting must have prayer, prayer faith, and faith activity; What can be
more necessary in the case of faith, then faith?Luther ani∣mosa ep. de ne∣gotio Evanglii ad Spalatin. in tantū est opus fidei, ne causa fidei sit sine fide; your difficul∣ties many, faith (which hath a kind of omnipotency) will carry you through all, tantum possumus, quantum credimus. In this service my study was that the word of truth propounded, your hearts (lift up in the way of the Lord to the work of the Lord) might continue in their height and heat by the spirit of burning, till all our filth and blood be purged, and washed away, till fa∣sting be turned into feasting, till men may use this speech in England, concerning the State, The Lord blesse thee ô habitation of justice; and concerning the Church, The Lord blesse thee ô mountaine of holinesse; till there be one Lord, and his Name one. That this Parliament (the repairer of the breaches, the restorer of the Paths to dwell in) by loyalty to our Soveraign, fidelity to the Kingdome, and zeale to Religion may be the joy of many Generations; which is the prayer of Your devoted servant, and daily Petitioner to the God hearing Prayer, THOMAS WILSON.
JERICHO'S DOWN-FALL. A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at a solemn Fast, Novemb. 28. 1642. HEB. 11. 30. By Faith the walls of Iericho fell downe after they were compassed about seven dayes. THE authority of this Epistle depends not on the Writer, but on the Authour:The Epistl to the He∣brewes. 1. Its author. 2. Its matter. not on Ma, but on God; whose Spirit of truth held and ruled the pen of the Writer. It evidently sets forth, 1. Christs 1. Person, God and man; and 2. Offices, King. Priest. Prophet. 2. The Christians duty, in faith and holinesse. This Chapter (a little book of Martyrs) containes
the encomium of faith, commended by its heroicall acts and marvellous effects; by (no the worlds, but) the Lords Worthies, in every age of the An∣cient Church, whose neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers; all shields of mighty men. Can. 4.4. These mighty men of God are renowned and recorded, powerfully to perswade men with cou∣rage and comfort to continue in the faith, sustained with the precious promises of the blessed God. Fidei documen∣tum in toto po∣pulo edium. Iun. & Par. in Hebr.The words read, rehearse the famous fact of Is∣raels faith, under the prosperous conduct of Ioshua (the Hebrews Generall) the conquerour of Canaan. This text, 1. Interpreted 2. Divided. 1. The interpretation. By faith.] By faith, both in Ioshua and Israel, his and their faith; not by armes, and engines; not by common sense, nor canall reason; not by faith historicall yet they knew the word; not by faith mi∣raculous, albeit this oracle tels us of a miracle: but by faith (called by Divines) justifying and saving principally, not only as it justifieth, but as it look∣eth towards God, and apprehends any promises, works, and benefits of God, past, present, or future, revealed in his word. Nixi Dei Praecepio, Promissione: Par.Faiths prop was 1. A word of precept, to compasse the city; yee shall goe round about the city. Iosh. 6. 1. 2. A word of promise annexed, the walls should fall; the wall of the city shall fall downe flt. vers. 5. Iericho.] It was a strong walled tower in their way, and first entrance into Canaan, after they had so safely passed over Irdan.
The walls of it fell downe.] The great walls, this townes-mens strength tumbled downe without mans hand, warlike engine, or violence. After they were compassed about.] They pitched not the ld against it, nor did they undermine or scale the walls; but goe abot them. A mean, to mans reason, 1 Very childish; seven Priests, sounded seven rammes hornes; would not Iericho laugh at it? Iosh. 6. 4. 2. Very perilous; had there been such Guns as be in these dangerous dayes. M. Perk. Yet after they had circuited the walls, 1. In obedience to Gods command, 2. In dependance on Gods promise, The walls fell down. Obedience to God, in the event meets with good: first, they mind duty; after it, they find mercy. First, they goe about Iericho; and then, they goe into Iericho. Seven dayes.] The walls fell not on any of the six dayes, nor untill the seventh time the seventh day. Till then the walls never shake, and then (nothing seen before) they fall it was Gods ap∣pointed time, in which every thing is beautifull: one of these dayes was the Sabbath, the observa∣tion whereof yeelds (for mans good) to this spe∣ciall command of God the great Law-giver. 2. The parts Iericho's downfall the wals fell down. 1. The meane of it, faith in Gods word. 2. The mer of it, in compassing it seven dayes. 1. The downefall of the walls, the strength of this city, the hlp whereby it was fortified as in∣vincible,
falles, this wall is cast downe and demo∣lished; the city is taken, and a straight way opened to the Israel of God. Ioshua 6. 20. Observ. 1. Church-ene∣mies helps will faile them.The greatest helps of Church-enemies will faile them, their walls which hinder Gods Church in the way to happinesse, will fall down, and their de∣fence departs from them. Numb. 14. 9. Herodot. & Xenoph. Decima persur∣bis est tota bo∣derna Romae Pontificia. M. Mede.As it is with this cursed city Iericho: So with old Babylon, the wall of Babylon shall fall, Ier. 51.44. The broad walls (fifty cubits thick, and two hundred cubits high, say Historians) of Babylon shall be utterly broken, er. 51. 58. Thus with Mystical Babylon it is thrown downe as a great milstone cast into the Sea; thus with vi∣olence shall that great city Babylon bee throwne down and shall be found no more at all, Rev. 18.21. The tenth part of the city, (the whole Kingdome of Popery, Br.) fell, was diminished by the revolt of the Germans; the Earth-quake ordinarily signi∣fying a great change of the estate of matters, Rev. 11. 13. The enemies vvalls. 1. Principality. 2. Prelacy. Satans Vicar the Antichrist of Rome, in∣stigated Charles the most puissant Emperour, to attempt war, that by vio∣lence the do∣ctrine of the Gospell, and the liberty of Germany may be op∣pressed; And the united Princes com∣pelled to the service and observance of his wicked and devilish reli∣gion. Sleid. Comment. li. 17.1. The enemies walls to stop the Churches way, which will faile and not be a shadow to them, be 1. Principality and imperiall power, Princes and their people, Emperours and their vassals, were a wall to the enemy; the ten hornes shall give their power and strength to the beast, Revel. 17. 13. CHARLES the Great, and K. Pipin arose with stout and fierce contention in the Beasts quarrell, advanced and honoured the Popedome. These shall make warre with the Lamb, vers. 14. in rebellion against Christ; yet the Lamb (Christ) shall overcome them. In Gods appointed time, the
Emperour CHARLES the fift, persecuted the Princes of Germany with a lamentable warre, because they re∣quired a liberty to worship the Lamb; but the victori∣ous Lamb the Lyon of the tribe of Iudah, got the victory (a free confessiō of truth) which the Lamb wrung from the Emperour against his will. And this by Christian souldiers, and armies of Protestants; Called, chosen, and faithfull, vers. 14. Yet by the good pleasure of God Christian Princes shall rise and make themselves ready against Rome, to bring the whore to an horrible destruction, contrary to her expectation, and their former profession for her. 1. These shall hate her, curse her, which bewitch∣ed Kings of the earth. 2. Make her desolate, they converting to Christ, revolting from her and ministring no aide to her. 3. Naked, by their confessions, by their writings which discover her filthinesse and lewdnesse. 4. Shall eat her flesh, not physically,Exossatio non Physicè se my∣sticè. but my∣stically, cutting away her toll-money, wealth gotten by her chaffering in their dominions. 5. Burne with fire, who will not otherwise bee purged; she shall be burnt as an whore not washen with nitre. Many Princes have failed Popedome, Revel. 17. 16. 2. Prelacy, purple Prelates, and their corrupt Clergy, hinder the passage of Gods redeemed ones into Canaan, heaven, and shall down: As the troop of Trent Bishops fortified themselves; and made a wall about Popery, that erroneous doctrine and corrupt worship might be continued; notwith∣standing
this, the man of sin, hi jurisdiction and his generation must down and be destroyed, that wicked one the Lord shall consume with the spirit of is mouth, 2. Thes. 2. 8. Prelacy ro and branch shall be taken away e∣very plant which God hath not planted shall bee plucked up by the root; all false callings, false do∣ctrine, false worship, God threatens, Mat. 15. 13. as a tree that cumbers the ground, must be cut downe; the Church and pure religion cannot thrive by it, under it, neer it. Prelacy is not on∣ly not fruitfull, but hurtfull, and if the vinedresser find no fruit, his word is, Cut it down, Luk. 13. 7. There is no ju divium to plead for it, it will come to nought as Gamaliels word was Act. 5. vers. 38. The Prelates were daubing a wall with un∣tempered morter, made of Canons, oathes, Consti∣tuions, & Superstitions, yet all falls that one may say, where is the wall and they that daubed it? God will effect it,Contusi Anti∣stitum falsm religionem ∣entium, Bran: that the pride of their glory shall be strained he shall tread upon Princes as mor∣ter, and as the Potter treadeth the clay, Isay. 41.25. The defence of the ene∣mies walls. 1. Policy. 1. Detected. 2. defeated. 2. Patrimony. 3. Power of. 1. One man. 2. Many men. . The defence of the eneies wall departs from th. 1 Policy, that failes, when they work by subtil∣ty, yet nothing in man, no wisdom, understanding, nor counsell, by all plots and hellish practices can prevaile against the Lord his will and work. Pr. 30. 1.  detected albeit most secre, as the Syri∣ns plot against Isrl, 2. King. 6.9. yet God told the Pophet of it, and the man of God told the King, vs. 10. the King of Syria suspected some to by imsty, vers. 11. but his servans ll him E∣lisha
revealed to the King of Israel, the words which he spake in his bed-chamber, v. 12. od knowes, and can point at the man, or men that gives evill counsel, Ezek. 11.2. He knowes all that comes into their mindes, v. 5. The folly (not wit) of them who resist the truth shall be (neere their fall) manifest to all men: How many plots of mentlesse men, have been discove∣red before the eyes of all men? have they not pro∣claimed to every one by their way, this their folly? 2 Tim. 3.9. 2. It is defeated, their counsell comes to nothing, but to the hurt of the authors: as Ahitophel a deep Politician, gives counsell against a good man, but the good God disappointed it; for the Lord had ap∣pointed to defeat the good counsell of Ahitophel, 2 Sam. 17. 14. Men advanced for their wisedome, are oft times made a prey, and Judges who should keep a Common-wealth from civill dissentions, and ruines, doe themselves (when God pleaseth) become fools, He maketh the Iudges fools, Iob. 12.17. 2. Patrimony and possessions will faile them, the tenth part of the city fell;Hanc urbis de∣cimam casu∣ram; agro sibi pro patrimonio atributo spoli∣atam, Pontiice vi iude pulso, praerogativam & dominium in urtes & populos amissu∣ram M. Mede.  nomen tributi; the revenues, profits, first fruits, tributes, commēdams, lands, taken away, Rev. 11.13. In that fall many men were slaine, not in their bodies, but in their e∣states, spoiled of Monasteries, Nunneries, Abbeys, whereby many filled their paunehes, as Lordly Prelates, all-belly Abbots, evill beasts, slow bellies: it was a death indeed to be brought to true pover∣ty, from their former luxuy, v. 13. the vine was gathered, many cloysters, and clusters pulled, and cut downe, in the dayes of that great Prince,
Henry 8. who not onely did shake off the Anti∣christian yoke, but did confiscate the lands of ma∣ny Frieries, Priories, &c. whereby the stals of the fatlings were destroyed, and havock made of Pa∣pists goods, that the horses of them set over the bu∣sinesse, seemed to swim in their spoiles, as it were in a river of pressed grapes; to the great good of many who had no small good, by the fall of this oake, Rev. 14.19,20. Euphrates g∣nificat praeci∣pua Babylonis Antichrist: prae∣sidia, quibus ad tantam excre∣vit potentiam: Et in vigore stetit hactenus. Vrbs slumine qàm muri ∣rat munitior. Par.The water of Euphrates was dryed up: as Cyrus when he took Babylon, the way of Romish traffick decayed. Euphrates notes the chiefe safeguard of Antichristian Babylon, which was stronger by this river, then their wall. 16.12. 3. Power: mountaines be made a plaine: however they swell, and seemed invincible, immoveable, unpassable, inaccessible; yet God contemnes the e∣nemies mightinesse, and will remove all impe∣diments of the restauration of the Church, and make it as easie to march over, as a plain and eaven Champaine. Zechar. 4.7. 1. In the might of one man is no safety for sinners against Sion, as Haman a great favourite, highly promoted and advanced, no man had either priori∣ty, or parity, Esther 5.11. yet he abode not in ho∣nor, he began to fall before Mordecai, 6. 13. he is detected and accused as the adversary, and enemy of the Jews. 7.6. he is cast off by the King, v. 7. he is cut off, for they hanged Haman on the gallowes which he had prepared for Mordecai, he made a net for his owne neck, his pride falls, and power failes, 7.10. 2. In the multitude of many men is no strength
to uphold the evill doers. Captain Sisera had in his company nine hundred Charets of iron, and much people, Iud. 4. 13. yet the Lord discomfited them, ver. 15. there was not a man left, ver. 16. The Midi∣anites were numberlesse, Iud. 6. 5. as the grashop∣pers for multitude, 7.12. yet before Gedeon and his three hundred, ver. 16. all the Host ran, cryed, and fled, v. 21. Many nations, of divers abominations, wickedly consulted, & unanimously consented in a cursed cō∣federacy, and cruell combination, against the Lord of glory, (Who hate his Church hate him) Ps. 83. 5, 6, 7, 8. which by some is supposed to be in the dayes of Iehoshaphat, whom Moab, Ammon, and Edom beset and assaulted, 2 Chron. 20.1. a great multitude there was, v. 2. yet they were smitten, v. 22. one hel∣ped to destroy another, v. 23. that Iudah looking on the multitude, and behold, they were dead bo∣dies, fallen to the earth, and none escaped, v. 24. The Ethiopians came against Asa, with a huge host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred Charets, 2 Chron. 14.9. yet they fled, v. 12. Thus it is clear that no policy of man, no patrimony in the world, nor power of united forces, can be a sure wal to secure the sons of wickednesse.Reasons why the enemies wals will fall. 1. The ene∣mies 1. Impiety, being 1. prayer∣lesse 2. ful of cur∣sing. 3. Idolatrou Reasons why the Enemies wals will fall. 1. In regard of Church-enemies 1. Their impiety: they are a cursed generation; iniquity will cast them down, as the inhabitants of Iericho, whose wall fell, were Canaanites, a seed of evill doers, to be utterly destroyed, both man and woman. Ios. 6.21. 1. They are prayerlesse, they cannot, they will not,
they do not pray, they twit prayer in the spirit, they (by predominancy of Atheisme) call not upon God: hence is that prediction of wrath, to fall on them who call not on Gods name, Psal. 79.6. 2. They are full of cursing, and it shall come unto them; cursing men be cursed men: What is in their mouthes, but fearefull, self-damning imprecations, and innominate soule-damning oathes? the mercy they desire God to shew them, is to damne them; such words be heard, as those who wished they might die in the wildernesse, God took them at the word, As ye have spoken in mine eares, so will I doe to you, Numb. 14. 28. 3. They are idolatrous; who withstand the Church, in the way to reformation, they desert God and his pure worship; and cannot prosper by that meanes, but must fall, they and all their con∣fidences, as is manifest, in those vain men, children of Belial, who gathered to Ieroboam, 1 Chron. 13. 7. who had golden calves for gods, the gods of the land of bondage, v. 8. who cast out the Priests of the Lord, v. 9. who kept not Gods charge but for∣sooke him, v. 11. who (albeit Israelites in name) op∣posing God, (a gracelesse act) cannot prosper, v. 12. God smote Ieroboam, and all Israel, v. 15. that Is∣rael fled, v. 16. fell downe, v. 17. and were brought n∣der at that time, v. 18. The vanity of their helps. 1. Horses. 2. Men. 1. Faint. 2. Fearfull. 1. Kings. 2. Merchants. 3. Mariners. 2. The vanity of their helps; their wals high and broad, are earth, dust, built on the sand. 1. Their horses (how many soever troops they have) be but vaine for safety, the strength of horses cannot be the deliverance of man, in danger, Psal. 33. 7. it is not well with them, but woe to them
who stay upon horses, because they are many and strong, Esay 51. 1. 2 Their men, 1 are faint, frail, feeble; men, and not God; when the Lord stretcheth out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shal fail together, Esay 31.3. 2. Are fearefull, afraid to help: as when the great city fals, her lovers take up a lamentation, but doe not, dare not help her. 1. The Kings of the earth, the spirituall sons of the Roman See,Romanae sedis filii spirituales qui cum Papa perseverabunt. Par. the whores slaves: as the King of Spain and others, who have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewaile her, and lament for her, Rev. 18.9. Standing afar off, when they see the smoke of her burning, they hast not to help, but are in a bodily feare, by beholding the whores misery, they feare their owne safety, and will not venture themselves for an old withered harlot, v. 10. 2. The Merchants of the earth, which chaffer with spirituall matters,Nundinatores spirituales, Ca∣merae Pontifi∣ciae Quaestores. Par. rather then corporall, who by making countries serviceable to Rome, by their confederacy, prove brave and gallant fellowes, and gained well by this merchandise, getting Bi∣shopricks, Cardinalships, as C. Woolsey, a notable ambitious, tumultuous, flourishing Romish Mer∣chant, who durst brave, and beard, yea out-face, and out-brag King Hen. 8. a mighty Prince, Rev. 18. 11. thus all stand afar off, having short hornes and no hearts to repell this imminent danger, v. 15. onely they cry, Alas, expressing the truth and terri∣blenesse of their grief for this change, v. 16. 3. The Mariners, Shipmasters, Saylors, they can∣not
not keep Romes ship from sinking, nor S. Peters fishboat from the sands, or rushing on the rockes, although many a lusty lubber hath laboured hard to promote Romes lustfull lawes, as Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch-Deanes, Abbots, Jesuits, Priests, Priors, Fryers, Monkes, the Canonicall Clergy, and all inferiour officers; yet the more they would cover, the more they discover, the whores and the Popes filthy wickednesse; and more at length, when the whores wages for their acts of wickednsse be detained, de∣nyed, consumed, Rev. 18.17,18. Many greater and lower Churchmen are of the minde of Demetrius, and the craftsmen, concerning this happy Reforma∣tion, intended, & entred upon, whereby their gaine ceaseth, they live by a craft, By this craft we have our gain, Acts 19.25. their rotten props removed, & cor∣rupt courts abolished, this one craft is in danger to be set at nought, v. 27. Their Diana despised, and her magnificence destroyed, v. 27. this trade of theirs is decayed, their wares not merchantable, for no man buyeth their merchandise any more, Rev. 18.11. God his 1. Contrari∣ty. 2. Commina∣tion. 3. Promise. 2. In regard of God 1. His contrariety to the enemies and their helps: God faith, he will arise against the house of evill-doers, and against the help of them that work ini∣quity; if God arise, they must fall, Esay 31.2. God is contrary to them, that he will make a city a heap, a defensed city, a ruine, a palace of strangers to be no city, it shall never be built, 25.2 God in his pow∣er, over-powreth the enemies, that he bringeth down them that dwell on high, the lofty city he
layeth it low, he layeth it low en to the ground, he bringeth it even to the dust, 26.5. 2. His commination: God hath threatned this fall of the enemy, and his word will take hold on men, they cannot evade his vindictive hand. Babylon is faln, is faln, Revel. 14.8. 3 His Promise: God in truth hath assured his Church to remove all impediments. Hee is a God of his word, who saith to the Deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers; fulfilled by Cyrus, who (the Citizens of Babylon not dreaming of it) dryed up their Euphrates, and brought Babylon under his hand, Isay 44. 27. God means not to leave a Canaa∣nite in the house of the Lord, and will performe the good thing which he hath promised: There shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord, Zechar. 14.21. 1 To wicked men: yet misled.Exhort. 1. Wicked men be not 1 Vain coni∣dent. 2 Impenitent. 1 Be not confident in any meanes to wall about you: What? can Princes protect you? can Prelates support you? will policy, patrimony and power faile you? how can you be confident? Babels brickmakers would build a city, to prevent scatte∣ring, Gen. 11.3,4. but God disappointed them, for he scattered hem abroad, and they left off to build the city, v. 8. God is against you, who is unresisti∣ble, for all your association; Associate you selves, & ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: take counsell together, and it shall come to nought; speake the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us, Esay 8.9,10. 2 Be not impenitent, nor hardned in the sins of
the enemies: H will a hard heart indure whe God casts downe its defence and confidence? ô repent before the fall; ele ye are in danger to perish in the fall; ô walk not in a way contrary to God; ô receive not the beasts mark in the forehead, which is to professe openly their homage and sub∣mission unto the holy Apostolike Catholike See of Rome, th Popes vassals, they called Catholikes; receive not his mark in the hand, to advance and pre∣ferre with your best power, the Romish preroga∣tive; this, Emperors, Kings, and great men of the earth received, by being obliged to the Pope by solemne oth,T.W. in his Dist. promising and binding themselves to be defenders and protectors of the chief Bishop, and the holy Church of Rome: All, small and great repent and worship God, or else they must drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indigna∣tion, and they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.9,10. Be not at rest now in fin; they have no rest, day nor night who worship the beast; v. 11. Godly men 1. Come out from the ene∣mies. 2. Be not afraid of the enemies. 2 To the godly. 1 Come out from the enemies: Come out of Baby∣lon, is counsell to Gods people; have no share in Romes sins, & ye shall have no part in her plagues, Rev. 18.4. it is our lesson when we heare such news of its fall, v. 2. Doe as Rahab, when she perceived their city to be in danger, she provided how to get out of it, Ios. 2. 12. to be saved alive. v. 13. So she peri∣shed not with them, who beleeved not, when all
who remained in Iericho were destroyed, Heb. 11.31. O get out of the way of evill men, and save your selves from an untoward generation, which you heare will come to desolation, Acts 2.40. 2 Be not afraid of enemies, whose wals will fall; God hath threatned it. Caleb and Ioshuah said to Israel, Their defence (but a shadow) is departed from them, feare them not, Numb. 14.9. be strong and couragious, be not afraid of them, nor dis∣maid for them, they have but the arme of flesh, all their help is vanity; Why doe men tremble when the enemies wals shake? 2 Chron. 32.78. It is a comfort,Consolat. Comfort when the enemies be 1. In power. 2. In policy. 3. In prospe∣rity. that the helps which uphold the enemies, will faile; Rejoyce, be glad, and hout for joy at this fall, when Babylon with violence is thrown downe, Rev. 18. 21. then abundant joy comes to all the godly; rejoyce over her, thou hea∣ven, (the universall multitude of the Saints on earth) and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, the Godly and learned teachers of the Church, in the dayes of reformation; these more deadly hated by the whore by whom they endured much tribulation, are now called to rejoyce most, v. 20. Shout against Babylon, round about, her wals are throwne down, as sure of victory; as if all were already effected, Ier. 50.15. It is firme ground of strong consolation, 1 When the enemies, be 1. In power, and pride; as Haman had such a principality, who but he? he could write what he pleased, he could accuse, and none could gain∣say him, yet he, when he was well (in his conceit) walled, and xpected to rise to more honour, (am∣bition
is never satisfyed) would be higher, yet in his pride he fell, as did T.E.St. in great jollity, he was laid in the dust, his neck brought under foot; pride hath a certain fall, Esth. 6.13. 2 In policy, full of plots and projects against Christ and Christians, then all is in vain, they fail, they take counsell together against the Lord, Psal. 2.2. to reject his commands, which they judge too strict, v. 3. The Lord laughs at them, v. 4. and da∣sheth them in pieces. Christ will be too hard for them who plot against him, v. 9. The late Cano∣neers cast Canons to defend their wals, but they re∣coiled upon themselves, they travelled with ini∣quity, conceived mischiefe, and brought forth fals∣hood, Psal. 7. 14. Wicked men make pits, and dig them, but fall into the ditch which they made, ver. 15. their mischief return upon their own head, and their violent dealing comes downe upon their own pate, v. 16. 3 In prosperity, they fall into misery: Davids ob∣servation may be presented to us, I have seene the wicked in great power, and spreading himselfe like a green bay tree; yet he passed away, and lo he was not, yea I sought him, but he could not bee found; Psal. 37.35,36. How manifest is this, in the Arch-B. W. L. and the ret of the Prelates, come downe when they were in their Pontificalibus? When wicked men flourish, it is an evidence they shall perish; when the wicked spring as the grasse, and all the wor∣kers of iniquity doe flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psal. 92.7. 2 When the Church is
1. In the impotency of men,When the Church is 1. In impo∣tency of men. 2. In the insuf∣ficiency of meanes. the enemies helps fail when friends be few and feeble, The foot shall tread it (the lofty city) down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy, Isay. 26. 6. 2. In the insufficiency of meanes, rams hornes in appearance a childish thing to cast down such walls, as erichoes were, Iosh. 6. 20. But God can cause the enemies fall; 1. By a weak hand,God can cause enemies fall. 1. By a wea hand. 2. By their own hand. 3. Without hand. the least of the flock shall draw them out, Ier. 50 45. 2. By their own hand, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, 9. 16. 3 Without hand, the mighty shall be taken a∣way without hand, Iob 34. 20. 1. The Mean of this fall is faith, by faith they fall, the walls of Iericho could not stand before the faith of Ioshua and Israel. Faith in God is mighty to remove the greatest im∣pediments of good.Observ. 2. Faith is potent to remove im∣pediment. Faith gets victory over the mightiest enemy. Faith overcomes any difficulty. Faith is stronger then all the world, This is the vi∣ctory that overcometh the world, even our Faith. 1. Iohn 5. 4. David feared not the Philistine, nor would have any mans heart faile because of him, 1 Sam. 17.32. Davids faith in God prevailed over Goliah, yet there was no sword in the hand of David, verse 50. Israel by faith could goe dry, where the Egypti∣ans were drowned, the Sea gives way to faith, Heb. 11. 29. Caleb through faith, stilled the muttering and murmuring people: assuring them (albeit the Ca∣naanites were strong, their cities walled and great; and the children of Anak there) they were well
able to overcome all. Numb. 13. 30. The ground of this. Faith is omnipotent through Christ. I can doe all things through Christ which strengthened me, Phil. 4. 13. God in whom we beleeve, is never put to a non∣plus, hee meets no impossibility; for with God shall nothing be impossible. Luk. 1. 37. and thus all things are possible to him that beleeveth,Ground of the Power of faith. 1. It builds on Gods word. 1. His pre∣cept. 2. His pro∣mise, min∣ding in it, 1. His mercy. 2. His grace. 3. His truth. Mark. 9. 23. 1. Faith builds on Gds word as most firm: as David; In God will I praise his word, in God will I put my trust, Psal. 56. 4. there is a strength in the Scripture, leane on it, it cannot be broken, Io. 10 35. 1. Gods word of precept is faiths warrant, God bids, 'tis enough for faith to build on: as in this compassing by Iericho, God commanded them, of Iosha 6. 4 Abraham also at Gods word walked through many difficulties obediently, Heb 11.8. He went and followed God to his foot, whose command carried him through that great tryall of offering up Isaac, verse 17. Gods speciall com∣mand overcame reason, affection, and all hinde∣rances: God said to him, Take thy son, thine on∣ly sonne Isaac whom thou lovest; and offer him for a burnt offering, Gen 22. 2. 2. Gods word of promise is a proppe to faith, God promised the walls should fall, Ioshua 6 20. God hath spoken the word, faith is strong upon it. Beleeve in the Lord so shall ye be established, beleeve his Prophets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chron. 20. 20. Fith for its confirmtion minds in the pro∣ises,
1. Gods mercy to make a promise, in pity to men, by it to send in reliefe to mans heart. God did performe his mercy to Abraham Mic 7. 20. 2. Gods grace in his promise, all is of grace to us unworthy, 'tis free without our desire or desert. Cry grace, grace to it, Zechar. 4. 7. 3. Gods truth, he is faithfull, he failes not in his word, what he promised in mercy and grace he will keep in truth; he keepeth his truth for ever, Psal. 146. 6. 2. Faith rests on Gods providence,Faith rests on Gods providence, sustained 1. By his goodnes 2. By his wisdome. 3. By his power. who is by it a wall of fire about his Church, Zechar 2 5. Faith in Gods providence is sustained by behold∣ing, 1. His goodnes, who is good to doe his good in a time of need, which is a great strength to them. The Lord is good and a strong hold in the day of trouble, Nahum 1 7 2. His wisdome, he hath millions of wayes to help his which they know not of, The Lord is great in counsell; who hath an art in working for his his wayes are not known, but the wyles of his enemies be open to him, Ier. 32 19 3. His power, nothing is too had for him, Ier. 32 17. Faith lookes not at the deadnesse of men, or naptnesse of meanes, but relies on God, perswaded that what he had promised he is able to performe, Rom. 4. 19. 20 1. Faith in God being so mighty, know it,In form. 1. The valour of beleev∣ers. Be∣leevers be most valiant victors, the chiefest con∣querours, godly men relying on the word, bee stronger then all the world, their spirits be hero call, their armes made strong by the mighty God
of Iacob; Kingdomes cannot stand before them. Through faith they subdued Kingdomes, Heb. 11 33. Waxed valiant in fight, verse 34. David beleeving in the Lord, prevailed against the great and formi∣dable Philistine: by faith Barak over-powred Sisera and vanquisht Iabin: by faith Gedeon mastered the Midianites: by faith Asa chased the Ethiopians: by it the Iewes brought down Haman in his glory: by it the Canaanitish Kings fell before Ioshua: by it the Kingdome of Saints are a Peerlesse people. It is the honour of all the Saints to triumph over all contrary Royalty and Nobility, to bind Kings in chaines, and Nobles with fetters of iron, Psal. 149. 8, 9. The vanity to expect vi∣ctory by what is not of faith, as 1. Formality. 2. Policy. 3. Power. 2. 'Tis a vanity in any difficulty to expect victory by what is not of faith, which is so potent an instru∣ment; without faith there is no setling of any heart in hope or state in happinesse; If ye will not beleeve, surely ye shall not be established, say 7. 9. 1. Formality in Religion: Ceremonies in Gods worship, be heartlesse, empty, powerlesse; faith is the power of godlinesse, 'tis a deceit to rest in go∣ing to Church (as men speak) as once it was con∣fidence in a lye to say, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these, Ier . 4. These are lying words, they trust∣ed to that could not profit, vers. 8. Yet God ru∣ined all where was no faith, both the temple, vers. 14. and Shiloh of old, vers. 12. When Israel trust∣ed to the Ark to save them from the enemy, 1 Sam. 4. 3. etch the Arke—let it save us; Could it save did it save them? nay, many Israelites were mitten, vers. 10. and an impure paire of
Priests slaine, verse 11. 2. Policy is too impotent to remove all impedi∣ments, worldly wisdome weakens men, carnall reasonings be faiths enemies, and Satans strong holds. Lean not to thine own understanding, Pro. 3.5. carnall reason is called a bitter enemy of God. Luthers oracle published,Melch. Adam. vita Lutheri. pa. 157. what would be the pest and perdition of Christian Religion: 1. Oblivion of Evangelicall blessings. 2. Security generally raigning. 3. Wordly wisdome which would reduce all in order, and heale the land with ungodly coun∣sells. Iehu subtilly cut off Ahabs Baals, and in wyli∣nesse, yea wickednesse, kept Ieroboams calves, 2 Kin. 10. 28, 29. yet could not he continue the Kingdome; for then began the Lord to cut Israel short, verse 32. 3. Power of many men is too weak a prop to lean on. Many provisions, severall stratagems, manifold machinations, be without faith meanes of no va∣lue; God promised Zerubbabel, whom as speciall Magistrate it concerned to see the temple reedifi∣ed, nt by might of many men, or power of one man, but by my spirit, power, providence, and gracious favour, (when all helps which bee subordinate faile) will I build the Temple, Zechary 4. 6. 1. Prove ye your selves,Exhort. A tryall of faith. 1. It casts down walls 1. In mens hearts. 2. In mens houses. whether you be fitted to conquer all commers, to remove all impedi∣ments, obstacles, or obstructions in your way and work; Have ye faith? deale kindly and truly with your selves, be not by sloth, and presumption de∣ceived.
1. It is a faith will cast down walls. 1. In mens hearts, it casts down strong holds in us, 2 Cor. 10. 4. it layeth low our lofty imaginati∣ons, and every high thing that exalteth it selfe a∣gainst the knowledge of God, it silenceth our rea∣sonings, verse 5. it removes the perversenesse of heart, it causeth frowardnesse of heart to depart, Psal. 101. it cannot endure vaine-glory, as in Heze∣kiah, his heart was lif up after a mercy, 2 Chr. 32. 25. yet he humbled himselfe for the pride of his heart, verse 26. Faith diallowes worldlinesse, . in lusts after honour, greatnesse, reputation; as Moses by faith he refused to be called the sonne of Pha∣raohs daughter, verse 24. 2. In lusts after pleasure; faith preferres the afflictions of Gods people be∣fore the pleasures of sinne, verse 25. 3. Lusts after profit and pleasure; the treasures of Egypt cannot lye in faiths way to bribe it, verse 26. Faith wasts, ruines, and undermines all inward evill, it regards no iniquity in heart, it purifieth the heart, it cleanseth the conscience, abhorres hypocrisie, security, inward vanity, Acts 15. 9. 2. In mens houes, it is upright in the family, as David, I will walk within my house with a per∣fect heat, Psal. 101. 2. he reformes servants, He that worketh deceit shall not dwell in my house, he that telleth lyes shill not tarry in my sight, ver. 7. The father of the faithfull, Abraham comman∣ded his children and houshold to keep the way of the Lord, Gen. 18. 19. Iacob purged his house from all strage Gods and vanities, 35. 2. and had no enemy to hurt him, for the terror of God was up∣on the cities round about him, verse 5. Cornelius
a Centurion, a pious souldier, a devout man, one that feared God with all his house, Acts 10. 3. Gedeon, a noted man for goodnesse, and famous for faith, began his reformation at his fathers houshold, and cut downe his grove, and threw downe the Altar of Baal, Iud. 6. 25. 27. Have yee faith to cast down evils, Idols, and to remove scan∣dals in Gods houses, to reforme our Churches, Ministers and members? and is it not most serious and sincere to begin with your owne hearts and houses? how unseemly, yea and unsound is it to talk of reformation Ecclesiasticall, and to neglect the heart, as disordered, and the family as deform∣ed and unreformed? 2. This faith in God is effectuall,Faith is effectuall. 2. It relyeth on the Lord. 2. It gloryeth in the word. 3. It worketh by love, to Christ. To his Church. 4. It walketh by rule. 1. In religi∣on. 2. In refor∣mation. where it is in man. 1. It relyeth on the Lord, his presence, his assi∣stance, his arme, his name; as Iudah did in 2 Chron. 13. 18. Faith will set God his word, his promise, a∣gainst all. Faith hath a God to trust to, the Lord is its hope, not men, or meanes, Ier. 17. 7. 2. It gloryeth in the word of God, with praise to God, when it seeth nothing but present trou∣ble, in dayes of feare it feares not man, his cruel∣ty, policy, power. When King Saul misled by e∣vill counsellours, pursued David (a loyall subject, a faithfull servant) to swallow him up, Psal. 56. in the title, and verse 1. his faith cures his feare, verse 3. his soule made its boast of the promise of God, verse 4. 3. It worketh by love, 1. to the Lord Jesus, Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drowne it: if a man would give all the substance
of his house for love, it would utterly be contem∣ned, it cleaves to Christ in contrary temptations, Cant. 8. 7. 2. To the Church, it loves the houshold of faith, the Saints; others it pitieth, in them it delight∣eth, Gal. 6. 10. this is the faith the Gospell prai∣seth, Gal. 5. 6. 4. It walks and works by rule, a divine Canon, 6. 16. 1. In Religion and worship of God, it minds and credits the word of God,Non ex arbi∣trio, sed ex im∣perio Deo ser∣viendum. 'tis fully for the Scripture, all that is in the Scripture, it is for: as Paul confessed, I worship God, beleeving all things which are written in the law; it dislikes un∣written traditions, it disallowes no divine institu∣tions, it is well pleased to be ruled by Gods will, it will not accept mans lust for a law, nor except against any law of Christ, Acts 24. 14. 2. In reformation, it minds the word as a pat∣terne most perfect, as Moses had his patterne, not a pin was left to his discretion in that great work of the tabernacle, yet he was prudent, he was pious, but he is charged to attend to directions of God; See that thou make all things according to the pat∣terne shewed to thee, Heb. 8. 5. the word is our pat∣tern, in the day of grace, the man of God is to hold fast the forme of sound words, as 2 Tim. 1. 13. measure all by this patterne in this our new build∣ing, Ezek. 43. 10. Learne all the formes, all the ordinances, and all the lawes of this house, and doe them, verse 11. A faithfull man is to mind that too, Ezra 7. 18. Doe after the will of your God; command, or com∣mend
nothing but by divine warrant; whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it bee diligently done for the house of the God of heaven, verse 23. Gods words is a perfect rule, feare him; doe no∣thing without, beside, or against the word of God; Gods commands containe a mans whole duty, Eccl. 12. 13. Faith is to beleeve no more then may bee preached, but the preachers may and must preach; not what men invent, but whatsoever Christ commands, Mat. 8. 20. Gods word will furnish a man with all that is profitable, 2 Tim. 3. 16. and will perfect a man in all things doctrinall, and in all things practicall; more then is in that perfect word, needs neither be knowne, taught, nor done in the Church of God, verse 17. 2. Procure that which is the speedy way to remove all obstacles in your work, your good work;Procure faith. 1. Governors. 2. Governed. Non docet ic Christus mon∣tes transfere, sed certitudi∣nem fidei ra∣dit, & quanta sit fidei virtu. B. e∣ven this wonder-working faith, Mark. 11. 22. Have faith in God, this will remove mountaines, great and seemingly setled impediments: beleeve what God doth say, and you may have what you shall say; verse 23. Christ doth ascertaine us of it, neither is it spoken of miraculous faith, which removes these mountaines, it is an usefull instruction unto beleevers now, Mat. 21. 21. 22. 1. Governours, (yee most noble Senatours) trust in the Lord, this will make you incompara∣ble, succesfull, free-men, as Hezekiah, a godly King trusted in the Lord, so that none was like him, 2 Kings 18. 5. and he prospered whither so∣ever he went, verse 7. it is a glory to be a beleever and a counsellour, a beleever, and a Parliament
man. Bee wise now and kisse the sonne of God, with faith; 'tis your wisdome, the beleever is the wise man, it will bee your happinesse to trust in Christ, the beleever is a blessed man, Psal. 2. 11,12. 2. The Governed people who desire to doe any good at this day, when difficulties be many, this work sticks: ô 'tis want of faith! beleeve in the Lord, beleeve down these walls, these high walls, when others put to their hands, have yee faith in your hearts, Beleeve in the Lord and prosper, 2 Chron. 20. 20. Now yee (Right Honourable, who love our nation, and whose hearts are to build us synagogues) who meeet with many oppositions, and discern many obstructions, and such dangerous distractions in this crazy State and diseased Church; A way to have faith among us, by 1. Promoting preaching. 2. Provoking unto prayer. 3. Providing for th pure ad∣ministratiō of the seals. 1. Promote preaching of the word of faith, which is so powerfull to remove impediments: men must heare if they would beleeve, and how shall they heare without preachers? Rom. 10. 14. 'Tis preaching is a notable alarme against God-forsakers, although (as Church-Papists may doe) they keep their Church, and will not bee called Church-forsakers. 2 Chron. 13. 12. Preachers be the strength of a Land, the Charets of Israel and horsemen thereof, 2. Kings 13. 14. It is more needfull to set up Preachers, then garrisons in townes; let them have maintenance, counte∣nance, continuance. Exalt ye Christs Kingdome, it will downe with all contrary Kingdomes; Sa∣tans, and Antichrists power failes, and is broken, where Christ is known as King, Dan. 2.44. Christ is that stone, breaks some and grinds others to pow∣der, Mat. 21.44.
Let Christ (the object of faith) be the head, al∣beit the builders (in place, name; not in 1 act, 2 nature) refused him, Psal 118.22. What is to be expected in Counties, where little or no word of faith is? there the enemies swarme and triumph: What good can you find in men, either toward righteousness, or re∣ligion, where mē are as the mountains of Gilboa, no rain nor dew of the doctrine of faith fals on them? Let your hearts be lift up in the way of the Lord, to doe according to that your pious resolution, of establishing a Preaching Minister through out all the whole ingdome; for faith comes by the word preached, Rom. 10. 17. 2 Provoke unto prayer: Prayer is a way to have an addition to faith, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our faith: restraine not prayer by any decree, for any time, as they wickedly did, Dan. 6. 12. Let thm that can pray, pray; men are to be excited, to cover earnestly the best gifts, and not to rest in a dull de∣votion, but to pray in the holy Ghost; a perfect help to prayer, a blessed mean of more faith, Iud. v. 20. 3 Provide that the seales of the Covenant of God may be purely administred, as helps of faith, this excel∣lent grace, Rom. 4.11. Let your wisedome search the book of God, and study the will of God, that according to the counsell of the Lord, Ministers and members in all our assemblies may be sanctifi∣ed sufficiently for this, 2 Chron. 30. 2. Till men be sufficiently sanctified, they cannot come to the Lords supper no more then keep the passeover, v 3. Remove in this all obstacles, all superstitions, pro∣fanations, v. 14. O that all migh be according to the Word of the Lord in Pastors and peope! 35.6.
God is the God of order, in his owne ordinances. Worship him we must after the due order, lest in stead of a blessing we meet with a blow; as Da∣vid discovered and reformed, 1 Chron. 15. 2.13. Motives to faith; then 1. Preaching profits. 2. Prayer pre∣vayles. 3. The Soul∣dier tri∣umphs. 4. Good done by God. 1. He will ef∣fect all. 2 Hee will bring tho∣row diffi∣culties. 3. Hee will shew his glory. 4 He can doe a world of good in a week. Motives to this faith in God; 1. Preaching by it profits men; How good is a word, a sermon, a promise beleeved! it works ef∣fectually in them that beleeve, 1 Thes. 2.13. where∣as the Gospell full of glad tydings profits not, be∣ing not mixt with faith in them that heare it, Heb. 4. 2. 2. Prayer then prevailes when it is the prayer of faith; What is fasting without prayer, (prayer be∣ing a speciall duty more to bee mending on a fast day) or prayer without faith? this day ye fast, this day yee pray, this day yee beleeve and speed; Asa cryed to God, relyed on God, 2 Chron. 14. 11. and the Ethiopians fled, verse 12. 3. The souldiers by this triumph, and the enemies fall; faith is good in the field, faith is the warri∣ours Target, the souldiers shield. Trust in God will raise us, and ruine his enemies, Psal. 20. 7.8. 4. God will doe much good for those who trust in him. 1. God will effect what they commit to him, trust to this Commissioner, and he will bring all to passe; works shall succeed and be prosperous, when men rest on the Lord: without faith, things will be at a stnd, and not bee effected: you would have all ended comfortably that is happily begun, rest on the Lord, and he will doe it to your hand; Faith puts the businesse in, and will not take it out of Gods hand, as Psal. 37. 5. 2. God will carry beleevers thorow mids of manifold
troubles, and difficulties, with great ease, comfort, and safety; the red Sea was for beleevers made dry land: Yee whose unparalleld paines have met with unheard of difficulties in your proceedings, cast the eye of your faith upon the Lord, to make your way plaine and passable, that the Lords flock may goe (albeit through the wildernesse,) Canaan-ward, Heb. 11. 29. 3. God will shew beleevers his glory, his glory of power to help, of mercy to pity, of truth to keep promise, of wisdom to counsell them: men without faith, misse and meet not with God: but bow the eare to that of Christ our Saviour, Said I not unto thee, that if thou wouldst beleeve, thou shouldst see the glory of God, Iohn 11.40. 4. God can doe a world of good for men in a week,Ratio quidem non assquitur, quomodo ex ni∣hilo sint omnia; inò, ratio con∣tradicit ex ni∣ilo nihil fieri; quod verò ratio non capit, fides intelligit. Par. in Heb. 11. 3. In coelo plantat & terra reno∣vata—Ecclesia intelligitur. Sanct. in lo. he made a world in sixe dayes, that may cause us to rest on him; What great things can God doe in a day in your great councell, for this sinfull King∣dome, and corrupted Church! mind what a day may bring forth, or a week bring about; and rest on the Lord, who can work all our works for us: were a matter as hard as to make a world, yet God can by his owne hand (he needs no intruments, who are all unactive without him) plant the hea∣vens, and lay the foundation of the earth, Isay 51.16. 2. The manner of this fact, they are diligent every day, early compassing this city Iericho seven dayes, having no rest till the work bee done, the wals be down, as the Lord had told them. Faith in God is active for God, till it have done the will of God,Observ. 3. the worke of God, as Ioshua and Israel did as
God bad them without ceasing; so Caleb a man of a generous spirit, having a regenerate heart, when others would turne back, he would on to Canaan in the act of faith, he fully followed the Lord, who promised them the land, Numb. 14. 24. Faiths activenesse is A bete coo∣moda & remo∣vete quaecunque sunt incommo∣da ad promo∣vendam eccle∣siam. In. The good Kings of Iu∣dah, 1. aboli∣shed idolatry, and supersti∣tion, & 2. plan∣ted true reli∣gion D. Will. on. Dan.1. In removing stumbling-blocks as walls out of the way, that Gods people may hold on in Gods way and not decline: it is a command, Pre∣pare the way, take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my people, Isay 57. 14. 2. In restoring the worship of God, that all di∣vine institutions may be enjoyed in a right man∣ner and due order: thus David was solicitous and reckoned himselfe afflicted, till the Ark of God was set in its proper place, Psal. 132. 1. Davids af∣flictions, his religious care to bring the Ark home before that breach upon Vzzah. un: he vowed, and layd a solemne tye upon his soule; an oath, a forci∣ble obligation, verse 2. he would not give sleep to his eyes, or slumber to his eye-lids, ver. 4. in his new house which he had builded in the city of David, verse 3. till he found out a place for the Lord, represented by the Ark, verse 5. In that faith is so active it may informe us, Inform.1. 'Tis no wonder, that many (unwilling to bee good, or wise to doe evill) so hinder and oppose faith in the meanes of it; the enemies have reason (as they would be true to a cursed cause) to resist it, which will not rest till it have razed their walls, ruined their building, crossed their cause, over∣throwne their helps, and dashed their hopes. 1. The devill hinders faith, that it be not prea∣ched
to men: Paul would have come to the Thessa∣lonians, for the furtherance of faith; but Satan (an adversary) hindered, 1 Thes. 2. 18. the devill in his instruments turns away men (desirous to heare the word of God) from the faith, as Elymas (the child of the devill) dealt with the Deputy Sergius Pau∣lus, a prudent man, Acts 13. 7,8,10. 2. The world allowes and likes no beleevers, they are all under the observation of an envious eye, as ahab was in Iericho, Ios. 22. the men of this world, not men of God, forbid preaching, the word of faith, and salvation, 1 Thes. 2. 16. they are stiffe opposers: as Apostaticall Alexander greatly with∣stood (who had once stood for) Pauls preach∣ing, 2 Tim. 4. 14, 15. They put away, shoulder,. and thrust out the word of God, Acts 13.46 2. Many persons be wicke men, men of no faith, as is evident by their non-activity for God, for whom faith is active; and of this sort are they, 1. Who be pleaders for Baal, and his wall that it should not down; when it was down, that men if they doe not stigmatize, yet they particularize refor∣mers, eminent men, as Gedeon, (a man, well known in those corrupt times, by his work of faith) ap∣pointed to dye. Baals Altar was cast down, Iud. 6.28. they said Gedeon had done it, verse 29. they willed his father Ioash, to bring him forth that he may dye, verse 30. a fitter censure for those who will plead for Baal; he that will plead for him, let him be put to death, verse 31. 2. Who be neuters, as lue-warme, most loathed persons, who will not medle, nor have a hand in
any good, as cursed Meroz, a people who came not to the help of the Lord, Iud. 5. 23. men bitterly cursed of God, as the Reubenites, meer worldlings, minding their folds and flocks, verse 16. lazy Gi∣lead tarried at home, verse 17. Dan tarried, minded his trade, his ships and traffick, ibid. Asher on the Sea coast abode in his breaches to fortify himselfe as weak, verse 17. and secure Iabesh Gilead yeelded, sent in none to punish delinquents, men of great folly and villany in Israel, Iud. 21. 9. albeit it was by an ordinance of their Parliament in a gene∣rall Assembly, 20. verse 2. 9, 10. that the children of Belial might receive condigne punishment, verse 13. 3. Who be active against the Church, for the ene∣my, with the enemies of Church and State, as E∣dom, Moah, Ammon, joyne with Philistines, Tyrians, Assyrians, degenerate professors, fit companions, (in service against the Church, albeit they pretend the Church-service) of lewdest persons, Papists, Atheists, and men of flagitious lives, Psalm. 83. 5, 6, 7. This did Amelek, feared not God, but smote the Church in its way for liberty, Deut. 25. 17,18. These as Balaam (hired to curse the Church of God) can pray, read a prayer, yea preach against the children of God, under the notion of here∣sie, hypocrisie, schisme, rebellion, treason, Numb. 22. 17. 23. 8. 4. Who be builders of Ierichoes walls, as the men who set up superstitions, Altars, images, in∣novations; they be knowne men, God (if they belong to him) grant them repentance, lest that
curse be clapt upon them, Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Iericho, Ioshua 6. 26. Faith in God, being so Active for God,Exhort. as men perswaded of this, bee active, quit your selves like men, as did Generall Ioab to his brother Abi∣shai in that fight against Ammon and the Syri∣ans, Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God, and the Lord doe that which seemeth him good, 2 Sam. 10, 11, 12. receive that counsell, put your selves in Aray against Babylon round about; all ye that bend the bow shoot at her, spare no arrowes, for she hath sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50. 14. 1. Rulers, ye Worthies of our Israel, called out of Noble families in the severall coasts of the Kingdome, as they in Israel out of Ephraim, Ben∣jamin, Machir, Issachar, Zebulon, and Naphtali, be ye of raised and stirring spirits in the work of the Lord, Iud. 5. 14, 15, 18. 1. In the civill State. Most sage Senate, touch the mountaines of proud incendiaries, they will become a plaine before you, Zechar. 4. 7. Scatter the everlasting mountaines of firme setled Ca∣naanites, make the perpetuall hills bow, Hab. 3. 6. Remove the wicked from before (they will rush into the presence of the, as speciall servants, and Chaplaines in Ordinary to) the King, that his throne may be established in righteousnesse, take away the drosse from the silver, impious persons be very pernicious to Princes, as Darius counsel∣lors, Herods flatterers, Pharaohs sorcerers, Rehobams young companions, with many Hamans to Aha∣su,
Dg to Saul, who blemish the repuation of Princes,Spiritus dicun∣tur, quia pro∣fessione erant spirituales Pa∣tres; tres, multi suficientes ne∣gotio suo pera∣gendo; impuri, ortu, ingenio ac moribus; imi∣les ranis, sordibus, impu∣dentia, loquaci∣tate, clamosita∣te, aures regum obtundunt; ra∣narum quadra∣ta capita geo∣metricis Pileis referunt, Par. i lo. as Shbna did Hezeiahs, Prov. 25. 45. Leave no frogs, that creep into Kings chambers, provoking them by their croaking to make warre; they are knowne by the gter whence they come, out of the mouth of the Dragon, out of he mouth of the beast and the false Prophet; they are spirits of devils, which goe forth unto the Kings of the earth, to gather them to battell; Prince against his Principality, King against Parliament, Kingdome against Kingdome, nation against nation, England against Scotland; by Men like frogs impudent in croaking, the frogs head like their caps; quadrata ranarum capita; frogs are an Egyptian plague, Rev. 16. 13,14. Here is work for the power of a Parlia∣ment, that the King may have no croakers in his Chamber or Court, to be offensive to his Royall ares, ha he Kingdome distracted and bleeding may have justice and peace this (God command∣ing you so) doe according to your wisdome, given you of God. 1. , A nw de∣cree made,  by Nebuchadnz∣zar, to punish blasphemers, Dan. 3. 29. binding  any vanity or burdens which lye heavy on the Church: the Kings word was changed, Dan. 3. 28. the decree ullified, verse 10. as did Darius, Dan. 6. 26. and Haman letters of Mart reversed by Ahasrs to Esther and Mordecai, Esther 8. 5. 8. By Darius for true Reli∣gion, 6. 26. A great change in Kings and Lawes.2. Contend with great one, Nobles, Judges, Ju∣stces, that be profan themselves, or countennce iquity in the Kingdome; as did renowned Nee∣mi, with those men who profaned the Sabbath, Nhm. 13. 17, 18. 3. Destroy the accursed, daw the wheel over the
wicked, take away the accursed things,Vnius facius pesti multorum Salvian. de guber. Deo. l. 7. else God will have a controversy with England, and deny us his presence in all our proceedings; away with Achans, Iosh. 7.11. 12. 2. In the Church. 1. Cast out block, stumbling blocks: as Asa took courage and put awy abominations out of the land, 2 Chron. 15. 7, 8. and Iehosophat took away the high places & groves out of Iudah, and did not leave them to please the people, 17. 6. Shew you your inte∣grity, as that pious Prince, 20. 32. let it bee the peoples blemish, to affect and keep p high places, verse 33. Remember the Prelates, as that proud Primate Diotrephes, with malicious words,. prating against and casting out good Church-members, 3 Ioh. 10. Beare not, but be imptient with men who pretend to be Apostolicall, and are Apostaticall lyers, Rev. 2. 2. Forget not the odious sin of non-reidency, idle, dumb, and scandalous ministers, which make the people loath the offerings of the Lord, drive them out of Gods house for the wickednesse of their do∣ings, Hos. 9. 15. Regard the godly discipline of zealous Iosiah, he put down idolatrous Pries, 2 Kin. 23. 5. that they should not come up to the Altar of the Lord in Ierusalem, verse 9. It is recorded what Ne∣hemiah did in his zeale and reformation, he clean∣sed the Chambers (of intruders) in the Courts of the house of our God, Nehe. 13. 7, 8,9. and cha∣ced away Saballats sons in law from him, ve. 28. These (as the Ierichnies hut their gates, Iosh. 6. 1.) hinder the passage of the people of God into the land of Canaan. Mat. 23. 13. ee inder; people be too slow, but it is laid on the Priests as the impe∣diment,
yee would not, verse 37. It is considerable what was done to the leprous house: Levit. 14. 40.1. Take away the stones in which the plague is. . Take other stones and put in the place of them, Lev 14. v. 42. If after the house be scraped and plaistered, the plague come againe and break out in the house, v. 43. then break down the house, the stones of it, and timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; it is a fretting leprosie, verse 45. A leprosie was discovered in Queen Mary her dayes, after that zealous Prince King Edward the sixt, but all was new plaistered in the Raigne of that Englands Deborah, Queen Elizabeth: but the plague is broken out againe, wherefore downe must the house, leave not one stone upon another unthrowne downe. For profanenesse from the Priests is gone out through all the land, profanenesse, super∣stitions, are spread; downe with their walls, their builders, their repairers, their defenders, as Ioash judged, Iud. 6. 31. 2. Erect  wall about the Church in building it up, as Exod. 15. 2. prepare God an habitation, with a stirring spirit doe the Lords work, Hag. 1. 14. and then prosper in your work, From this day will I blesse you; consider what successe hath fol∣lowed since the voting downe the Prelacy, what blessing God gives you, Hag. 2. 18, 19. 2. Preachers be active to cast down Antichrist, Popery in doctrine, and worhip; the Churches be called Reformed, not onely in doctrine true, but in discipline pure. 1. In preaching the word of truth; Preachers must doe their work as well as Princes, to cast
down the man of sinne; God casts him down with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Ths. 2. 8. preach the Gospell, Christ conquers by it, riding on the white horse, Revel. 6. 2. Dagon will fall before th Ark, 1 Sam. 5. 3. 2. In praying, coveting the best gifts, to lift up a prayer, not in their hand, but in their heart for Zi∣ons happy deliverance; not in a formall customa∣ry bedulling manner, but watching thereunto accor∣ding to all occasions and seasons; wee having the same spirit of prayer as Isaiah had, let us lift a pray∣er as Isaiah was bid, 2 King. 19.4. 3. In our examples, as patterns; bee patterns of beleevers in spirit, 1 Tim. 4. 12. be as the Hee-Goates before the flocks, Ier. 50. 8. The Priests circuited Ie∣richo, goe into the gap, stand in the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battell in this day of the Lords controversie with England, Ezek. 13. 5. 3. People be active for God. 1. By their portions.Quis Domino mente credit & facultate non∣credit? quis Deo animam suam macipat & pecunia negat? Salvian. ad Eccl. Cath. lib. 2. Honour the Lord with your substance, now when his enemies would rob us of Religion, let your Merchandize be holinesse to the Lord, Isay 23. 18. Prov. 3. 9. 2. By their persons, power, and lives; it is a glo∣ry in ebulon and Naphtali, they jeoparded their lives, Iud. 5. 18. 3. By prayer: earnest prayer was made by the Church in a troublous time, Acts 12. 5. that God would remember Church-enemies Edomites, Psal. 137. 7. 1. The manner of this Activenesse. 1. Obedientially, doe all according to Gods will, rule and call, else a man may smart for it, as Iehu
did, Hos 1, 4. Iehu reformed after his owne and not Gods heart, and God would bee revenged on the house of Iehu. Doe all according to the law of God, and then let all obey as Artaxerxes to Ezra, Ezra 7 25,26. Gods lawes are not new but old wayes, his law is not novelty, but the best antiquity; Aske for the old way, Ier. 6. 16. Away cast up of God to goe in, Isay 57. 14. Thus peace shall bee to you in doing as God com∣mands you, Exod. 18. 23. 2. Diligently; the Israelites goe about Iericho se∣ven dayes, and seven times the seventh day, most of all on the Sabbath: enemies receive greatest blowes, and the Church greatest help, blessing, victories on that day; Be not weary of your work albeit it cost you many dayes, work not slothfully, He is cursed who doth the work of the Lord negligently, Ier. 48. 10. 3. Vnanimously they all compassed it; unity is happy in the people, in the Preachers, in the Par∣liament, all as one man, all one way, Neem. . 1. no divisions Are yee not Members in this High Court, both Houses one Parliament, all vote for the truth, for holinesse, for justice against iniquity, scndall, Popery? it is the good had of God to our joy to give you one heart, 2 Chron. 30. 12. with your magnanimity, to grace you with unanimity. You call to mind this day, wee have one Covenant and Protestation to maintain truth, to withstand evill; be enlarged in covenanting, as of Iehoiada 'tis writ, He made a covenant between the Lord and the King and the people, that they shoul be the Lords people; (when this was) then all the people of the land brak
down throughly Baal his house, altars, and images to pieces; unanimity works effectually to cast downe iniquity, 2 Kin. 11. 17, 18. 4. Patiently, 1. in tarrtance for a fit time, the Lords time; wee see nothing done (wee call great things nothing, who the other yeare would have been glad of some of those many things bee now effected) at many dayes work, as they in compassing Iericho many times, 12 times saw never a stone falne, yet it will succeed well in the end, and all will downe. Though the vision tarry, wait for it; at the end it shall speak, and not lye; it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. 2. In silence, mutter not; in this compassing of Iericho, not one spake a word till the last day; and then yee shall shout, Joshuah 6. 10. Stand still, feare not, hold your peace, Exod. 14. 13. 14. Wait ye for the salvation of the Lord, 2 Chron. 20. 17. 5. Confidently by faith, an active grace, vali∣atly be strong in the Lord, who will not deceive, Heb. 11. 34. Stagger not at the promise, Rom. 4. 20. call to mind ye mighty men, the Magistrates must have Lyon-like courage in every pssage of their work, all the steps of Solomons throne were sp∣prted with Lyons, 1 Kings 10. 19. 20. 6. Constantly till the wall be downe, the work bee done, and way bee made for the Lords peopl to passe on toward their inheritance; wait on God till mercy come, Psal. 123. 1, 2. till the Lord lok down upon us, Lam. 3. 49, 50. as Israelites wast∣ling till we have a blessing, Gen. 32. 26. nevr hld
your peace day nor night, keep not silence, give the Lord no rest till he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isay 62. 6, 7. 2. The motives to this Activenesse. 1. In regard of the enemies. 1. They are active, a busie world it is, they lay their heads together to plot mischiefe, and as Sampsons foxes turned taile to taile to burn up all, they are set on fire, Iud. 15. 4. they take crafty counsell, they consult: shall they stirre against good for evill, and we sit still and not move against evill for good? Psal. 83. 3. Philistines could animate one another, Be strong, quit your selves like men, against the Israel of God, 1 Sam. 4. 9. they encourage themselves in an evill matter, Psal. 64. 5, 6. 2. They would ruine all, Ierusalem must (so they have their will) down to the ground, Rase it, rase it even to the foundation, Psal. 137. 7. they would have the name of Israel no more in remembrance, 83.4. They would cut off Ireland, that none might remember the Lord any more. May not this pro∣voke mens zeale (to see the wicked devoure the men more righteous then themselves) to help Ire∣land with all forwardnesse? alas for it, the day is great, cruell men have shed blood, the blood of Saints, the blood of Prophets, and in justice they must have blood to drink: for they are worthy, Rev. 16.5,6. Reward Babylon as she hath rewarded you, double to her double, in the cup she hath filled, fill to her double, 18. 6. 3. They be spiritlesse, faint and fearfull, they flye away, follow on; the Canaanites hearts melted be∣fore the armies of Israel, Iosh. 5. 1. and no courage
left in Iericho, 2. 11. near a ruine, they are dead, 6.21. A hornet of feare is before their fall; feare not them who are halfe dead men, Exod. 23. 27, 28. 4. They are falne, Babylon is falne, is falne; it is repeated, it is certain, Revel. 18.8. falne 1. in domi∣nion, Kings and people fall from them. 2. In do∣ctrine, her folly is manifested. 3. In credit for re∣ligion and holinesse, which made them feared and honoured. 4. In rich revenues taken away by the power of the Gospell, the whore is a withered, that once was a well favoured harlot, the beasts King∣dome is full of darknesse, Rev 16.10.11. a Scottish myst is falne on Episcopacy, the viall is on them, and yet they repent not. Goe on and prosper in your work, and the Lord hasten Babylons full and finall fall. Rev. 18. 2. 2. In regard of the work. 1. It is high, an Angelicall work; who but An∣gells powre out the vialls. May not men work? Rev. 15. 1, 6. 2. It is holy, a divine work, you work as Gods; you have a divine title, in office, Gods, Psal. 82. 6. You work for the King and the Kingdome, for your countries, and our consciences; your and our Eternity. You work for Christ and his Kingdome, you work for the Lord, 2 Chron. 19. 6. 3. It is a happy, it is a blessed work; happy you in rewarding Babylon as shee hath served us; you may by just censure doe to her, what she in her a∣gents hath done to us in unjust sentence, Psal. 137. 8. You work here, but you and yours have many a prayer, every day prayer, oft in the day prayer, Christs servants in the Ministery pray for you, Christs
people his beloved ones pray for you, all that can pray, pray for you the blessing of the poore, the prisoner, the exiled, the persecuted, the oppressed, the just, is upon you, that you may be as the Sun when it goeth in his strength, over all mountaines, and sublunary impediments. Much honoured, you may well work, you are under many a prayer, with ma∣ny a teare powred out to God the hearer of pray∣ers, that you and your work may prosper: it will wi∣ther any most flourishing bay tree, to have the Church pray against it; it will put vigour and spi∣rit into any gracious heat, to have Gods children pray for it. Iud. 5. 31. 4. It is Honourable, a work full of credit: Ioshuah is by this made famous in the world, upon this fall his fame was noised throughout all the countrey, Josh. 6. 27. Great is, and greater will be the glory of this Englands Parliament, albeit you meet with ill re∣quitall, by an unworthy and unthankfull people, yet your work will redound to ages, to posterity that will know your name; you continue Israels name, yea Christs name among us; you shall bee called the friends of nations, the healers of the Kingdome, deliverers raised up, Saviours come up on mount Sion, the repairers of the breach, the resto∣rers of the path to dwell in, Isay 58. 12. Work the Lords work, study his name and glory, hee will mind your memory, and honour, your name shall be blessed, Prov. 10. 7. 3. In regard of good to many. 1. The King shall raign in honour, and happines, (all impediments removed) a loving King over a lig people his throne will be established i righ∣ousnesse,
Prov. 25. 5. the evill (the King sitting on the throne of judgement) will bee scattered away with his eyes, 20. 8. His Crowne will be in safety, and His Person in dignity, verse 21. His Subjects many to His Honour, 14. 28. His Countenance as life to them, 16. 15. and His Favour as the cloud of the latter raine, yea as dew upon the grasse, 19. 22. to the joy of his peo∣ple by justice, 29. 2. 2 The way to Canaan, heaven opened,Doctur po lngam ignran∣tiam facienda esse hominibus copiam cognos∣cendae veritatis. Locupletissi∣mum veritatis incrementum, doctrin pluri∣bus capitibus illustratâ, enu∣clatius cogni∣tâ, distinctius traditâ. Bri in loc. and by the preaching of the Gospell made plaine, which by impediments was shut up; the Temple of God was open, Revel. 11. 19. After much ignorance, truth shall be knowne more clearly; the little book will be open, the vaile will be taken away, Revel. 10. 2. which was marvellously over-spread, Isay 25. 7. downe with these walls, and then many may goe on more comfortably, hopefully, speedily, to the promised land. 3 Liberty for Gods chosen, to come out of the fellowship of Canaanites, to hold communion with true Israelites: as Rahab was freed from Ieri∣cho when the walls fell, and it was taken; She was saved alive and dwelt in Israel: many now greatly afflicted with the company of the evill doers, when the work of reformation comes to an end, shall be able to live in communion of Saints; Ioshua 6. 25. 4 An addition to the Church of God of many di∣stressed, who by humane vanities, and inhumane persons could not dwell in the land; who will come home, and fall in to us abundantly by a re∣formation: many went away, but went not from us;
but were scattered, they love the assembly of Saints, without separation from them; when offences bee ta∣ken away, they being driven away will be gathe∣red; we shall lose none but gaine many,Ecclesia Di est qasi oculus: nm u in ocu∣lum etiamsi parva sordes inidit, ttum lmen obae∣ca; sic in Ec∣clesiastico cor∣pore, etiamsi paci sordida faciant, propè otum Ecclesia∣stici splendoris lumen obscu∣rant. Salian. de Gubern. Dei lib. 7.  whereas mens former wayes have scattered Saints and in∣creased Papists, and superstitions have over-spread the face of Religion in many places: our study to con∣tinue the Church in peace by vaine ceremonies, hath increased distractions in it; and the will and wit of man to content and convert Papists with May-poles and Morris-dances, is both vitious and ridiculous. King Asa his serious reformation, in putting downe Idols, and in setting up Gods wor∣ship, brought in men; 2 Chron. 15 8. And he ga∣thered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasses, and out of Simeon: (for they fell to him out of Israel in abun∣dance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him) verse 9. 4 In regard of God, 1 His word, 1 Calling you his choice ones to doe his work, as to Solomon, God hath chosen thee to build him a Sanctuary; take heed, Gods providence was in your choice, people set their hearts on you, gave voice and hand for you, to doe this work; you see your call, mind your duty, authority, opportu∣nity, and doe as God hath called you, 1 Chron. 28. 10. 2 Commanding you to doe his work, bee strong, and of good courage, doe it; v. 20. 2. His reward to you, your work shall be rewarded,
so did Obed assure Asa, 2 Chron. 15. 7. you shall not lose your labour in Gods service, Ierem. 31. 16. God will not be a man as Nebuchadnezzar, lack his wages for his Army, Ezek. 29. 19. but the Lord said, I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour, wherewith he served against it, (Tyre) because they wrought for me, saith the Lord, verse 20. Then he will give his voluntary servants a plena∣ry reward, 2 John 8. 1 Internall peace, joy, hope, the fruit of well-doing in your pure consciences, inward friends, very fast and faithfull to you without falshood or flattery, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 2 Externall in your houses, God will blesse you, and build your families; take care of Gods house, his worship, Religion, children, let God alone with your housholds; you are from them for to wait on God, God will be with them to wait to doe you good; mind Gods house now at this day this time, God will care for yours for time to come; as to David, the Lord will build thee an house, 1 Chr. 17. 10. David said in thankfulnesse to his God, thou hast spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come, verse 17. 3 Eternall, the reward of faith,; merce∣dem fidei: Bez. Praemium: Tr. inter. the salvation of the soule, 1 Peter 1. 9. God will never give lesse then a Kingdome, ô be faithfull in this Kingdome, you shall have a call to inherit a prepared Kingdom; Ye blessed, inherit ye it. Mat. 25 34. 3 His presence, behold him, Moses saw him, hence is your ability, sufficiency, safety, successe, think on it every day to meet with God in your Honourable assembly, God is among you gods,
God judgeth among the Gods, Hebrews 11. 27. with Psal. 82.1. 1 To work before you: God wrought on the Ieri∣chuntines ere Ioshua came to them, Rahab told the spies, The Lord hath given you the land, your terrour is fallen on them, they faint because of you, Ioshua 2.9. God hath wrought before you in Scotland, an honou∣red nation, our dearest brethren, a loyall people, most faithfull subjects. You have had your feet on the neck of the enemy, follow on in justice and holi∣nesse; so shall God doe to all your and his enemies. God will cleare your righteousnes as the light, and your judgement as the noon day, Psal. 37. 6. 2 To work for you: God will work all your works for you, to your hand, when they may be too hard for you, Isay 26. 12. Christ that man with a drawne sword comes in for his, as a captain of the Lords host, to fight for them when Ioshua could not tell which way to assault Iericho, Ioshua 5. 13, 14. 3 To work with you: as with Gedeon; The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour, Iud. 6. 12. the sword of the Lord and Gedeon will make the ene∣mies run, cry, and fly away, 7. 20, 21.Exibitis victo∣res, alacres, quia Deus rit dux vester, vos∣que proteget & diriget. Cornel. à Lap. in loc. Ruina Babylo∣nis praebitura sanctis laetandi & celebradi Dei jucundissi∣mum argumen∣tum. Par. 4 To be rereward to you, to gather you up, the Lord will regard the faint and weary, he will help his on, he will shield his from feare of the enemies and hurt of evill: The Lord shall goe before you, and the God of Israel shall be your rereward, Isai 52. 12. 4 His praise and glory (your ultimate end, your chiefe desire) when the walls be down the people shout, Ioshua 6. 20. the Church will praise God when Babylon falls, much people in heaven (the Church reformed and redeemed from the earth) were say∣ing
Allelujah, Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God, Revel. 19. 1. for he hath judged the great whore, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand, verse 2. againe Allelujah verse 3. all the company of Saints say againe Al∣lelujah, verse 4. a voice charging me to praise God, vers. 5. Allelujah, for the Lord God omniptent raign∣eth, verse 6. Let the feare of the Almighty fall upon all your hearts who come this day to lay your selves low before him, goe from this duty with renewed pur∣poses and confirmed resolutions to be for the Lord and his work with all activenes. Think on the enemies of the Church: Be they active? and not you! Would they ruine all? and not you study to preserve all? Be they spiritlesse, may not you have heartinesse? Bee they falne? will you feare them? Consider what may carry you on in your work, it is high, and holy, happy, and honourable: be of good courage and doe it; ponder in your hearts the good you may doe in your work, the Kings Honour, the Subjects peace, the way to heaven more o∣pened, the liberty of the Church procured, and an addition to the Church of many scattered, all call upon you, and under God depend on you. With deepest thoughts regard Gods word calling and commanding you; Gods reward internall, externall, and eternall for you; Gods preene to work before you, for you, with you: and to bee rereward to you; Gods praise the grea∣test good, the chiefest fruit of all your work, who will allow you comfort; and take the glory to himselfe: vow this day to the Lord and performe
it Say, every soule, I am the Lords, that it may bee evident you have fasted to the Lord,Christianus nisi bona opera fe∣cerit, fidem su∣am penitus ap∣probare non possit, Salv. de Gubern. lib. 4. pray∣ed to the Lord, beleeved in the Lord, while you work for the Lord; then the Lord will turn our Trouble into Peace, our Crosses into Comforts, our Fasting into Feasting, our Prayer into Praise, our Sorrow into Ioy, and our Mourning into a good day. FINIS.
