12719 99839462 3881
VIRGIDEMIARVM The three last Bookes. Of byting Satyres. Corrected and amended with some Additions. by. I. H. Imprinted at London for Robert Dexter, at the signe of the Brasen Serpent in Paules Church yard. 1599.
The Authors charge to his Satyres. YE luck-lesse Rymes, whom not vnkindly spight Begot long since of Trueth and holy Rage, Lye heere in wombe of Silence and still Night Vntill the broyles of next vnquiet age: That which is others graue shalbe your wombe, And that which beares you, your eternall Toombe. Cease ere ye gin, and ere ye liue be dead, And dye and liue ere euer ye be borne, And be not bore, ere ye be buried, Then after liue, sith you haue dy'd beforne, When I am dead and rotten in the dust, Then gin to liue, and leaue when others lust. For when I die, shall Enuie die with mee And lye deepe smothered with my Marble-stone, Which while I liue cannot be done to dye,
Nor, if your life gin ere my life be done, Will hardly yeeld t'await my mourning hearse. But for my dead corps change my liunig verse. What shall the ashes of my senselesse vrne, Neede to regard the rauing world aboue. Sith afterwards I neuer can returne To feele the force of hatred or of loue? Oh if my soule could see their Post-hume spight Should it not ioy and triumph in the sight? What euer eye shalt finde this hatefull scrole After the date of my deare Exequies, Ah pitty thou my playning Orphanes dole That faine would see the sunne before it dies: It dy'de before, now let it liue againe, Then let it die, and bide some famous bane. Satis est potuisse videri.
VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 4.
SAT. 1. Che baiar vuol, bai. VVHO dares vpbraid these open rimes of mine With blindfold Aquines, or darke Venusine? Or rough-hew'ne Teretismes writ in th'antique vain Like an old Satyre, and new Flaccian? Which who reads thrise, & rubs his rugged brow, And deepe intendeth euery doubtfull row, Scoring the margent with his blazing stars And hundreth crooked interlinears, (Like to a Merchants debt-role new defac't When some crack'd Manour crost his book at last) Should all in rage the Curse-beat Page out-riue, And in ech dust-heape bury mee aliue
Stamping like Bucephall, whose slackned raines, And bloody fet-lockes fry with seuen mens braines; More cruell than the crauon Satyres Ghost, That bound dead bones vnto a burning post, Or some more strait-lac'd Iuror of the rest, Impannel'd of an Holy-Fax inquest; Yet wel bethought stoops downe, and reads a new: The best lieslow, and loathes the shallow view, Quoth old Eudemon, when his gout-swolne fist Gropes for his double Ducates in his chist: Then buckle close his carelesse lyds once more, To pose the pore-blinde snake of Epidaore. That Lyncius may be match't with Gaulards sight, That sees not Paris for the houses height; Or wilie Cyppus, that can winke and snort Whiles his wife dallies on Maecenas skort; Yet when hee hath my crabbed Pamphlet red As often times as PHILLIP hath beene dead,
Bids all the Furies haunt each peeuish line That thus haue rackt their friendly readers eyne; Worse than the Logogryphes of later times, Or Hundreth Riddles shak't to sleeue-lesse rimes; Should I endure these curses and dispight While no mans eare should glow at what I write? Labeo is whip't, and laughs mee in the face: Why? for I smite and hide the galled place. Gird but the Cynicks Helmet on his head, Careshee for Talus, or his flayle of lead? Long as the craftie Cuttle lieth sure In the blacke Cloude of his thicke vomiture; Who list complaine of wronged faith or fame When hee may shift it to anothers name? Caluus can scratch his elbow, and can smile, That thrift-lesse Pontice bites his lip the while. Yet I intended in that selfe deuise, To checke the churle for his knowne couetise.
Ech points his straight fore-finger to his friend, Like the blind Diall on the Belfrey end: Who turnes it homeward to say, this is I, As bolder Socrates in the Comedy? But single out, and say once plat and plaine That coy Matrona is a Curtizan, Or thou false Cryspus chokd'st thy wealthie guest Whiles hee lay snoring at his midnight rest, And in thy dung-cart did'st the carkasse shrine And deepe intombe it in Port-esquiline. Proud Trebius liu's for all his princely gate On third-hand suits, and scrapings of the plate. Titius knew not where to shroude his head Vntill hee did a dying widow wed Whiles she lay doting on her deathes bed, And now hath purchas'd lands with one nights paine And on the morrow woes and weds againe. Now see I fire-flakes sparkle from his eyes
Like a Comets tayle in th'angry skies, His pouting cheeks puffe vp aboue his brow Like a swolne Toad touch't with the Spyders blow; His mouth shrinks sideward like a scornefull Playse To take his tired Eares ingratefull place. His Eares hang lauing like a new-lug'd swine To take some counsell of his grieued eyne. Now laugh I loud, and breake my splene to see This pleasing pastime of my poesie, Much better than a Paris-garden Beare, Or prating puppet on a Theatere, Or Mimoes whistling to his tabouret Selling a laughter for a cold meales meate. Go to then ye my sacred Semones, And please me more, the more ye do displease; Care we for all those bugs of ydle feare? For Tigels grinning on the Theater, Or scar-babe threatnings of the rascal crue,
Or wind-spent verdicts of each Ale-knights view? What euer brest doth freeze for such false dread, Beshrow his base white liuer for his meede. Fond were that pitie, and that feare were sin, To spare wast leaues that so deserued bin. Those toothlesse Toyes that dropt out by mis-hap, Bee but as lightning to a thunder-clap: Shall then that foule infamous Cyneds hide Laugh at the purple wales of others side? Not, if hee were as neere, as by report, The stewes had wont to be to the Tenis-court, Hee that while thousands enuie at his bed, Neighs after Bridals, and fresh-mayden heade; While slauish Iuno dares not looke awry To frowne at such imperious riualrye, Not tho shee sees her wedding Iewels drest To make new Bracelets for a strumpets wrest, Or like some strange disguised Messaline,
Hires a nights lodging of his concubine; Whether his twilight-torch of loue do call To reuils of vncleanly Musicall, Or midnight plaies, or Tauerns of new wine, Hy ye white Aprons to your Land-Lords signe; When all, saue tooth-lesse age or infancie, Are summon'd to the Court of Venerie. Who list excuse? when chaister dames can hyre, Some snout-faire stripling to their Apple-squire: Whom staked vp like to some stallion-steede They keepe with Egs and Oysters for the breede. O Lucine! barren Caia hath an heire After her husband's dozen yeares despaire. And now the bribed Mid-wife sweares apace, The bastard babe doth beare his fathers face. But hath not Lelia past hir virgine yeares? For modest shame (God wot) or penall feares. He tels a Merchant tidings of a prise,
That tels Cynedo of such nouelties, Worth little lesse than landing of a Whale, Or Gades spoyles, or a churles funerale: Go bid the baines and point the bridall day, His broking Baud hath got a noble prey, A vacant tenement, an honest dowre Can fit his pander for her paramoure, That hee, base wretch, may clog his wit-old head And giue him hansell of his Hymen-bed. Ho! all ye Females that would liue vnshent Fly from the reach of Cyneds regiment. If Trent be drawne to dregs, and Low refuse, Hence ye hot lechour, to the steaming stewes. Tyber the famous sinke of Christendome Turn thou to Thames, & Thames rūn towards Rome: What euer damned streame but thine were meete To Quench his lusting liuers boyling heate? Thy double draught may quench his dog-daies rage
With some stale Bacchis, or obsequious page, When writhen Lena makes her sale-set showes Of wooden Venus with faire limned browes; Or like him more some vailed Matrons face, Or trained prentise trading in the place: The close adultresse, where her name is red Coms crauling from her husbands lukewarme bed, Her carrion skin bedaub'd with odours sweete, Groping the postern with her bared feet. Now play the Satyre who so list for mee, Valentine selfe, or some as chast as hee. In vaine she wisheth long Alchmanaes night, Cursing the hasty dawning of the light, And with her cruell Ladie-starre vprose Shee seekes hir third roust on her silent toes, Besmeared all with loathsome smoke of lust Like Acherons steemes, or smoldring sulphur dust: Yet all day sits shee simpring in her mew
Like some chast dame, or shrined saynct in shew, Whiles hee lies wallowing with a westiehed And palish carkasse, on his Brothel-bed, Till his salt bowels boyle with poysonous fire, Right Hercules with his second Deianire. O Esculape! how rife is Phisicke made, When ech Brasse-basen can professe the trade Of ridding pockie wretches from their paine, And doe the beastly cure for ten-groats gaine? Al these & more, deserue some blood-drawne lines: But my sixe Cords beene of too loose a twine. Stay till my beard shall sweepe myne aged brest, Then shall I seeme an awfull Satyrist: While now my rimes relish of the Ferule still, Some nose-wise Pedant saith; whose deepe-sene skil Hath three times construed either Flaccus ore, And thrise rehears'd them in his Triuiall floare, So let them taxe mee for my hote-bloodes rage, Rather than say I doted in my age.
SAT. 2. Arcades ambo. OLD driueling Lolio drudges all he can, To make his eldest sonne a Gentleman. Who can despaire that sees another thriue, By lone of twelue-pence to an Oyster-wiue? When a craz'd scaffold, and a rotten stage, Was all rich Naenius his heritage. Nought spendeth he for feare, nor spares for cost: And all he spendes and spaires beside is lost; Himselfe goes patched like some bare Cottyer, Least he might ought the future stocke appeyre. Let giddie Cosmius change his choyce aray, Like as the Turke his Tents thirse in a day.
And all to sun and ayre his suites vntold From spitfull mothes, and frets, and hoary mold, Bearing his paune-layd lands vpon his backe As Snailes their shels, or Pedlers do their packe: Who cannot shine in tissues and pure gold, That hath his lands and patrimony sold? Lolioes side-cote is ough Pampilian Guilded with drops that downe the bosome ran, White Carsy hose, patched on eyther knee, The very Embleme of good husbandrie, And a knit night-cap made of coursest twine, With two long labels button'd to his chin; So rides he mounted on the market-day Vpon a straw-stuft pannel, all the way, With a maund charg'd with houshold marchandise With egs, or white-meate, from both Dayries: And with that byes he rost for sunday-noone, Proud how he made that weeks prouision:
Else is he stall-fed on the worky-day With browne-bread crusts softened in sodden whey, Or water-grewell, or those paups of meale That Maro makes his Simule, and Cybeale: Or once a weeke perhaps for nouelty, Reez'd Bacon: soords shall feast his familie; And weens this more than one egge cleft in twaine To feast some patrone and his Chappelaine; Or more than is some hungry gallants dole, That in a dearth runs sneaking to an hole, And leaues his man and dog to keepe his hall Least the wilde roome should run forth of the wall. Good man him list nor spend his idle meales In quinsing Plouers, or in wining Quales; Nor toot in Cheap side baskets earne and late please To set the first tooth in some nouell-cate. Let sweete-mouth'd Mercia bid what crowns she For halfe-fed Cherries, or greene garden pease,
Or the first Artichoks of all the yeare, To make so lauish cost for little cheare: When Lolio feasteth in his reueling fit, Some sterued Pullen scoures the rusted spitt. For else how should his sonne maintained bee, At Ins of Court or of the Chancerie: There to learne Law, and courtly carriage, To make amendes for his meane parentage, Where he vnknowne and ruffling as he can, Goes currant each-where for a Gentleman? What Brokers lousy wardrop cannot reach, With tissued paines to pranck ech peasants breech? Couldst thou but giue the wall, the cap, the knee, To proud Sartorio that goes stradling by, Wer't not the needle pricked on his sleeue Doth by good hap the secret watch-word giue? But hear'st thou Lolioes sonne, gin not thy gate, Vntill the euening Oule or bloody-Batt.
Neuer vntill the lamps of Paules beene light, And niggard lanternes shade the Moon-shine night, Then when the guiltie bankrupt in bolde dreade, From his close Cabin thrusts his shrinking heade, That hath beene long in shady shelter pent Imprisoned for feare of prisonment. May be some russet-cote Parochian Shall call thee cosen, friend, or countryman, And for thy hoped fist crossing the streete, Shall in thy fathers name his God-son greett, Could neuer man worke thee a worser shame Then once to minge thy fathers odious name, Whose mention were alike to thee as leeue, As a Catch-pols fist vnto a Bankrupts sleeue; Or an, Hos ego, from old Petrarchs spright Vnto a Plagiarie sonnet-wright. There soone as he can kisse his hand in gree, And with good grace bow it below the knee,
Or make a Spanish face with fauning cheere, With th' Iland-Conge like a Caualier, And shake his head, and cringe his necke and side, Home hyes he in hisf athers Farme to bid. The Tenants wonder at their land-Lords Sonne, And blesse them at so sudden comming on, More then who vies his pence to view some tricke Of stranges Moroccoes dumbe Arithmeticke, Or the young Elephant, or two-tayl'd steere, Or the rig'd Camell, or the Fidling Frere. Nay then his Hodge shallleaue the plough & waine, And buy a booke, and go to schoole againe: Why mought not he as well as others done, Rise from his Festuc to his Littleton? Fooles, they may feed with words & liue by ayre, That climbe to honour by the Pulpits stayre: Sit seauen yeates pining in an Anchores cheyre, To win some parched shreds of Miniuere,
And seuen more plod at a Patrons tayle, To get a gelded Chappels cheaper sayle. Old Lolio sees and laugheth in his sleeue, At the great hope they and his state doe giue. But that which glads and makes him proud'st of all, Is when the brabling neighbours on him call, For counsell in some crabbed case of law, Or some Indentments, or some bond to draw: His Neighbours goose hath grazed on his Lea, What action mought be entred in the plea? So new falne lands haue made him in request, That now he lookes as lofty as the best. And well done Lolio, like a thrifrie syre, T'were pitty but thy sonne should prooue a squire. How I fore see in many ages past, When Lolioes caytiue name is quite defa'st, Thine heire, thine heyres heyre, & his heyre againe From out the loynes of carefull Lolian,
Shall climbe vp to the Chancell pewes on hie, And rule and raigne in their rich Tenancie; When pearch't aloft to perfect their estate They racke their rents vnto a treble rate; And hedge in all the neighbour common-lands, And clodge their slauish tenant with commaunds, Whiles they, poore soules, with feeling sighs cōplain And wish old Lolio were aliue againe, And praise his gentle soule and wish it well And of his friendly facts full often tell. His father dead, tush, no it was not hee, He findes recordes of his great pedigree, And tels how first his famous Ancestor Did come in long since with the Conquerour. Nor hath some bribed Herald first assign'd His quartered Armes and crest of gentle kinde, The Scottish Barnacle (if I might choose) That of a worme doth waxe a winged goose;
Nathelesse some hungry squire for hope of good Matches the churles Sonne into gentle blood, Whose sonne more iustly of his gentry boasts Than who were borne at two pide painted postes; And had some traunting Merchant to his syre That trafiqu'd both by water and by fyre. O times! since euer Rome did Kings create, Brasse Gentlemen, and Caesars Laureate.
SAT. 3. Fuimus Troës. VEL Vix ea nostra. VVHat boots it Pontice, tho thou could'st dis∣course Of a long golden line of Ancestors? Or shew their painted faces gaylie drest, From euer since before the last conquest; Or tedious Bead-roles of descended blood, From Father Iaphet since Deucalions flood, Or call some old Church-windowes to record The age of thy fayre Armes, Or find some figures halfe obliterate In rain-beat Marble neare to the Church-gate,
Vpon a Crosse-leg'd Toombe: what boots it thee To shew the rusted Buckle that did tie The Garter of thy greatest Grand sires knee? What to reserue their reliques many yeares, Their siluer-spurs, or spils of booken speares; Or cyte olde Oclands verse, how they did weild The wars in Turwin, or in Turney field? And if thou canst in picking strawes engage, In one halfe day thy fathers heritage, Or hide what euer treasures he the got, In some deepe Cock-pit; or in desperate Lot Vpon a sixe-square peece of Iuorie, Throw both thy selfe, and thy posteritie? Or if (O shame!) in hired Harlots bed Thy wealthie heyre-dome thou haue buried: Then Pontice little boots thee to discourse Of a long golden line of Ancestors. Ventrous Fortunio his farme hath sold,
And gads to Guiane land to fish for gold, Meeting perhaps, if Orenoque denye, Some stragling pinnace of Polonian Rie. Then comes home floting with a silken sayle, That Seuerne shaketh with his Canon-peale; Wiser Raymundus in his closet pent, Laughs at such danger and aduenturement; When halfe his lands are spent in golden smoke, And now his second hopefull glasse is broke. But yet if haply his third fornace hold, Devoteth all his pots and pans to gold; So spend thou Pontice, if thou canst not spare, Like some stout sa-man or Philosopher; And were thy fathers gentle? that's their praise, No thanke to thee by whom their name decays; By vertue got they it, and valourous deed, Do thou so Pontice, and be honoured: But else looke how their vertue was their owne,
Not capable of propagation, Right so their titles beene, nor can be thine, Whose ill deserts might blanke their golden line. Tell me, thou gentle Troian; dost thou prise Thy brute beasts worth by their dams qualities? Say'st thou this Colt shall prooue a swift-pac'd steed Onely because a Iennet did him breed? Or say'st thou this same Horsse shall win the prize, Because his dame was swiftest Trunchefice, Or Runceuall his Syre; himselfe a Gallaway? Whiles like a tireling Iade he lags half-way; Or whiles thou seest some of thy Stallion-race, Their eyes boar'd out, masking the Millers-maze, Like to a Scythian slaue sworne to the payle; Or dragging froathy barrels at his tayle? Albee wise Nature in her prouidence, Wont in the want of reason and of sence, Traduce the natiue vertue with the kind,
Making all brute and sencelesse things inclin'd, Vnto their cause, or place where they were sowne That one is like to all, and all like one. Was neuer Foxe, but wylie cubs begets, The Beare his feirce-nesse to hi brood besets; Nor farefull Hare fals out of Lyos seed, Nor Eagle wont the tender Doue to breed; Creet ur wont the Cypresse sad to beare, Acheron banks the palsh Popelare; The Palme doth rifely rise in Iury field, And Alpheus waers nought but Oliues wild. Asopus bred big-Bul-rushes alone, Meander heath; Peaches by Nilus grown; An English Wolfe, an Irish Toad to see, Were as a chast-man nurs'd in Italy. And now when Nature giues another guide, To humane kind that in his bosome bides: Abue instinct, his reason and discourse,
His beeing better, is his life the worse? Ah me! how sldome see we sonnes succed Their Fathers praise in prowesse and great deed? Yet certes if the Syre be ill inclin'd, His faults befal his sonnes by course of kind. Scaurus was couetous; his sonne not so, But not his pared nayle will hee forgoe: Florin the syre id women loue alie, And so his sonne doth too, all, but his wife: Brag of thy Fathers fauls, they are thine owne; Brag of his lands, if those be not forgone: Brag of thine owne good deeds, for they are thine, More than his life, or lands, or golden line.
SAT. 4. Plus beauque fort. CAn I not touch some vpstart carper-shield Of Lolio's sonne, that neuer saw the field Or taxe wild Pontice for his Luxuries, Bt straight they tell mee of Tiresias eyes? Or lucklesse Collingborns feeding of the crowes, Or hundreth Sclps which Thames sill vnderflowes? But straight Sigalion nods and knits his browes, And winkes and wates his warning hand for feare, And lisps some silent letters in my eare? Haue I not vow'd for shunning such dbate (Pardon ye Satyres) to degnerate? And wading low in this plbein lake
That no salt waue shall froath vpon my backe, Lt Labeo, or who else list for mee, Go loose his eares and fall to Alchymie. Onely, let Gallio giue me leaue a while To schoole him once, or ere I change my style. O lawlesse paunch the cause of much despight, Through raunging of a currish appetite, When splenish morsels crm the gaping Maw, Withouten dets care, or trencher-law, Tho neuer haue I alerne imes profest To be some Ladies trencher-criicke guest; Whiles each bit cooleth for the Oracle Whose sentence charms it with a ryming spell; Touch not this Coler, that Mlancholy This bit were rie and hote, that cold and dy; Yet can I set my Gallios dting, Apetle of a Larke, or Plouers wing, And warne him not to cast his wanton eyne
On grosser Bacon, or salt Haberdine, Or dried Flihes of some smoked Beeue, Hang'd on a writen wythe since Martins eue, Or burnt Larkes heeles, or Rashers aw and greene, Or Melancholike liuer of an Hn, Which stout Vorno brags to make his feast, Ad claps his hand on his braue Ostrige-breast; Then fals to praise the ardy Ianizr, That sucks his horse side thirsting in the warre. Lasly to sale vp all that he hath spoke, Quaffes a whole Tunnell of Tabacco smoke: If Matius in boystrous Buffes be drest, Branded with Iron plates vpon the brest, And pointed on the shoulders, for the nonce, As new-come from the Belgian garrisons: What shall thou need to enuie ought at that, When as thou smellest like a Ciuet Cat; When as thine oyled locks smooth platted fall,
Shining like varnisht pictures on a wall. When a plum'd Fanne may shade thy chalked face, And lawny strips thy naked bosome grace. If brabling Make-fray at ech Fayre and Sise Picks quarrel for to show his valiantie, Straight pressed for an hungry Swizzers pay To thrust his fist to ech part of the fray, And piping hote puffes toward the pointed plaine With a broad Scot, or proking spit of Spayne, O hoyseth sayle vp to a sorraine shore, That he may liue a lawlesse Conquerer. If some such desperate Hakster shall deuise To rouze thine Hares-heart from her cowardise, As idle children striuing to excell In blowing bubles from an emptie shell; Oh Hercules how like to proue a man, That all so rath thy warlike life began? Thy mother could thee for thy cradle set,
Her husbands rusty iron corselet; Whose iargling sound might rocke her babe to rest That neuer plain'd of his vneasie nest There did he dreame of drery wars at hand, And woke, and fought, & won, re he could stand But who hath seene the Lambs of Tarentie, May gesse what Gllio his manners beene; All soft as is the falling thistle-downe, Soft as the fue ball, or Morrians crowne; Now Gallio, gins thy youthly heat to raigne In euery vigorous limme, and swelling vaine, Time bids the raise thine hedstrong thoughts on by To valour and aduenterous chiualry; Pawne thou no gloue for challenge of the deede, Nor make thy Quintaine others armed head T'enrich the waiting Herald with thy shame And make thy losse, the scornefull scaffolds game Wars; God forend; nay God defend from warre,
Soone are Sonns spent, that not soone reared are: Gallio may pull me roses ere they fall, Or in his net entrap the Tennis-ball: Or tend his Spar-hauke mantling in her mew, Or yelping Begles busy heeles persue, Or watch a sinking corke vpon the shore, Or halter Finches through a priuie doore, Or list he spend the time in sportfull game, In daily courting of his louely dame, Hange on her lips, melt in her wanton eye, Dance in her hand, ioy in her iollity, Here's little perill, and much lesser paine, So timely Hymen doe the rest restraine: Hy wanton Gallio and wed betime, Why should'st thou leese the pleasures of thy prime? Seest thou the Rose-leaues fall vngathered? Then hye thee wanton Gallio to wed: Let Ring and Ferule meet vpon thine hand,
And Lucines girdle with her swathing-bands, Hy thee and giue the wld yet one dwarfe more: Such as it got when thou thy selfe wast bore: Looke not for warning of thy bloomed chin, Can neuer happines to soone begin; Virginius vow'd to keepe his Mayden-head, And eats chat Lettuce, and drinkes Poppy-seed, And smels on Camphyre fasting: and that done, Lng hath he liu'd chast as a vayled Nunne, Free as a new-absolued Damosell That Frier Cornelius shriued in his Cell, Till now he waxt a toothlesse Bacheler, He thaw's like Chaucers frostie Ianiuere And sets a months minde vpon smiling May. And dyes his beard that did his age bewray; Byting on Annis-eede, and Rose-marine, Which might the Fume of his rot lungs refine:
Now he in Charons barge a Bride doth seeke, The maydens mocke, and call him withered Leeke, That with a greene tayle hath an hoary head, And now he would, and now he cannot wed
SAT. 5. Stupet Albius aere. VVOuld now that Math were the Satyrist, That some fat bribe might greaze him in the fist, o which he need not braule at any barre Nor kise the booke to be a periurer; Who else would sorne his silence to haue sold, And haue his tongue tyed with strings of Gold? Crius is dead, and buried long since, And all that loued golden Abstinence: Might he not well repine at his old fee, Would he but spare to speake of vsurie? Hirlings enow beside, can be so base, Tho we should scorne ech bribing varlets brasse;
Yet he and I could shun ech ealous head, Sticking our thumbs close to our girdle-stead, Tho were they manicled behind our backe, Anothers fist can serue our fees to take: Yet pursy Euclio cearly smiling prayde, That my sharpe words might curtal their side trade; For thousands beene in euery gouernall That liue by losse, and rise by others fall. What euer sickly sheepe so secret dies, But some foule Raen hath bespoke his eyes? What else makes N. when his lands are spent, Go shaking like a threedbare malecontent. Whose band-lesse Bonnet vailes his ore-grown chin And sullen rags be wray his Morphew'd skin; Soships he to the woluish weterne ile, Among the sauage Kernes in sad exile; Or in the Turkish wars at Caesars pay To rub his life out till the latest day;
Another shifting Gallant to forecast, To gull his Hostesse for a months repast, With some gal'd Trunck ballac'd with straw & ston Left for the paune of his prouision; Had F. shop lyen fallow but from hence, His doores close seal'd as in some pestilence, Whiles his light eeles their fearfull flight can take, To get some badg-lesse Blew vpon his backe? Tocullio was a welthie vurer, Such store of incomes had he euery yeare, By Bushels was he wont to met his oyne As did the olde wife of Trimlcion Could he do more that finds an idle roome, For many hundreth thousands on a Toombe? Or who reares vp foure free-schooles in his age, Of his old pillage, and damn'd surplusage? Yet now he swore by that sweere Crosse he kist, (That siluer crosse, where hee had sacrific'd
His coueting soule, by his desires owne doome, Daily to die the Diuels Martyrdome) His Angels were all flowne vp to their sky, And had forsooke his naked Tresurie: Farewell Astraea and her weights of gold Vntill his lingring Calends once be told; Nought left behind but wax & parchment scroles Like Lucians dreame that siluer turn'd to coles Shouldst thou him credit, that nould credit thee? Yes and maiest sweare he swore the verity; The ding-thrift heire, his shift-got summe mispent, Comes drouping like a pennylesse penitent, And beats his faint fist on Tocullios doore, It lost the last and now must call for more. Now hath the Spider caught a wandring Flie, And drags her captiue at her cruell thie Soone is his arrand red in his pale face, Which beares dumbe Characters of euery case,
So Cyneds dusky cheeke and fiery eye, And hayre-les brow, tels where he last did lye; So Mtho doth bewray his guilty thought, While his pale face doth say, his cause is nought Seest thou the wary Angler trayle along His feeble line, soone as some Pike too strong Hath swallowed the bate that scornes the shore, Yet now nearehand cannot resist no more: So lyeth he aloofe in smooth pretence, To hide his rough intended violence; As he that vnder name of Christmas Cheere, Can starue his Tenants all th'ensuing yeare: Paper and wax (God wo) a weake repay, For such deepe debts, and downast sums as they; Write, seale, deliuer, take, go, spend and speede, And yet full heardly could his present need Part with such summe; For but as yester-late Did Furnus offer pen-worths at easie rate,
For small disbursment; He the bankes hath broke, And needs mote now some further playne ore loo; Yet ere he goe fame would he be releast: Hy yo ye Rauens, hy you to the feast; Prouided that thy lands are leften yre, To be redem'd or ere thy day expire; Then shalt thou teare those idle paper-bonds, That thus had fettered thy pawned lands. Ah foole! For sooner shalt thou sll the rest, Then stake ought for thy ormer Interest; Whn it shall grind thy grating gall for shame, To see the lands that beare thy Grandies name, Become a dunghill peasants sommer-hall, Or lonely Hermits cage inhospitall; A pining Gourmand, an imperious slaue, An horsleech, barren womb, and gaping graue, A legall thiefe, a bloud-lesse murtherer; A feind incanate, a false Vsurer,
Albee such mayne extort sorns to be pent In the clay wals of thatched Tenement, For certes no man of a low degree, May bid two ghetes; or Gout, or Vsurie: Vnlesse some base hedge-creeping Collybist Scatters his refuse scraps on whom he list, For Easter-gloues, or for a shroftide Hen, Which bought to giue, he takes to ell agen: I doe not meane some glozing Merchants feate, That laugheth at the cozened worlds deceipt, When as an hundred stocks lie in his fist He leaks and sinkes, and breaketh when he list. But, Nummius cas'd the needy Gallants care, With a base bagaine of his blowen ware Of fusted hoppes now lost for lacke of sayle, Or mo'ld browne-paper that could nought auaile: Or what he cannot vtter otherwise, May pleasure Fridoline for treble price.
Whiles his false broker lyeth in the wind, And for a present Chapman is assign'd, The cutthrote wretch for their compacted gaine, Buyes all for but one quarter of the mayne; Whiles if he chance to breake his deare-bought day And forfai for default of due repay His late intangled lands: Then Fridoline, Buy thee a wallet, and go beg or pine If Mammon selfe should euer liue with men, Mammon himselfe shalbe a Citizen.
SAT. 6. Quid placet ergo? I Wote not how the world's dgnerate, That men or know, or like not their estate: Out from the Gades vp to the Easterne morne, Not one but holds his natiu state forlorne. When comely striplings wish it were their chance, For Caeis distae to exchange their Lance; And we are curl'd Priwigs, and chalke their face, And still re poring on their pockt-glasse Tyr'd with pinn'd Ruffs, & Fans, and partlet strips, And Buskes, and Verdingales about their hips; And tread on corked stilts  prisons pace, And make their Napkin for their spitting-place,
And gripe their wast within a narrow span: Fond Caenis that would'dst wish to be a man; Whose mannish Hus-wiues like their refuse state, And make a drudge of their vxorius mate, Who like a Cot-qune freezeth at the rocke, Whiles his breach't dame doth man the forren stock. Is't not a shame to see ech homely groom Sit perched in an idle charriot-roome, That were not meete some paunell to bestride Surcingled to a galledg Hackneys hide? Ech Muck-worme will be rich with lawlesse gaine, Altho he smother vp mowes of seuen yeares graine, And hang'd himself when corne grows cheap again; Altho he buy whole Haruests in the spring And foyst in alse strikes to the measuring: Altho his shop be muffed from the light Like a day-dungeon, or Cimmerian night: Nor full nor fasting can the Carle take rest,
Whiles his George-Nobles rusten in his Chest, He sleeps but once and dreames of burglae, And wakes and castes about his frighted eye, And gropes for theeues in euery darker shade, And if a Mouse but stirre he cals for ayde. The sturdie Plough-man doth the soldier see, All scared with pide colours to the knee, Whom Indian pillage hath made fortunate, And now he gins to loath his former state: Now doth he inly scorne his Kendall-greene, And his patch't Cockers now dispised beene. Nor list he now go whistling to the Carre, But sels his Teeme and fetleth to the warre. O warre to them that neuer tryde thee sweete! When his dead mate fals groueling at his feete, And angry bullets whistlen at his are, And his dim eyes see nought but death and drere: Oh happy Plough-mā were thy weale well known;
Oh happy all estates except his owne! Some dronen Rimer thinks his time well spent, If he can liue to see his name in print: Who when he is once fleshed to the Presse, And sees his handsell haue such fayre successe, Sung to the wheele, and sung vnto the payle, He sends forth thraues of Ballads to the sale. Nor then can rest: But volumes vp bodg'd rimes, To haue his name talk't of in future times: The brainsicke youth that feeds his tickled eare With sweet-sauc'd lies of some false Traeiler, Which hath the Spanish Decades red a while; Or whetstone leaings of old Maundeuile, Now with discourses breakes his mid-night sleepe, Of his aduentures through the Indian deepe, Of all their massy heapes of golden mines, Or of the antique Toombs of Palestine; Or of Damascus Magike wall of Glasse,
Of Salomon his sweating piles of Brasse, Of the Bird Ru that beares an Elephant: Of Mer-maids that the Southerne seas do haunt; Of head lesse men; of sauage Cannibals; The fashions of their liues and Gouernals: What monstrous Cities there erected bee, Cayro, or the Citie of the Trinitie: Now are they dung hill-Cocks that haue not seene The bordering Alpes, or else the Neighbour Rhene, And now he plyes the newes-full Grashopper, Of voyages and ventures to enquire. His land morgag'd, He sea-beat in the way Wishes for home a thousand sithes a day: And now he deemes his home-bred fare asleee As his parch't Bisket, or his barreld Beefe: Mong'st all these sturs of discontented strife, Oh let me lead an Academicke life, To know much, and to thinke we nothing know;
Nothing to haue, yet thinke we haue enough, In skill to want, and wanting seeke for more, In weale nor want, nor wish for greater store; Enuye ye Monarchs with your proud excesse At our low Sayle, and our hye Happinesse. Lib. 4. Finis.
VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 5.
SAT. 1. Sit paena merenti. PArdon ye glowing eares; Needs will it out, Tho brazen wals compas'd my tongue about, As thicke as wealthy Scrobioes quicke-set rowes In the wide Common that he did inclose. Pull out mine eyes, if I shall see no vice, Or let me see it with detesting eyes. Renowmed Aquine, now I follow thee, Farre as I may for feare of ieopardie; And to thy hand yeeld vp the Iuye-mace, From crabbed Persius, and more smooth Horace; Or from that shrew, the Roman Poetesse, That taught her gossips learned bitternesse,
Or Luciles Muse whom thou did stimitate, Or Menips olde, or Pasquillers of late, Yet name I not Mutius, or Tigilline; Tho they deserue a keener stile then mine; Nor meane to ransacke vp the quiet graue; Nor burne dead bones, as h example gaue, I taxe the liuing, let dead ashes rest, Whose faults are dead, and nayled in their chest; Who can refraine, that's guiltlesse of their crime, Whiles yet he liues in such a cruell time. When Titios grounds, that in his Grand-sires daies But one pound fine, one penny rent did raise, A sommer-snow-ball, or a winter-rose, Is growne to thousands as the world now goes: So thrift and time sets other things on flote, That now his sonne soups in a silken cote, Whose Grandsire happily a poore hungry Swayne, Begd some cast Abby in the Churches wayne
And but for that, what euer he may vaunt, Who knows a Monke, had beene a Mendicant; While freezing Matho, that for one leane see, Wont terme ech Terme the Terme of Hibarie, May now in steed of those his simple fees; Get the fee-simples of fayre Manneryes What, did he counterfait his Princes hand, For some streaue Lord-ship of concaled land? Or on ech Michaell, and Lady-day, Tooke he deepe forfaits for an houres delay? And gain'd no lesse by such iniurious braule, Then Gamius by his sixt wiues buriall? Or hath he wonne some wider Interest, By hoary charters from his Grandsires chest, Which late some bribed Scribe for slender wage, Writ in the Characters of another age, That Ploydon selfe might stammer to rehearse, Whose date ore lookes three Centuries of yeares;
Who euer yet the Trackes of weale so tride, But there hath bene one beaten way beside? He, when he lets a Lease for life, or yeares, (As neuer he doth vntill the date expeares; For when the full state in his fist doth lie, He may take vantage of the vacancie,) His Fine affor'ds so many trebled pounds, As he agreethy ares to Lease his grounds: His Rent in faire respondence must ase, To double trebles of his one yeares price; Of one bayes breadth, God wot, a silly cote, Whose that ched spars arefurr'd with sluttish soote A whole inch thick; shininig like Black-moors brows Through smok that down the head les barrel blows. At his beds-feete feeden his stalled teme. His swine beneath, his pullen ore the beame: A starued Tenement, such as I gesse, Stand stragling in the wasts of Holdernesse,
Or such as shiuer on a Peake-hill side, When Marches lungs beate on their turfe-clad hide: Such as nice Lipius would grudge to see, Aboue his lodging in wild West-phalye: Or as the Saxon King his Court might make, When his sides playned of the Neat-heards cake. Yet must he haut his greedy Land-lords hall, With often presents at ech Festiuall; With crammed Caponseuery New-ye ares morne, Or with greene-cheeses when his sheep are shorne Or many Maunds-full of his mellow fruite, To make some way to win his waighty suite. Whom cannot gifts at last cause to relent, Or to win fauour, or flee punishment? When griple Patrons turne their sturdie steele To waxe, when they the golden flame do fcelc; When grand Mcenas casts a glauering eye, On the cold present of a Poefie:
And least he might more frankly take then giue, Grops for a french crowne in his emptie sleee Thence Clodus hopes to set his shoulders free, From the light burden of his Naprie. The smiling Land-lord showes a sunshine face, Faining that he will grant him further grace; And lear's like Aesops Foxe vpon a Crane, Whose necke he craues for his Chirurgian; So lingers off the lease vntll the last, What recks he then of paines or promie past? Was euer fether, or fond womans mind, More light then words; the blasts of idle wind What's sib or fire, to take the gentle slip; And in th' Exchequer rot for surety-ship; Or thence thy starued brother liue and di, Within the cold Cole-harbour sanctuarie? Will one from Scots-banke bid but one grote more, My old Tenant may be turned out of doore,
Tho much he spent in th'rotten roofesrepayre, In hope to haue it left vnto his heyre; Tho many a loade of Marle and Manure led, Reui'd his rren leas, that earst lay dead. Were he as Furius, he would defie, Such pilfring slips of Pety land-lordrye. And might dislodge whole Collonies of poore, And lay their roofe quite leuell with their floore, Whiles yet he giues as to a yeelding fence, Their bagge and baggage to his Citizens, And ships them to the new-nam'd Virgin-lond, Or wilder wales, where neuer wight yet wond: Would it not vexe thee where thy syres did keepe, To see the dunged foldes of dagtayled shepe, And ruined house where holy things were said, Whose free-stone wals the thatched roofe vpbraid, Whose shril Saints-bell hangs on his louerie, While the rest are damned to the Plumbery?
Yet pure deuotion lets the steeple stand, And ydle battlements on eyther hand; Least that perhaps, were all those reliques gone, Furious his Sacriledge could not be knowne.
SAT. 2. Heic quaerite Troiam. HOus-keping's dead, Satrio: wot'st thou where? For-sooth they say far hence in Brek-neck shire. And euer since they say that fele and tast, That men may breake their neck, soone as their fast. Certes, if Pity died at Chacers date, He liu'd a widdower long behind his mate: Saue that I see some rottn bed-rid Syre, Which to out strip the nonage of his heire, Is cram'd with golden broaths, and drugs of price, And ech day dying liu's, and liuing dies, Till once suruind his ward-ships latest eue, His eies are closd with choyse to die or lue
Plenty, and hee dy'd both in that same yeare, When the sad skye did shed so many a tear. And now, who list not of his labour faile; Marke, with Saturio, my friendly tale: Along thy way, thou canst not but descry, Faire gittering Hals to tempt the hopefull eye, Thy right eye gins to leape for vaine delight, And surbeate toes to tickle at the ight As greedy T. when in the sounding mold Hee finds a shining pot-shard tip't with gold; For neuer Syren tempts the pleaed eares, As these the eye of fainting passengers; All is not so that scemes; for surely than Matrona should not bee a Crtizan, Smooth Chrysalu should not bee rich with fraud, Nor honest R. bee his owne iues baude, Looke not a squint, nor stride a crosse the way, Like some demurring Alcide to delay.
But walke on chrely, till thou haue espide, Saint Peters finger at the Church-yard side, But wilt thou needs when thou art warn'd so well Go ee who in so garish wals doth dwell? There findest thou some stately Dorick frame Or neate Ionicke worke; Like the vaine bubble of Iberian pride, That our-croweth all the world beside Which reard to raise the crazy Monarches fame, Striues for a Court and for a Colledge name; Yet nought within, but louzy coul's doth hold, Like a scab'd Cuckow in a cage of gold; So pride aboue doth shade the shame below: A golden Periwig on a Black-mores brow. When Maeios first pag of his poesie, Nayl'd to an hundreth postes for noultie, With his big title, an Italian mot, Layes siege vnto the backward buyers grote.
Which all within is drastie sluttish geere, Fit for the Ouen or the Kitching fire: So this gay gate adds fuell to thy thought, That such proud piles were neuer rays'd for nought Beat the broad gates, a goodly hollow sound With doubled Ecchoes doth againe rebound, But not a Dog doth barke to welcome thee, Nor churlish Porter canst thou chafing see: All dumbe and silent, like the dead of night, Or dwelling of some sleepy Sybarite. The marble pauement hid with desart weede, With house-leeke, thistle, docke, & hemlock-seed, But if thou chance cast vp thy wondring eyes, Thou shalt discerne vpon the Frontispice, ΟΥΛΕΙΣ ΕΙΣΙΤΩ grauen vp on hie, A fragment of olde Platoes Poesie: The meaning is, Sir foole ye may be gone, Go backe by leaue, for way here lieth none.
Looke to the towred chymne is which should bee The wind-pipes of good hospitalitie, Through which it breatheth to the open ayre, Betokening life and liberall welfaire, Lo, there th'vnthankfull swallow takes her rest, And; fils the Tonue with her circled nest, Nor halfe that smoke from all his chymneies goes Which one Tabacco-pipe driues through his nose So rawbone hunger scorns the mudded wals, And gin's to reuell it in Lordly halls; Sothe blacke Prince is broken loose againe That saw no Sunne saue once (as stories faine) That once was, when in Trinacry I weene Hee stole the daughter of the haruest Queene, And grip't the maws of barren Sicily With long constraint of pinefull penurie; And they that should resist his second rage, Haue pen'd themselues vp in the priuate cage
Of some blind lane; and their they lurke vnknowne Till th'hungry tempest once bee ouerblowne; Then like the coward, after his neighbours fray, They creepe forth boldly, and aske where are they? Meane while the hunger-staru'd Appurtenance Must bide the brunt, what euer ill mischance; Grim Famine sits in their forepined face All full of angles of vnequall space, Like to the plaine of many sided squares, That wont bee drawne out by Geometars; So sharpe and meager that who should them see Would sweare they lately came from Hungary When their brasse pans and winter couerled, Haue wipt the maunger of the Hosesbread; Oh mee; what ods there seemeth twixt their chere, And the swolne Bezell at an Alehouse fire, That tonnes in gallons to his bursten panch, Whoseslimy droughts, his draught can neuer stanch?
For shame ye gallants grow more hospitall And turne your needlesse wardrop to your Hall: As lauish Ʋirro that keepes open doores Like Ianus in the warres, Except the twelue-daies, or the wakeday-feast What time hee needs must bee his Cosens guest, Philene hath bid him, can he choose but come? Who should pull Virroes sleeue to stay at home? All yeare besides, who meal-time can attend: Come Trebius welcome to the tables end: What tho he chires on purer manchets crowne, Whiles his kind client grindes on blacke & browne A iolly rounding of a whole foote broad, From of the Mong-corne heape shall Trebius load What tho hee quaffe pure Ambe in his bowle Of March-brewd wheat yet slecks thy thirsting soule With palishoat, roathing in Boston-clay Or in a shallow cruse, nor must that stay
Within thy reach, for feare of thy craz'd braine, But call and craue, and haue thy cruse againe; Else how should euen tale beere gistred, Or all thy draughts, on the chalk'd barrels head? And if he list reuiue his hartles graine With some French grape, or pure Canariane When pleasing Brdeaux fals vnto his lott, Some sowsh Rochell cuts thy thirsting throate, What tho himself carueth his welcoe friend With a cold pittance from his trenchers-end? Mut  lip hang to ward his trencher side? Nor kisse is fist to take what doth betide? What tho to spare thy teeth he emploies thy tongue In busie qustions all the dinner long? What tho the scornefull wayer lookes askile, And pouts and frowns, and curseth thee the while, And tak his frewell with a iealous eye, At  morsell hee his last shall see
And, if but one exceed the common sise Or make an hillocke in thy cheeke arise, Or if perchance thou shouldest, ere thou wist, Hold thy knife vprights in thy griped ist, Or sittest double on thy back-ward seat, Or with thine elbow shad'st thy shared meat; Hee laughs thee in his fellowes eare to scorne, And asks aloud, where Trebius was borne. Tho the third Sewer takes thee quite away Without a staffe: when thou would'st enger tay What of all this? Is't not inough to say, I di'd at Virro his owne boord to day?
SAT. 3. ΚΟΙΝΑ ΦΙΛΩΝ. THe Satyre should be like the Porcupine, That shoots sharpe quils out in each angry line, And wounds the blushing cheeke, and fiery eye, Of him that heares, and readeth guiltily. Ye Antique Satyres, how I blesse your daies, That brook'd your bolder stile, their owne dispraise, And wel neare wish; yet ioy my wish is vaine, I had beene then, or they were now againe! For now our eares beene of more brittle mold, Than those dull earthen eares that were of old: Sith theirs, like anuilles bore the hammers head, Our glasse can neuer touch vnshiuered.
But from the ashes of my quiet stile Hence forth may rise some raging rough cile, That may with Eschylus both find and lese The snaky tresses of h' Eumenides: Meane while, sufficeth mee, the world may say That I these vices loath'd another day, Which I hae done with as deuout a heer As he that rounds Poulespillers in the are, Or bends his ham downe in the naked Queare. T'was euer said, Frontine, ad euer seen, That golden Clerkes, but wooden Lawyers bene; Could eur wise man wish in good estate The vse of all things indiscriminate? Who wots not yet how well this did beseeme, The learned maister of the Academe? Plato is dead, and dead is his duise Which some thought witty, none thought euer wise; Yet certes Mch is a Platonis,
To all, they say, saue who so do not list, Because her husband a farre-trafi{que}'d man, Is a profest eripatecian, And so our Grandsires were images past▪ That let their lands lye all so widely wast, That nothing was in pale or hedge ypent Within some prouince or whole shires extent: As Nature made the earth, so did it lie, Saue for the urrowes of the ubandrie; When as the neighbour-lands so couched layne, That alore show of one fayre Champian Some head-lesse crose they digged on their , Or rol'd some marked Mar-stone in the way Poore simplemen For what mough that auayle That my fild might not  neighbours payle More than a pilled sticke c tand stead, ynedo from his nighbours bed Mre than the thrd bare lints pouertie th' Aturney of his woted fee?
If they were thriftlesse, mote not we amend, And with more care our dangered fields defend? Ech man can gard what thing he deemeth dr, As fearfull Merchants doe their Female heyre, Which were it not for promise of their welth, Need not be stlled vp for feare of stealth; Would rather sticke vpon the Belmans cries, Tho profrd for a branded Indians pric, Then rayse we muddi bl-warks on our bakes, Bset around with treble quic-set rankes, Or if those walles be ouer weak a ward, The squard Bricke may be a better gard. Go to my thritie Yeoman, and vpreare A brazen wall to shend thy land from feare, Do so; and I shall praise thee all the while, So be, thou stake not vp the commo stil; So be thou hedge in nought, but what's hiown, So be thou pywhat ithes thy neighbors done, So be thou let not lye in falowed plaine.
That which was wont yeeld Vsurie of graine, But when I see thy pitched stakes do stand On thy incroched peece of common land, Whiles thou discommonest thy neighbours keyne, And warn'st that none eed on thy field saue thine; Brag no more Scrobius of thy mudded bankes, Nor thy deepe ditches, nor three quick set rankes: Oh happy dies of olde Deucalion. When one was Land-lord of the world alone! But now whose choler would not rise to yeeld A pesant halfe-stakes of his new-owne field Whiles yet he may not for the treble price Buy out the remnant of his royalties? Go on and thriue my pety Tyrants pride Scorne thou to liue, if others liue beside, And trace proud Castile that aspires to be In his old age a yong it Monarchie Or the red Hat that cries the lucklesse mayne, For welthy Thames to change his lowly Rene.
SAT. 4. Possunt, quia posse videntur. VIllius the welthy farmer left his heire, Twise twenty sterling poūds to spēd by yeare; The neighbours praysen Villios hide-bound sonne, And say it was a goodly portion; Not knowing ow some Marchants dowre can rise, By sundaies tale to fiftie Centuries; Or to weigh downe a leaden Bride with Gold; Worth all that Matho bought, or Pontice sold: But whiles ten pound goes to his wiues new gown, Nor little lesse can serue to sute his owne, Whiles one peece payes her idle wayting man, Or buyes an hoode, or siluer-handled Fann,
Or hires a Friezeland Trotter halfe yarde deepe, To dag his Tunbrell through the staring Cheape Or whiles he rideth with two liueries, And' treble rated at the Subiies, One end a kennell keeps of  ounds, What thinke yo rest's of all my younkers pounds, To diet him, or eale out at his doore, To cofer vp, or stocke his wasting store? If then I reckon'd right, it should appeare, That sourtie pounds serue not the Farmers heye. Finis. Lib. 2.
VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 6.
SAT. 1. Or like a painted staring Saracin; His cheks chang hew like th'ayre-fed vermin skin Now red, now pale, and swolne aboue his eyes Like to the old Colossian imageries: But when he doth of my recanting heare; Away ye angrie fires, and froses of feare, Giu place vnto his hopefull tempered thought That yeelds to peace, re euer peace be sought: Then lt me now repentmee of my ge, For writing Satyres in so righteous age: Whereas I should haue strok't her towardly head, And cry'd Eue in my Satyres stead, Sith now not one of thousand does amisse Was neuer age I weene so pure as ths: As pure as olde Labulla from the Baynes, As pure as throughfare Channels when it raynes, As pure as is a Black-moores face by night, As dungclad skin of dying Heraclite.
Seeke ouer all the world, and tell mee where Thou find'st a proud man, or a flatterer: A thiee, a drunkard, or a parricide, A lechor, lyer, or what vice beside? Merchants are no whit couetous of late, Nor make no mart of Time, gaine of Deceipt. Patrons are honest now, ore they of olde, Can now no benfice be bought norsold, Giue him a gelding, or some two-yeares tythe, For he all bribes and Simny defi'th. Is not one Pickthanke stirring in the Court, That seld was free till now by all report, But some one, like a clawbacke parasite, Pick't mothes from his masters Cloake in sight, Whiles he could picke out both his eyes for need, Mought they but stand him in some better steed. Nor now no more smell-feast Vitellio Smiles on his master for a meale or two;
And loues him in his maw, loaths in his heart, Yet soothes, and yeas, and nayes on eyther part. Tattelius the new-come traueller, With his disguised cote, and ringed are, Trampling the Burses Marble twise a day, Tels nothing but starke trueths I dare well say, Nor would he haue them knowne for any thing, Tho all the vault of his loud murmur ring. Not one man tels a lye of all the yeare Except the Almanacke or the Chronicler. But not a man of all the damned crue For hils of Gold would sweare the thing vntrue. Pansophus now though all in the cold swat Dares venture through the feared Castlegate, Albee the faithfull Oracles haue orsayne, The wiest Senator shall there be slaine: That made him long keepe home as well it might, Till now he hopeth of some wisr wight.
The vale of Standgate, or the Sters hill, Or westerne plaine are free from feared ill. Let him that hath nought, feare nought I areed: But he that hath ought; y him; and God speed; Nor drunken Dennis doth by breake of day Stumble into blind Tauerns by the way, And reele me homeward at the Euening starre, Or ride more asely in his neighbours chayre. Well might these checks haue fitted former times And shouldred angry Skltons breath-lesse rimes: Ere Chrysalus had ar'd the common boxe, Which earst he pick't to store his priuate stocks; But now ath all with vantage paid againe; And locks and plates what doth behind remaine; When earst our dry-soul'd Syres so lauish were, To charge whole boots-full to their friends wel-fare; Now shalt thou neuer see the alt beset With a big-bellied gallon Flagonet.
Of an ebbe Cruce must thirsty Silen sip, That's all forestalled by his vpper lip; Somewhat it was that made his paunch so peare, His girdle fell ten ynches in a yeare. Or when old goty bed-rid Euclio To his officious factor fayre could show, His name in margent of some olde castbyll And say; Lo whom I named i my will: Whiles hee beleeues and looking for the share, Tendeth his cumbrous charge with busy care; For but a while; Fornow he sure will die, By his strange qualme of liberalitie: Great thanks he giues: but God him sheild & saue From euer gayning by his masters graue; Onely liue long, and he is well repaide, Ad weats his forced cheeks whiles thus he said, Some rong-smeld Onion shall tirre his eyes Rather than no salt teares shall then arise
So lookes he like a Marble toward rayne, And wrings and snites, and weeps, & wipes againe, Then turnes his backe and smiles & looke askance, Seasoning againe his sowred countenance, Whiles yet he wearyes he auen with daily cryes, And backward Death with deuout sacrifice, That they would now his tedious ghost bereauen, And wishes well, that wish't no worse than heauen. When Zoylus was sicke, he knew not where Saue his wrought nightcap, and laun Pillow-bere: Kind fooles; they made him sicke that made him fine Take those away, and thers his medicine: Or Gellia wore a veluet Mastick-patch Vpon her temples when no tooth did ach, When Beauty was her Reume I soone espide, Nor could her plaister cure her of her pride. These vices were, but now they ceas'd off long: Then why did I a righteous age that wrong,
I would repent mee were it not too late, Were not the angry world preiudicate: If all the seuens penetentiall Or thousand white wands might me ought auaile, If Trent or Thames could scoure my foule offence And set me in my former innocence, I would at last repent me of my rage: Now; beare my wrong, I thine, O righteous age As for fine wits an hundreth thousand fold Passeth our age what euer times of olde. For in that Puis-nè world, our syres of long Could hardly wagge ther too-vnweldy tongue As pined Crowes and parats can doe now, When hoary age did bend their wrincled brow: And now of late did many a learned man Serue thirtie yeares Prenti-ship with Priscian, But now can euery Nouice speake with ease The far fetch'd language of th'-Antipodes.
Would'st thou the tongues that earst were learned hight Tho our wise age hath wipt them of their right; Would'st thou the Courtly Three in most request, Or the two barbaous neighbours of the west? Bibinu selfe can haue ten tongues in one, Tho in all Ten not one good tongue alone. And can deepe skill lye smothering within Whiles neither smoke nor flame discerned bin? Shall it not be a wild-fig in a wall Or fired Brimstone in a Minerall? Doe thou disdaine, O ouer-learned age, The tongue-ty'de silence of that Samian sage; Forth ye fine wits, and rush into the presse, And for the cloyed world your workes addresse. Is not a Gnat, nor Fly, nor seely Ant, But a fine wit can make an Elephant; Should Bandels Throstle die without a song, Or Adamantius my Dog be laid along,
Downe in some ditch without his Exequies, Or Epitaphs or mournfull Elegies? Folly itselfe, and baldnes may be praised, And sweet conceits from filthy obiects raised; What doe not fine wits dare to vndertake? What dare not fine wits doe for honours sake? But why doth Balbus his dead-doing quill Parch in his rustie scabbard all the while, His golden Fleece ore-growne with moldy hore As tho he had his witty workes forswore? Belike of late now Balbus hath no need, Nor now belike his shrinking shoulders dread The Catch-poles fist The Presse may still remaine And breath, till Balbus be in debt againe. Soone may that bee; so I had silent beene, And not thus rak't vp quiet crimes vnsene. Silence is safe, when saying stirreth sore And makes the stirred puddle stinke the more.
Shall the controller of proud Nemesis In lawlesse rage vpbraid ech others vice, While no man seeketh to reflect the wrong And curb the raunge of his mis-ruly tongue? By the two crownes of Pernasse euer-greene, And by the clouen head of Hippocrene As I true Poet am, I here auow (So solemnly kist he his Laurell bow) If that bold Satyre vnreuenged be For this so saucy and foule iniurie. So Labeo weens it my eternall shame To proue I neuer earnd a Poets name. But would I be a Poet if I might, To rub my browes three daies & wake three nights, And bite my nayles, and scrat my dullard head, And curse the backward Muses on my bed About one peeuish syllable: which out-sought I take vp Thales ioy, saue for fore-thought
How it shall please ech Ale-knights censuring eye, And hang'd my head for feare they deeme awry; Whiles thred-bare Martiall turnes his merry note To beg of Rufus a cast winter cote; Whiles hungry Marot leapeth at a Beane And dieth like a staru'd Cappucien; Go Ariost, and gape for what may fall From Trenchr of a flattering Cardinall, And if thou gettest but a Pedants fee Thy bed, thy board, and courser liuerie, O honour farre beyond a brazen shrine To it with Tarleton on an Aleposts signe! Who had but liued in Augustus daies Tad beene some honour to be crown'd with Bayes When Luca streaked on his Marble-bed To thinke of Cesar, and great Pompeys deed; Or when Archelaus shau'd his mourning head Soone as he heard Steichous was dead. Atleast would some good body of the rest,
Set a Gold-pen on their bay-wreathed Crest Or would ther face in stamped coyne expresse, As did the Mytelens their Poetesse Now as it is, beshrew him if he might, That would his browes with Caesars Laurell dight: Tho what ayl'd mee, I might not well as they Rake vp some forwone tales that smothered lay In chimny corners smok'd with winter-fires, To read and rocke a sleepe our drouzy Syres No man his threshold better knowes, than I Brutes first ariuall, and first victory, Saint Georges Sorrell, or his croste of blood, Arthurs round Board, or Caledonian wood, Or holy battels of bold Charlemaine, What were his knights did Salems sieg maintaine; How the mad Riuall of fayre Angelice Was Phisick't from the new-found Pardice; High stories they; which with their swelling straine Haue riuen Frontoes broad Rehearsall Plaine,
But so to fill vp bookes both backe and side What needs it? Are there not enow beside? O age well thriuen and well fortunate, When ech man hath a Muse appropriate, And she like to some seruile areboar'd slaue Must play and sing when and what he would hue! Would that were all: small fault in number lies, Were not the feare from whence it should arise But can it be ought but a spurious seede, That growes so rife in such vnlikely speed? Sith Pontian left his barren wife at home, And spent two yeares at Venice and at Rome, Returned, heares his blessing askt of three, Cries out, O Iulian law, Adulterie? Tho Labeo reaches right: (who can deny?) The true strayne's of Heroice Poesie: For he can tell how fury re his sense And Phoebus fild him with intelligence,
He can implore the heath en deites To guide his bold and busie enterprise; Or filch whole Pages at a clap for need From honest Petrarch, clad in English weed; While bigge But ohs ech stranzae can begin, Whose trunke and tayle sluttish and hartlesse bin; He knows the grace of that new elegance, Which sweet Philisides fetch't of late from France, That well beseem'd his high-stil'd Arcady, Tho others marre it with much liberty, In Epithets to ioyne two wordes in one, Forsooth for Adiectiues cannot stand alone; As a great Poet could of Bacchus say, That he was Semele-femori-gena. Lastly he names the spirit of Astrophel: Now hath not Labeo done wondrous well? But ere his Muse her weapon learne to weild.
Or dance a sober Pirrhicke in the field, Or marching wade in blood vp to the knees, Her Arma Virûm goes by two degrees, The sheepe-cote first hath beene her nursery Where she hath worne her ydle infancy, And in hy startups walk't the pastur'd plaines To tend her tasked her that there remaines, And winded still a pipe of Ote or Brere Striuing for wages who the praise shall beare; As did whilere the homely Carmelite Following Virgil, and he Theocrite; Or else hath beene in Venus Chamber train'd To play with Cupid, till shee had attain'd To comment well vpon a beauteous face, Then was she fit for an Heroicke place; As wittie Pontan in great earnest said His Mistres brests were like two weights of lead,
Another thinks her teeth might likened bee To two fayre rankes of pales of yuory, To sence in sure the wild beast of her tongue, From eyther going farre, or going wrong; Her grinders like two Chalk-stones in a mill, Which shall with time and wearing waxe as ill As old Catillaes which wont euery night Lay vp her holly pegs till next day-light, And with them grinds soft-simpring all the day, When least her laughter should her gums be wray Her hands must hide her mouth if she but smile; Fayne would she seeme all frixe and frolicke still. Her forehead fayre is like a brazen hill Whose wrincled furrows which her age doth breed Are dawbed full of Venice chalke for need Her eyes like siluer sauces fayre beset With shining Amber and with shady Iet
Her lids like Cupids-bow, case where he hides The weapons which doth wound the wanton-eyde. Her chin like Pindus or Pernassus hill Where down descends th'oreflowing stream doth fil The well of her ayre mouth Ech hath is praise. Who would not but wed Poets now a daies! FINIS.
ΡΟΜΗ ΡΥΜΗ. SAT. 2. VVHo say's these Romish Pageants bene too hy To be the corne of sportfull Poesy? Certes not all the world such matter wist As are the seuen hils, for a Stiryst. Perdy, Iloath an hundreth Mathoes tongues, An hundreth gaters shifts, or Land-lords wrongs, Or Labeos Poems, or base Lolios pride, Or euer what I thought or wrote beside; When once I thinke if carping Aquines spright To see now Rome, were licenc'd to the light; How his enraged Ghost would stampe and sta That Caesars throne is turn'd to Peters chayre.
To see an old shorne Loze perched hy Crossing beneath a golden Canopy, The whiles a thouand hairelesse crownes crouch low To kisse the precious case of his proud Toe, And for the Lordly Fasces borne of old, To see two quiet crossed keyes of gold, Or Cybles shrine, the famous Panthons frame Turn'd to the honour of our Ladies name. But that he most would gaze and wonder at, Is th'honed Miter, and the bloudy hat, The crooked staffe, their coules strang forme and store, Saue that he saw the fame in hell before, To see their broken Nuns with newshorne heads, In a blind Cloyser tosse their idle Beades, Or Louzy coules come smoking from the stewes, To rays the Leud Rent to their Lord accrewes, (Who with ranke Veice doth his pompe aduance By trading of ten thousand Curtizans)
Yet backward must absolue a females sinne, Like to a false dissembling Theatine, Who when his skinne is red with shirts of male And rugged haire-cloath scoures his greazy nayle, Or wedding garment tames his stubborne backe, Which his hmpe girdle dies all blew and blacke. Or of his Almes-Boule three daies sup'd and din'd, Trudges to open stewes of eyther kinde Or takes some Cardinals stable in the way, And with some pampered Mule doth we are the day Kept for his Lords owne sadle when him list. Come Valentine, and play the Satyrist, To see poore sucklings welcom'd to the light With earing yrons of some sowre acobite, Or golden offers of an aged foole To make his Coffin some Franciscans coule, To see the Pops blacke knight, a cloked Frer Sweating in the channell like a Scauengere.
Whom earst thy bowed hamme did lowly greete, When at the Corner-Crosse thou did'st him meete, Tumbling his Rosaries hanging at his belt Or his Barretta, or his towred felt, To see a lasie dumbe Acholitite Armed against a deuout Flyes despight, Which at th'hy Altar doth the Chalice vaile With a broad Flie-flappe of a Peacockes tayle, The whiles the likerous Priest spits euery trice With longing for his morning Sacrifice, Which he reres vp quite perpendiculare, That the mid Church doth spite the Chancels fare, Beating their emptie mawes that would be fed, With the scant morsels of the Sacrists bread. Would he not laugh to death, when he should heare The shamelesse Legends of S. Christopher, S. George, the sleepers, or S. Peters well, Or of his daughter good S. Petronell.
But had he heard the Female Fathers grone, Yeaning in mids of her procession; Or now should see the needlesse tryall-chayre, (When ech is proued by his bastard heyre) Or saw the Churches, and new Calendere Pestred with mungrell Saints, and reliques dere, Should hee cry out on Codr's tdious Toomes, Whē his new rage would aske no narrower rooms? FINIS.
A Post-script to the Reader. IT is not for euery one to rellsh a true and naturall Satyre, being of it selfe beside the natue and in bed bttrnes and artnes of particulrs, both hard of  and harsh of sle, and therefore cannot but be  easing bon to the vnskilull, and uer Msicall cae, the one being affected with only a shallow and easie mtte e other with a moth and currant dsposition: so that I wel foresee in the timely publication of these my concealed Satyres, I am set v∣pon the rake of many mrcilesse and peremptori censures. which sith the calest & most plausible writer is almost fatally subiect vnto in the curiostie of thee nicer times, how may I hope to be exempted vpon the occasion of so busy and stirring a subict? One thinkes it misbeleeing the Author, becaue a Poeme: another vnlawfull n itselfe because a Sa∣tyre; a third harmefull to others for the sarpnesse & a fouth vnsay rlke for the mildnesse: Te learned too perpicuous, being namd with luuenall, Prsius, and the other ancient Sayres; The nearned, auourlesse, because too obure, and obur because not der the reach. What a monster must he be tht would please al? Certaney looke what weer it would be if euery Alma∣nake should be verfied; uch what lke Pms, if uery fan∣cie should be suted. It is not for ths kinde o dee or hope to pleae, which naturaily should onely fine pleasure in dis∣pleasing; notwithstanding f the ult findg with the vi∣ces of the time ma honestly accrd with the good will of the partis, I had as  al my sele wt a slender ∣polog, a wilflly bare h bnt of  nger in my silence. For Poetrie  after the so  all and aso∣lue indeauour f her onouted Patons, yther shee nee∣deth no new defence, or else might wll rne the offer
of so impotent and poore a Client. Onely for my owne part; tho were shee a more vnworthy Mistresse, I thinke se might be inoffensiuely serued with the broken Messes of our twelue-a-clocke houres, which homely seruice she onely cla∣med & found of mee, for that short while of my attendance: yet huing thus soone taken my solemne Farewell of her, and shaked hande with all her rtinue, why should it be an eye-fore vnto any, sith it can be no losse to my selfe? For my Satyres themselues, I see two obuious cauils to be answered. One concerning the matter; then which I con∣fesse none can be more open to dangr, to enuie, sith flts loath nothing more than the light, and men loue nothing more than their faults, and therefore what through the na∣ture of the faults, and fault of the persns, it is impossble so violent an appeachment should be quietly brooked. But why should vices be vnblamed for feare of blame? and if thou maist spit vpon a Toade vnuenomed, why maist thou not speake of a vice without danger? Especially so waily as I haue indeauoured, who in the vnpartiall mention of so ma∣ny vices, may safely professe to b altogether guiltlesse in my selfe to the intention of any guiltie perion who might be ble∣mished by the likelyhood of my conceiued application, her∣upon choosing rather to marre mine owne verse than ano∣thers name: which notwith anding if the iniurious Rder shall wrest to his owne spight, and dsparraging of others, it is a short answere: Art thou guiltie? complaine not, thou art not wronged: art thou guiltles? complaine not, thou art not touched. The other concerning the manner, where in perhaps too muh stouping to the lowe reah of the vul∣gar, I shalbe hought not to haue any whit kindly raght my ancient Roman predecessors, whom in the want of  late and familiar presidents I am constrained thus farre of to
imitate: which thing I can be so willing to graunt, that I am further readie to warrant my action therein to any indiffe∣rent censure. First therefore I dare boldly auouch that the English is not altogether so naturall to a Satyre as the Latin, which I doe not impute to the nature of the language it selfe, being so farre from disabling it any way, that me thinks I durst equallit to the proudest in euery re∣spect, but to that which is common to it with all other com∣mon languages Italian, French, Germaine, &c. in their Poe∣sies, the fettering together the Series of the verses, with the bondes of like cadence or desinence of ime, which if it be vnusually abrupt, and not dependent in sence vpon so neere affinitie of words, I know not what a loathsome kinde of harshnes ad discordance it breadth to any iudiciall eare: which if any more confident aduersarie shall gainsay, I wish no better triall than the tralation of one of Persius his Satyrs into English; the difficultie and dissonance wherof, hall make good my assertion: besides the plaine experience thereof in he Satyres of Ariosto, (saue which, and one base french Sa∣tyre, I could neuer attaine the view of any for my direction, and that also might for neede serue or an excuse at least) whose chaine-verse to which e fettereth himselfe, as it maie well afford a pleasing harmony to the eare, so can it yeeld no∣thing but a flashy and loose conceyt to the iudgement. Wher∣as the Roman numbers tying but one foote to another, offereth a greater freedome of varietie, with much more delight to the reader. Let my second ground be, the well knowne daintines of the time, such, that men rather choose carelesly to lease the sweete of the kernell, than to vrge their teeth with breaking of the shell wherein it is wrap∣ped: and therfore sith that which is vnseene is almost vn∣one, and that is almost vnseene which is vnconceiued, either
I would say nothing to be vntalkt of, or speake with my mouth open that I may be vnderstood. Thirdly the end of this paines was a Satyre, but the end of my Satyre a further good, which whether I attaine or no I know not, but let me be plaine, with hope of profit, rather than purposely obscure onely for a bare names sake. Notwithstanding in the expectation of this quarrell, I thinke my first Satyre doth somewhat resemble the soure and crabbed face of Iuuenals, which I indeauouring in that, did determinately omit in the rest, for these forenamed causes, that so I might haue somewhat to stoppe the mouth of euery accuser. The rest, to each mans censure: which let be as fa∣ourable, as so thanklesse a work can deserue or desire. FINIS.
After this impression was finished, vpon the Authors know∣ledge, I had the view of a more perfect Copy, wherein wer these additions and corrections, which I thought good to place here, desiring the reader to referre them to their pla∣ces. Additions. Betweene the 10. and 11. line of the 16. page. While yet he rousteth at some vncouch signe Nor neuerred his Tenures second line. Ρομη Ρυμη. SAT. 7. lib. 4. Wwo saies these Romish Pageants, To be the &c. And so to the end.
