E694_6 99866140 166512
A Considerable QUESTION ABOUT Government, (Of very great Importance in reference to the state of the present times) Briefly Discussed. WITH A Necessary ADVICE TO THE Governors and Governed. By ISAAC PENINGTON, (junior) Esq May 9. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle at the West end of Pauls. 1653.
A QUESTION ABOUT Government, &c. THe Question is this: Which is better, both for the Good, Safety and Welfare, both of the Go∣vernors and Governed, Absolute or Limited Au∣thority? Absoluteness is a full Power of Government without interruption, without rendering an account, residing in the Brest, Will or Conscience of the Governor or Go∣vernors. Limitation is a circumscribing of this Power within such certain bounds, as the people, for whose sake and benefit Government is, shall think fit to confine it unto, for their good and security.
Now without Controversie great is the advantage of Absoluteness, both to the Governors in the execution of their Duty, and to the People towards their reaping the fruit of Government; supposing the person or per∣sons who govern, to be men of knowledg and integrity, whose Judgments and Consciences are not liable to be deceived or perverted. Laws cannot fully answer the needs and necessities of men, many may need a Law before it can be made: nay Laws are usually much needed by the people, and they suffer much through the want of them before they have them: but a standing clear free Light and full Power might effect this. But now in respect of the corrupt estate of Man, who is too apt to bend all aside to his own advantage with the prejudice of others, this root becomes evil, and brings forth the worst kind of fruit. It brings forth Slavery in stead of Liberty, Oppression in stead of Ease, swallowing up the good and happiness of the People in stead of nourishing and preserving it. It is the happiness of Man to be governed by Rules of Righteousness: To have these freely, purely, swiftly and fully framed and dispenced. This may be best done by an absolute Government. But because of mans corruption (which always lieth lurking in him, and is still ready to issue forth from him, when it espyeth its opportunity) it is impossible this should be rightly or∣dered and administred: And we find dayly, that by Absoluteness in Government the People are exposed to slavery, their liberties, yea their very lives subjected, not to righteousness in another, but to the corruption of another. So that Absoluteness of Government, take
it as the state of things now stands, is no other then a giving up of the estates, liberties and lives of the People into the jaws of unrighteousness, into the hands of a selfish Power. This then is the plain result; Absoluteness is best in it self, but limitations are safest for the present condition of man. But what if God (from whom both these had their being, continuation and blessing) be striking at the root both of Absoluteness and of Limitedness, shewing the weakness and insufficiency of both, and turning them upside down as fast as he discovereth it? For my part I desire to be silent concerning these things; not only outwardly before men, but even inwardly in mine own Soul: According to which propensity, I hasten to a conclusion, only adding one word of advice both to the Governors and the Governed in these tottering times. My advice to the Governors is, That they undertake not to bring forth that which is not in them. He who stands below, when he looketh on those above, easily espyeth many miscarriages in them (though not always justly) making no question of amending them, when he himself comes in place, and is invested with Power; but doth it prove so? The Parliament seemed to spring up with a more excellent spirit, undertaking to rectifie that which was crooked in the foregoing Government, but did they indeed and in truth effect it? The Army seemeth to rise up with a more excellent spirit then they: but what their thoughts and intentions are, and what will be the success, the Lord only knoweth, (for man himself knoweth neither his own heart nor ways, sel∣dom being what he still taketh himself to be.) He who
is of counsel with the Lord, may know what he intends; but alas how easily may all the good purposes of man fall to the ground, and he prove the great Introducer of that which he proposed to himself to be the Deliverer from! There is some times a sudden blast of the Lord, leading man towards that which is righteous; but so soon as man is exalted, he forgets the Lord, and returns into himself, and in that very day all his good thoughts dye and perish. Man so soon as ever he comes into place of government, his heart is immediatly lifted up above his brethren, which temper maketh him unfit for go∣vernment, and prepareth the way to his own ruine. The wind of the Lord is strong, O take heed of exaltation! The wisdom, heart, and spirit of man is narrow and weak, Oh take heed of undertaking much! The true oil is very rare and scarce, O who can do the work of the Lords annointed! My advice to the Governed is, but this. Expect not that fruit from your Governours, the root whereof is not in them. Did man ever bring forth righteousness or peace? Have ye not yet had enough of looking for Reformation and amendment of things from this or that party? O Lord God what a poor Reformation and settlement is it, which man desires, and yet how far is he from attaining it! In the midst of all his travell∣ing pangs, he travels but with the wind, and can bring forth but a whirlwind. Who hath shaken this State? Is it not the Lord? and do ye think man can settle it? If ye your selves were Governours, ye would act like those that had gone before you; and having the same spirit of selfishness and injury in you (though ye see it no more in your selves, then they did in themselves)
how dare ye be so bitter against them? Be still, be qui∣et, and ye shall see that the Lord will deal with those that oppress you. There is no power of unrighteous∣ness and oppression, shall be able to found it self so deep, or settle it self so strong, but the Lord will shatter and raze it. If the Lord hath designed (and be arisen in this Land) to break open the gates of violence and op∣pression, wo be them who henceforth, under any pre∣tence whatsoever, step into the seat of it. There shall henceforward be no peace to the wicked, saith my God; but onely a little stilness and security, while his foun∣dation is undermining. Fear not the hand of the op∣pressor because of his height or irresistibleness; for, for this end is all this, that God might glorifie and exalt himself in his downfal and desolation; which when it is perfected, then shall it be said and sung with joy, Come and see what desolations the Lord hath made in the earth. Onely be not ye too busie, but kiss the rod; and com∣plain not so much of the iniquity and unrighteousness of others, but mourn bitterly over that root, nature, and vigor of it which is in your selves. There is indeed a great truth now held forth, That the Saints shall govern the world, which is the very inte∣rest of the world, though they know it not: for the na∣ture and happiness of their life dependeth upon the na∣ture and happiness of the life of Christ. When the Spi∣rit of Christ is poured out upon, and springeth up in his Saints, they shall be able to effect this: But if they who are not this in truth, shall take this upon them (or if they who are in it, in the root and nature of it, shall step into it too soon) they will not onely fall short of ef∣fecting what they aim at, but in stead thereof will bring
forth the clean contrary, viz. the greatest unrighteous∣ness established by the strongest and most unrighteous Law. The Law of the spirit of Christ is the easiest, the best, the sweetest: but the Law of the Spirit or cor∣ruption of man, under that vizard is the worst. Oh that this so long-captived-Nation, could lift up their eyes towards, and wait for, the salvation of God! FINIS.
