B3265 E450_9 99864563 161898
BLOUDY NEVVES FROM COLCHESTER CONCERNING The late Fight on Tuesday last, between the Forces under the command of Sir Charles Lucas, and the Suffolke Forces, neer the East-gate; with the manner of the Fight, and the number that were slain and taken prisoners. Likewise, the Proclamation of the Earl of Norwich, and Sir Charles Lucas, concerning the Duke of York's com∣ming to Coulchester, and their proclaiming of it at the Head of each Regiment throughout the Towne. Together with the Lord Generals Propositions to the Earle of Norwich, and Sir Charles Lucas, touching a generall peace. And their Answer thereunto, concer∣ning his Excellencies Army. LONDON: Printed for R. W. 1648.
PROPOSITIONS FOR PEACE SENT By His Excellency the Lord Generall Fairfax, to the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the Commanders in chief, &c.
THe Lord Generall Fairfax having seriously weighed and considered the sad event of war, and the effusion of more Christian and inno∣cent bloud, occasioned by the present Engagement of the two Armies at Colchester; for prevention where∣of, and for the future preserving of the peace and tran∣quility both of that County and Kingdome, his Excel∣lenc hath agreed upon certain Propositions to be sent to the Commanders in chiefe of the Kings Forces in Colchester, a copy whereof followeth, viz. My Lords, I Shall here let you know what your selves and those under you may expect from me (which for the re∣storing of quiet to this County, and the Kingdome, without more bloud-shed, and for the saving so emi∣nent a Town from the chance of War) I shall offer, viz. 1. That if your selves, and the rest with you in Col∣chester, shall within 24. hours after notice hereof, lay down Arms and surrender the Town, the common Souldiers, and men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their severall homes, and there quietly to re∣main, submitting unto the authority of Parliament, and this I shall make good however, to so many of that sort respectively, as shall accept thereof, and do accor∣dingly. 2. That your selves, and the Officers and Gentlemen ingaged with you in the Town shall have liberty and passes to go beyond Sea, with equipage befitting their qualities, engaging themselves not to returne into this Kingdome without leave from both or either Houses of Parliament.
3. That all of both sorts, with the Inhabitants of the towne, shall be free from plunder or violence of the Souldiers, their Armes, Ammunition, and Furniture of War within the town, and also their Horses imployed to Military service (except such horses and swords, as shall be fit to be allowed to Captain, or superior Of∣ficers, and Gentlemen of quality, for their removall) being first delivered up without imbezelment, in an orderly manner, as shall be further set down, and the Forces under my command, or such as I shall appoint, being admitted a peaceable entrance into the town. I desire that the Gentlemen of the Committee may bee acquainted herewith, and that it be not concealed from any that are concerned in it. T. Fairfax. The Answer to the Propositions for Peace. My Lord, THose conditions you proffer to the Officers and Souldiers on our part, we doe hereby make offer of to the Officers and Souldiers on your part. We shal in this occasion deal plainly, we do not without evident reason conceive our selves to be in a condition all the force you can make, and thereby to give courage and opportunity to all true-hearted English-men, to reco∣ver their ancient and known Lawes, or if you shall ad∣venture to attaque us, we doubt not but by the mercy & assistance of Almighty God so give you such a re∣pulse, as shall give testimony of our force & courage, & at how high a rate we value the general peace of the kingdom. And as for that clause, touching the commu∣nicating of it to those whom it may concern, we con∣ceive you intend the Inhabitants of Colchester, Wee were very unworthy persons if any should exceed us in our care for this good town. Norwich, Charles Lucas. Sir, Since my last dated June 24. we have had seve∣rall skirmishes with the enemy, they have often times approached neer our Guards, but have beene repulsed and beaten in again.
The Enemy is very resolute, and takes all the advantages that may be in sallying out upon us; they have made severall attempts upon the Suffolk Forces, and have salled out at the East-gate, bea∣ting them from their Workes, and falling in a∣mongst their trenches; but after a sharp dispute, the enemy were forced to retreat, and the Suffolke Forces pursued, doing great execution. Captain Green (a Suffolk Gentleman) de∣ported himself with much courage and gallantry, in this conflict, charging with two hundred musque∣tiers, against three hundred of the enemies Horse and Foot, worsted them, killed fifteen upon the place, and took neer upon thirsty prisoners, with the losse of eight men, three slain, and five wounded. Some of the prisoners, upon their examination, confessed, that their Commander in chief, Colonell Lunsford, give order, that no man should give quarter to any of the Suffolk traytors, but that they should put every man to the sword, which cru∣elty and Barbarisme, hath not a little stirred up the spirits of the Suffolk-men, insomuch, that they will adventure to the very Wals and Gates of the town, to restrain the enemy of their liberty, and on
Tuesday morning last, captaine Fisher with his trooy of horse, and captain Greene with his Foot company fell upon a party of the enemies neer East-gate, who were guarding of a Heard of Cattel, but they perceiving the resolution of the Suffolk men to ingage, caused the cattel to be drove into the town, and advanced towards captain Fishers troope, but kept within command of their canon, whereupon sixe of captain Fishers troupers rode out, and gave fire, a party of the enemies met them, and did the like, and at the lact both Bodies engaged, and a re∣solute charge received and given by each other; but the enemy perceiving the Suffolke Foot com∣ming up, retreated neerer the walls, and discharged four pieces of Ordnance, which did little harme, ex∣cept the losse of one man, and two horses; and cap∣tain Fisher perceiving that the enemy would not ingage, unlesse upon great advantage, made good his retreat within the Line, and endeavours to make his approaches neerer the town. We keep them with continuall allarms on all sides, which causeth much murmuring amongst the common souldiers, and divers come in unto us, who have confessed, that many hundreds would have come
had it not been for a paper which the Lord Goring, sir Charles Lucus, and the rest of the Commanders in chief caused to be read at the head of each Regiment, tho∣row out the town; a copy whereof I have here sent you inclosed, viz. All Gentlemen and Souldiers, who have listed them∣selves under the immediate command of Sir Charles Lucas, Generall of the Kings Forces, raised for the defence and preservation of His Majesties Royal Person, Crowne, and Kingdome, are required to stand firm to their first principles and engagement, and to defend this towne a∣gainst all opposition, being assured, that within few days, His Highnesse James Duke of York, will come in to our assistance, with a considerable Army from Holland. But Since the proclaiming of this Paper, divers have disserted them, and are resolved to be no longer caryed on by their hypocriticall suggestions, and false Delu∣sions. This day the enemy made a salley out upon Stanway side with a great party of Horse and Foot, commanded by sir Charles Lucas, and col. Beal, and with great fury, advanced towards a Body of ours, but finding the hed∣ges ambuscado'd retreated and would not engage, our men pursued, kiled three, and took six prisoners. From the Leagure before Colchester, June 27. 1648. FINIS.
