B4249 E276_14 99868709 121063
THE REFORMED ARMY. VVherein is plainly set forth, 1. What Officers are necessary in an Army, over one particular Brigade. 2. VVhat Officers may well be discharged, which as yet are al∣lowed. 3. VVhat revinews will be saved which may be imployed to more necessary uses. 4. VVhat disaduantage the State receives by such unnecessary Officers, overpowring Votes in Councells of war. 5. What can be alleaged for the allowance of such Places and the difference between these our Civill VVars, and those in other Countries. Seene and allowed by the Right Honour∣able, the Lords, and Commons, in Parlia∣ment, and published for the good of the Kingdome in generall. London, Printed for J. B. 1645.
The the Right Honourable, the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament. Right Honourable, THe unfained zeale I beare to the publick, hath emboldned your daily Orator to compile this indigested fragment, though I know it will not suit with the affections of some in these our times: yet it is not inten∣ded to distast any: I wish it may safely arrive to the view of some candid and iudicious Auditour, whose know∣ing vertues may be a covering to my imperfections: the serious consideration whereof hath moved mee, though the most unworthy to present your Honours with my worthlesse Labours: And the rather, when according to my duty I deeply pondered the sad di∣stempers, and dangerous maladies now in the bowels of my deare Countrey: I held my selfe the rather obliged to imploy that talent which I have received from divine Providence, partly to satisfie my owne conscience, in what becomes a faithfull subiect, for the welfare of his distracted Countrey, and for the fu∣ture encouragement of al, who are in necessary places of honour in our Armies abroad; and those who are
under their commands, to the end they may the more couragiously fight under the banner of truth: and tru∣ly Right Honourable, my humble Request is, that you will cast your eyes on it. Vuitu serent, that so your Honours may rightly understand you must not expect here filed Phrases, or oyled terms, but field lan∣guage: For I never was a Court-flatterer, nor Time∣server: but what I have here presented to the world, is only to shew what unnecessary Officers in an Army, though allowed by a State or Kingdome, prove dis∣advantagious to the same. Wherefore if you daigne to cast an eye on this my reformed Army, although it be not so exactly pro∣portiontble, as you perhaps expect: yet here you shal find that it is possible to fight an Army consisting of never so many Brigades of Cavelrie and Infantrie, without those Officers whom here I have excluded: but thought I it would be taken ill for my boldnesse in discovering plain truth, I should bury my thoughts in silence, and stifle my poore Babe in its concepti∣on, rather then it should be borne a son of discontent: But Right Honourable, its your favours only that I crave, which if I may be so happy to attaine, I shal be doubly obliged, as in all duty ever to remaine, Your Honours most humble, and faithfull Servant, IOHN BRANDON.
To the Reader. Friendly Reader, THere being a fatall necessity that compels the State to keepe severall Armies on foot in the bowels of this sad Kingdome, for the publick good in the conserving of our Religion, from the Popish and Delinquent crew. I conceive I could not doe God, and my countrey a better service, then by prescribing, according to my slender skill, a direct and eassie way to bring them in to such conformitie, as the Officer and Souldier being duly paid, the States service may be by them duly & truly performed, the crying sinsin our Armies severely punished those heavy judgements impendent, and iminent removed: and our intestine enemies now in open Hostility against God, Religion, Law and Liberty rooted forth, to his glory, his Churches welfare, the setting up of the unspotted Gos∣pel of his Son in full Majestie in the 3. afflicted parts of our Princes Dominions, for the establishing of our King with comfort in his Throne, with his faithfull Parliament now resident at westminster, and to the never dying com∣fort of all his posterity, and faithfull subjects: thus desi∣ring thee with patience to reade, but however thou art pleased to consure, I wish thee a contented life, and an ho∣nourable death.
The new reformed Army, &c. IT'S that which hath encouraged me to at∣tempt this subject, for that I have formerly had command in severall Brigades, At Southam, & Worcester twice, Edge∣hil, Banbury, Branford, He∣reford twice, Cirincester, Burford, Shewdly-Casile, Malmsbury, Gheltnam, Highnam∣house, Little∣deane, Rosse, Covert, Men∣diffe, Froom, Clarken. down, Lands∣down, & Tog∣hil, Amsbury, the Vise, Cherington∣downe. which are now abroad, and truely have much grieved to see the neglect hath beene in some Officers through discontent twixt each other in contestation, about their severall duties in their places; wherefore now I shall present unto you these follow∣ing considerations. First, What Officers are necessary in an army, or one par∣ticular Brigade. Secondly, What Officers may well be casheered, which as yet are allowed. Thirdly, What revenew will be saved, which may be con∣verted and imployed to better uses. Fourthly, What disadvantage hath, and may rise to the State by meanes of such unnecessary Officers, over powring Uotes in Councell of Warre. Fisthly, what can be alleaged for the allowance of such place; of Honour, and the difference between these our uncivill wars, and those in other Countryes. For the first of this, there is necessity of a Captaine Gene∣rall over the whole Army, consist it of never so many, or few Brigades, for they are all to be Commanded by this Cap∣taine Generall, and no more: and in his absence his Leistenant Generalls Command is to be obeyed, as if the former were present, and so by Consequence but one Major General, a Com∣missary Generall, one Quarter-Master-Generall, and a Scout
Master Generall to the whole Army, raised by the State or Kingdome. A Lievtenant Generall to the Ordnance of the whole Army not to be excluded. I conceive there is no necessity of more Generalls, but that every particular Brigade be assigned to a Commander in chief, whom the Captain Generall shall know to be an able Souldier or the eldest Major of the Brigade, and for the Commanders in chief of every Regiment to be no other then Majors by Commission, It is his place by succession. whether of Cavalry or Infantry, a Captaine Leivetenant Cornet, or Ensigne, With Can∣noneers, Gentlemen to the Ordnance Metrosses, &c. Fires Mr. with his necessary attendants, as Wagon-Mrs. pyoneers, &c. a Quarter-Master to every Troope of the Cavalry, & to every Regiment of the Infantry, three Corporalls or Sergeants, with Trumpet and Drum; and for the Leivetenant Generalls assistant to all the traines be∣longing to the several Brigades, that may officiate his place, he being in the Captain Generals own Brigade. Thus have I shew∣ed briefly what places of Command are absolutely necessary in an Army; and to give thee better satisfaction I shall lay downe some speciall reasons to prove the same. First, for that unlesse there were a Captaine-Generall, All manner of Officers ought to be mightily in∣dewed with patience, hu∣mility, some∣times, to have a severe hand over such as are of a muti∣nous dispositi∣on, to the end he may have them all in generall at Command when need requires. there could be no superiority in places of Honour, and so by con∣lequence they could not be so valiant, did not the hope of pre∣ferment spur them forward unto noble actions, neither gene∣rally would they indure those extremities which are incident to their callings, neither could they have that command over their Souldiers as necessity requires; But its matter of en∣couragement to all that fight under the Banner of a grave Heroick, & politick Generall. To which end he that is created such is well known by that State or Kingdom that elects him, to be a man of great birth, an able States-man, and expert Souldier, whereby he is enabled to discharge so great and high a trust: we have many examples in sacred Writ of their Chief∣taines, who alwayes had power above al other in their sever∣all Hoasts to constitute Lawes, for punishing the offences of their Souldiers. This president we have imitated, and had not there been an overpowering command to be obeyed by all in our Armies, As of Iesta Iudge of Isra∣el, and divers others. be it spoken to the everlasting Honour of His Excellency, the Earle of Essex, we should not have had so many deservedly executed for thefts, tapes, mutinies, treacheries, and other outrages, as hath beene by vertue of those Mattiall Laws set
forth by him at his entring into that high place of Honour, Or in case he be Comanded to present his Generalls person with a∣ny of the o∣ther Brigades which are not resident with the Captaine Generall, there he takes place from the other Com∣mander in chiefe. which he so faithfully hath performed. Secondly to prove the necessity of a Leivetenant-Generall which consists in representing the Person of the Generall in his absence & when the army is engaged to secure the Person of his Generall by engaging himselfe, for it is very unfit that a Generall should engage himselfe in any fight, further then to view how his enemy lyes, thereby to take his best aduan∣tages for ground, to fight his men, to place his Artillery and Carraiges, and to give al possible encouragements, and to order when they shall charge, and in what nature, to retreate or persue, all which is performed by the judgement, fidelity, and valour; of the Major-Generall, after orders received from his Captain-General which proves the necessity of his place of honour in the feild. Because he drawes up the whole Armies in Battalia & fights the bo∣dy answera∣bly. And by succession a Quarter-Master-Gen: who receives orders for the quartring of the whole Army, either in feild or towne, as occasion shall require; his charge is great, he ought to be a man of great judgement & experince, e∣specially in the knowledge of al countries, with the pas∣sages, Yet to do no∣thing without his judgment, agree with his superior Officer, & to receive or∣der from them and inlets thereunto, the safety of the whole Army: it being to be quartred lies in his wisdome and fidelity, which shews there is a duty by him to be performed: so by consequence his place of honour is neceisary. The Scout-Master-Generalls place is very necessary, but dangerous, his duty is ro discover all passages, and results a∣mongst the enemy to his Generall, but to hold no corres∣pondence, This Officer may easily betray his trust, where∣fore it re∣quires great care in the choise of him. but to discover their strength & intentions & togive intelligence of their advance towards any of their Quarters, or elsewhere, in such time as they may make themselves ready to circumvent their enemyes intended policy. I desire to be excused if I faile in ranking their places of honour, according to succession, for the necessity of a Lievetenant-Generall to the train of Artillery; I have not yet urged; his Office is of great concernment, This Officer ought to be such a man as is not used to drinke much wine, nor to be familiar with his attendants ut very circamspect what Officers he hath about him. he ought to be a well-grounded Engineer, a man well knowing in all in gredients, for Peetare, & Gran∣adoes, as well for the Morter, as the hand, also for the travifing the ground he is to play upon, there is many other things in duty belongs to his place, which causes it, appeare necessary
so much may suffice to be spoken of the necessary Generalls in an . he ought to be a man of an undaunted sp;irit. It is onely for forme sake & no of neces∣sity, but to distinguish his place of Hon∣our by way of title from the rest. yet its thought more proper for him that shall have the command of a Brigade then for he who has the Com∣mand but of owne Reg∣ment. Which is 5. s. par die or 18. l. 6. d. for the other. He ought to be a very mo∣derate man & of exellent judgement. That is Major Gener alls to the same, com∣missary Gen: Quarter-Master Gen. Scour mster-gen: Colonels & Livetenant lo: Adietant Gen & Aud∣itor Gen to the whole Army, the benefit these to latter make of their places is unknow. Now I come to shew the necessary Officers requirable in a particular Brigade. The first is a Commander in chief, who ought to be the eldest Major in the said Brigade, whether of Cavalry or Infantry, so hee be a knowing man and an able Souldier: and if it shall so please that State whom imploy him, to honour him so much, as with the title of Collonel, but to have no more in the same Brigade: so by succession the next Major in the same Brigade to have the second place of honour in the same and to have a Commissary, who shall both muder and pay, as assistant to the Commissary Generall: Also the eldest Quarter-master to this Brigade, which shall receive orders from his supreme Officer, and to deliver them to the rest of the Quarter-master of the same, and to receive my, as Captaine to Infantry, or Livetenant to Cavalry: but not as Quirter-master Generall: and for the traine of Attil∣lery; to have an able man to depute the place of the Livete∣nant generall to the Ordinance, withall other Officer; under them to officiate in every Regiment: and for every Regiment to be commanded by its Major, whose duty is to draw them up in Battalia, and no Officer elfe, and to sight it in that form and manner, as he shall thinke fit after orders received from the superiour Officers, hee giving to every Captaine his charge: and so consequently every inferiour officers charge under them for the maintaining of the Battle, without whose assistance the busines could not be performed: wherefore these places of Honour necessary and what Officers are over & above these which I have expressed are superfluous. The next thing that fals into my hands, is the consideration of what Officers they are that are now imployed and yet un∣necessary in our Army, or particular Brigade in the whole Army, the Auditour Generall, and the Aditant General may be excluded: For the first of the two the Commissary Ge∣nerall being both to muster, and pay is bound to cast up the severall entors, which appertaines to every officer, and souldier of the said Army, or Brigade for his owne discharge, that being the only worke of the Auditour Generall: but, being performed by the aforesaid Commissary, I conclude that
his place as Auditour Generall may be excluded. As for provid∣ing necessarys for their soul∣diers, when they are in Garrison, and keep continu∣all outgard or watch for it is the duty of him that is the Captaine of the watch for to ride or walke the rounds, to see that his gards be safe, and his men prepared with things answerable to their charge whether he be Major Capta. or other, & not the particular duty of the adietant, if it be wel weigh∣ed it will plainly appear to be a great Nenefit to the State. It is a beare Titile with∣out a duty. Which may o well be done by the. Major and as much for the Souldiers en∣couragement. For the second, which is the Aietant Generall, I conceive his duty is no other then what is performed by every Major, Captaine, and Quarter-master, being they are particular duties in their places: and for those Officers which are unnecessary in a Brigade, consisting of never so many of the Cavalry, or In∣fantry, is first a Major Generall, for that the eldest Major by succession may performe the duty of a Major Generall: but some will say who shall officiate his place in his own Regi∣ment, its answered by way of objection, who executes the du∣ty of a Collonel, to those two or three Regiments, that some Major General have under command as Collonel: besides their Major Generals place, but either their Livetenant Colonell, or Major, and why not in this case for the benefit of a State or Kingdome, the eldest Captaine of a Regiment per∣forme the duty of his Major, whilst his Major executes the duty that is performed by those Maior Generals, who are im∣ployed in these our times: Wherefore, I conceive the Maior Generall to a particular Brigade may be excluded, but I shall leave it to the considerations of better Iudgements then my owne: and for Collonels of Cavalty, and Infantry, I con∣ceive there is no use of them at all, otherwise then as they charge in the head of their Regiments, is matter of encou∣ragement to those whom they have under their command, if they doe ought else, as to receive orders from the Commander in chiefe of the same Brigade or partie either for pursuit, or retreat, or in what manner or forme they must charge their Enemy; it is that which is the absolute duty of the Maiors, and not theirs: Presidents for any of these Officers which I have excluded to be imployed in any Army we have none, but what have beene of very late yeers: but if we looke upon Valerius the Roman Emperour, wee shall find that his field Generals, though his Army consisted of never so many Legions, were no more then three; and they are conceived to be no other then a Captain Generall, Livetenant Generall, and Maior Generall; there is no nomination of any more Generals, neither of Collonels, or Livetenant Colonells, but that all their Legions that were above the number of three were commanded by no other, then by such as performe the
duty of Maiors in these our times, It is to be ad∣mired that a∣ny should be to ambitious, as in a Regi∣ment to ex¦pect any step of Honour, to be raised to other then Majority in the same. Can we think the Major is as Minor, to Colonell and Livetenant, Colonell: it ought to be considred whe¦ther they be no: new Vp∣start Titiles of Honour. And this is the absolute duty. This has been common but might now be reformed. As to be drawne forth, to make good such a place, or to be a reserue to such a part  &c. This is worthy of note, and not to be look  on as a fantasy. It concernes all faithfull Subject. that Maior that hath the command of a Brigade, the Enemy being drawn up in a Bat∣talia in perfect view, it his duty with his Assistants, as the el∣dest Major next himselfe, provided his judgement be answera∣ble to his place of Honour, with is his ablest Quarter-Master, to ride or goe on foot to survey their own ground, viewing their Enemy, how they lie & answerable to the same forme or figure: the Enemy is drawne up; so to travise their owne ground, so as they may draw up their men in Battalia for their best advantage and to confult in counsell of warre, when they returne unto their body in what nature they shall fight, upon what disadvantage, retreat, how to make it good: and whe∣ther this being done; the orders are first given by the Com∣mander in chiefe to all the Majors in the said Brigade, and e∣very one of them to performe their duty of their place, which is to draw up the men according to their orders received and to sight them answerablely. And truly for the Colonel, and Lievtenant-Colonel that shall have comand, it may be they may attend upon the Command∣er in chief, leaving the charge of their Regiment unto the Major, whilst they ride to & fro, and see fashions and fighting, of which sort we have to many in our Armies: there superiour Officers seeing of them by chance, certifies them of some duty that must be performed by their Regiment, they presently ride or send to their Major, & acquaint him with the orders which are performed by the said Major, so by consequence there is no duty properly belonging, either to Colonell or Lievtenant-Colonell: otherwise then what is performed by more neces∣sary Officers, as being their absolute duty in their severall re∣spective places, now the next thing we are to consider: is the revenewes that may be converted to better uses, for I conceive there is more need of private Souldiers, then of superfluous Officers, and this will be a meanes to encourage men to adventure their lives, hazarding themselves in greatest dan∣gers to see such great and unnecessary sums deducted and their pay more constant, it being a meanes by which the Army is strengthned, and kept full and compleat, imagine there be but fourty Colones in the whole Cavalry now imployed by the Honourable Houses of Parliament, their pay amounts to
per annum 73000. Yee must un∣derstand its at the rate but of 5. l. per die for every Co∣lonel of horse. 45000. will pay 1200. horsemen constantly year, to year, and there wil be 28000. remaining out of the 40. Colonells re∣venews to pay Officers that are necessary. The Liveten∣ant Colonell of horse his pay wil main∣taine 600. with constant pay, and if I be not much mistaken the overplasse wil be about 16 or 17000. l. par annum, which w do very wll towards other charges. If we looke back, we shall find an Army constantly paid out of that which hath bin allowed to uneccessary Officers, it consisting of 1800. Horse and 4000. foet. Hre we shall find a fair inning for a recrute to the former. 17520. l. per annum is the ful some of eight Mj eneralls, pay at 6. l. pat die apeice, so that in case these Officers be casheered their severall revenews will maintain 2100 of the Cava∣lry, and 5500 of the infantry There is ne∣cessity of re∣formation in these particu∣lars as ought else, consider∣ing the great charge the Kingdom is at the proceed∣ing of our war being not an∣swerable to those in other Countries, though it is true our fights are more des∣perat butmain taind in no form for that they are not pitcht buinesses by consent. For this very reason if they allow of these. Officers in their Armies, yet they are not usefull to us. l. this revenew being expended for the pay∣ment of the private Souldiers of the Cavaity would be con∣stant pay for 1200 at 2 s. 6 d. par die a peice, for 45700 is a just yearely meanes, for 1200. so many Lievtenant-Colonells being 40, in mber, amounts to 40000. l. par annum, or ther∣abouts which if deducted will maintain about 600. Horsemen as for Colonell and Lievtenant-Colonells of Infuntry, being both in number 200. their yearely revenews amounts to on 169910. l. par annum which may maintaine private Souldiers of the Infantry about 4000. paying them constantly. 8. d. by the day a peice all which being thus proved there ought to be a serious consideration whether there be any particular duty to be performed by these Officers before mentiond, which is not performed by more necessary Officers, as being their duty in place, for a Major-General under any Commander in chief of a Brigade, unlesse in the Captain-Generalls, but as Major-Generall Potly was to Sir William VValler. I conceive there is no necessity, for their duty may as well be performed by the eldest Major of the Brigade and their pay converted to better uses. If there be but eight Major-Generalls in all our Armies, they receive pay, if I be not exeedingly mistaken, both as Major-Generalls & Colonells, either of Horse or Foot, which amounts to great sums, let pay day come never so seldome, it cometh too often for the service they do, as it being their proper duty in either of those places, by above 9. pay daies in 10. their revenews wil maintain 1500. of the infantry with con∣stant pay, the Major Generals pay at 6. l. per die a peice doth amount for eight of them to 17520 per annum, there are other Officers whose revenews will arise to a great matter in the yeare, as the Commissary to every Brigade, the word Gene∣rall being excluded, and assistant added, there will be some∣what remaining towards the payment of the army and them∣selves well satisfied: for the pay-master there is no use at all of himf the Commissary Generalls assistant be faithfull and industrious, we have examples hereof in these our Armies, to mine owne knowledge, where the Commissary hath both mustred and payed, but my feare is he hath received pay for both Offices, which is most unfit: for their pay is great, I verily beleeve, if the Auditor Generall were exempted and
Commissaryes of the severall Brigades receive pay onely as a∣ssistant to the Commissary Generall to the whole Army, there would be a sufficient remainer out of what I conceive their re∣venew doth amount to for maintaining 500. of the cavatry, & make their places more benefitial then is any Captains place of the Infantry, the next thing we are to consider is, the disad∣vantages that have and may arise to the State by reason of the over powreing notes of unnecessary officers at Councels of war as for this point I need not stand much upon it considering we have had so many sad testimons in these our times (how many town, have bin treacherously delivered up to the mercy of the enemy,) nay I believe more had bin had not the multi∣plicity of inferiours even pressed down the over powring votes of some superfluous Officers, which though it may seem con∣trary to all good manners, yet it was most befiting found judgement to contradict the humors, of indiscreat effeminate Commanders: the next thing we are to consider is of what can be said for the allowing of such places of Honour: and the difference between these our uncivill Civill Wars, and those that are and have been in other Countries, some will say why should there not be such places of Honour in our armies here in England since we have other Countries for our president viz. Germany Sweedland, Neatherland, France, Spaine, &c. cer∣tainely they being such absolute Souldiers as they are, both for judgement and valour, they would not allow of such Officers as the Author here excludes, unlesse there were a ne∣cessary duty to be performed by them, as in satisfaction to this poynt. It is the Authors desire that any German. French, Sweedish, or other Commander of them al wilbe so pleased as to dispute this duty which they conceive properly to be per∣formed by no other then those Officers, or at least out of curtesie to informe his judgement what duty it is that any of them performes under a Commander in chiefe of a private Brigade: for that I have beene somtimes a Souldier, & as yet know of no duty at al that properly appertaines to them, why then to be allowed in out Armies, is it for forme sake because they are tolerated in other Countries, is it possible the example of Forraine Nations should prove a president so remarkable as we can no way shew them one more noteable.
It is my desire that as this Honourable Parliament have done so many worthyacts to their never dying fame, as makes them seeme like so many glorious stats fixt in England Firmament to the view of the whol World & almost to the astonishment of Romes Stumpet so that now they would be pleased to view this new reformed Army, drawne up in batalia by the judge∣ment of a Loyall Subject, and faithfull Servant. I imagine this Army consist of 100000. horse and foot they are Commanded in chief by a Captain Generall, who accord∣ing to all presidents hath a Life-guarde for his security of his owne person, to be in number 200. or 150. at least of such Gentlemen, as shall forth of love to the said General adven∣ture themselves to attend his person and to lead the Van of that part of the whole Army, which shall at all times be resi∣dent with the said Generall: he is also to have one peculiar Re∣giment of Horse, and two of Infantry, his Lieu: General to com∣mand in chiefe two Regiments, the one Cavalry, & the other of Infanfry: the Maior Generall to have answerable those several Regiments to be commanded under them, by no other, then Maiors: Every Regiment of Cavalry to consist of 600. & every of the Infantry a 1000. That is to say in His owne Brigade. at least: And for so many more Regiments as shall be resident with the said Captaine Gene∣rall, then what is before mentioned, to be commanded by no other Officers in chiefe, As Canoneers Gentlemen to the Ordnance Conductor, Muntrosses, Pioneers, &c. then as above, unto the same there must be a Livetenant Generall unto the traine, with all ne∣cessary Officers thereunto belonging: A Quarter-Master General, a Commissary Gen: and a Scout-Master General, as to the whole Army, but are alwayes to attend the Captaine Ge∣nerall: and if they have any command in the said Army: be∣sides, It may be a meanes to cause them neglect their more necessary duties. That is to be under∣stood as need shall require. these afore-named Offices, it ought to be in the Captain Generals owne Regiment: but for their having other com∣mand: I know no necessity, by reason the other places are of great trust, and requires great vigilancy in the performance thereof: all which being drawn up, and commanded as afore∣mentioned, and under them those inferiour Officers without whom a Battalia cannot be maintained against an Enemy: And for the other Brigades, which are to make up the number of 100000. though severally dispo∣sed into divers parts of the Kingdome, yet to be commanded in chief by no other then the eldest Majors of the same Brig∣ade;
and so answerablely every Regiment by no Colonell, nor Livetenant-Colonell, and yet may performe what by them shall be undertaken in a more gallant and honourable way to themselves, and with lesse charge to the State, who imploy them by a 100000. l. par annum, then ever before, when they had all the unnecessary Officers to command them: yet I will not be my owne judge in this mater, but I leave the Conse∣quence to the considerations of whom it most concernes, desiring the GOD of Heaven, the chief Captaine of our Hos to bestow upon our Commanders, who are conceived to be necessary in our Armies, faithfull hearts towards himselfe, As many have done but look upon the cause in it self. & to the Cause they undertake, so as they may take no place of hon∣our upon them for any by or mercinary ends, but to joy in that God has pleasd to make them Instruments as in main∣taining his Cause, & to be Circumspect as they may do no un∣just act, under the maske of that just Cause: and with all sound Judgement, so as they may understand their duties in their severall places, valour to go on in the performance of their duties, with undanted Heriock Spirits, humility, so as they may win the hearts of their Souldiers to be in an equall ballance with their own, and conjoine together with all love, judgement; fidelity, and courage, against all which are now in Armes against God. Religion, Law, and Liberty. VVher∣fore I now shall desire every Officer seriously to consider their owne duties in their severall places, before such time as to receive their charges. After which they shall find; It points out that they are weighty Charges they undertake, wherefore they must not so looke on the honour as thereby to be puft up with pride as it shall cause them to waue their duty for sure it is every Officer hath under GOD the charge of his Souldiers Lives more or lesse ac∣cording to his trust committed to him, when he receives his place of Honour. that for as many of those men as shall be under their severall Commands and loose their Lives for their want of judgment, fidelity, & valour, or through their neglect of duty in their severall places, they must give a strict accompt for those mens lives at the last day, and further they will see that there is no necessary duty to be performed by those Officers which in this my weake Esayes I have excluded. FINIS.
