B693 E458_8 99864473 162091
A DECLARATION AND Vindication of the carriage of Edward Barber, at the parish meeting house of Benefinck London Fryday the 14. of Iuly 1648. after the morning exercise of Mr Callamy was ended, wherein the pride of the Ministers, and Babylonish or confused carriage of the hearers is laid down. As also the false aspersions cast upon him, he doing nothing but what was accor∣ding to the primitive institution, and is & ought to be in the best reformed Churches according to the Protestation and Covenant. Hosea. 8. 12. I have written unto them, the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strang thing. Hosea 9. 7. The dayes of visitation are come, the dayes of recompence are come, Israel shall know it; the Prophet is a foole, the spiritaall man is mad. Isa. 9. 13. For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hoasts. &c. Ionah 2. 8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies. Isa. 44 25. I am the Lord that frustrateth the tokens of the lyars, and maketh diviners mad, that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolishnesse: Zech. 13. 4. And it shall come to passe in that day, that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied: nei∣ther shall they weare a rough garment to deceive, &c. Mich. 3. 5. with 11. Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people erre, that bite with their teeth and cry peace: and he that puteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against them. Ioh. 3. 19. 20. 21. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darknesse rather then light: because their deeds were evill. For every one that doeth evill, hateth the light, nei∣ther commeth to the light least his deeds should be discovered; But he that doth truth, commeth to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Ioh. 16. 2. 3. They shall put you out of their Sinagogues: yea, the time commeth, that who∣soever killeth you will think he doth God service. And these things wil they d unto you because they have not known the Father, nor me. By E. B. freeman of England, and Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London.
BEing earnestly desired by diverse of the Inhabitants of the parish to come to heare Mr. Callamy at the Morning lecture, they promi∣sing that I should have ierty to add to what he should deliver, or con∣tradict if erronius, he being to be there upon the 14 of July. At which time, according to their desire and my duty I came, and having heard him all his Sermon without interruption, wherein is cheif discourse was concerning Moses rodd, which being done, I desired him and the rst of the audience, to permit me to add some few words to what he had delivered, conceiving he had not so much as toucht upon the very quintecence of the text, which did most neerly concern the people, to wit, The Lord Jesus the great Ensigne of the Gentils; Isa. 11. 10. upon which he desired me to forbear till he had concluded, & I might speak, upon which I did forbeare till he had done and pronounced his bles∣sing: and then desired that as he had prayed that the Gospell might be sent forth in the right order, that I mieht have liberty to speak accord∣ing to St. Pauls exortation, 1 Cor. 14. 29. 30. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. If any thing be revealed to another that siteth by, let the fist hold gi peace. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learne and all may be comforted. &c. Which freedom was practi∣sed in the Sinagogues as Acts 13. 15. where After the reading the Law and the Prophets, the Rlers of the Siagogues were so far from denying this priviledge that they sent unto Paul and Barnabas saying, ye men and brethren if ye have any word of exortation for the people say on. not coun∣ing their speaking, to be making a disturbance as Mr. Callamy did, who conrary to his promise, when according to his desire I had forborn till he had done, instead the of giving me leave said he wonded that any that prfect the Gospell would come to make a disturbance in the Church of God, dealing with me as formerly he had done with Mr. Kffin, Mr. Knoles and Mr. Cox concerning the publike dispute that should have been at Aldmanbury meeting house, or at least discovering his malice or ignorance of the Gospell practise, as Acts 15. 13. where it is written, after that Paul and Barnabas had spoken and held their peace Iames answered saying, &c. compared with Pt. 1. 4. 10. Upon which his deniall of this Gospel priviledge, I told him and the rest of the audience, that as I had bin a long dweller in the parish, where I had bin a diligent observer of the traditions of their fathers, those popish practises of paying tiths, and infants sprinkling &c, bu being now bet∣ter enlightened, and also by authority of Parl. injoyned in that place with the rest of the parish to take the protestation a thing injoyned up on the whole Kingdom, wherein I was injoyned to protest against all popery, and popish innovation: & this tying of the spirit of God only is the mouths of the Black coes, bing one of the grearest innovations that
ever was invented, as to raise, so to uphold the Kingdom of Antichrist: and so long as it is upheld, it shall never be raced, nor the libety of the Gospell obtained, which we are all injoyned to enev the overthrow thereof; and therefore desired the audience to consi∣der these Scriptures as I shuld nominate, as Acts 2 4. And they wre all filled with the Holyghoast and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utteranes. comp. Numb. 11. 26. with 29. Ioel 2. 28. Upon which the Assembly was filled with confusion, like the whole City of Ephesus, Acts 19. 29. and 22. 22. Where Pau declaring the liberty of the Gospel, which was by him to be preached to the Gentls, The Iews giving him audience unto that word, and they lift up thir voices and said, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he shuld live, crying out, casting off their cloaths, and throwing dust in the Ayre. &c. So these being in this confusion, some crying one thing some another, some crying lay hold on him, some throw him down, others kill him, others pull him limbe from limbe, som kiking him, others pulling off his coate, another his hat, some saying he is mad, others he is drunke, women scraching me by the face, where I might have been both rob∣bed and murthered, had there not been a Constabe there, who Centu∣rian like rescued me, there being Mr, Calamy Mr. Clanford, Mr. Clarke and some eight more of them, and not one endeavouring in the least to stop the rou; but 3 or 40 following me in this tumultuous manner to my own house much abusing me, thronging about the doore as they of Sodom did to Lots, Gen. 19. 9. Mr. Callamy and the rest never shew∣ing so much ayde or humanity as Gamaliel Acts 5. 34. 35. or the Cap∣tain of the band that rescued Paul from the rude multitude, Acts 21. 30 31 &c. they shewing more wisdom and morality then any of these did though at lest o in number; but I confesse your condition being like Demetrius and the rest that made silver shrines for Diana, at this time ingreat danger, I canno blame ye to looke about you; for if the liberty of the Gospell be obtained, your Kingdom will fall like Dagon before the Arke to the ground. Whereupon, you not giving the least liberty of the Gospel of Christ, I could not but protest against that Antichristian practise, and told them that as they and their tribe had bin the stirers up of the people of the Kingdom to these unnaturall and bloudy wars, yet pretend, they are the Ministers of Christ, and all the members of their Church Christians, though they thus kill one another, their practise being like Ahabs Pro∣phets, 1 King. 22. 22. And those uncleane Spirits like Frggs. as Revelation. 16. 13, being confident, that these wars will never be ended, nor a wel grounded Peace setled, till they, as well as their Fa∣thers be discovered, and the Kingdome of Antichrist, Root and Branch destroyed: As Mat. 15. 13. they being Plants nevr planted by Christs
Now I beseech all rationall men to consider, whether Paul made the proar, Act. 19 or Demetrius and his silver shrine-makers, and the rude multitude, Act. 20. 1. and 21. 38. and so for the Assembly. And inasmuch as Mr. Calamy, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Cawton, Mr. Cace, Dr. Burges Mr. Love▪ &c. have often since the Parliament, before them, and others, much envied and Railed against Sectaries, Schismaticks, Anabaptists, and never by the wordshewing who they are, much lesse confuting them, but in grosse as their Fathers against the Calnenists, Lutherens, Zwinli∣ant, Protestants, and Presbyterians, &c. Although they I believe practi∣sed according to their light in those dark times; & we according to the institutions of Christ▪ and premitive practice, but they passe all over in grosse, never opening the tearmes, much lesse confuting of it by the word, looking upon it as a great sinne, that any should question what they deliver, though never so false, but take all they deli∣ver as an oracle, by which their doings, they sowe the very seed of divi∣sion, hatred, persecution, & blood shed, as much as in them lyes contrarie to the Doctrine & practice of all the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ. But how▪ God hath answered their plottings and underminings, with Judgments I would the State and all men would take notice of, as when you have gotten Ordinances Saul like, Acts 9. 1. for the pun∣ishing by imprisoning of people for Conscience, thereby intrenching upon the prerogative royall of King Jesus, then immediately God hath sent some eminent trouble to the State and Kingdom, as hath been no∣ted by divers, &c. And where as some old men and women in the Assembly, out of their ignorant zeal, would have had me gone home in private to Mr. Calamy to be satisfyed, let them know that I am satisfyed already, that they are all of them the Ministers of Antichrist, and seeke as to uphold his King∣dom, so to keepe the people still in ignorance, & as it was said of Israel, so it may be said of them, Isai. 9. 14 15, 16. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and taile, branch and rush in one day. The ancient and honourable, he is the head: and the prophet that teacheth li, he  the taile, For the leaders of this people cause them to rr, and they that are led of them are destroyed. And therefore as the Apostle exhorts, Tim. 1. 5. 20. that those that sin are to be rebuked before all, that others also may fear. Now if this be not a sin to cause men to sweare with their hands lift up to the most high God, protesting and covenanting against all Popery, and Popish Innovasions, and without respect of persons to endeavour the extirpation of Poperie and Prelacy, that is Church-Government, by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, their Chancellers and Commissaries, Deanes and Chapters, Arch decons, & all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending up∣on that hirarchy, &c. now if not to perform this by such as have sworn,
it be not perjury I know not what is, and Eceles. 5. 4 5. Solomon saith, when thou vowest a vow unto God, deferre not to pay it, for he hath no pleasure in fooes, pay that which thou hast vowed: Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, then that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Now whether Mr. Calamy, with the rest of them that received their Or∣dination from the Bishops, who ha [their] Ordination from Rome, & for∣merly prayed for them as their right, reverend, and reverend Fathers, wearing their Surplus, having Altars at their Commnds, and cringing to them, &c. be not depending on that hitarchy▪ I leave to every understan∣ding experienced protestor and Covenanter to judge, seeing it is said, Iobe 14. 4 who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not one, and Dr. Burges before the Committee confest that the Bishops were as truly Antichristian, as Gods word was Gods word. Although 400l. per Annum of the same meaner, and the Dean of Paules his house in his account be not, but could swallow greater things then these. I shall now declare what I would have then said, had they given me li∣berty, which he so much spoke of from Exod 17. 5. 11. And 1. we are to con∣sider what Moses that Messenger of the Lord, that ruler and deliverer of the Isralites, that tipe of Christ was, to wit, a poor mechanick Sheapheard, yet learned in all the wisdom of the Egiptions, and refusing to be called the Sonne of Pharoahs Daughter, chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sinne for a season, &c. Paul-like Phil. 3. 7. 8. counting those things that were gain to him losse for Christ. 2. He being a Sheapheard, endeavored to get his own bread, laboring with his own hands, and not only with the brain▪ as some now pretends, getting into rich men and womens houses, that so their feete being under their Tables, thereby to uphold themselves in their Idlenesse, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and practice, Acts 20. 34. Thes. 2. 3. 6. 7. 8. 3. This Rod of Moses tipisied, or held forth that Bnner or Ensigne of Gods love, Jesus the Anointed, as Isa. 32. 1. Behold a King shall raign in righteousnesse, with Acts 2. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, and not only King, but Priest and Prophet, and where Christ is not thus recei∣ved in his offices but devided, he becomes no Christ to the devider. Now examine and see which of the ministers of these times can say with Paul, Acts 20. 26. 27. I take you to record this day that I am clear from the [blood] of all men; for I have not shuned to declare unto you all the councell of God. 4 This Ensign as it was to be lifted up as was noted, to signifie Gods power, promises and experiences, so I shall adde that Christ is to be lifted up as an Ensign to the Gentles▪ in the administrations of the Gospel, as Isa 5. 26. & 11. 10. And in that day there shall be a roote of Iesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seeke, and his rest shall be glo∣rious
compare with Isa. 49 6. & Matt. 12. 21. Acts 13 47. 48. and Rom. 10. 15. This is cleerly laid forth unto us, Mark. 16. 15 16. the par∣tition wall being broken downe that stood between Iews and Gentles. Goe ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that be∣leeveth and is dipt shall be saved, but he that beleeveth not shall be damned, compare with Mat. 28. 19. 20. & Luk. 24. 47. Wih Commission of Christ, is unviolably to be kept by beleivers, un∣der the penalty of a curse without alteration unto the end of the world, as Heb. 10. 28. 29, He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath troden under foot the Son of God &c. 5. This Ensign Christ is to be lifted up in his natures as he was God, and as he was man: Also in his Offices as he was the Priest, Prophet, and King of his Church; the Priest by whos offeting he hath perfected for ever all thm that are sanctfied. Heb. 1. 14. compare wih verse 10. the prophet whose voice only we ar to heare, Deut. 18. 15. Acts 3. 22. 23. For Moses truely said unto the fathers, a prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your, brethren like unto me; him shall you hear in all things whansoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to psse that very soule that will not hear that Prohet shall be destroyed from among the people. 3. The only King and Law-giver to his Church▪ as, Isae 33. 22. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Law giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, compared with Psa. 89. 27. 1 Tim. 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. & 19. 16. Iohn 12 32. 33. And I if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all men unto me. 6. Christ is to be lifted up in the administracion of the Gospel, accor∣ding to the beginnings of the foundation of the doctrines of Christ, in the constitutions and maintenance thereof; the Churches of Christ being to be so gathered after the apostacy, as planted in the primitive times, to wit, by repentance from dead works, faith towards God, the doctrin of dippings, & imposition of hands, as Hb. 6. 1. 2. it being according to the great Charter of the Gospel of Christ and primitive practise, as Acts 2. 38. to 43. & 8. 12. 36. 37, 38. & 10. 46. 48. which practice would soone dis∣cover the falsnes or Naionall holynesse, fetherall holynesse, Church privi∣ledge to naturall infants, Parish Priests and Assemblies, taking Tithes and Alters, &c. From whence you may observe the danger of all such as shall adde to the word of God, or diminisheth there from, as Mat. 5 19. comp. with R. 22. 18. 19 7. Christ being thus lifted up it will discover those that pretend themselves ministers of Christ, and are not; Re. 2. 2. Nor yet con∣tent with his wages, that he hath left them, and in his own way, and not to trouble the Civill Majestrates nor the people, by the violent taking away there goods from them, and troubling them with unjust suites, contrary to the rule & their Protestation & Covenant, whereby if you will not be per∣jured,
you can neither take tithes nor they pay them. &c Consider Lvi. sons those sons of Belial Sam. 1. 2. 13. That came with their flsh▪hooke with three teeth which they strook into the pan or kettle, & all that which the hooke took up, the Priest took for himsel by force; but ver. the 36 their condition is declared when they shall come and crouch for a peice of silver & a morsell of bread, saying put me I pray te into the Priests Office that I may eate a peice of bread. 8. This discovers the folly of those as hav∣ing drunk of the wine of Babels golden cup, whereby they stil seek to up∣hold their popish traditions, though to the overthrowing of the glorious institutions of Christ and the drawing down the wrath of God upon the nations, yet pretend themselves ministers of Christ, yet seeking by violence and compulsion to set up the Gospel, a thing contrary to the very nature thereof, and Christ and his disciples practice. But let them know they are not the men that God will give his people deliverance by, neither is that the way which they take, they having received as their power and autho∣rity so their practice from the beast, Re. 13. 16. & therefore must be rooted up, as Mat. 15. 13. & Ier. 51. 25. 26. Behold I am against the O destroying moun∣tain, &c. 9. Let this informe the people of God not to stay in Babel in that state, it being not their resting place as Mich. 2. 10. 11. Arise ye and depart, for this ie not your rect, because it is polluted, &c, Mar. 8. 37. 38. & 2 Cor. 6, 14. to 18. where the Apostle shewing the disagreement betwixt light and darknes, beleivers with unbeleivers, righteousnes with unrighteousnes, he that beleiveth with an Infidell, the Temple of God with Idols beleivers being the Temple of God in whom he will dwell and walke, being their God and they being his people; Wherefore he saith, Come out from among them saith the Lord and be ye separate &c. And in this reformation to have a word for their warrant, and not to make reformed Churches their pat∣tern, as Germany Scotland &c. But rather the Primitive Institutions, as Ezra and Nehemiah did in their Reformation, and as the Apostle exorts, Col. 2. 8, Beware lest any man spoyle you through Phylosophy and vaine deceit, &c. for as Christ saith, Mar. 8. 36. 37. For what shall it profit a man if h shall gaine the whole world and loose his own soule, &c. & Iohn 1. 3. 2. the Apo∣stle saith, Beloved now are we the Sonnes of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 2 Tim. 2. 11. 12. It is a faithfull saying, for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, if we suffer, we shall also rayne with him if we deny him, e also will deny us. 1 Cor. 2. 9. But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. Rev. 7. 14. 17. These are they which come out of great tribulation, and have washed their Rebes, and made them white with the blood of the Lamb: therefore they are before the Thrown of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple,
and he that sitteth on the Throne shall dwell among them, they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light upon them, nor any heat for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feede them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of waters, & God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes. Reasons 1. VVe may take notice that God will be found in his own way, and by his own means his wayes & thoughts being hgher then mens, Isa 55. 8. 9. compared with Luke 16 31. where Abraham tells Dives that  his bretheren would not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded though one rose from the dead. 2. It matters not how weake the nstument is, that God vvorks by the vvork being his, as Iudges 7. 16. 17. 18. Also Amos a head man, Iosua Moses his servant, Nehemia a Courtier the Kings Butler, David a Sheapheard, Peter Andrevv Iames and Iohn Fishermen. Paul 2 Tentmaker, Acts 18. 3. yea Christ himselfe a Carpenter, Mark 6. 3▪ 3 This should teach all the Servants of Christ not to undervalevv the gift of God in any, nor ye up the Tongues of those vvhose mouths the Lord shall open by his spirit, but to give liberty and freedom to them, as Acts 2. 4. vvhere they vvere all filled vvith the Holy Ghost, and spake as the spirit gave them utterance, and Acts 15. 7. 13. compared vvith 1 Cor. 14. 29. to 33. 1 Pet. 4. 10. when Christ assended upon high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto men for the gathering edfying and perfecting of the Saints, (not Arts and Sciences) lened at the Universities. 5. God is now about his great marvelous work, and a wond in overthrow∣ing the State of Antichrist, root and branch, Isa. 2. 9. to 15. saying, stay your selves and wonder, cryye out, and cry they are drunck, but not with wine, they stagger, but not with strong drink, for the Lord hath powred out upon you the spirit of deepe sleepe, and hath closed your eyes, the Prophets, and Rulers, the Seers hath he covered, and the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, read this I pray thee, and he saith, I cannot for i is sled, and the book is delivered to one that is no learned, saying, read this I pray thee, and he saith, I am not learnd, wherefore the Lord sid; forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, & with their lps do hnor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold I will pro∣ceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men shall be hid, wo unto them that seeke deepe to hide their Councel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say who seeth us and who knoweth us, surely your turning things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay, Cor. 1. 1. 18. But it may be said, of these at this time as it is said, Ezek. 33. 31. 32. 33. they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words but they will not do them, for with their mouthes they shew much love, but ther heart goeth aft their covetuousnesse, And loe, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of on that hath▪ plea∣sant voice, and can play well on an instrument, for they heare thy words, but they will not do them: but when this cometh to passe, loe it will come, then shall they know that a Pro∣phet hath been amongst hem Thus what I would have then spoken, I have written and committed to publike view and sensure of all being thereunto constrained, necessity being layd upon me, desiring the Reader to receive t as favorably as it was truly intended for the glory of God, and the ex∣altation of the Gospel of King Iesus. FINIS.
