J814 E470_34 99864995 117228
A LETTER FROM THE HEAD-QVARTERS, At St. Albanes, Communicating, the Proceedings of the Ge∣nerall Councell of the Army the weeke past: Setting downe such Queries by the Offi∣cers and Souldiers, as were presented to the Generall and Councell. Written to a Friend in London, November, 10. Printed in the Yeare 1648.
A Letter from the Head Quarters. Sir: IT is fit my service should last as long as your commands; and since your desires are but the discharge of my ingagements to you, it being my positive promise to communicate to you the Debates, Results, and desires of the Counsell, and private Souldiery, and Officers of the Army; I heere send you what hath beene transacted since Saturday, which transactions are very high, and may doe much good for this Kingdome, if God be but pleased o owne us in Counsell as he hath owned us in the Field: the Regiments have delivered in their desires, and some Queries to the Counsell, and wee doe dayly expect some more from the Liefte∣nant Generalls Army, which wee conceive will be as high as our Armies; the Souldiers are growne to a great dislike of the Parliament, and much
doubt their owne safety under the hands of them, and conceive they have great reason, considering the mutabillity and unconstancy of their esoluti∣ons, and are ready to say, that the Majo part of the now sitting Commons, and the whole House of Peeres are as changeable as the Camelion; vote an affirmative, and as contrary with the same breath, which wee believe is very dangerous to both King∣dome and Army, and much tends to the ruine and destruction of both; knowing very well that in∣stabillity and changing is bid to be ware of by the wisest of men; Medle not with them that are given to change, for their calamities shall be great, and who shal know the ruines of them? but you shall receive the Queries and desires heere inclosed, which wee conceive to be both reasona∣ble and honest▪ and much tending to the happinesse of both Kingdome and Army: I am something in haste, and cannot inlarge my selfe at present, but in my next you shall receive a full account of all the prceedings of the Counsell and Army; from him who is, Sir, Your Friend to serve you, R. Johnson. Let my service I pray salute all our friends in Holburne, Queen-street, and Savoy.
Honourable: VVEE shou'd, and are worse be wit∣ched then the Galatians, if wee should believe that this Treaty were any thing other then a snare to enslave and ruine, and truely wee cannot but thinke a spirit of mad∣nesse hath possessed the hearts of all those who be∣lieve this Treaty, or a Treaty with those wee have conquered twice, can any way prove propitious to us, or this Kingdome, there is none so blinde as those which doe not see slavery and bondage coming upon us, and our Posterity, as travell upon a woman with childe, which wee cannot escape if this Trea∣ty take effect; therefore wee present our sence of it, with all humblenesse to this Honourable Counsll in a few Queries, desiring that they may be speedi∣ly taken into consideration, as things that are the sole good, and in which all our happinesse is wrapt up in. First, VVhether an Ordinance made by Parliament in a time (unquestionable) of free∣dome, and liberties, and in a full House upon mature deliberation, and after many dayes de∣bate,
and after all objections made against no Addresses to the King, and a full Vote passed in the House to governe without Him: Let it be judged whether the safety of a Kingdome can be free in the hands of such, when they vote the contrary upon a tumultuous Petition, and treat with, and court our conquered Ene∣my. 2. VVhat is an Ordinance of Parliament worth, or will be accounted of by any, if as soone as its granted, or upon any Rebellion or Insurrection, though at a hundred miles di∣stance it may be recalled? what a slender ground and foundation, nay upon what a broken reed, doe, and will men say they have built on all this while, in venturing their lives, and ha∣zarding all that is deare unto them, or in act∣ing for the Parliament, or by an Ordinance? therefore we cannot thinke our selves in safe∣ty, so long as things are thus carried. Whether or no in the judgement of any in∣different men it can stand with the honour, ju∣stice, authority, and gravity of the supreame Court of judicature, and the great Counsell of a Kingdome, when upon mature deliberation,
and waighty reasons in the most legall way, when noe addresses have beene voted in a full House to the King, and now addresses made, & he courted as one that hath not had the least finger in all hat innocent blou that hath been shed, when he himselfe hath confessed to be the Author of all, and guilty of that bloud that hath been spilt in these 3 Kingdomes. 3. Whether the Army can be in safety when those their knowne Enemies have the mana∣ging of this Treaty, and are most forward to support that which will ruine us and our poste∣rity. 4. Whether the Army can bee in safety, when the Counsell of the Citizens are the sole guide of the Parliaments transactions, and the absolute influence into the Councells of the same, and those of the Citizens too, which are our profest enemies. 5. VVhether the Army and Kingdome can be in safety, when the desires and requests of the Malignants are so frequently granted, and the onely men put in places of trust. 6. VVhether the Kingdome and Army can be in safety, or we ever expect a blessing from
heaven, so long as the chiefe abetter, and main∣tainer of these wars live without punishment, and be not brought to justice. 7. VVhether there can bee safety for the Kingdome and Army, so long as the Kings friends go abroad, and are suffred to weare armes, and pistols, and murder our friends, and are not put to death, and brought to condigne punishment. And now we conceiue that it is the sence of your Excellency and this Councell, that the Kingdome is in danger, if these things be not takn in your se∣rious consideration, and by your wisedome and care prevented: & we present unto you our humbledesire. First, that those which have beene the principl of the first and second war, may be tryed by a Council of war, as prisoners at war. 2. That all those of both Houses, who vted with those that would have further addresses may bee que∣stred the House, as well those of the Peeres as the of Commons. 3. That those Citizens which indeavoured the rai∣sing of an Army, when we were at Colchestr may be forthwith apprehended, and brought to exmplay pu∣nishment▪ being they indeavoured to raie without any Authority or Ordinance of Parliament. 4. That the Treaty may not go on any further, but may be speedily broke off, and a course taken that no tearmes may be hkened to, or offred to that Party but that speedy justice may be done upon Him and His ad∣herents. FINIS.
