L1738 669.f.6[59] 99871057 160920
A Letter to the Kindome of ENGLAND, To stand upon their Watch, least the darke winter nights (by the lightning of Cannons) prove terrible to their Spirits. To all that wish well to the Church and Common-Wealth, greeting, with desire that the multitude of frivolous Pamphlets, may not hinder them from reading, or perusing of this affectionate Letter from a Friend, or Brother of theirs. Deare Countrey-men. MY Prayer to God, and hearts desire is, that you may be safe in this life, and saved in the world to come. Are not good Laws the Life of a Kingdome, and the Gospell in its purity the power of God unto salvation? Can you be in safety, if the streames of Law, runing through the Channell of Equity should be dam'd up by black Envie, and desperate Malignity? What will become of your Liberties and Estates, your Selves and your Posteri∣ties, if boundlesse Prerogative sore aloft; And the wholsome Statutes enacted, and good Laws prepared, be so depressed, that their depression prove no lesse then their annihilation? It is the Word that begets Faith, and Gods Ordinance that instrumentally vivifie our dead, and refoscilate our drooping and distressed spi∣rits: Can the Vision therfore faile, and you not be in danger to perish? It is the boldnesse of Gods Messengers, and the late enlargement of their bounds, that now enrageth nefarious and Malevolent persons. That the Law may not be your Prote∣ction, that the light of Sacred Truth may not shine so clearly; that they may be advanced, and you and yours for ever ensla∣ved, diverse corrupt Men, Men of corrupt spirits have perswaded His Majesty to desert His Great, His Wise, and His Faithfull Councell, the Councell of Parliament: yea, I wish they may not (if they have not) prevailed with Him to take up Armes against those, who are and will ever be found to be his Loyall Subjects: But what meaneth the sounding of the Trumpets, and the striking up of Drums in severall Counties, by vertue of his Majesties Commission, if Warre was not intended in this our Nation? It may be you are, or shortly will be sent unto, for Men, Moneys, Horse, and other Warlike Ammunition, and if not to beare at least to lend your Armes, which you have provided for the good of your Countries, that under pre∣tence of Defence of his Majesty, and the maintenance of your own Peace they may be borne by others. It is not his Ma∣jestie, but his Majesty misinformed, that calls for this from you, not himselfe, but his ill affected Councellors and the Cava∣liers, who follow them at the heeles, and (as it may be thought) many of them, not only criminous, but of desperate For∣tunes, desiring through the Sea of your blood to swimme to their hoped haven that put him on upon these strange and unheard of courses. The wise mans eyes are in his head, stand upon your Watch, look about you, the Romish party and the Malecon∣tented Courtiers would ensnare you; Sleep not, Security precedes Misery: it is ill resting in a Syrens armes; faire Pretences sometimes open the doore to let in a Troop of Evills. You have of late had many goodly Protestations, but few reall acti∣ons: take heed what you doe, you have cause to Feare, not to Confide, and if to Confide, not in a Prince carryed away by private Councell, but in the great Councell of State, that Councell is his Majesties; they were Summoned by his own Writ; They are yours; they came together by your own Election; should you doe contrary to their Advice, you would desert both your King and your Selves. It is for God and the Common good that they stand. Meroz Curse wilbe your portion, if you come not out to helpe Them, much more if you should goe forth or send any Force against them. The Lords and Com∣mons intend nothing but Loyalty to his Majestie, and the continued and continuall preservation of your Safety: Therfore helpe them with your Prayers, neither let your Estates and Lives be deare unto you for their sakes; and see that you lift not up a hand against them, least you be sound fighters against the Lord. Defend his Majesties Royall person to the last droppe of blood in your Veines; maintaine his Dignity, with the priviledge of Parliament, with the hazard of your Lives; and fur∣ther, according as you lately Protested, endeavour to bring all underminers of Church and State to condigne punishment. Goe not out of your Counties, but defend them and your Selves. Lend not your Armes, least being naked you be beaten with your own Weapons. Take my advice, you may come to prevent Dangers. It is the advice of a Friend, and of one that is a Loyall Subject to his Majestie; therfore let his promonition be a premunition to you all. London, Printed by R. O. & G. D. in the yeere, 1642.
