L3192A 669.f.25[18] 99870569 163823
THE PRAYER OF Collonel Iohn Lambert IN CAPTIVITY. This Prayer is not in the Hebrew, but was Translated out of the Greek by his Chaplain for the Collonels own proper use. MOst Plaguye and most Confounded Ill Fortune, Thou that didst favour Oliver, and Bulstrode, Whitlock, that didst exalt the Poor and Needy, and for many years together send the Rich empty away; Thou didst blesse Clowns with the blessing of Mony baggs, and madest Jone as good as my Lady, why, Oh why hast Thou left me in the Mire? I confesse Thy Afflictions are Vnsupportable, and Thy Fickle, Giddy, and Whimsical wayes, are to me unsearcheable. Yet Thou art not altogether without Compassion, Thou hast ostentimes returned to those whom Thou hast made Miserable, and made them as happy as before thou hadst rendred them Contemptible; When wilt Thou deal so by thy Servant John Lambert? I confesse I did Offend Thee with my Impudence, for I unseated the RUMP too soon, I vexed the City too early, and shewed my Teeth before I was well able to Bite. Yet in one thing I Obey'd Thee, for I put my Confidence in a Fool, thinking Thou hadst favoured him. If thy Maximes be not true, that was none of my fault. Thou didst help me out of the Tower by Thy Favour; but Thou didst very discourteously suffer me to be taken again (Hells Curse light on Thee) and now my Transgressions, are multiplye'd before my Enemies: So that I am only leapt out of the Frying-pan into the Fyre. How long Ill Luck wilt Thou knit Thy Brows; and Frown upon him that was once Thy Darling. Remember what Thou hast béen toward me, and for shame let not all the World sée what an unconstant Whore Thou art: Yet if Thou bée'st resolv'd to make me the Sport of thy wanton Hours, I beséech Thee to provide well for my Daughter the Infanta of Wimbleton, and suffer her not to be jeer'd to Death for the Folly of her Father; take not from my Wife the Comforts of the New Exchange, but enlarge the Hearts and Purses of the Sectary's towards her, that she may not be forc'd to keep in and sigh in Fair Wea∣ther, but may still visit Hide-Park and the Spring-Garden, with a Pomp befitting their Generals Wife. And as for my self deliver me out of Prison if it be Thy Will, least a worse thing befall me, for I hear Innocent blood, and that Royal too crying out for revenge. Oh grant that the Portugal Embassador may beg me, and send me out of the noise on't, where it may happen that by Thy Favour I may be Protector in a strange Country, that am so much despised in my own. But if Thou wilt have me Dye, Mazzle up the Mouth of gaping History, that it may not publish my Dishonor, and the ill Suc∣cesse of my Rebellion, my Effeminate Escape, and pittiful Submission in the Field. More I might say, Dear Goddesse; But I never us'd to pray long, or much: And therefore do but help me out at this dead lift; and Thou shalt be my only Deity, to which I and my Successors will ascribe all our praises while the World endures. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.
