L486 E572_21 R206173 99865348 165379
The last great and BLOVDY FIGHT IN IRELAND ON Wednesday last, being the 29. of August, 1649. between the Marq. of Ormonds Forces, and the Lord Governour Cromwels, upon his Lordships advance with his whole Army of Horse and Foot from the City of Dublin. WITH The particulars thereof, the manner of their engagement, the wounding of Lieut. Gen. Jones, and a List of the Officers and Souldiers, killed, wounded, and taken prisoners. ALSO, The Lord Governour Cromwels Letter to the Parliament of England, and his Declaration and Resolution touching IRELAND. London, Printed for Robert Williamson, the 4. of September, 1649.
C R central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right A GREAT FIGHT IN IRELAND Between The Lord Governour Cromwels Forces, and the Mar. of Ormonds, upon the advance of the Parl. Army from the City of Dublin towards Drog∣hedah, with a lift of the prisoners killed and taken. Right Honourable, UPon Wednesday last, being the 29. of August, the Lord Governour Cromwell (with his whole Army of horse and foot) took the field, he marched forth of the City with Trumpets sounding,
Drums beating, and Colours flying; and about foure miles from the City, they drew up into a body, where the most facile meanes were used by the Officers, for the safe marching and prefervation of the Souldiers, and after severall speeches made by the Commanders in chief, at the head of each Troop and Company, in reference to the great work in hand, a selected party of horse were drawn forth, under the command of co∣lonell Reynolds, who were to march three miles di∣stance from the Van of the Army, for a more timely discovery of the enemy. After few hours, the whole Body drew off in a Re∣gimentary way from the place of Randezvouz, and quartered all wednesday night about six miles distant from the City. The next morning the said Col. Reynolds (by Orders from the Lord Governour Cromwell) and Lieutenant Gen. Jones, advanced with one thousand of the choi∣sest horse within five mites of Droghedah (where the chiefest strength of the enemy then lay) with a full resolution, to beat up the Out quarters of the Mar∣quesse of Ormond; but by the vigilancy of his Scouts, our party were discovered, who soon gave the Capt. of the Guard notice of their neer approach, and al∣larum'd the rest, in the parts adjacent; insomuch, that each man endeavoured to put himself in a readinesse to receive our party, and accordingly body'd, which being done, both parties came within sight of each o∣ther; the Scouts met, and upon each firing wheeled off; at last, the Forlornes were drawn forth, who met each other upon a full career, but fired with great wisdome and moderation, and upon engagement dis∣puted
the place with most admired gallantry, which by reason of the sudden inflamation of such magna∣nimous Spirits, the Victory seemed dubious, each man striving for Conquest; till at last, both the bodyes engaged, and after a most sharp and desperate encoun∣ter, the honour of the action fell to Lieut. Gen. Jones, and Colenell Reynolds, for after one hours dispute, the enemy wheeled, deserted engagement, and with what haste possible they could, made towards Drogheda, up∣on which dishonourable falling off, our horse fell in upon the Rear of them, killed many, and took divers prisoners, with the losse of 30. men. Of the Enemies side, it is said there fell three for one, which according to the ensuing List, are as fol∣loweth. A List of the prisoners killed wounded and taken in the last Engagement neer Drogheda. Killed. Two Captains of Horse. One Lieutenant. Three Cornets. Seven Corporals. 200 Tooopers. Wounded and taken pri∣soners. Major Butler, Nephew to the Marquesse of Or∣mond. Major William Gerrard. Captain Dillon. Captain Francklin. Captain Oneal. Cornet Fitz-James. Cornet Kembolt. Cornet Armstrong. Corporall Williams, Corporall Mackart, 80 Troopers. 200. horse, pistols & arms. In which conflict, some report Lieu. Gen. Jones to be wounded, but not mortall. Dublin 31. August, 1649.
The Declaration of the Lord Governor Cromwell in Ireland. WHereas God Almighty, in the aboundance of his Mercy and goodnesse, hath been pleased from time to time to vouchsafe Preservation and de∣liverance unto this City from the rage and cruelty of a bloudy Enemy, and in a more speciall manner to manifest his numerous Hrmy of Rebels encampt a∣bout this City; which continuall mercies do justly call for a thankfull acknowledgment of his gracious goodnesse, by a sincere and earnest endeavour, as well to maintain the honour of his most holy Name, as to oppose and take away such offences, being contrary and displeasing to his divine will: And yet notwith∣standing, by the frequent practise of prophane swea∣ring, cursing and drunkennesse, his holy name is dayly dishonoured and blasphemed, to the scandall and grief of all good men, although the said offences are pro∣hibited by the Law of God, the known Laws of this Land, and the known Articles of War, whereby wee have just cause to sear, that without a through Refor∣mation of such sins, he may deservedly break off the continuance of his wonted loving kindnesse towards this place, and give us over to destruction.
And for as much as it is a duty required at the hand of the Magistrate, who ought not to bear the sword in∣vain, but to improve the power committed into his hand for the punnishment, prevention of Offences; We therefore sadly taking the premises into conside∣ration, and resolving that the said Offences be strictly proceeded against and punnisht according to the ut∣most severity and rigour of Law, do by this our Pro∣clamation strictly charge and comand, that as well the Major of this City, and other Officers and Ministers of Justice in the same City, whom the same shall concern; As also that all Officers of the army do respectively cause the said Laws and articles to be put in execution against all such persons as shal offend against the same And we do further charge and command all Officers of the Army to be ayding and assisting to the said Ma∣jor of this city, and other the said Officers and Mini∣sters of Justice therein, for the apprehending of all and every the sald Gffenders which shall, be members of the Army, and for the bringing of them before their proper Officers, whereby they may be severely pu∣nisht according to the said Articles of War: And we do hereby declare our full resolution to punish the neglect and contempt of this our Proclamation with the severest punishment which by Law may be in∣flicted upon the contemners thereof. Signed, O. CROMWELL. Given at Dublin-Castle this 23. of August. 1649.
By Letters further from Ireland thus: Sir, The strength of the Marquesse of Ormond is very great, his Army grows numerous, and resolved men for a field, being for the most part confident of success, notwith∣standing their late defeat; the conjuction of the Lord Inchiquin, the Lord Ards, the Earl of Clanrickard, and the Earl of Castlehaven, are said to be at least twenty thousand horse and foot, our army not above twelve thousand, but resolved to fight them; in the intrim, the Lord Governour Cromwell seriously weighing the great necessity of supplies both for men, money, and ammunition, hath sent a letter to the Parliament of England, for the speedy sending of them over; for in all probability, there will be work enough for them, by reason of the Countries coming in to the enemies assistance to oppose our Armies further march up in∣to the Country; yet many of the English Inhabitants denies to yeeld obedience to the Marq. of Ormonds Summons, notwithstanding the rigor of the L. Moor, (Governour of Tredagh against them, who hath de∣clared his resolution to fight it out to the last man for Charles the I I, rather then to yeeld it to the power & obedience of the Parliament of England, but many are of opinion, that upon the Lord Governours approach neer him, he will be of another mind. Imprimatur, T. J. FINIS.
