N1075 669.f.4[84] 99869121 160706
The Copy of a Letter Written by Mr. William Newton, One of the Gentlemen Vshers unto the Lady ELIZABETH, unto his Brother Francis Newton, Esq. One of the Foure Squires of the Body to his Maiestie. From the HAGE, March the 18. New stile, 1641. BROTHER, WEE are here at the Hage, but in little better case, as touching feares and Iealousies, then you are in England: true, the matter of the Prince of Orange is seemingly composed, I wish I could say ended, fire raked up, may possibly appeare, yea and flame: The States will not trust him with monies, and paying of the Armie, as formerly: but will set up and create a new Officer for that purpose: this sometimes discontents his Highnesse: the Governor of Bergen ap Zome, that Towne of so great strength, being once a neere ser∣vant to his Highnesse, and brought up a long time under him, in very neere services, and preferred unto that great place of Trust by the Princes mediation: him would the States now very faine remove; but the talke goes here, that he will not hearken to it, having that great garrison firme on his side; as it is feared upon too iust grounds; the Prince hath all the Armie, so that wee are not yet heere quite cleer of all surmizes of after-claps: the Burgers in the Townes, plainly give out, that they feare the Prince hath been aforehand with them: and one of the Burgemasters of Flushing, openly in my Mr. the Princes presence Chamber, told my Lord Goring, in my hearing, that they had iust cause to feare, that the Princes Sons Marriage with the eldest daughter of the King of great Brittaine, had set the Prince on such a high straine, that shortly hee doubted either their ruine or his owne: pray God things may stand as they were, for unwonted aspiring thoughts, produce many times enterprizes more pleasing then successfull, if distempers should againe breake out heere: I thinke wee must be forced to come visite you in England: truth is, the States Generall have never the better opinion of the Prince of Orange since this Match, some thinke the worse: nay, their usuall respects are something coulder toward my Lady, and Master, who I dare say upon my oath, is heartily grieved for this distance, and discorrespondencie between the Prince and them, and hath no interest or partnership, but sorrow in it, and who must needs reape disconvenience by it. and may account this to the rest of her crosses: the Queens entertainment at the Hage, is in my very soule more royall then heartie, the Duth liberalitie is almost at an end: and the Queens entertainment begins to slaken with them: only his highnesse holds on his wonted noble∣nesse in chearing her: they set her Maiestie a day, that they would be rid of her, if so it please or stand with her occasions: Proclamation against your Parliament delinquents, forbidding them strictly to repaire hither during her Maiesties abode here upon paine of imprisonment, and sending back into England with strict guard, hath been here published in all Townes and dominions of the States: yet two have bravely adventured to kisse her hand, who came hither wonderfully well disgui∣sed, and walked nor openly in Court, lay in the Prince of Oranges owne lodging, and after two dayes took their leave either for France or Brussels: God knowes the Queene is very narrowly watched here, as a Personage of her quality may bee, and I durst pawne my life the Parliament hath some agents here meerly to attend that businesse; and three of them are in my Conscience, L. O. S. S. I H. Her Maiestie would have gone first to Cullen, to have attended upon her Mother, then to Brussels, but was denied; the Prince of Orange seemed very forward to accomplish her desire in both, as farre as lay in his power; but he was not so forward, but she found the Dutch as froward, who absolutely denyed in plaine termes, studying all the wayes they can to gratifie, and complie with your Parliament, not caring who they displease, so they satisfie them; I verily thinke, the Queen as the matter stands, will not trouble them long heere, and that yee shall have her in England yet a good while before Easter. Thus hoping your welfare, and all our contents from his Highnesse Court at the Hage this present Friday, March the Eighteenth, I remaine your ever true loving Brother, and Servant, Wil. Newton.
