N241 E1560_1 99863090 115272
NATURA EXENTERATA: OR NATURE UNBOWELLED By the most Exquisite Anatomizers of Her. Wherein are contained, Her choicest SECRETS digested into RECEIPTS, fitted for the Cure of all sorts of Infirmities, whether Internal or External, Acute or Chronical, that are In∣cident to the Body of Man. Collected and preserved by several Persons of Quali∣ty and great Experience in the Art of Medicine, whose names are prefixed to the Book. Containing in the whole, One thousand seven hundred and twenty. Very necessary for such as regard their Owne Health, or that of their friends. Valetudinem tuam cura diligenter. VVhereunto are annexed, Many Rare, hitherto un-imparted Inventions, for Gentlemen, Ladies and others, in the Recre∣ations of their different Imployments. With an exact Alphabetical Table referring to the several Diseases, and their proper Cures. London, Printed for, and are to be sold by H. Twiford at his shop in Vine Court Middle Temple, G. Bedell at the Middel Temple Gate Fleetstreet, and N. Ekins at the Gun neer the West-end of S. Pauls Church, 1655.
portrait The most Illustrious & most excellent Lady, the Lady Alathea Talbot &c. Countesse of Arundell & Surry & the first Countesse of England.
READER, IT hath ever been an humor in the world for men either absolutely to condemn or supercilliously to dispise all other things, beside what themselves can effect, and most unhandsomely prejudicate, That there is no merit, but in their own actions: Thus the talka∣tive dogmatists would word their patients out of A∣gues, Gouts, and Apoplexies, as if they took exor∣cisms for cures, or their Cantings and incantations of strength enough to supersede the Grave. The re∣futations of which irksome discourses, are many times seen in the real actions and performances of others, whose Probatums are more sanative then the consul∣tations of such, whose Method, Beard and Gowne are all the reallities to commend them to the world, whilst their languishing patients, impatiently (though very truly conclude) That Garrulus medi∣cus est onerosior morbo. That which hath done, may do, what that which never did may fail in. Method, tis true, may rectifie and informe the reasonable fa∣culty in man, yet be of very little assistance in acci∣dents, whose uncouth causes are not lyable to Rule. What folly is it therefore for any man to think, That that by which Hypocrates was Hypocrates, was not much more considerable in the curing of his malady, then that by which he was a man. The species can never have Feaver nor Consumption, 'tis the fluid temperament consequentious to the principles of In∣dividuation
that made Socrates groan and die. So that if accidents are the grounds of Infirmities and diseases, then practical observations are more assi∣stant then Systemes; obscure words rather beget a∣mazement then amendment in sick people. They who do (though emperically) are to be preferred before those who dispute and talk. All which hath been said in order to justifie the sedulous observations and collections of these ensuing receipts, which are com∣mended because they have done upon many, and do carry their reason of doing upon most, whose lingering condition shall invoke their aid. That there is credit in their performances, those whose care hath preserved them, may informe; that they are out of order, the several hands from whence they are deri∣ved, and the hastning of them to the presse for pub∣lick good may justly excuse: And the Table as exactly direct, as if the particulars in the body of the Booke had been placed in their order. PHILIATROS. Reader, I here commend thee to a booke Of health; not, for thy trivial time, to look Over a leafe or two, lay't down again; Call for another, vex the Stationers brain To find thee out varieties: lay hold on this, Bring it to practice, health thou shalt not misse. Horat. —Atqui Si noles sanus, curres Hydropcus.— Thy freind, PHILOHUZEIUS.
A Catalogue of such Persons of Quality, viz. Knights, Doctors of Physick, Gentlemen, Countesses, Ladies and Gentlewomen, &c. by whose Experience, these Receipts follow∣ing have been approved. Sir Walter Raleigh Sir Kenhelm Digby Sir Francis Swift Sir Nicholas Le Strange. Dr. Butler, Dr. Lyster Dr. Ward Dr. Jordain Dr. Walker Dr. Atterslow Dr. Nicholas Dr. Hatcher Dr. Hill Dr. Coldwell Dr. Stevens Dr. Sherman Dr. Martin Dr. Moor Dr. Aquapendente Dr. Martin of Kurnbeck. Mr. Jacob Mr. Peacock Mr. Holditch Mr. John Gally. Mr. Clement Warwick Mr. John Richard Mr. Throgmorton Mr. John Cornwallis Mr. Neave Parson Saywel Mr. John Knape Mr. Birch Mr. Peterson Mr. Edwards Mr. Buckbeard Mr. Smith Mr. Vowel Mr. Cooper John Fernelius Mr. John Digby Mr. Kendal Mr. Pelham Mr. Green Mr. Cockman Mr. Herrick Mr. Mosse Mr. Dimmock Mr Hubberd Mr. Gestwick Beda
Mr Hendly Mr. Hampton Mr. Warth. Mr. Neot. Mr. Hutton Mr. Gaskin Paracelsus Countess of Surry Countesse of Sussex Lady Cromwell Lady Cook Lady Coventry Lady Capel Lady Paget Lady Heydon Lady Savil Lady Constable Lady Killegrew Lady Skreene Lady Fortescue Mrs. Downing Mrs. Miller Mrs. Maydenhead Mrs. Forster Mrs. Wilson Mrs. Minne Mrs. Scudamore Mrs. Lindsey Mrs. Nichols Anne Kirby Mrs. Kent Goodwife Worsted of Cal∣thorp Mrs. Parnell Dall Mrs. Birch Mrs. Blowe Mrs. Dinne Mrs Jones Mrs. Dawson Elizabeth Chanon of Oyt∣berry. Mrs Church Mrs Brent Mrs Cranmer Mrs. Purvey Mrs. Firmingham Mrs. Elizabeth Standish Mrs. Newse Mrs Napper Mrs. Nash Mrs. Cleere Mrs. Hagger Mrs. Conway The number of Receipts and Experiments contain∣ed in this Volume is 1720.
Selected Experiments in Physick and Chirurgery. A Soveraign Plaister for the Plurisie. Mrs. Downing▪ TAke Brook-lime one handful, chop it very small, and with it Deer suet, or Sheeps-suet, and put to it one handful of bran, and boil it in so much water as will seethe it very tender and thick. A Plaister for the heat in the back. By Mrs. Miller. TAke three spoonful of Oyle of Roses; as much of good vineger, and as much of House-leek, with the white of an egge beaten, and temper it with barly meal, the bran being taken away, and make a Plaister upon a linnen cloth, and lay it to the back, and as it dry∣eth so let it be renewed until your pain be gone. For the same. TAke flower of Wheat one handful, Bole-armoniack one ounce; Oyle of Roses one ounce, and as much of Plantane-water, temper all these together, and make a Plaister, and lay it to the back. An Oyntment for an ach in the back. TAke the Grease of a Fox, and the Grease of a Duck, and the Grease of a Hog of one year old, and Sallet Oyl, of every of
them a like quantity, and mingle them all together and make it warm and annoint the back therewith. An excellent Oyntment for an ache and shrinking of Sinewes. By Mrs. Maidenhed. TAke the young buds of Poplar, three times so many as will fill a quart pot, and the like quantitie of Barrowes grease, and mingle them together in a pot, and stop them as close as may be, and so let them stand fourteen dayes, and then take them out and warm them, and strain the liquor from the buds, and stamp them, then take a pint of Sallet Oyl, half a pint of Oyle of Excester, 2 l. of fresh Butter unwashed; then take the Barrows grease, Sallet Oyle, Oyle of Excester and the butter, and boile them together with a soft fire, wherein you must cast the Poplar buds with a handful of meal, stirring it till it grow to be green, then take it off from the fire and strain it; when it waxeth cold, put it into a fair Gally-pot, and stop it close, and keep it seven year if you will: when you mean to occupy it, take and warm it, and annoint the place that aketh, for which it is ex∣cellent good. An excellent Oyntment for an ache, or for shrink∣ing of Sinewes; and for the Gout. By Mrs. Downing. TAke two handful of Smallage, otherwise called March, and two handful of Commin bruised in a Mortar, six spoonful of Boars grease, six spoonful of Aqua vitae, six spoonful of Rose-water; bruise well your Smallage, then put them all together and boile them a good while, then strain it; and where the paine is annoint it against the fire, and so use it till you be whole, and bind alwayes a cloth to it. An Oyntment for the Gout, and all cold cases. TAke a pint of Neats soot Oyle, and a pint of Aqua Composita, and the marrow of the bones of a whole Buck, and the marrow of a horse being newly dead, and a great handful of Cammomile, and put all these in a Pewter pot, and stop the mouth close with paste, and set it in a kettle of water, and let it boil twelve hours, and then take
anst straine it, and wring it hard in a Glass, and keep it till you have need, and annoint the place grieved. A good Salve for any kind of old Sore. TAke English Wax, May butter, Sallet Oyle, and Lapis calami∣naris, every parcel like weight, and boile them together, and you shall have a very good Salve. This La is calaminaris will stop the humour that feedeth the Sore, and so cause it to heal the sooner. A good Salve for Bruises and Wounds, called, Gratia Dei. TAke a quarter of a pound of unwrought Wax, as much of Parros∣sen, as much of Mastick, as much of Frankinsence, as much of common Rozen, as much of Deers suet, and beat the things that are to be beaten, and melt the other, and so put them together in a Chafer, and seeth them with a soft fire; then strain it through a course canvas, and put it into a Chafer, and set it on the fire, and put in two ounces of Turpentine, and two drams of Camphire bea∣ten with a little Linseed, and stir it very well; and when it hath had a walme, then take it off, and pour in a quart of White-wine and so stir it till it be so cold as you may work it into Roles. This Salve (as it is reported) was revealed unto King Alexan∣der by an Angel. An Oyntment for Aches, or other griefs, and all other cold causes. By Mrs. Forster. SMallage, Brook-lime, Loveage, Ground-Ivye, Bawme, Vervaine. Honey-suckle leaves, Penioyel, Cammomile, Water-Betany▪ Land-Betany, Maudelin, Mallowes, of each half an handful. This must be gathered in mid-May, and washed in fair water, and then lay them between two linnen cloathes till the water be dried, that is to say, by the space of a fore-noone; and then take Boars∣grease one pound and a half, and boile the same till the juice of the Herbs be in it, and strain them, and annoint the place grieved▪
To make the green Oyntment, by Wilsons wife of London, TAke Orpine, Columbine, the herb Mercury, Ivy, the tender crops of red Brambles, Ribwort, Hounds-tongue, Plantane, Water-betany, Mallowes, Valerian, Rose-Campions, wild Tan∣sey, Cinqfoile, of each one handful, Wormwood four little bran∣ches, or half an handful, half an handful of Fetherfew, and as much of Smallage, of Rue three little crops, Daisie roots, leaves of Colts foot, Privet, Sage, Hartstongue, Honey-suckle leaves and flowers, Tornsorve, Horehound, Garden-Betony, Cammomile, Alehoofe, Nightsade, Tansey, Saint Johns-wort and Dill, of each a good handful, of Hemlocks, whereof the stalks be speckled, half an hand∣ful; all these being clean washed and dried in a cloth, then shred them small, and beat them small in a stone Mortar. Then take four pound of clarified butter, and boil your herbs therein till it wax green, and so strain it through a course canvas; then put to it two ounces of Turpentine washed, and half a pound of wax clarified, one ounce of Honey, one ounce of Rosen molten; and set all this on the fire a Pater Noster while, then take it off, and poure it into a Vessel of cold water, and when it is cold, beat it from the water, and put it into boxes; and so use it. This is a most excellent Oyntment or Salve for any kind of swel∣ling, sore or green wound. A good Oyntment for all kind of Bruises. GOldworthy, Archangel, Balm, Valerian, Marigolds, unset Por∣et, of each two handful, and they must be gathered in the month of May; wash them clean, and lay them on a fair cloth in the Sun for the space of two hours, then shred them small, and put them in a pan, and therein put one pound of May-butter, and a quart of Sallet Oyle, and boil them all together, and so strain them through a linnen cloth.
To make the black Plaister which is good for the Gout, and all other Aches coming of cold causes. By Mrs. Maidenhed. TAke half a pound of Olibanum fine searced, and half a pound of Rosen searsed, half a pound of Pitch searsed, a quarter of a pound of sheeps tallow tryed, two ounces of Cummin searced, one ounce of Labdanum, half an ounce of Cloves, half an ounce of Mace, and a quarter of an ounce of Saffron being beaten all in powders; set them on a soft fire. Your Labdanum must be beaten with some o∣ther of your powders with a hot pestel, and so stir them all mixt to∣gether till they be all molten. And if you be disposed to make any Plaisters, you must take a Cheverel skin, and so stretch it up on a board with little tack nails, and your Salve being almost cold, spread it with a slice or a knife thin in all places alike, and the rest you may make up in Roles▪ having Sallet Oyle poured on a board, to annoint your hands for cleaving; this you may lay to any place, either hands, arms, legs or soles of your feet, it will draw away the humor, and break no skin. A Salve for a Cut or other Wound. TAke Sage, Smallage, Sunshine or Groundsel, Wood-binds, Cumfrey, Bewgle, Cellendine, Gold-worthy, Setwel, Valerian, of each a handful, and of Toutswain leaves half an handful, bruise all these small, and boile them in a quart of May-butter, and a pound of Sheeps suet, then straine them through a canvas, then set them on the fire again, and put to it halfe a pound of Rosen beaten, as much of good wax tried, and so stirre them together till they have a walme, and then put it up in some Vessel to use it as you need. An Oyntment for the Ache in the arme, or any o∣ther place that cometh of cold, or by the Rheume. By Mr. Jacob. TAke an handful of Sage, as much of Wormwood, as much Camomile, as much of Herb-grace, boile all these in a pot∣tle
of Malmesey till they be consumed, then put to a pound of fresh butter, and so let it seethe a good while, and straine it through a coarse canvas, and when it is cold put it up in a box, and annoint the place grieved, and lay a little black wooll to keep your slieve from drinking it away. A Plaister for the pricking of a nail. Take black soap, honey, and garlick fine beaten, then bray them all together, and so lay it to the Patient in a Plaister. Probatum est. An Oyntment for a Bruise with a fall. By Mrs. Swift. Take Elder flowers and beat them small in a Mortar with Bean∣flower bolted very fine, grind them all together till they be very smal, then take them forth, and put them in a glasse, and put thereto Sal∣let Oyle, and so let them stand until you have need of it. And for the Elder, the more there be, the better it is; and annoint the Patient against the fire. This is an approved Medicine. A Plaister for a Thorn or splinter. Take the root of Flower-de-luce, stamp it small, and mix it with Turpentine and black soap, and lay it to the sore. A Salve for any rankled sore. By Mrs. Downing. Take one handful of Herb grace, and halfe an handful of red Sage, and as much fat roasted Bacon as will make it soft, when it is ground together in a Mortar, which must be done very fine, and then it will spread very fine on a cloth: And if the Sore need∣eth to be tnted, straine some of the Medicine and wet your Tent in it. An excellent salve for any Wound. By Mrs Downing. Take a good handful of Smallage, as much Sage, Orpine, red Fennel, Salendine, Toutswain, Nightshade, Water cresses, Plan∣ine, Ribwort, Ragwort and ugle of each one handful, halfe a pound of unwrought ax, halfe a pound of Rosen, one
pound of Deers suet, or Sheeps suet, one pound of May-butter; chop the herbs small, then let all these boile together, and stir it as long as it seethes; then take a wet cloth hard wrung, that is course, and with a pair of tongs wring it into an earthen pan, and when it is cold role it in parchments, and so keep it and occupy it. This must be made in May. You must also put into it a pint of Sallet Oyle. A Powder to stanch bleeding Wounds. By Mrs. Downing. Take dried Vervain made in Powder▪ and so lay the powder to the wound, and it will stanch it. For the same, or for ones Nose bleeding: By the same Author. Take a piece of new black Cotten, and scrape it to lint, then burn it in a candle to ashes, and lay it in the wound. Another, by the same Author. Take leaves of Rue and stamp them, and lay it on the wound. A Salve for any Sore. By Mrs. Downing. Take half a pound of Cummin, half a pound of Boars grease, and half a pint of Aquavitae, a good handful of Smallage, and beat the Cummin seeds in powder, then put all those together in an earthen pot, and let it seethe till it be green, and strain it into an earthen pot, and while it seetheth stir it together; then take some of it and strike it on a cloth, and lay it on the sore twice a day. A Salve for the Piles, or Emrods. Take Mullet leaves and gilt grease, and stamp them with the oyle of Garden-snails, and so make a Salve of it, and annoint the place grieved.
Another for the same. Take herbe grace and sheeps dung, being new, and boil it with Guilts grease, and so straine it, and put it up in a box. Another for the same. Take the blowing of ones nose, and put it on a cloth, and lay to the place. Another for the same. Take cold cream, and annoint them, and take the powder of fine ginger, and strow upon it. Another for the same. Take the blowing of ones nose, and the soot of a brasse pot, and lay it to it, and if they come too low downe, sit upon a close stoole with Frankinsence, on a chafingdish of coals, after you have beene at the stoole. Another for the same. By Mrs. Minne. Take the flocks of Scarlet, the hoofe of a horse, and frankinsence, put them all in a chafingdish of coles, and sit over it, and take the heat. Probatum est. Another for the same. By Mr. Jacob. Take half an handfull of elder budds, as much of camomile, as much of wild mallowes, as much of mullet leaves, and boil them in a pot of strong ale, when they be tender, take half of them out, and crush out the ale of them, and grind them in a mortar, as you doe green sawce, very fine, with a quarter of a pint of Sallet oyle, and so make it as thick as salve, and put it in a box, and when neede requires, spread it on a cloth, and lay it on the piles, and if it be in the fundament pricking, you must take the rest of the herbs and ale, seething hot, and sit over it in a close stoole, after you have beene t the stoole, and wet a piece of a spunge in it, and sit close upon it.
Another for the same. Take mastick and burn it upon a chafingdish of coals and sit o∣ver it, after you have beene at the privie. Another. Take Germander, two or three garden snailes rosted and pilled, and so bruise the snailes, and Germander together, and lay them too, as hot as you can suffer. Another. Take an onion cored, and put a little Saffron into it, and rost it in a paper, and when it is rosted, pill it, and lay it to the piles. Another. By Mrs. Downing. Take Longwort, otherwise called lovage, chop it very small and beat it, boile it in fresh butter a good halfe houre or more, then straine it in a close box as you neede it, take lint and spread some on it and lay it to. Another. By Mrs. Scudamore aliàs Scidmer. Take a quantitie of unwrought tarre, and a quantitie of treacle, as much of the one as of the other, mingle them together, then take a little black, as broad as the sore place is, and lay the tarre and the treacle upon it in manner of a plaister, and so lay it to the fore. To make Unguentum mundificatum. Take a quart of sallet oyle, one pound of Bole-armoniack, two ounce of wax, two ounces of Deer suet, put it over the fire all together, stir it still till it be almost cold, then put thereto two ounces of camphire, stirre it together, and put it in boxes.
A plaister for the head ach. Take the juice of wild mallowes, and a piece of a rose cake, mix them together, and lay them warme where the paine is. An ointment for the ach in the bones. Take the juice of sage, camomile, and rue, of each a like much, and mix them with oyle of Excester. An ointment for rednesse of the face. Take Saffron one ounce, white Frankinsence, and myrrh, of every of them three ounces, Camphire one ounce, Amber one ounce, make of all these a fine powder, and doe it with oyle of Roses. Another. Take the juice of house-leek, and strain it, and put thereto a spoonfull or two of white vinegar, and if the vinegar be not ea∣ger enough, put more thereto, and annoint the face every morning with a linnen cloth dipped therein, and this will destroy it in short space. An ointment for heat in the back. Take Sage, Rosemarie, Camomile and Maudelin, of each an handfull, then pound them together, and frie them with May butter, and annoint your back with it warm. Another for the same. Take four ounces of good oyl of Roses, one ounce of whie wax cut in small pieces, and put them into the oyle, and seeth them both in a dish, upon a chafer of seething water, and when the wax is melted, then put thereinto the juyce of singreen stamped with fair water, and a spoonfull of vinegar, and labour them altogether, annoint therewith the small of your back▪ and where the grief is.
An ointment to refresh, coole, and strengthen the back. Take oyle of almonds, red Rose-leaves, violet leaves and flow∣ers, of each like quantitie, bruise them in a morter, and with your oyl put them into a glase, an let them stand in the Sun three or four daies, then take of this oyle, and annoint your back therewith sometimes, and it will both strengthen it, and coole it, and peru∣sing this oyle in a close glasse, and refreshing it with Roses, three or four times, and it will continue all the year. A plaister for a Felon or an Ancombe. Take a quantitie of stale ale, and clarifie it clean, then take a quantitie of wheat flower fine bolted and put into the ale, and steep them together upon the fire till it be thick, then strick on a plaister, and use it morning and evening. An approved salve for a Felon. Take Smallage, rustie bacon, beat them together, till they be both one, but most of the bacon, then put to it the yolk of a new laid egge, wheat flower, soot of the Chimny and hony, and temper them alltogether, and they will be like a salve; then take a peece of the same, to the bignesse of a nut, and put to it as much gray soap, and foure corns of bay salt bruised, temper them well toge∣ther, and lay it to the Felon four and twenty hours or more, till it be killed, and then dresse it evening and morning with that salve. Another. Take running water, sowr leven bread, allom, bay salt, place these together till they be thick, and lay it to hot. Another. Take bay salt, and burn it upon a little stone, till it breake, then mingle it with the yolk of an egge, and lay it to.
Another. Take daisies, herb grace, woodbind, fetherfew, golds, nettle tops, the yolk of an egge, wheat flower and bay salt, and mix all these together. Another. Take Oak coals, and the white of an egge, and a little bay salt. Another. Take crummes of good leaven bread, and allom in sine powder, make it thick, and lay it to hot. Another. Take a lillie root, leaves of the wild mallow, a red onion, lay them in fair water while they be tender, after frie them in Deeres suet. Another. Take the milt of a red Herring, and the bark of the root of red roses, and bay salt, and mix all these together. Another. Take a quantity of herb grace, guilts grease, and snailes with their shells, and beat all these together, and lay to the Fellon. Another. Take rue and bruise it, and put to it the yolke of an egge, and two or three corns of gray salt, and a little hony and wheat flower, and make a plaister of it, and lay it to the sore, and it will make it whole. An approved ointment for a wrench, bruise or burning. Annoint the place corrupted, with the fat of a dog tried against the fire.
An approved ointment for a scalding or burning. First, take a handful of timniffe, and three spoonfuls of good milk and bray them together and straine it, and annoint the place there∣with to kill the heat. Then take a pound of sheeps suet new, and try it well, putting to it a handfull of sheeps dung, well braid by it self, and two handfulls of daisies with the roots likewise brayed by it self, and then seeth them together and strain it, and annoint the grief therewith. An ointment to asswage burning, swelling and aking of any sore. Take the juyce of pettie morrel, white bread and orpine, and mix them with the white of an eg, and wheat flower, and lay it to the fore. For the same. Take turpentine, vinegar, hony, whitewine and wheat bran, mingle all these together, and seeth them til they be thick, and lay it to the burning. An ointment for a ring▪worm. Take Popilion and Cerus, mix them together, and anoint the place. For the same. Take mustard and hony and annoint the place three daies. Another. Take the red docks that be rotten, and wash them cleane, drie them, and make them as is abovesaid. Another. Lay Guilts grease thereto. Another. Take the root of a red dck, and take the second film, and stamp it and mingle it with vinegar, and annoint the place.
For a Cancer in the Head and Joynt. Take a root of Primrose, and stamp it with a little clarified▪ Honey, and lay it plaister-wise upon the sore, and Cancer, and change it eve∣ry morning and evening till it be whole. For the Cancer in a Womans Pap. Take Goose dung and Celendine, and bray them together, and lay them to the sore Pap, and it will cleanse the Cancer, kill the worm, and heal the sore. Plaisters to take away Corns, or Angnailes. Pare your Corns very near, then lay Marigolds stamped thereon, even and morn, and it profiteth: or else lay thereunto Turpentine and red wax boiled together, and made Plaister-wise, and it helpeth. Another. Take quicke Lime, Guylts grease, and a little black Soap. Another. Take Tallow and anoint the Corn morning and evening conti∣nually. A Plaister for the Pluresie. Take Brooklime, Sheeps sewet, and a little fair water, and fry them together in a frying-pan, and make thereof a Plaister, and lay it to the Patients side, and it will draw out the corruption. For a Stitch or Pluresie. Take Aqua-vitae and Capons grease, boil them together, and dip therein black wool, and lay it hot to the Stomack, and that will help it. Another. Take the roots of Cowslips, and the juice of Vervain, and nine leaves of Sage, and binde them to the wrists and neck behinde.
An Oyntment for a scald, by Mistresse Downing. Take Pidgeons dung of the softest, and beat it fine in a morter, then take as much Boars grease, and half as much Honey, and beat them altogether till it be like an Oyntment, then pull off the scab, and chafe in the oyntment with your finger twice or thrice a day. A speciall Oyntment for burning or scalding, by Mrs. Downing. Take Alehoofe, or Hollyhoofe, and chop it small, then fry it in May butter, if it be strong of the Herb it will look green, then anoint the sore place two or three times in a day. Plaisters to take out the fire of burning or scalding. Take the core of a Quince, lay it in a sawcer of water, and lay it to the Burning, and it will take away the fire. Take an Apple and bruise it soft, and lay it on the sore, and it will take out the fire in one hour. Another. Take the juice of Sage, and wash where the burning or scalding is, then take of ground Ivie, penyroial, stamp them with Guilts grease, or May butter, frie them together, and strein them, and so lay them to the place. Another. Take the middle bark of Elm, scrape it fine, and seeth it in fair water, and lay it to the burning. For the same. Take the fat of Bacon tried and streined, put thereto the juice of Dasies, and mingle them well together, and anoint the place with a feather, and binde thereto a fine linnen cloth, and never remove it, but ever anoint it above till it be whole. Another▪ Take Goos grease, the yolks of Eggs, Sage, stamped together, warmed and streined, Guilts grease, and so lay it to the place. Another for the same. Take a good handfull of ground Ii, and four heads of Housleek
clean picked, stamp them together very small, then put thereto of Goos dung, and Sheeps dung, of the newest you can get, of each an handfull, and stamp them together with the herbs aforesaid, then take a quart of barrow-hogs grease, and beat it in a morter with the other things aforesaid, fry them together in a frying-pan with a soft fire, by the space of half an hour, and then strain it with two sticks through a fair canvas cloth, into an earthen pot, wherein you may keep it by the space of two years, and when you shall ocupie any of it, take so much as you think will suffice, and warm it in a sawcer, and with a feather anoint the burned or scalded place. For the same, by Mrs. Limsey. The white of an Egg, and beat it with a spoon, and then scum off the froth thereof, and burn a linnen cloth, and take the ashes of the cloth, and put it into the white of the Egg, and temper them together, then take a feather, and therewith strike it upon the burning of scal∣ding, and it will pull out the heat within one hour. A Plaister for a swelling like a Wen. Take Soap, the yolks of two or three Eggs, and soot, and beat them all together, and lay to it till it break. A salve or Plaister to stanch Blood, by Mrs. Skudamore. Take Bursa pastoris, called Shepherds purse, the dung of a Mare, not green, but dry, Spider-webs, soot of a chimney tempered with whites of Eggs. Any Medicine laid to a Vein or cut, must lye three dayes without removing, if you will stop the blood kindly. The crops of Nettles pounded and laid too, is good. A salve to knit sinews or Veins. Take great knotty Worms of the Valley, and seeth them in Oyl Olive, with a little Hyperiovestus, which Pedlers have to sell, lay it to the wound or grief nine dayes, and not remove it. An Oyntment to kill Itch. Take one half penny worth of black Soap, and one penny worth of
ores grease, beat them together in water, and anoint you therewith when it itcheth. An Oyntment for all manner of Aches. Take a quart of Neat Oyl, and a handfull of Southernwood, a much Wormwood, as much of Bay-leaves, stamp them, and put them to your Oyl, then take the gall of an Ox, and as much Aqua vitae as the gall hath liquor in it, fry all these together in a frying-pan, then strein it, and keep it in boxes. A Plaister for aking of Bones. Take a pint of white Wine, and the gall of an Ox, boil them well, scum them clean, and then take crums of white bread and put ther∣to, make a Plaister hereof, and lay to the place two or three times, and by the permission of God it will be whole. A Plaister for the rising of the Mother. Make a Plaister of Galbanum, and lay it to the Heart, and drink a little Aqua vitae with Ale. An Oyntment to heal a Burning that it shall not be seen. Take Oyl olive and the white of an Egg, let them be together till they be thick, and so anoint therewith the burnt place. Divers Plaisters and Oyntments for a white Scurf. Take a quantity of Rosin, so much wheat flower, boil them to∣gether in fair water, untill it be able to be emplaistred, then lay it, and drive it on a linnen cloath, and upon every patch of scabs lay a Plaister, and at even pluck them away quickly, for it will pull the hair up by the roots, then wash it with Ox or Cow-pisse, but the best were to wash it with Ale: and to kill it, you must take Celydon and pound it, then put thereto Vineger, and so strein it, and wash there∣with. Also a Plaister made of Honey and Garlick pounded together. Item, A Plaister of Rye-meal. A Plaister also made of Pich and Wax sodden together, and lay
o as hot as the Patient may suffer, and to lye on nine dayes without removing. Also take oyl of Linseed, oyl of Roses, oyl Olive, and temper it with Letharge, and lay thereto. Item, take May batter, and the juice of Vervain, seeth them toge∣ther, then set them a cooling, and therewith anoint the scab. Item, take the juice of black Bees, and bath the Head withall. An Oyntment to make a man's visage white. Take fresh grease of Swine, Hens grease, and the white of an Egg, and meal of Cockle, temper them together, and anoint thee therewith. An Oyntment for a sore Leg: Take flowers of Broom, put them in a linnen cloth, and lay them in Hors-dung till they be rotten, then take Barrows grease, and a quantity of oyl Olive, stamp all these together, then boil them, and strain them, and anoint the sore Leg therewith, and winde about it a red cloth. A Plaister for any kinde of swelling. Take Linseed and Holioke beaten well together with Sheeps tal∣low, make a Plaister thereof, warm it, and lay it on the sore, and it will lay the swelling, and gather to a sore, and then lay thereon Im∣plastrum unguenti albi, and that will draw and heal. A Plaister for the Kings Evil. Take Adders grease, red Dock and Pellitory, temper them with juice of Leeks, emplaister it upon cotten, and lay it to the grief. An Oyntment for ones face that seems Leprous. Take Quick-silver and the grease of a Barrow, black Pepper▪ and Score called Recheles, stamp them all together, and therewith anoint thy face, and keep thy face three dayes from th winde, and it will be whole.
An Oyntment for sauce▪flegm in ones face that riseth with pimples. Take the root of the Dock, pound it well with Barrows grease, them fry it in a pan, strain it, and anoint the face. A Plaister to draw out a thorn or a stub: Take Egrimony, Hares grease, mosse of an Haw-thorn, and red Wine, seeth all together in red Wine, and lay thereto hot. A red salve for old sore Legs▪ Take Letharge of Lead, searce it, and grinde it on a stone, take Bole armoniack and Butter made in May, and clarifie it in the Sun, and grinde them in likewise, and put it in boxes. An Oyntment for a Canker-pock. Take a quantity of Turpentine, two ounces of Hors-mint, one spoonfull of Honey, one drachm of Verdigreece, two ounces of Bole armoniack, and one penny weight of Camphier, boil all these toge∣ther, and so anoint the grief. An Oyntment for the Piles or Emrods. Take oyl Olive and Frankincense, and make an Oyntment thereof, and put it into thy Piles. Another for the same. Take Marrow and Oyl, and make an Ontment thereof, and put it into thy Pile. A Plaister to defend, that no wicked Matter draw to a Wound. Take of Bole armoniack 1. ob. of Gum called terra sigillata one ounce, pound them together, and temper them with oyl of Roses, half so much Vinegar as Oyl, put them into a morter, and grinde them well together, and so do by little and little till it be thick as Oint∣ment, then spread it on a cloth, and lay abroad about the Wound over the sore untill it be whole.
An Intret to open, heal and cleanse a Wound, to take away the ache, and to fret away dead and cankred flesh. Take the juice of Walwort, Wormwood, the crops of red Nettles, of each a like quantity, of whites of Eggs somwhat lesse, cast thereto Rye meal, seeth it untill it be thick, and if the Wound be deep, make a tent and dip therein: otherwise make a Plaister thereof, when it waxeth dry moisten it with the foresaid juice. An Oyntment for the Gout, by Mr. Peacock. Take white Aarchangel, pick the flowers and leaves from the stalk, and put it in an earthen pot, and lay a Laye of May-butter, and a Laye of these leaves and flowers till the pot be full, then stop it very close with a parchment, and set it in the earth up to the brim, and cover it with a board that no rain come at it the space of a moneth, then take it up and there will be a blew scum, cast away the blewnesse thereof, then boil it on the fire, and strain it through a cloth, and it will come to a salve, and anoint where the grief is. A Plaister for a scald Head. Take Primrose-leaves, stamp them and lay to it. Another. Take oyl de Bay, Frankincense, Guilts grease, and a quantity of Mercury mortified, fry them, and put in boxes to anoint with it. Another. Take tar and clean tallow, and melt it with a soft fire, and first bath it with Neas oyl, and also the broth, and after lay your Oynt∣ment to it. A Plaister to break a sore Brest. Take Lily-roots and a piece of Leaven, seeth them in milk till the Lily be soft, and then spread it Plaister-wise upon a linnen cloth, and so lay it to as hot as the party can suffer it morning and evening.
To keep a Brest from breaking, if it be not too far gone. Take Clay that is without stones, and knead it with sharp Vine∣ger and the yolks of two Eggs, and a little English Saffron, work it in the Clay, and take as much of it as will cover the rednesse of the Brest; it must be used cold. Some Brests will have no colour, and such are not lightly saved from breaking; and if the colour be red, it is the better to be liked. A black salve that cureth all old sores and Ʋlcers, be they never so foul and stinking. First take a gallon of stale Ale, very strong, two handfuls of Woodbine-leaves, half a handful of red seeded Nels, as much Colewort with the jagged leaf, half a pound of red Onons▪ half a pound of Garlick pilled, one handful of unset Leeks a litle dish full of bark dust, let all these be stampe small in a morter sevrally by themselves, and put them into the ale with half a pound of Roach∣allom, then set them over a soft fire, and let them boil till one part or more be boiled away; then let them stand three o four dayes, and strain them through a cloth into a fair vessel; then put to them half a pound of Wax, a pound of the best Rosin, a pound of the best nar∣vel that is green, a quart of English Honey; then set them over a fost fire again, and let them boil till the one half be consumed away; then put it into an earthen pot, keep it close, and use thereof when you have need. For a saucy face, an Ointment. Take the juice of Sage, and play it with May-butter, with Quick∣silver and a little salt. A Plaister for Pimples in the face. Take Wheat-flower mingled with Vineger and Honey, lay it upon them and it will cleanse them. Another, by Mr. Holdich. Take unwrought Brimstone finely beaten and searced, and as much Cinamon (used in like sort) mixed with Capons grease and a little Vineger, and anoint the place withal.
A Poultesse made Plaister-wise to asswage swelling, and put away the ache, wheresoever it be. Take a pottle of running-water, two handfuls of Mallows; as much of Smallage, chop them small and put them together in a pot, and let them seeth, then put into it four handfuls of Oat-meal, as much Lin∣seed broken in a morter, a little quantity of Vinegar, a pinte of red Wine, lesse then a pinte of Milk from the Cow, almost a pound of Sheeps sewet, then seeth all these together untill it be thick, and there∣of make a Plaister as hot as may be suffered, and cover the place that is pained; and as often as need is, renew and amend it. For Women that have sore Paps. Take Popilion and anoint the sore brests well therewith; after take Camomile and cut it somwhat small, and strow it upon the brests, and lay thereupon Sage leaves a good thicknesse. Swelling of Brests. Take Oak apples, and stamp them, and mingle them with oyl of Roses, and lay that to the swelling, and it will swage. Idem. Take the juice of Morrel or of Dasie, or dregs of Ale, and an Egg hard. An Oyntment to take away the rednesse of the face. Take Boars grease and try it, then take a quantity of Fumitory gathered in May, and stamp it, and put the juice thereof to the Bores grease, then take a little oyl of Spike and mingle therewith, and so anoint the Patient morning and evening. An Oyntment to kill Worms. Take wilde Mallows, Garlick, Swines grease, and grinde them wel together, and melt them in a pan, strein them through a cloth, and anoint well thy hands or body. A Plaister for the same. Take a handful of Wormwood, and seeth it with milk till it be soft, then take it out, and lay it upon a linnen cloth the breadth of a royal, and then take a little powder of the Aloes and strow upon it, and so binde it to the navel of the Childe as hot as the Childe may endure it.
An Oyntment for sauce flegme in the face. Take Brimstone, and make it into smal powder, and Swines grease, and mingle them together, and make an Oyntment with all, and e∣very night annoint the sore place therewithal; and then take white wine Vinegar and put it in a pot. Then make a little bag of linnen cloth, and put it full of powder of Brimstone, knit it, and let it lye in the pot day and night, and every morning wash off the Oynt∣ment with the bag. Another for the same. Take juice of House-leek, strain it, and put thereto a spoonful o two of White-wine-vinegar, and if the vinegar be not eager enough, put in the more, and annoint the face withal where it is sore. And every morning take a soft linnen cloth and wash off this, and it will destroy it quickly. An Oyntment for all manner of sicknesse in the Head Take the juice of Sage, Rue, and red Fennel, mix them together with a little Vinegar, and annoint the Head therewith. To make a Plaister for a Marmole. Take Cow-milk and Flower sodden together, as thick as pap, and after put thereto red cole stamped, make a Plaister thereof, and lay to the sore, and when it purgeth to the red flesh, make Salve of Ro∣sen and fresh sheeps suet, and lay it thereto till it be whole. Another for the same. Take a Gallon of fair running water, and cast therein three or sour handful of Sage, and seeth it into a quart, and put thereto one half peny worth of Alome, and then wash the Marmole with the said Water, hot, then cover the wound with soft lint, and lay a Plaister of the Sage above thereon: And do thus ten or twelve daies.
Divers Plaisters for a Thorn or Shiver. Take Southernwood, and Swines grease, and stamp them toge∣ther, and it will both draw and heal. Take a Snail, Soap, Ivy, Bay-salt beat all together, and lay to it. Take clay and honey, mingle them well together, and make them in Plaisters, and lay it to the sore, and if the skin be growne on, make a little issue, and then lay on the Plaister. Take the white of an egge, honey and vineger, and mix all these together. How to make an excellent Plaister to break an Impo∣sthume. Take Rye-meal, and pouder of Walwort, and the white of an egg, a little Oyle of Olives, and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it a∣bove where the sore is, and it will break it truly. A Plaister for an Adder or Snake. Take Lung-wort decocted in aqua L. V. and put it upon the vene∣mous biting, and it certainly drawes out all the venom. Divers Plaisters good for the biting of a mad Dog, or a∣ny other venemous Beast. Take Turpentine, and Dictamne and Rue, and stamp them, and drink them, and lay thereof in the wound, Take green Betony and lay to it, and it will heal it. Mrs. Limsey For stinging of a Wasp. Take an Onion, and cut it in the midst, and lay it to the stinging and it shall shortly take away the pain.
A Plaister for the Spleen, being hard and windy: Take Melilote, Urine, Smiths-water, play them together, and make a Plaister and lay to the side. Which shall be rather made in a Ceare-cloth with Turpentine and Wax, that it may cleave there a sevennight, and it is very good to allay the pricking pain and swelling. A Plaister for the Spleene. Take one handful of Mints, one handful of Camomile, and one handful of Maudlin, chop them small, and put thereto a pint of Malmesey, Oyle of Camomile, Oyl of Wormwood, Oyl of Roses, and Oyle of Mint, set them to the fire and boile them well, then put in one handful of Barley flower, and boile it till it grow thick, then put it on a double cloth, and lap it to the Pa∣tient. Probatum. A Quilt or Plaister for the stomack. Take a Rose-cake, and the four Oyles next above specified, Vi∣neger and Rose-water, heat all upon a Chafing-dish with coals, lay it between two cloathes, and so lay it to the Patients stomach, as hot as he may endure. For the same. Take a piece of a Rose-cake, Vineger, Rose water, and Oyle of Roses, and wet the cake in it upon a Chafing-dish, with coales, and as warme as it may be lay it to the Patients stomack. Pro∣batum est. Another. Take Oyle of Roses or May-butter, and a bur leaf, and pick the ribs off the leafe; then wet the leafe in the Oyle, and so warm as the Patient may endure it lay it to the stomack. Probatum.
For a Stitch. Take Cammomile flowers, boile them well in Vinegar, knit them in a cloth, and so lay it to the side as hot as may be suffered. A Lotion for the heat in the Liver, or in the Stomack: Take a cloth five or six double, and wet it in Verjuice, and lay it to the right side, right against the liver, and bid it that it slip not away, and wash his wrists with Verjuice, and do this till the heat go away, which will be very shortly, and beware you lay it not to when the Patient sweats. A good Oyntment to comfort a weak stomack, and cold, that cannot digest well. By Doctor Martine: Take an ounce of Oyl of Mastick, and an ounce of oyl of worm∣wood, mingle them together, and therewith annoint your stomack, and make a Quilt of wool to keep it from your linnen. A Quilt for the heat of the Liver. By the Countss of Sussex. Take a piece of Scarlet, or red Sarcenet, and put upon it an ounce of red Saunders, and straw upon it of all places alike, and take two spoonful of the Juice of House-leek, as much Womans milk, as much Fumetory-water, as much Rose-water, and a hird part of Vineger, beat them together, then sprinkle it upon the Sanders with a branch of Rosemary, and so lay another piece of Sarcenet, baste it, and lay it to the liver side. A Plaister for a stitch. Take Saint Johns-wort, or grasse and red mints, fennel, herb∣grace; then take two tile-stones, make them very hot, and lay the Herbs between them; you must have two read, that as one is cold, another may be ready; then lay it on a linnen cloth, sprinkle it with Vineger, and as hot as he may lay it to.
A Fomentation for the swelling of the spleen or the stitch in the side: Take wild mallowes, Camomile, and the flowers if you have them, Beets and Cummin, Anniseed and Liquorice, boil these al in a Gallon of fair water til the fourth part be sodden away, and then put the one half into a bladder with the Herbs and all, and lay it to your side as hot as you can suffer it, and use this the space of three or four hours in your bed, and so you shall find great ease, and it will cause you to sleep. Use this three or four times in the year, and it is very good. A Quilt for the stomack: Take red rose leaves and spearmint, and wormwood, and pow∣der of Nutmegs and powder of mace; quilt it in a linnen cloth bag, and heat them all together with Malmesey, or with mint-water, and so lay it to your stomack. A good Plaister for the Dropsie: Take shavings of Neats hides, and put them to fair water, and seeth them till they be as thick as bird lime; then lay it on a faire cloth, and bind it about the Womb. For this is a secure Medi∣cine. A Plaister for the lightnesse in the head; that cometh by great heat or sicknesse: Mrs. Downing. Take black Snails one handful, as much Smallage, skant halfe a handful of Bay salt; first beat the snails, and then all together; that done, bind it to the soles of your feet. A Plaister to make one sleep. Take four spoonfuls of good Vinegar, as much Rose-water stilld and two spoonful of oile of Roses, and thereto as much in qunity of the crumbs of course leven bread made of Wheat, and the pow∣der of one handful of Rose-leaves dried, as much as you think
will make it thick lay upon a linnen cloth, and so lay it at length from the one eare to the other, and let him lye upon the bed, ma∣king no noise. A Plaister for the Megrim. Take Houseleek and Garden-worms, but not so much as of the Houseleek, stamp them together, and put thereto fine flower to make it Plaister-wise, and put it in a fine cloth, and lay it from the one Temple to the other. An Oyntment for a stroak in ones Eye. Take the juice of Smallage, the juice of Fennel, and the white of an egg, and mingle them, and lay to the Eye. An Oyntment for a mote in ones Eye. Take the white of an Egg, the juice of Wormwood, Oyle of Roses, Powder of Cummin, mix them altogether, and lay them to the eye. A Plaister to break wind in the body. Take an Onion and roast it, and pill it, then make an hole in it, and put in Frankinsence, and lay it to the navel, and it will help you. An Oyle or Oyntment for sore eyes having a Pin or Web. By Mrs. Downing. Take Egrimony a good handful, and bruise it, and put it into a glasse with half a pint of May-butter, and set it in the Sun till the strength of the Herb be in the butter, and be sure you keep it well stopped whilst it standeth a Sunning; then strain it into a fair glass and stop it close; when need is, drop two or three drops in the eye twice a day till it be whole. A Plaister for the same. Eadem. Take Hemlock and bay salt, and the furring of a chamber pot, beat all these together, and bind it to the wrist of the contrary side
that the sore eye is of, and so dress it once in twenty four hours till it be whole. A Plaister to make one sleep. Take womans milk, Oyle of Dill, and oyle of Lilies, and a little Vineger, and a little Poppy seed bruised, and a little Rose-water, and let it be luke warm, and lay it upon flax, and so lay it upon both sides of the Temples. Another for the same. Take Womans milk, and a little of the juice of Houseleek, and a little Rose-water, and a little Vineger, and a little Dill seed, and a little Nutmegs bruised, and so let it be blood warm, and wet a Rose Cake in it, and lay it upon the Temples. An Oyle for a Ringworm. Take a fair Latten Bason, and burn therein new linnen cloth, and thereof will come Oyl. Take the same Oyle and make a cir∣cle about the Ringworm, and it will kill it. An Oyntment for sorenesse and swelling in the face. Take Oyle of Camomile, Oyle of Roses, of each a like quanti∣ty, and heat them warm, and annoint your face wel against the fire, and keep it warm. Chaw a little Mastick in your mouth in the morning; and it will bring downe the humor, and alwayes to avoid it, do as a∣bove. A good Oyntment for the eyes. Take Oyle of Olives three spoonful, and great Raisons one ounce with the stones taken out, stamp them all together, strain them, and drop thereof into the eyes, and stop it with black wool.
Another for the Pin and Web in the eyes. By Mrs. Scudamore. Take the white of a new laid egge, and beat it with an elder stick the pith taken out, and the bark cut off, then take the clear thereof and put unto it the juyce of plantane, womans milk of the contrary kind, and a little honey, and strain all together, and with a feather drop it into the eye thrice a day. A Plaister for one that cannot make water. Take two of St. Omar's onions of the reddest, rost them in the fire, and then take Bores grease and fry it in a frying pan, and when the grease is hot, lay in your onions, the upper pill being taken off, so let them steepe two hours, and then take it out and lay it upon a faire cloth, and lay it to your Navel as hot as you can. A Plaister for the Collick or Stitch. By John Gally. Take grounds of Malsy, sheeps tallow, ribwort, red sage, and Allesanders, seeth all these together, and make a plaister thereof, and lay to the grief, and annoint thee with oyl of olive, and oyl of Balm mixed together. Another for the same. Take pellitory, unset leeks and mallows, of each a like quantity, stamp them, and put them to a pennyworth of neat oyle, fry them in manner of a plaister, and put them in a bag of linnen cloth, and being very hot, lay it to the belly, and it helpet within one houre. For the paine and heat in the back, Linimentum. By Mrs. Nichols. Take of Unguentum infrigidans Galeni four ounces, of the juyce of consolidi majoris two ounces, and of bole armoniack two ounces, make a liniment hereof.
A Plaister for the paine and weaknesse in the back. Take a pint of muscadine, and a quarter of an handfull of Sage, as much of pellitorie of the wall, and boil it until the herbs be soft, make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the back. For swelling in the cod. Take cummin, barly and honey, frie them together, and make a plaister thereof and bind it to the yard or cod. A Salve to skin a sore leg. Take wax and oyl olive, mingle them together, stirring them often with your spittle till it be black, then take a little of it, lay it on a cloth, and let it lie on the sore two daies. A Cearcloth for the swelling of the leg or any other place, By Sir Nicholas le Strange. Take white lead, English wax and sallet oyl, boil them together, and make a Cearcloth, and lay it where the pain is. An ointment to make hair grow. Take willow leaves, seeth them in oyle, and annoint the bare place, and hair will grow. Item. Take the juyce of egrimony, temper it with Goats milk, and annoint the place therewith. Item. Take the triddles of a Goat made in powder, mingle it with oyl, seethe it on the fire, and lay it to. A Plaister for the Stone. By Sir Nicholas le Strange. Take house-leek, fetherfew, plantane and tansey of the gar∣den, of each a like, stamp them and strain them, and set them upon the fire, and mingle them with bean flower, and three spoonfuls of
clarified honey and stirre it, and let it boile untill it be plasterwise; and spread it upon a cloth, and lay it round about the body and back; and let it lie a day and two nights, or two daies and one night; and it will help you. To heale a wound without plaister. By Clement Warwick. Take Daisie, Sanacle, of each two handfuls, Bugle and pim∣pernel, of each three handfuls; stamp them a little, boile them in wine and drink hereof till you be whole, which wil be soon. For any wound or sore. Idem. Take Plantane, Ribwort, Scabious, Matefelon, Goose grease, Pettybugle, Flos campi and betony of each alike much, stampe them together in a mortar, and put them in a pot of earth with May-butter. And if you will have this oynment greene, let it stand seven daies, and then put it in a pan til the butter be melted, then straine it into a bason, chafe it againe, and so keepe it in boxes. A Salve for all manner of Sores. By Clement Warwick. Take a good portion of Moral, stampe it, and take the juyce, and a little rain water that runneth from a house that is leaded, a little wheat flower clean boulted, and mingle them together till it bee thick, and keepe it in boxes. To purge or cleanse any wound of dead flesh and corruption. Take halfe a pound of honey purified, and a quartern of verde∣greece smal ground, and a good sawcerful of vineger and do it toge∣ther, and make it to boile in a pan till it be red, and all the while stirre it wel with a slice; it wil have many colours ere it bee red, and when it is red, take it from the fire and box it, and use it as need requireth.
A good powder for dead flesh, and to dry up every old sore and wound. Idem. Take salt and bray it to powder, and new burnt lime, and grind them both to powder, and then put thereto as much hony, and put it into a new earthen pot, and close it well, and set it in the fire till it be burnt, and turned into white powder, and then work with∣al as it is beforesaid. An Ointment for griefe of joints, and old running sores, that have been issues and old wounds. Idem. Take Bugle, Scabious, Matfelm and Bores grease, and make thereof an ointment, and put it into the wound, and it shall heal it fair and well with a drink made of the same herbs, tempered with white wine and use it, for it healeth safely. A good Ointment for the Palsey. Idem. Take oyle of olive, the grease of an Hedghog, the marrow of an horse, and May-butter with Aqua vitae; put all these things to∣gether in a glasse and stop it up, then set it in hot horse dung nine dayes, and therewith annoint the place that is grieved. A Plaister to kill the worm in a sore leg &c. By Mrs. Minne. Take Guilts grease one pound, and rozen three quarters of a pound, put them together in a pan, and set them upon a few coles, boiling them softly til it be good and thick like plaister, and alwaies as it seetheth, scumme it; then strain it through a linnen cloth, but straine not that which is in the bottom of the pan, and so let it coole: Take then so much of a sheeps skin as will reach over all the leg, where you doubt the wormes be, and spread the salve a∣foresaid upon it, and lay it to all night or more, till the Patient feel the worm keep a great tickling and a crawling; then scrape the salve
off againe, and put new upon it; and upon that ere you lay it to, strow the powder of white Coperas very finely beaten, all over the plaister, and this wil kil her, lay this to twice with the Coperas, and after that the same plaister stil till it bee whole, unlesse it be a great deepe wound, and then you may use some other good draw∣ing Salve. To asswage the swelling that cometh of an Ague in the leggs, or any other place. By Mrs. Minne. Take two handfuls of red Sage, and as much smallage, half a pint of dregs of Beer or Ale, as much Chamber-lie, half a quar∣ter of a pound of sheeps suet cut in morsels as big as a pease, seethe these all together til it become a thick plaister, and so use it. A Plaister for a Felon. By Anne Kirby. Take a handful of red Sage, a handful of Smallage, herb grace a handful, a quantitie of rustie Bacon as big as a Walnut, Bay salt two ounces, sowr leaven as much as an egge, soot a good quan∣titie, black soap the quantitie of half an egge, stampe all these to∣gether, and so apply it. An Ointment for an Ach, Rheum or swelling in the joints, made with swallows. By Mrs. Kempe. Take twenty Swallows and put them quick into a mortar of stone (Memorandum the Swallows may not touch the ground) and put threin Lavender-cotten, Spike, Knotgrasse, Ribwort, Bawm, Vale∣rian, Rosemarie tops, Woodbind tops, Strings of Vines, French mallows, the tops of Aloes, Strawberrie strings, Tutsan, Plan∣tane, Walnut leaves, tops of young Bayes, Hisop, Violets, Sage of vertue, fine Roman Wormwood, of each a handful, two hand∣ful of Roses, as much Camomile, beat all these together and put thereto a quart of neatsfoot oyl, or May butter, and grind all these
together, and beat with them, an ounce or two of Cloves, put them all together in an earthen pot, and stop it very close with a peece of dow round about, so that no air come out, and set them nine dayes in a Cellar; and then take them out and seeth them six or eight hours upon the fire, or else in a panne of water, but first open your pot, and put in halfe a pound of wax, white or yellow, whe∣ther you wil, and a pint of oyl or butter. A Pultesse to allay a swelling. By John Richads. Take a quart of new milked milke, a handfull of mallowes, a handfull of fennel, and a little hony, boil all these together, and lay to the swelled place. Another for the same. By Mr. Throgmorton. Take a quart of running water, and the crummes of a stale Manchet grated; let them boil together til they be thick, and put thereunto a little sweet butter while it is seething, and so apply it as warm as the patient can suffer. To make the black Plaister for the Gout, to draw out all evil humors from any part of the body, very good to amend the sight, and paine in the head, to break an Imposthume and to amend the hearing. By Mr. John Cornewallis. Take two pound of Pitch, two pound of Rozen, two pound of Frankinsence, beat all of them severally into powder finely sear∣ced, one pound of sheeps Tallow, one ounce of Saffron, two oun∣ces of Cloves, two ounces of Mace, half a pound of Cummin, three ounces of Labdanum; all these must be beaten and searced into powder, and being put together, must be sodden the space of one hour, the pitch must bee put in alone first, and the rest after, and when it is sodden, make it in long rols, and keepe it to your use.
The use thereof. Cut soles of fine tawed Leather, fit for your soles of your feet, strick some of the plaister upon them, and lay them to your feete, wearing them til they fall off through moisture, the space of one month or more, when they be too moist or too drie, strike them a∣gaine and apply them till you find ease; if you have the Siatica or paine in your shoulder or arm coming of cold, lay a plaister there∣of striked as before upon the place, and let it lie til it doth itch, or til your plaister doth fall off, then rub your place with a drie cloth; and although smal pimples do arise there, and the skin be off, yet apply againe the plaister, though it be one, two or three months, and it will cure the paine. Proved by many that have had pains and aches the space of six or seven years. An Ointment for any sore. Mr. Neave. Take boneset called Comfrey, red Sage, Bawme, Fetherfew, Parsley, Isope, Smallage, Herb grace, a little Plantane both roots and leaves, Adders tongue, Gold worthie and Coleworts, Lilly leaves, Timewort, Camomile, Woodbinds, Daisies both roots and leaves, the under rind of elder. All these must bee gathered in May, at which time the ful effect is thought to be in them. Take of each of these a handful and chop them very fine, then take butter from the churne unwashen, and clarifie it upon the fire, boile them all together in the butter, then straine it into a pot, and so annoint the place. A Poultesse for any swelled sore. By Mr. Neave. Take a pint of running water, two or three shives of wheaten bread and boyle them together, and put thereto a little quantity of sallet oyle with a little juice of houseleeke; for lack of oyle take a piece o fresh butter, boile them all together and lay to thy swelling place.
An excellent healing Salve. By Parson Saywe. Take one handful of Sage, an handful of Valerian, one handful of Plantane, one handfull of knot-grasse, one handful of Setwel, one handful of Daisies roots and all, one handful of St. Johns wort, one handful of Egrimony, half a handful of Isope, half a handful of Vervaine, and shred them all together, and put thereto one pound or more of Guilts grease, and stampe them wel together, and so let them stand sixteen or eighteen dayes together; then take and boil them and strain them through a linnen cloth; then take halfe a pound of new wax, halfe a pound or more of the best Fran∣kinsence, half a pound of Rosen, two ounces of Turpentine, foure penny worth of Myrrh of the best, and boile all these together a∣gaine til they be melted, then strain them all through a canvas cloth and pour it into a bowle of water, and when it is coole, take it out and box it, and your salve is made. And if you wil have it cooling, you may put in halfe an ounce of Camphire. An Ointment for any sore which hath dead flesh or any corruption within, and to take away the rednesse and pimples of the face: By Goodwife Worsted of Calthorp. Take half a dram of Mercurie sublimata white, and grind it with three or four spoonfuls of oyl of Bayes, and grinde it upon the Paynters stone, and so put it up into your box, and use it as need shall serve. This wil make the partie in great paine, as though hee lay in nettles for the space of twelve hours. But if the paine be so great that he cannot endure it, then take of red Sage one handful, of Costmarie one handful, of wild mallows one handful, bruise them and boile them in Bores grease, and so when it is cold, annoint the place. Terrasigillata is a good powder to stanch blood, which did helpe Mr. Day.
An approved Salve to heale a corrupted sore. By Mr. John Knape. Take three ounces of Deers suet or sheeps suet, and boil it with bay leaves, and wel melted, strain it, then put to it one ounce of English wax, one ounce of turpentine, a quarter of an ounce of rosen, as much English hony, and seeth all together, till they be wel melted; straine it, then set it to the fire again, and put to it a quarter of an ounce of May butter, and foure spoonfuls of sallet oyle and stirre it, then take it from the fire, and put it in a bason to coole, and put to it two spoonful of Rosewater, and stirre it well for fear of running over, then divide it equally, and put to the one half, one ounce of stone pitch, before your May butter and sallet oyle, and straine that again being well melted, and this with pitch wil draw more then the other, and it will keepe seven yeares. To make a black Salve. By my Lady Heyden. Take Rosemary, Thime, Lavender, Dil, Balme, Brooklime, Yar∣ow, Lovage, Smallage, Vervain, Camomile, Orpine, Plantane, Nightyard, alias St. Johns wort, Herb Robert, Adders tongue, Polipodie, aliàs ferne growing on an Oake; Woodbine, Daisies and Comfry, of each a handful; beat all these together small, and put in a quart of Verjuice or more if need be, strain these together and take the juice thereof, then take two pound of new wax, one pound of Colophony, a pint of oyl olive, one pound of pitch, one pound of May butter, and seeth all these together till all be melted, and it must be well stirred upon the fire for running over, till it be thick and melted all, then take a gallon of running water, and put the water into a clean vessel, and after take a yard of linnen cloth called minster of the strongest for a strainer, and two persons to hold the strayner over the water, and an other with a ladle to take the salve with the other things together sodden, and straine all into the water, then let it be cold, then take it up, and make thereof round balls, as you thinke best, and chafe your hands with May butter, and worke them.
To make the green Ointment. First, take all the herbs aforesaid in like quantity, and shred them small, and put them in a pan; then take a gallon of oyle of Olive, and put to it two pound of May-butter, half a pound of new Wax: and let all these together, (being in a pan with the Herbs) stand twelve dayes, stirring them well once every day; then seeth it on the fire till the wax and butter be molten, then strain it into a clean vessel. This must be made between May and Bartholomew Tide. For a Scald Head. By Mr. Birch. Take salt Armoniack, salt Peter and white Coperas, of either two drams, grind it with White-wine-vineger; then take of burnt Al∣lome so much, Oyle of Brimstone one dram, Swines grease two ounces, oyle of Tartar half an ounce, Camphire a little: Let all these be well incorporate together, and so annoint the head there∣with mornings and evenings; and as the scurf doth arise, take it off with Oyle of Roses. Probatum est. A Cataplasm Pultesse, or Defensative to defend and draw humors from any Sore. By George Birch. Take the roots of Marsh-mallowes clean washed two ounces, cut them in smal slices; then take of Camomile and the leaves of Marsh mallowes, and the leaves of common Mallows, and Fether∣few, of either two handful; boil all these in faire water until the roots be tender; then take out the roots first and stamp them, and after that the Herbs, then pulp them all together. Take these roots and herbs thus pulped, and put to them so much wine Lees as wil boil them, adding the meal of Fenegreek and Lin∣seed, of either three ounces; stir them well together until it be well mixed, and let them boil pon a soft fire until it be thick like a Pul∣tesse. In the end of the boiling put in two ounces of Oyl of Camo∣mile, two ounces of oyle of Lambs grease. Apply these mornings and evenings for a special remedy for a prick or any swellings to take away the pain, or to soften or ripen any hardnesse.
To make Diacytony, which they call Clear Cakes. Take Raspices or Goosberries, or any tender Plums, and put them in a stone jug, and put that jug into a pot of seething water, and when they be dissolved, strain them, and take to every pint of liquor a pound of sugar; but let your pulp and liquor be all strained together▪ and put to your pound of Sugar, half a pint of water, and boil it in∣to a Candie height, and boil the liquor by it self till it be some∣what thick, and then put them seething hot together, and put it into glasse-plates made of the fashion of Marmelade boxes, and set them in a warm Stove, and let them stand three weeks, and never let them be cold, and in a week they will turn, and every day turn them till they be dry. For clearing the Blood. Take Brooklime, Water cresses, Scurvigrasse, Scabious, Egrimony and Fumetory, of each a good handful, wash them clean, and bruise and chop them together in a gallon and a half of Whey, boil them with two ounces of Anniseeds or Fennel seeds, till halfe a gallon be spent; then strain the herbs from the liquor, and with six ounces of Sugar sweeten it, and drink of it morning and evening a large draught and likewise at four of the clock in the afternoon. For the Jaundies. Take Turmerick, some two thimbles full, finely shaved, and as much Harts-horn finely shaved, a penny worth of Saffron, some half an ounce of Castel-soap shaved, as much Mithridatum as you can put on a knifes point at twice, and melt all these together, either in white wine or Ale luke-warm, and drink it fasting, and fast two hours af∣ter. Take it three or four mornings together. For weaknesse in the back. Take a handful of Clarey white, as much of white Campion leaves, and a quantity of the inward bark of a white Damson tree, Boile them in a quart of Muscadine, from a quart to a pint, and drink thereof morning and evening.
For China Broth. By Doctor Moor. Take a paper of China, and infuse it all night in a Pipkin in three quarts of water; in the morning set them to boile til a quart of the water be spent, then put to it a good great chicken, a few Raisons of the Sun without their stones, a littie Maiden-hair, Ce∣terach and Cowslip of Jerusalem, a sprig of Time, and a little Plan∣tane, a spoonful of Ivory, and let them boile together till there re∣main a quart of the broth, of which drink every morning half a pint, and as much in the afternoon at four of the clock every day, and be∣fore the first Brothbe ended make new to be in readinesse. Another about China Broth. Take of Root of China cut into thin chips, and of Sarsaparilla sliced and cut into short pieces, of each an ounce, of the root of Sassa∣fras a Dram, in fuse these all night in six pints of fair water, in a pipkin close covered upon warm embers; in the morning set them to boil till one pint of the liquor be consumed; then put to them a chicken ready dressed, a spoonful of French-barley, a little Maiden-haire and Ceterach, a few Raisons of the Sun without their stones, a sprig of Time and Rosemary, a flake of Mace, and a crust of bread, and let all these boil together with the other things until there be but a quart left in all, which strain from the other things, and keep for your use. For the Gargle. Take of the leaves of Plantane, Cinqfoile and red Roses, of each half a handful, of Pomegranate stowers a pugil; boil these in a suf∣ficient quantity of barly water till it come to a pint, then strain it, and put to it of red Rose-water two ounces, or Sirrup of dry Roses one ounce, of Sirrup of Mulberries half an ounce, of Oyle of Vi∣triol as much as will make it tart, and so keep it for your Gar∣gle.
To make the juice of Licoras. Take six handfuls of the crops of Isop, three handfuls of foals foot, one handful of Rosemary flowers pickt, let all these be well stamp▪ and strained into a skillet with a pint of running water, then take a quarter of a pound of the flower of Licoras, being finely beaten and searced, and put to the rest in the skillet, when it is blood warm, take it off the fire, and straine it through a strong cloth for that purpose; then set it on the fire again until it be half boiled, then put into it a quarter of a pound of Sugar Candy finely beaten, and let it boil un∣til it be as thick as paste; then take it off the fire, and work it with your spoon until it doth look very white, then make it up in Balls and Roles. To make Almond Milk Take of French Barley well washed and boiled in two or three waters, two spoonfuls, of Strawberry leaves, Endive and Cinqfoile, of each a small half handful, boil them in three pints of running water, until there remain but one pint of the liquor, and then strain them, and with a good spoonful of French Barley sodden, and an half ounce of white poppy seed, and nine or ten Almonds; relish it with Sugar and Rose water to your liking.
Sundry Waters for several Uses. A Water to take the heat from the stomack. TAke a good handful of violet leaves, a root of Henbane, scrape it and boyl them together in a quart of water, and wash the soals of the feet with the water; then lay them with your hand upon the ball of the foot as hot as he can endure it, then wrap the feet in a warm cloth. A Water to wash the Fundament for the hanging out of the same. Take a quart of Red-wine, and a handful of red Rose leaves dry∣ed, and an ounce of Pomgranat flowers dried, and beaten into grosse Powder, and let them boile on the fire half away; and take it and put it into a close pot, and every time that the Patient goeth to the stool, take a little and warm it, and bathe the place, and wet a spunge, and wring the moisture; sit upon it as hot as you may the space of a quarter of an hour; and within ten times it will help. For the same. Take Barley meal, and cast it upon the Fundament, but take heed you do not handle it.
A Water for sores Eyes. Take a new laid egg, and take out the yolk, and put unto the white as much Coperas as a fitch, and the roots and leaves of Dai∣sies and red Fennel, and stamp it, and strain it, and put to the white of the egg, then set it upon the embers till the white of the egg be ga∣thered, and alwayes stir it upon the fire, and then wring it through a fine cloth, and so use the water. A Water for a Canker in the mouth. Take a pint of White-wine, one handful of buds of red Roses, play them, and strain them, and put to the wine a good spoonful of clarified honey, and put to it a good quantity of Vineger, and a little Allom, and wash where need is. A most precious and excellent Water for the Eyes. By Mrs. Downing. Take red Fennel, Euphrasia, lis Eyebright, Vervain, Tormen∣til, Betony▪ Red-rose, Grape-leaves, Appovarmemorid, Ground-Ivy, and Ivy that growes on an Oak, of all these alke much. It must be used thus for three or four nights. The first day and night in the water of a Man-child and a Virgin; the second day and night in a womans milk, the fourth day and night in clear honey. This done take all these herbs, and put them in a Stillatory, and the water that comeththereof, it must be put in a Viol; and when you wil use it, put one clear drop thereof into your eye; and into this put the fourth part of an ounce of an Onyser beaten in a Mortar. This is a precious Medicine. This is a special Remedy for the eyes to clarifie the sight, and cu∣rable to all passions in the eye, as hath been proved many times. It is profitable for Scriveners and such like. This Water maketh the sight bright, it putteth away the bloodi∣nesse of the eyes; it will destroy a Pearle; it overcometh the Me∣grim, and it will heal the eye which is smitten with a stroke.
A Water for the Pearl in the Eye. Take ground Ivie, and bruise it very smal, and an Egg being new laid, and hard roasted; then take the white thereof, and beat both the white and Ivie together, then strain it, and put thereof one drop at once into the Patients Eye. Divers and sundry WATERS for sore Eyes, as followeth. A Water to be made in the beginning of May. Take a pint of Fennel-water, and a pint of Celendine-water, and put them both together in a glasse, then put to them as much white Coperas as a hazle Nut, and so let it stand in the Sun two or three moneths; and then drop it into your Eyes evening and morn∣ing, and as oft as you think meet. Another Water for the same, to be made at all times: Take a new laid Egg and open one end, and put out all the meat, and fill up the shel with fair running water, and put to it as much Coperas as a little pease, and a little bruised Cummin, and boil them altogether in the shel upon a chasing-dish of coals; and at the first ri∣sing stir it in again, and at the second time scum it clean; and when it is wel boiled, strain it through a fair cloth, and wash the shel again, and then put it in again; and so drop this into your Eyes at night at your going to bed with a feather. A speciall approved Water for the healing of sore Eyes. Take a piece of white Coperas as big as the Kernel of an ha∣zle Nut▪ and make it fine into powder, the like quantity of Ho∣ney, then take an Egg and make a hole in the one end, putting out all
the meat; then put the Coperas and Honey into the empty shel, and fill it up with fair running water (not too full) then take a chasing∣dish with coals and put the Egg thereon, and so suffer it to boil; but if it boil too fast stir it with the point of your knife, and put a dram of water therein with your knife, and let it boil the space of an hour; afterward take a piece of linnen cloth and strain it, and so keep it in a Vial, and use it when you go to bed. Another for the same. Take the juice of red Fennel and a little English Honey, and boil it together, and with a feather anoint the Eye-lids when you go to bed, and use to eat conserves of Betony for the swimming in the head, and somtime the crops of red Fennel. A Water for a sore Mouth, by Mrs. Downing. Take a pottle of running water, put in it one handful of Wood∣bine-leaves, red Sage, red Fennel, red Nettles, Hysop, Plantain, Ribwort, five leav'd-grasse and Herbgrece, of each one handful, four or five slips of Rosemary, two peny worth of Roach allom, six spoonfuls of English Hony, set it on the fire, and scum it so long as any wil rise, and let it seeth half away; then every day wash the sore: as long as it bleedeth let him not drink. To make a Water for a sore mouth, by Mr. Peterson. Take a handful of Sage, of Celendine, of Woodbine, of Rew, of Smallage, of each of these half an handful, and seeth all these in a pottle of conduit water until half be wasted; then strain them hard, and put that straining over the fire, and put into it half a pinte of Honey and two ounces of Roach allom; and when it doth seeth, take it from the fire and scum it clean, and then set it on the fire again, and put to it three quarters of an ounce of fine beaten Greins, let it seeth a while, and then take it from the fire, and when it is cold put it into a Glasse, and therewith wash the sore. A Water to destroy the heat of the palms of the hands, and of the soles of the feet. Take twelve spoonfuls of Rose-water, one spoonful of Vineger, and
wet therein a linnen cloth, and wash the palms of the hands and the soles of your feet when you go to bed. A Water to destroy the heat of the Face. Take a quart of fair running water, and a quart of the strongest ale that may be gotten, and half a pound of Roach allom, and seeth it till it be half sodden away, and then put it up in a close Glasse or pot, and when you have need of it, take a linnen cloth that shal be four or five double, and wet it in the water, and lay it to the grief as warm as you may suffer it; and as it dries wet it again: Use this and it will help you. If you put it in a glasse when it cometh hot from the fire it will break it. A Water for bleard Eyes. Take the juice of Straw-berries in time of Summer, and fair Ho∣ney, seeth it and scum it, and melt it together; then take a drop thereof and put into thine Eye, and thou shalt have fair Eyes and clear. A good Water for the Eyes, by Mrs. Skudamore. Take Cummin: Wine sodden with Frankincense is good for running Eyes. Item, restraining shal be made about the temples and forehead. Item, pure Wax being clean tried and tempered with powder of Cummin, and oft emplaistred, doth away the tears and wetnesse of the Eyes. A precious Water for the Eyes, by my Lady Heyden. Take Fennel, Rew, Eye-bright, Vervain, Tormentil, Betony, red Roses, Endive of the Wood, Oculus Christi, Chicken-weed, Pimper∣nel, Celendine, Philage, called Mous-tail, or Weesel-tail, or Housleek, or little stone-crop, Pionies, Vine-leaves, Smallage, Egrimony wood∣bind with long sweet hangles, of all these a like quantity; then beat them in a morter, and lay them in white Wine four and twenty hours, and as long in a sucking Childes Urine, the third day in wo∣mans milk of divers mens children, the fourth day in liquid Honey; (and if the Honey be not liquid heat it on the fire) and then hand∣ful after handful put it into the Stillatory; and that Water which
cometh out reserve it preciously; drop it into your Eyes with a fea∣ther as you need. This Water is entred before under the name of Mrs. Downing, sa∣ving that they differ somwhat in the Herbs. fol. 44. A Water for the Stone, by Mrs. Parnel Dall in Smith-field. Still Milk; and into a pottle of Milk put one ounce of Oris, be∣ing beaten, and take Alesander-leaves, and so distil them all together. A Water for the heat in the Back, by my Lady of Sussex. Take the juice of Plantain, the juice of Housleek, and Womans milk, and the juice of Lemons, and Rose-water, of each a like quan∣tity, two or three spoonfuls of Vineger; herein wet a cloth, and lay it to your Back, and as it drieth you must renew it again. A Water for them that be lunatick in the Head, by Mr. Edwards. Take Polipody of the Oak, Wood-sage, Wormwood, and a Root called Osmond, of all a like quantity; dry them and beat them to powder, and put this powder into Cowslip-water, or into Pottage. A Water for the swelling of ones Leg after an Ague. Take distilled Plantain-water one quart, Camphire four ounces, white Vitriol two ounces, make these two in fine powder, and put it into the Plantain-water, and let it have a warm or two on the fire, and so keep it, and wash the place swelled with a cloth. To make WOUND-WATER. Take two gallons of Water, and three handfuls of Honey-suckle∣flowers
and leaves, and one great handful of Celendine, and one of red Sage, and one handful of Rosemary; seeth all these together till the Water be half consumed away, and then strain it from the Herbs, and put to it one pinte of Honey, and one ounce of Roach allom, and one ounce of Greins, seeth all these together; that done, put it in a fair pot. An excellent water for any wound or cut. Take a handful of sage, as much woodbines, as much Lilly leaves, seethe them together in a gallon of running water unto a pottle, then strain them, and seeth the water again, and put thereto a pint of hony and skimme it clean, then put into it a handful of beaten grains, then let them play a while, and afterward keep the water in a glasse, and it wil keep it much longer, and wash the wound every morning, noone, and night with this water. If the wound be corrupt, shake the glasse that the groundsops may make it more strong. And if it be a fresh wound, take the cleer water only. At every washing you must cover the wound with a plaister of wax, and lay over the wax a linnen cloth or else a bladder. Approved. A good Water for the Collick and the Stone. By Doctor Sherman. Take the kernels of Peach stones, and the kernels of Cherry stones, and ashen keyes all bruised, and laid in white wine to steep a day and a night, and so distil them, and use to drink the water. A preservative water against the stone. By Mr. Buckbeard. Water of Saxifrage, Pearstone water, avens water, ramsy water, water of bean flowers, water of unset leeks, water of Samphire, each of these must be stilled by themselves, then take of each of them half a pint, so much of Malmsey as of the rest, stil them all together; and of the water so distilled, take three or four spoonfuls when you neede. A water to wash a red face. Take the root of wagebrode, plantane, salt, and the roots of burrs, stamp them together with aisel and powder of bayes, and therewith wash thy face.
A water against the itch and scab. Seethe herb bennet and hemlocks in running water, and in the seething, put thereto roch allom, and wash the scab with that water. Another for the same. Take honysuckle leaves and sage, seeth them together in running water, and wash therewith. A water for a ring-worm. Take a cleer latten bason, put therein a pint of vinegar distilled, take halfe an ounce of Bole Armoniack and rub it on the bottom of the bason in the vineger til it be all dissolved; then let it stand all day, and the water wil be blew, put it in a glasse, and therewith rub the ringworm. Divers approved medicines and waters for eyes First, The distilled water of eye-bright simple, compounded with nothing else. Item. The wine of eyebright, which is made for the eyes by put∣ting the herb into the must, until it be at length perfect wine, whose use maketh the eyes of old men wax young again. Item. A powder made of three parts of eyebright, and one part of mace, if a spoonful of it be taken every morning by it self, or with sugar or wine. Also the powder thereof eaten with the yolk of an egge is of the same effect. To make a blue water, being excellent to root out, and rot away dead flesh in a sore leg. By Mr. Smith of the Exchequer, that dwelt at Charterhouse. Take fair running water a gallon, and boil it with a pint of hony, one ounce of roch allom, til one quarter be consumed; then take it off the fire, and when it is between hot and cold, put to it an ounce of verdegreece and brew it, and labor it up and down til it be all of a
froth, and so let it stand a while and brew it again, and thus do five or six times a day, and when it is setled put it up and use it as need re∣quires. To make good red water for any old wound or sore leg. My Lady Pagets water. Take Bole Armoniack four ounces, Comfry one ounce, white co∣peras four ounces, boil your coperas and comfry together in a little black pot, until they become water, stirring them together til they be hard in seething; beat them in a mortar, then beat your Bole Armoni∣ack to powder by it self, & mingle them together, & keep your powder in a bladder: when you need to occupie the water, take a pottle of run∣ning water, and set it on the fire until it begin to seeth; take it from the fire, and take three spoonfuls of the powder, and put it into the water, and then put alltogether into a glass, and let it rest until it be clear in the uppermost part of the glass; then take the cleerest of the water and wash the sore therewith warm, and lay a linnen cloth four times double wet in the water upon the sore, and bind it fast with a roller and keep it warm. Do this evening and morning until it be whole; for it is an approved medicine; although the sore seem worse after the first dressing, fear it not, for it is a very good approved medicine. A special good water for red bleared eyes. By Mrs. Birch my mother. First, take Lapis calaminaris, not the male but the female, which is the grayer in colour, and the better for this purpose, and prepare it thus; cast it into the fire til it be red hot, then take it out and quench it in white wine; do thus so often til you perceive it is clean without metal and dross, afterward lay it in the May Sun all the time of May; which done, you may keep it to serve this purpose as long as you wil. And when you wil use it, you must take part thereof, and grind it upon a Painters stone into such fine powder as wil easily goe through a fine lawne; put this powder into a glasse with white wine, and drop therof with a feather into the sore eyes at going to bed, first one drop and after a little pawse another drop; thus do with either eye if they be both sore. It wil smart sore, but it wil do exceeding much good; for it wil both stop the humor whence the soreness proceeds, wherein the operation of it is most excellent, and also heal the sorenesse and rednesse of the eyes in short space. Ere you put it up in the glasse, straine it through a course linnen cloth once or twice, for otherwise it wil be too rough and sharpe for ones eyes.
Also when you use it, you must shake your glasse for to stir up the powder, for otherwise it will lye still at the bottom. For lack of White Wine you may make it with Fennel Water, but White-wine is the better, for that will skin the sorenesse. A good Water to asswage the great thirst in a Feaver. Take a pint of Endife Water, then take a pint of Rose Water, an ounce of Vineger, boil them with sugar, and let the Patient drink a spoonful when he is thirsty. A Water for the Itch. Take fair rain water one pint, distil it, and when you will ocupy it, put to it green Coperas, and lay in it Plantane leaves pricked full of holes, and herewith wash the place where the Itch s, and lay some of the Plantane leaves upon it. Idem. Take Enula Campana roots, and seeth them in whey, and wash the Patient with it warm. A good Water to wash and heal a Marmole. Take a gallon of fair running water, and cast therein three or four handfuls of Sage, and seeth it unto a quart; and put thereto an half penny worth of Allom, and wash the Marmole therewith being warm, then cover the wound with lint, and lay a Plaister of the Sage above. Do thus ten or twelve dayes. A Water for the evil in the throat or mouth Take Fennel and boil it in water, when it is boiled, hold thy mouth over it, after drink of the Water and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, then cast it up. Do thus three times a day for four dayes, and it will be whole. A Water for the Stone. Take Pellitory of the wall, and broom flowers, and distil them together, and drink of this Water as need requireth.
An approved good Water to draw water out of the Stomack. Take two or three pieces of leavened bread, a pottle of vinegar, two handfuls of Sage, and put them all together in a stillatorie, and so still them, and make a water of them, and when you feel your self accumbred, drink one spoonful thereof in a morning. A good water to wash all manner of sores, risings and swellings. By Clement Warwick. Take a gallon of the best Tanwesse, and thereto put one penny-worth of madder, and one penny-worth of roch allom, make a pow∣der of them, and boile it with th▪e Tanwesse till the powder be mel∣ted, and then take a linnen cloth, and make a rundel of it as much as your hand, and wet it in the Tanwesse, and roll it about the swel∣ling hard and fast, and so let it be still two dayes, and this will cleanse fait, and abate swelling. A most Soveraigne Water, that Dr. STEVENS the Physician kept secret unto his death. Take a Gallon of good Gascon wine, then take Ginger, Ga∣lingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Annis seeds, Fennel seeds, Caraway seeds, of every of them alike much, that is to say, a drachm; then take Sage, Mints, Red roses, Thime, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Camomile and Lavender, of every of them an handful; then bray the spices smal, and shred the herbs small, and put all in the wine, and let it stand so twelve hours and stir it divers times, then still it by Limbeck, and keep the first water by itself, for that is best; and then keep the second Water which is good, but not so good as the first. The vertue of this water is this. It comforteth the spirits vital, and helpeth the inward diseases that come of cold, and against the shaking of the palsie, and cureth the contraction of the sin∣newes, and helpeth the conception of Women that be barren; it killeth the wormes within the body, cureth the old Cough, it
helpeth the Tooth ache; it comforteth the stomack very much, and cureth the old Dropsie, it helpeth the stone in the bladder, and in the reins of the back; it helpeth shortly the stinking breath. And whosoever useth this water now and then, and not too often, it pre∣serveth him in good liking, and shall make him to seem young very long: With this Water D. Stephens preserved his own life until ex∣treme age that he could neither ride nor go; and continued yet Bed-rid five years, when three Physicians judged it impossible for him to live one year. He did confesse a little before his own death, that if he were sick at any time, he never used other Medicine but on∣ly this water. And also the Arch Bishop of Canterbury used it, and found great ease and goodness in it; and lived till he was not able to drink off a cup, but sucked his drink through a hollow thing of silver. And Mr. Brown Serjeant at Law learned of the Arch Bishop, to keep himself and his friends with this water. It will be much better if it stand in the Sun all the Summer. The Vertues of divers Waters, as followeth. Hysop Water. It is good for all manner of evils in the stomack and in the heart, and lungs for the brest and Maries. Water of Betony. It is good for all head ache to wash the temples therewith, and for filth about the heart. Water of Dragons. It is good for any Infection or Corruption in the aire that goeth into a man, and for the pestilence. Water of Elder. It is good for man or woman to drink against all manner of Jaundise.
Water of Endife. It is good for to drink for all manner of Feavers and hot evils, for the Dropsie, the liver or stomack. Water of red Fennel: Is is good for all manner of evils in the eyes, and good for a prick. Water of Wormwood. It is good for wormes in the belly, and for grinding in the Womb, and windinesse of the Collick, for the liver, for the Spleen, for drunkennesse, for the eye sight, and for evil air of Plagues or Pestilence. Water of Ditany. It is good for Poison, Venom and Pestilence. Water of Centory. It is good for the Liver, for the Milt, for Wormes in the womb, and for the sauce-flegme. Water of Fumetory. It is good for the Morphew, for scab or scall, for the Dropsie, for the liver, for the Maries. Water of Marnbine. It is good for the Gout, for the Lungs, Brest, and for the Collick.
Water of Balme. It is good for the liver, for the Spleen, for the Marrow of the back; and also it cleanseth and dryeth away the Mo∣ther. Water of Plantane. It is good for the Flux, and for the hot Dropsie. Water of Violets. It is good for a man within, and for the reins of the back, and for the liver. Water of Wood-binds. It is good for all manner of heats, and also scaldings in the mouth, which break out of the stomack, and for a Canker. To make Aqua Composita. First in April or May, or betweene the Ladie dayes, when Herbs be in verrue and unseeded, Take a large handful of Hy∣sop, Sage buds, Rosemary, red Fennel, of Enula Campana a scant handful, of red mints and Horehound half an handful, Marjoram and Pennyroyal a scant handful, and all these same before written minced, and three handful of Licoras well scraped and minced, and as much Annis cleansed and bruised; and put all into a brasse pot of four gallons, and fill up the same with as mighty Ale as you can get, at the least four or five dayes old, so that the pot be full within three fingers of the under ring. And so let it steep all one night, and in the morning stir all well together, and set the pot upon the fire till it boile; then abate your fire till it leave boiling, and then set your Limbeck with wrought paste quickly upon your pot, and put a few great charcoales under it, and so seth it with a soft fire till it come: and set a clean quart glasse
under the pipe to receive your water. And ever tend it well that it run not too fast for taking fire, nor too soft for being weak; but ever as it may drop and not run, for that is ever best. But alwayes be sure to fill the Cisterne of the Limbeck a∣bove with water, or it will be too hot; for if it be not well tended, and the fire also, it will run white, and be in jeo∣pardy to set all on fire: keep ever the first part by it self, and the second that runs cleer by it self; and the last to distill a∣gaine. Put thereto the best white wine lees that may be gotten to make up the Ale, in every pot one Gallon; and put thereto Mace, Coriander, Caraway, red Fennel seeds, Centory that is ga∣thered between the Lady dayes, of every one of them a quartet of an ounce, all well bruised and put thereto. And when you would have a Gallon or two or more that should excel and be prin∣cipal, brew much of the second, and all the last that came white out of the Still, and being now double stilled together it will be very excellent. To make a fine Damask Water. Take Rose water two pound, Musk two grains, let it seeth in the Rose water, and distil it with a soft fire. Take Rose water two pound, Saffron two ounces, seeth it in the Rose water between two platters, half a quarter of an hour then di∣still it and keep it close. Take Rose water one pound and a half, Cloves beaten into fine Powder one ounce, and put into the Rose water two dayes before you distil it, and keep it close. Take Rose water one pound and a half, Camphire one ounce, distil it with the Rose water with a soft fire, keep it by it selfe close. Then hast thou four Waters ready. Now to make an excellent Water of these four Waters. First take a pound and half of the Musk Water, two pound of your Saf∣fron Water; of your Camphire Water half a pound, and of your Clove Water half a pound; put them all into one Still of Glase, and distil them with a soft fire; and this shall be excellent Damask Water.
Another Damask Water. Take Rose water four pound, Rose leavs dryed two ounces, and put them into the Rose-water by the space of two days, then cast thereinto halfe an ounce of Marjoram gentle, one ounce of Benjamin, one ounce of Storax Calamint, and distil them with a soft fire. How to make another Damask Water, proved by her that distilleth the Sweet Waters at Hampton Court. Take of the best red Roses new gathered a good quantity, and strow them light in the bottom of your Still; then take Lavender, Spick, fine Marjorame and basil, the leaves of each mingled toge∣ther, of these four being mingled, take one handful and strow them light upon the Roses. Then take a little Damask Powder, and strow it lightly upon your green flowers, then take a handful of your Rose leaves, and strow them upon your Powder and greene flowers: Then take a quantity of Damask Powder, and strow it upon your uppermost Roses. These things above written being done, take six or seven Rose-leaves, and lay on every leaf the quan∣tity of half a grain of Civet, and lay them upmost of all, with the Civet upward, Then take and cover your Stillatory very close that no air get out, and distil them all together with a soft fire; and you shall make fine Damask Water. To make Rose Water. Take red Roses and pick them from the buds; then take Laven∣der, Marjerom and Basil the leaves of each two handful; then take five or six leaves of your Roses, and lay on them a little quantity of Civet; then take Damask Powder, and strow between every range; then distil them in your Stillatory with a soft fire in any wise.
To make Damask Water in winter. Take a Pottle of good Ale new cleansed, and let it stand in an earthen pot all night, in the morning take it out, and put thereto a pint of running water, and a quarter of Cloves, two pence in Camphire, a good quantity of dried Lavender, and as much dryed Roses that were dryed in the Sun, and put all these together into a Stillatory and still them. It was taught the Queen by the Ambas∣sadors of Almain. A Water for a Tetter or a Ringworm. Mrs. Blow, which she had of George Birch. First, take Gum Arabeck one dram, Sal Armoniack two drams, beat them to powder, and put therein six ounces of white wine Vine∣ger, and so boil them al together until it be half consumed, then strain it, and put it into a glasse and use it. The making of white Water for the eyes. Mr. Birch his Water. Take Gum Arabeck, Gum Dragagant, fine white Sugar candy, of the finest white Starch made of Wheat flower, of either of these two drams, and Camphire six grains, fine Venice Cerus washed oftentimes in Rose water three drams, of Sarcacolla one dram and a half; dry your Gums, and beat and searce them through a fine Searce, and so likewise your Starch and Sarcacolla; then take the white of an egg, and make little trochises thereof: take one of these tro∣chises dryed, the weight of a dram, and dissolve the same in two oun∣ces of white Rose water, one ounce of Eyebright-water, and one ounce of Fennel water. A special good Water for the Web or Pearle in ones Eye. By Mr. Vowel. Take a quantity of the whitest Coperas about one penny worth infused in a platter of running water; let it stand in the same platter one day and one night, then put it into another plater, and then shift it every day for the space of one month at nine of the
clock in the morning, and six of the clock in the afternoon. This must be made in June, July or August, and must be set in some cham∣ber where the Sun shineth hotest. Also white Rose Water, that is stilled by the self; and when you use the aforesaid water for any cause, then put into it three spoon∣ful of the Coperas water above specified, one spoonful of this Rose water, and so use it. This Water is approved. To make Balm Water. Take a pound of Balme fair stripped, washed and dried clean, and put it into an earthen pot of a Gallon, and put thereinto a pottle of very good Sack, a pottle of as strong Ale as you can get, three ounces of Licoras bruised, and three ounces of Annis-seed bruised. So they being put together, let them stand twelve hours, and stir them together; then in the morning still them in a Limbeck; the first pint take out by it self, and so likewise the second. This Water is good for the Windy-Collick, and for the Spleen; and the water is good to wash the side for the Spleen. A very good Medicine for sore eyes. By Mrs. Downing, and Mrs. Dynne. Take six drams of Lapis Tutiae, being prepared and beatn into fine powder, and as much Aoes Hpaticum, likewise beaten into fine powder, of fine Sugar half a pound, of Rose water one pint and a half, of good White-wine that is not sowre one quart; mix all these together, and put them into some Vessel This Vessel or Glasse must be so big, as when all the stuff is in it, it be not half full, to the end there may be room enough to stir the same.or glasse of a pottle, stop it close, and set it in the Sun one month, stirring it once in a day, that it may be well incorpora∣ted. At the monthes end straine it through a thick cloth into a clean glasse, and drop hereof into your eyes morning and evening, and as occasion shall serve.
A medicine to bee used for the Pox in the Throat. Boile in posset Ale Marigold flowers, maydenhair, hearts horn, Liquorice and figgs; let all these be boiled from a quart to a pint, and given warme to the party, as oft as you will, to bring forth the small pox kindly, and keepe them out of the throat. To keep the Pox from pitting in the face when they are come out, and begin to die. Take half a pint of Malmsey, and a quantity of sperma ceti, accor∣ding to the proportion of the Malmsey, let it be set upon the coales while it be melted, and then take it warm and bath their fa∣ces still as it dries in, and it makes the Roves come off, and keeps it from pitting. A black Salve and a powder, to heale any old Sore or Ʋlcer where the bone is not corrupt. By Mr. Birch. Take fine sallet oyle one pint, new wax half a pound, red lead grownd in fine powder, half a pound; boil all these together upon a soft fire, alwaies stirring the same with a spattle, untill it turneth into a black colour, then take it from the fire, and stirre it untill it be cold. The Powder. Idem. Take lead and beat it into thin plates, then file it into powder, steep it five or six dayes in wine vineger, changing the vineger two times a day, then take and powre the vineger from the lead and dry it, and when it is dry, beat it in a mortar, and grind it a good while together until it be as fine as you cannot feele it be∣twixt
your fingar and your thumbe. So keepe it for your use. First, you must cleanse the sore from all corrupt and dead flesh, either with precipitat, or burnt allom, or with Unguentum aegyptiacum or Apostolorum mixt with precipitat; when it is cleane, then cast on your powder, and upon that lay on your plaister, and assure your self it wil heal it: The plaister wil heale it alone, if it be not farre gone. An ointment for all wounds of what kind soever, so they be new and greene. By Mr. Birch. Take Venice Turpentine, Gum Elemnae, of either one ounce and a half, sheeps tallow one ounce, of old Guilts grease two oun∣ces, dissolve this together upon a soft fire, and so melted together, strain them: of this oyntment take half an ounce, and of oyle of St. Johns wort one drachm, dissolve these together, and dip lint in this oyntment, and put it in the wound, and apply the black plai∣ster over it, and so bind up the place. And this oyntment may be applied unto old sores also, as well as to new, laying first this oyntment thereto, and then a plaister made of the black salve next before written. A medicine for a Wound. Take two great handfuls of Celendine, and one of Mercurie, one gallon of running water; boile these til halfe be consumed, and the herbs very tender, and put in a pint of white wine, foure great spoonfuls of honey, as much Roch allom as the quantity of an egge: Consume a pint of it at the least. The Diet. By Mr. Cooper. Take Cortex guasi one pound, Sarsaparilla four ounces, sassa∣asse two ounces, Radix Cheni two ounces, Jujubes, Sebestien, four ounces, Raisins of the Sun the stones taken out, one pound, Da∣mask prunes four ounces, Currans four ounces, Maidenhair one ounce, Liquorice four ounces, Ginger one ounce, Juniper berries
two ounces, beat your Cortex, Sarsaperilla, Sassafrass and Radix Cheni into fine powder, and searce them, and infuse them six hours in four quarts of white wine, three quarts of March-beer, and three quarts of ordinary beere, and the liquorice bruised, then seethe them in Balneo Mariae, with all the other parcels put to the rest, and in the top of your lid there must be a hole, and this bag must hang in the pot being close stopped; and in the bag must be Cinna∣mon one graine bruised, Cloves one graine whole, Rubarb three graines whole, musk, civet and ambergreece of each three graines, and when it is halfe boiled in, then you shall adde to it four oun∣ces of China, one ounce of mithridatum letting them seeth one walm and then take it out of the Balneo Mariae, and set it upon hot em∣bers close stopped eight hours, and then strain it, and drink no other but this for six dayes, taking a quarter of a pint at a draught bloud warm, as nature wil beare. And your diet must be two meals a day, either mutton, chicken, or rabbet rosted dry, and your bread bisket; and after the six dayes you shal take broth made with Mutton, adding these herbs, bur∣rage, maidenhair, harts tongue and liver wort, with Raisins of the Sun the stones taken out, damask prunes, mace and grated bread. And you shal take two spoonfuls of this jelly following; Take a red Cock of a year old, pul him quick, and slit him in the middest, then break the bones of him and wash him clean from his blood, and dry him with a fair cloth; so done, take a handful of nepe, as much of Harts-tongue, a quantity of pennyroyal, halfe a pound of Rai∣sins of the Sunne, half a pound of Currans, two ounces of Ma∣nus Christi, one ounce of Sugar candy, six angels or more, and put these into the Cock, closing the sides together, and after take a pint and a halfe of Muscadine; put in the same with the Cock into a pewter pot, closing the lid that no air go out, and set the same into a brasse pot full of water; and as the water seetheth away, so fil it up, letting the pewter pot stand therein four and twenty houres, then strain it and keep it close, and use it as before. You must eat roasted Hares farsed with these herbs following, Mercurie with the curled leaf, mugwort and valerian. Then you must perfume three dayes together with Fran∣kinsence, Bay leaves, Nutmegs, Benjamin, of each a quantity, and muske a graine. Take three mornings this powder following; the scrapings of Cyprus a dram and a halfe, long pepper, Nutmegs, fine wood of alloe of each of them a scruple, the kidneys of a Hare dried and not burnt, and make them in powder, and drink it three times with Muscadine.
Weare upon your left arme an eagles stone, and lay to the reins of the back the white of an egge, beaten with five or six drops of vi∣neger of Solis. Take the powder of Cordial Dicalamintum and Diagalanga of each the weight of fourteen pence, Diamosco dulcis the weight of five pence, Aromaticum Rosarum, of each the weight of seven pence, Sugar four ounces; water of Wormwood a quantity; seeth them to a perfect heighth, and so put to your powder when it cooleth, and so gild these Lozenges. A medicine for the pricking of a sinew. Annoint the sinew pricked with oyle of eggs luke warme, and it will heal it. A medicine for the strangurie. Take a good handful of the crops of red nettles, stamp them, and straine them with a little new milk as it cometh from the Cow, and drink thereof every morning. For any bruise or rednesse in the eyes. Take white sugar candy very finely beaten into a powder, then take some of that powder into a goose quil, and blow it into the brui∣sed eye, and it is a ready cure. Probatum. To make an excellent Perfume. Take three ounces and a half of Benjamin, and lay it a night in Rose water, then beat it fine, and take half a pound of Damask Roses, the whites being cut off, then beat them fine in a stone mortar, then take the Benjamin, and put to the Roses, and beat them together till they come to a Paste, then take it out and mingle it with half a quar∣ter of an ounce of musk kindly beaten, then put to halfe a quarter of an ounce of Civet, as much Ambergreece, and mould these with an ounce of the best Sugar finely searced, then make them in little cakes, and lay a Rose leafe on both sides of them, then lay them a drying upon a board that hath no savour, where no aire cometh.
A purge for the head and stomack. Pilula coctiva a scruple, Pilula aggrativa halfe a scruple, a little syrup of Sticadine or Betony, make it into three pills, and take i at night or morning fasting. For the head and stomack Rheume. Take a Sage leaf wel washed, and it is very good to chew it in ones mouth. A cooling drink. Take a Gallon of whey, and boil it until it cometh unto a pottle, with a handful of Sorrel, Borage blossomes or Borage leaves a hand∣ful, boil the formost together until it come unto a pottle, straine it through a jelly bag; being strained, season it with Sugar candy, and juice of Lemmons until it be to your liking. For a splent of a horse. Take a stick and beat it down, then prick it with a little bod∣kin, after take a stammel cloth and double it, and between the double put some mastick, then take a whole brick, draw it upon it, until it show through the stamel, and then its sufficient. To stanch blood. Take toad roden, or the slime of toads in March, and put it into a coule or keele, and for nine dayes together steep some linnen cloths therein, and as often as they dry, dip them in again, these cloaths being used as before nine dayes together, you may keep them many years, use then this to the place where the bleeding is, take as much as wil fit the place, and it will stay it; if not, being dry, then draw the cloth through a little warme water, and use it as before, be the bleeding inward or outward, it will stay it.
A medicine truly approved for the Stone. Take the lees of white or Rhenish wine, and without any other ingredients, distil it until it comes unto a pottle of Aqua vitae, divide the pottle of Aqua vitae into two glasses that are wide at the top, and of a gallon a piece, into each of which glasses, put every day a quart of Strawberries until the glasses be full, and let these glasses being close stopped be put into the Sunne for two months, after which, straine the Aqua vitae from the Strawberries through a cloth or strainer, and being from the Strawberries, put into each of those glasses of Aqua vitae, a quart of muskadine, and a pound of Su∣gar candy, and then stop them close, and put them into the Sunne again as long as you please. The use of it. You must take it in this manner, if you will prevent any fit, you must take three spoonfuls of this water, and two of parsley water in the morning, and fast two houres after it: If the fit be upon you, then take five spoonfuls of this water alone or more, as you shall think sit: it is fittest to be taken in the morning, and fast two houres after it, or the last you take when you go to bed, two spoonfuls of this, and two spoonfuls of parsley water to prevent the stone. Divers good Medicines to stanch the bleeding of a wound. Take Terrasigillata and beat it into powder, and put it into the wound: And if it stanch not therewith, lay to it a white of an egge and flax, and put the powder upon it. Another for the same. Take the white moss of an Appletree, and dry it on the fire in a fire shovell, and make it into powder, and so put it into the wound.
And if the patient be hot, you must wet the neck with a little fair water in your hand. Another to stanch the bleeding at the Nose, or of a wound. Take egge shells, and burne them upon an hot brick or tyle in the fire, and beat them into powder, and put it into the wound; or if they bleede at the nose, blow it up into the nostrils with a quill. Also the soft down of Carduus benedictus being beaten to pow∣der, or feathers being laid to the wound, will stanch the bleed∣ing. Another for the bleeding of a wound. Write these four letters, AOGL with the blood of the wound, about the wound. To stanch bleeding. The powder of Bole Armoniack being put into the wound doth stanch bleeding, or otherwise being blowne up into the nose. Another to stanch it. Take the knots of knotwormes, and split them, and wash them with white wine, and dry it into powder, and cast thereof into the wound, and it will stanch the bleeding. To stanch bloud of a vein or wound. Take the haire of Hares skin, and temper it with the white of an egge, and lay it to the wound, and it will stanch it. Another for the same. Take linnen cloth and burn it into ashes, and take thereof and▪ mix it with sugar and so cast it into the wound.
A black Salve, very good for any green or old cut or wound. Take a pint of Sallet oyle, halfe a pound of white lead very finely beaten, foure or five penny worth of mastick, halfe a quar∣ter of a pound of fine rosen, as much of Benjamin, halfe as much of dry balsom, the like of Storax, all finely beaten, as much vir∣gins wax as a walnut, boile all these together, until they be so stife, that when it is cold it wil make rolls. Item. Take two handfuls of Angelica and stampe it, put thereto three pots of Beere, take three or foure spoonfuls of sheeps dung, of the newest, then stirre it well together, and then straine it, and put thereto halfe a pinte of Muskadine, or Malmsey, and so give to drink: you know the use of it. A medicine for the tooth ach. Take a live Mowle, and put him in a brasse pot, and there let him die, then cut him asunder and take out the guts, and dry the blood with a cloth, then cut him in quarters, and hang him on a thred drying by the fires side; when ye would use it, lay the fleshy side of it with bladders of Saffron, with a cloth to your sore. Take the heartes of six Mowles, put them upon a new tile-stone made red hot, then lay these hearts upon this stone, until they be burnt to coales, then beat them into powder; you know the use of it. For a child that hath a Cough. Take six spoonfuls of Malmsey, one spoonful of Capons grease, a pennyworth of Saffron, beat it into powder; put all these together and warme it, then annoint the stomack, and he soals of the feete, dip a little clout when ye lay it to the sto∣mack
it will heale it in three times laying. An excellent medicine or oyntment for any bruise, straine or pains in the joynts. Take two handfuls of Rosemary, as much of Isope, halfe as much of the herb you call adders tongue, halfe a handfull of Egri∣monie, stirre them together, then take a pound of sweete Hogs grease or barrows grease clarified, halfe a pound of rosen finely beaten and searced; then boile the herbs in the Hogs grease, and rosen, untill they bee a perfect oyntment, then straine it. For the falling sicknesse. Take the jaw bone of a man or a woman, and beat it into a fine powder, and if a woman have the falling sicknesse, then use the jaw bone of the man; and if it be a man, then use the jaw bone of a woman, so much of the powder as will cover a six pence, put it into wine or any other liquid thing which you shall like of, and drink it; you may use it as often as you will, but especially at spring and fall. For the dropsie. Drink your own water morning and evening. To purge the head and helpe concoction in the stomack. John Ferne∣lius his Pills. Take of the best allom six drammes, mastick and red Rose leaves of each two drammes, powder them all, and with a sufficient quantitie of Syrup of Roses, or Syrup of Wormwood, so much as wil make the powder into paste, then make it into pills, and take of them three or foure before supper an houre.
To cure a galled horse. Take of the leaves of the herb Arsmart, and rub the galled place with it, then throw it away, and as the leaves of the Ar∣smart rotteth, the sore will heal. Doctor Rowlands water for all manner of sores of the eyes whatsoever. Take Rose water, Celendine water, Rue water of each six ounces, Stibium one ounce small powdered, put it into a glasse, and let it stand, and when you wil use it, take the clear water, and drop it into the eye. A plaister to strengthen ones stomack. Take juice of Rue with honey of squills, which is the sea onion, a spoonful at a time, it is good for the falling sick∣nesse, or the vertigio in the head; the honey of squills it self is good for any winds or rheumes or cold flegms. For the falling sicknesse. Honey of squills, and a little powder of Pionie roote, that beareth the seed, is good for the falling sicknesse or winde; and the powder of the wood of Misselto with honey of Squills is also good. For the trembling of the heart. The juice of a Lemmon with a little Treacle or Mithridate, with a little Alchermes as big as a pins head. Pills for the running of the reins. Take of Olibanum, Myrrhe, Mace of each two drammes, Saffron, Camphire, of each halfe a dramme, make it into
a small powder, then take half a sheet of paper, annoint it with Tur∣pentine, and dry it by the fire, until you can make it all into a pow∣der; then take these two powders, and mingle them with so much washed Turpentine as will serve, and beat it in a Mortar well to a paste, which keep; of this make pills as big as a pease, and take thereof three or four at night. To make the face fair. Take the flowers of Rosemary, and boil them in White wine, then wash your face therewith, and drink of that water, so shall you make your face fair, and your breath sweet. To cure Poisoning. Take new milk, and drink as much as you can, and that will help. For the Wormes. Take Garlick, and make a Plaister between two cloths, and lay it a∣bove and beneath the navel, and so let it lye all night, and it is a pre∣sent cure for a child; or Alloes is also good. For a Pin or Web in the Eye. Take the tops of red Hemlock that groweth by the wall, and pound it, mix it with bay salt, and lay it to the contrary arm-wrist to the eye; if one wrist will not do it, lay it to both, and it will cure it. For a Canker. Take white Coperas, and Allom, first wash them in fair wa∣ter, then burn them, and beat them to powder; take as much of the one as of the other, and mix it with honey, and lay it upon the Canker.
For an old or green Wound. Mix a pint of oyle, with half a pound of red lead beaten, and finely searsed, which powder as you shake it into the Oyle, stir it to keep it from setling; and when it turneth tawny by boiling, then its almost ready; if it be stiff when it dropt into the water, its at best; to make the Searcloth put a cloth between two sticks, and dip it in the oyle as it boileth, and let it cool, and lay upon the sore. For the Yellow Jaundies. Take worms, wash off the earth, and then dry them upon a tile, then beat them into a powder, mix it with Turmerick and Saffron, of each a little quantity, and put them into two or three spoonfuls of drink, which drink morning and evening: it wil add something to the speedy recovery, if you slit a warm pigeon, and lay it to the soals of the feet. A most Soveraign Water, which hath all the ver∣tues of Venice Treacle or Mithridate, and far surpasseth them. Take a Composition made by the best Apothecaries called, Antidotus magnu Mathioli, take of it two ounces, and put it into the best Spirit of Wine, and let it stand a whole week, and stir it often, and it will be an Amber colour; then poure off the clear, and put unto it the equal weight of Sirrup of the rind of Pomecitron, and keep it close. This Water is most excellent against all poisons, and helpeth when all other Remedies fail; if you take three or four or more spoonfuls, as occasion re∣quireth, and sweat upon it; for it pierceth quickly through the whole body, and draweth the poison from the heart; it is good in the Plague time; and if you take a spoonful of it, it preserveth you from all▪ poison or infectious air; it strengthneth the heart, brains, stomack and all the inward parts wonderfully; and it is the best water to drive any venom from the heart in the Plague time or in infectious airs; take a linnen cloth and dip it into it, and smell unto it, and take some of the Antidote, and as much of the Water, and put some Cloves, Benjamin, Amber-greece and a little Musk unto it until it be thick like a paste, and smell unto it. And you may be sure, that using the Water in the morning, and smelling often unto it, no
Plague shall hurt, nor infect you, as hath been proved by experience upon those that have been stung with Snakes, and almost past all cure and sense, and understanding, yet have been by this recovered. Against the Inflamation of the Cods, or Falls, or Bruises. Take White-wine-Vineger and Rose water, of each a like, mingle it, and apply it with a cloth, and lay upon it a plaister, called, Dia∣palma; and if need be, do it again, for it is a certain Remedy. For sore Eyes. Take a pint of White-wine, and put into it four ounces of Ca∣lamint stone, being heat six or seven times one after the other, and then beat the stone into powder, and keep it in the water. The use is thus: Take a little in a spoon, and before you put it out of the glasse into the spoon, shake the glasse that the stone may arise, and make the Water thick, and then put it into the spoon; and being there, put your eye as neer as you can unto it, and shake your eye lid up and down that it may wash into your eye; and this is a perfect cure. Another. Take of Tutia preparata one ounce, Scuttlebone a quarter of an ounce, a pint of White-rose-water, mix these together, and drop some of the water into the eyes morning and evening, and with all wash the pit of the neck with fair water. To stay a loosenesse. Take an ounce of Scuttlebone, and boile it in a pint of milk, and drink it, it is a present Remedy. For the Tooth ache. Take the juice of green Burrage, and poure it into the eare of that side the pain is, and lye on the other side, that it may con∣tinue in the ear some time, and it will give present eae.
For a Tooth that is rotten and aketh: Take an ordinary earth worm, and dry it into a powder, take of that powder, and put it into the Tooth when you go to bed, and put wax upon the Tooth to keep it in, and by morning the corrupt part of the tooth will waste away, and the good will remain. For the Stone. Distil the Herb Rue in May, and drink every morning ten spoon∣fuls of the water for fifteen dayes together; if you sweeten it with a little Sugar-candy, it will be the more pleasant, it is a perfect Re∣medy. For the Falling sicknesse. Take Frogs and Flea them, then dry them in a tin pan and beat them being dryed into a powder, drink of this powder for a year to∣gether in all the drink you drink. For the wind in the Stomack. By Mr. Jo. Digby. Take a piece of Cork, and burn it, and then beat it into a powder, take that powder, and put it into a pretty quantity of beer or wine, and then drink it, and it will give present ease. An approved Medicine for a Stitch. Take a handful of Mallow leaves, and an handful of Camomile, on ounce of Anniseeds, put them into a pottle of running water, boil them until the water be half wasted, then take the Water clean from the herbs, and put the water into a bladder, and apply it unto the place pained as hot as it can be suffered, and when it is cold, pour it out of the bladder into a Posnet, and make it hot, and use it as before; and in this manner apply it as often as you please. To take away a Corn. Take a plaister of Burgany Pitch, the Corn being pared, put the plaister unto it, either upon the toe or sole of the foot, if any Corne be there.
Another for the same paine, if it comes by a Plu∣risie. Take a toast of Ry-bread, or of Wheat and Rye; and when it is toasted hot put it into Treakle, and set it over a chafing-dish with coals and make it hot, and apply it to the place, grieved as hot as it may be suffered. To make Viper-Wine. Take eight Gallons of Sack which is the best Wine, and to that quantity put in thirty, or two and thirty Vipers; but prepare them first in this manner. Put them into bran for some four dayes, which will make them scowre the gravel and eathy part from them, then stop your Vessel or glasse you put them in very close until six months be past, in which time the flesh of the Vipers and vertue of them will be infused into the wine, although the skins will seem full, after which time you may take them out if you please, and drink of the wine when you please best to drink it. An excellent Purge. Take of Antimony, Scammony, Cream of Tartar all prepared. For men, 10▪ grains, 12 grains, 7 grains. For women, 8 grains, 10 grains, 6 grains. Young men, 6 graines, 8 graines, 5 grains. Children 6 years old, 3 grains, 6 graines, 4 grains. Children 1 year old, 1 graine, 4 graines, 3 grains. To bind the humors, heal the defects in the rains, and expel wind. Take a small Wine glasse of Muscadine, put therein a spoonful of Mastick in powder, drink so much in the morning fasting, and like∣wise in the evening, fasting two hours after it.
A gentle Purge to purge the stomack of viscous hu∣mors: Take a pint of White-wine, put it in a close earthen pipkin, put thereto an ounce of Rubarb finely sliced, let it stand on the embers simbring away till a third part be consumed, then take forth the Ru∣barb, and crush forth all the juice between two plates, and put in∣to the liquor half a quarterne of Currants, letting it stand over the fire til they be plump, then take it off; being cooled, take two or three spoonfuls in the morning, and if you please in the evening, fast∣ing only two hours after it, use it as often as you please. To cure any sore, (if the bone be not defective,) swelling or paine. Take of Craw-fishes eyes, called Crabs eyes, two ounces finely beaten, put it into a pint of the strongest White-wine-Vinegar, being in a long, round, and narrow necked glasse, unstopped untill the powder be qualified and setled, then stop it, letting it stand until it be clear, and take of it three spoonfuls morning, noon and evening, fasting after some two hours; to the wound keep a moist cloth dip∣ped in Plantane water: for swellings or pains, to bathe it with Wine-vineger is good. For the Stone, or to make one make Water. Take five living hive Bees, bruise them in a spoonful of Beer, and then put the Beer from them; drink the spoonful of Beer, and it will give present ease. For a Consumption. Take water and Oat-meal, and put into it five Cloves of a head of Garlick finely minced, and put into it a handful of Currants fine picked and washed, and boile them together to a Broth, and eat it morning and evening.
For the Gout. Take any Brine that is very salt, boil it, and when it is very hot, put it into a kettle, or something that will continue the heat, then put some sticks over the Brine, upon which the diseased part may lye over the brine, as over a Bath, and cover the legs so lying with some cloathes, that the Bath may work the better upon the part affect∣ed: and after an hour or two you may leave the Bath, but keep the part warm. Adde to this a drink made of Ale of indifferent strength, in which you must put when the Ale is first barrelled up, this that followeth, Bake some red Sage in a Pye, and when it is well baked, pound it all together; then put it in a bag, and hang it in the Ale; until the Ale be ready to drink, then drink it as oft as you please. For the Dead Palsie. Take Aquavitae, and boil in it some quantity of red Sage, and when it is hot and smoaking, let the place affected, some sticks be∣ing put over the liquor, lye over it, as over a Bath, and cover it that all the vapor of the Bath may be kept in the better to work upon the diseased part. Its a kind Medicine. For the Tooth ache. Take a naile of iron or a bodkin, and heat it red hot in the fire, and being so hot, lay the nail or bodkin end wayes, North and South, then take a Load-stone and draw it over the iron several times, and when your tooth is pained, stroke your gums with that iron naile or bodkin being cold, and it is a present remedy to take away the pain. This nail or bodkin you may carry about with you, and use at any time when you have pain. For the Stone. Take of the stone that is in a fishes head, called Amanete, beat it in∣to a powder, and take as much of it as wil cover a groat, or therabouts, and put it into some posset drink, made of what you like best, only a spoonful, and after you have taken that spoonful, then to wash it down, take two or three spoonfuls more of that posset, or any other.
To stanch bleeding. Take the root of a nettle, and hold it in your mouth, and it will stay bleeding: Or pound the leaves of nettles, and lay them in their juice in the wound, and it will also stay the bleeding. For the Stone: Take a quart of Dil, White or Rhenish-wine, and put unto it an ounce and a half of Salt-peter, and of roots of Parsley two, and two of Fennel, the pith being taken out, and so let them stand six houres; then morning and evening take half a pint of it, and drink it, and it is a present cure or ease for the stone. To cure the grating of the Stone in the Ʋ∣reters, or the Yard. Take a pint of milk from the Cow, put into it a good quan∣tity of Sallet Oyle and Sugar, and stir them together, and as you drink it, stir it, that the Oyle may be truly mixed with the Milk, that it may more assuredly carry the Oyle into the Ureters. This will most certainly heal it, although it be extremely galled by the motion of the Stone or Gravel; drink a pint, or half a pint mor∣ning and evening. For an Ague. Take a quart of strong Ale, put into it a penny worth of long pepper, a penny worth of Ginger sliced: boile these together, untill it come a to pint; then powre out the Ale, and sweeten it with Sugar to your likeing, and being sweetned, put into it a halfe penny worth of Mustard; stir it well, and drink a pint, or half a pint of it, an hour or half an hour before your Fit comes, and use some moderate Exercise after it, and after it keep your selfe warme, and it is an assured Cure for most that shall take it.
A Medicine for the sorenesse of any Leg. By Mrs Minne. Take a quart of good ale, and put in it two spoonfuls of English honey, and as much turpentine, and seethe them well together till it be thick; then wet lint in it, and lay it to the fore: then lay this Plaister following upon it. The Plaister for the same. Take a quarter of a pound of sheeps suet and shred it fine with some Bay leaves, melt it and strain it; put to it an ounce of En∣glish wax, as much turpentine, a quarter of an ounce of rosin, as much English honey, seethe them well together till they be well melted, and strain it; then set it over the fire, and put to it a quar∣ter of an ounce of May butter, and four spoonfuls of sallet oyl, and stir it well together til it be thick. A very good Salve for a green wound. By Mrs. Jones. Take a-pint of oyl Olive and set it to the fire in a pan, then put to it half a pound of red lead, and stir it continually until such time as it looketh something blackish; then drop a little upon the side of a sawcer, and if it be stiffe make it up in roles. A Plaister to heal all manner of biles, sores, or swelling of Legs. Take a pound of oyl Olive (the older the better,) half a pound of wax and somewhat more (as it cometh: from the cake) then take half a pound of white Lead in fine powder; boile all these together in a brass pan til it wax black; then make it up as before. For the same. Take oatmeal and cows milk and make grewel, and put therein the juice of sengreen and sheeps tallow, and let them boil together till they be thick, then make a plaister and lay it about the sore.
Another. Take sheeps tallow one pound, boile it in a pan until it be well melted, then set it down and put thereto two pound of oatmeale and stir it wel together; and when you have need to use it, do it on a linnen cloth, and chafing the swelled place at the fire, lay it up∣on it, and it shall certainly heal it by Gods blessing. An Oyntment to heale Scabs, Blisters and Pushes upon the Legs. Take an handfull of water-cresses, and two pound of sheeps suet that cometh off the kidney, and cut them together as small a pie∣meat, and put them together in a pan, and seethe them a good space till the suet be melted, and stir them well about together for hanging to the pan, and then take them off, and strain them into a fair bason, and then put it up into an earthen pot. When need re∣quires, take part out of it and put into a sawcer, and warm it upon the fire, and with a feather annoint the places where the sores be, and then wrap about it a linnen cloth, and thus use it once every day till it be whole. For the Plague or Pestilence. Take an onion or two, and cut out the core, and fill it with good treacle, and roast it in brown paper, and when it is roasted strain it in ale or beer, and drink it warm; and if you feel any rising, lay that which is strained to the sore (hot) and so lie down to sweat. A Medicine for the plague. Mrs. Limsey. Take a plaister of Galbanum and lay it to the kernell that cometh of the Plague, and it will hold him still, that it go not in again, if it be in the lask, armhole or neck: If it be laid to betimes, it is most precious. Probatum est. Another. If you feel any pricking, rising, or sore of Plague under the ears, arms, in the lask, or in any other part, take a chicken, pluck the vent
bare, and hold the vent of the chicken to the rising or sore til the chic∣ken die, then take another chicken and hold it to the sore in like manner til it be dead, & so one after another til one remain alive on the sore, and thereby ye shal perceive that the sore is drawn out of the patient by reason of the said chickens; and if it be for a man, take a hendrel, and for a woman take a cockrel, and then take the dead chickens, and put in the earth for the infection of any man or person. To gather and ripen a sore or bruise. Take a Lily root and seethe it in fair water, then strain away the water, and mix it with a little Guilts grease and lay it to the sore. Idem. Take linseed, oatmeal, and the yolk of an egge, hony, and boile all these together in cow milk til it be fully thick, and lay it to the sore. An ointment to break a sore. Take a handful of gentian and stampe it, and strain it, and put to it half a pint of May butter, and as much virgins wax as a walnut, and so boil them on the fire; and put to as much wheat meal as a walnut; stir them all together, and when it boiles take it off and strain it; stir it til it be cold, and put it up in a vessel. A salve to heal the sore. Take a quantity of sheeps suet, and as much of deers suet, and a quarter of as much virgins wax, three spoonfuls of wool oyl, and as much rosen as a walnut, boil them together upon the fire, straine it and stir it til it be cold, and put it up into boxes. To heal a cut or wound. Take unset Leeks and stamp them wel, then mingle them with hony, and lay it to your wound. Idem. Take rosen, wax and turpentine, of each an ounce, a quarter of an ounce of hony, a little sheeps tallow, and a little tarre.
Idem. Take a handful of Sage, as much of Wood-binds, as much of Ce∣lendine, and seeth them together in a gallon of running water, unto a pottle, and then strain them; and then seeth the water again, and put thereto a pint of honey, and skim it clean; and then put thereto a handful of beaten Allom, a penny worth of beaten grains; and then suffer them to play a while on the fire, and afterward keep the water in a glasse, and it will preserve much longer; and wash the wound every day at morning, noon and night, (if you will) with the Water; and if the wound be corrupt, shake the glasse that the grounds may make it stronger, And if it be a fresh wound, take the clear water; at every washing you must cover the wound with a Plaister of Vir∣gins wax, and over the wax lay a linnen cloth, or else a bladder. Probatum est. Tents for Wounds. Take white Roses, Campion, Celendine, Plantane, Smallage, whites of egs mixt with juice of the Herbs, and labor them in; and so let it stand all night; and the next day put to it a good quantity of ho∣ney, and burnt Allom and Coperas, of each a little. To keep a wound clean. Take Wood-binds, Celendine, Sage, of each a like, seeth them in a quart of water with Allom; boil them to a pint, strain them, and put a little honey to them, and give it a walm on the fire again. A Syrrup for wounded folks. Take Tormentil, Egino and Dictamnum; in Summer the leaves, in Winter the roots, and a little red Mints; seeth them in a little Beer or Ale together. For a cut either of Sinnew or Vein. Take Turpentine, and beat it in fair water til it be white, then put away the water, and take the yolk of an egg and beat them together; so make a Plaister and lay it to the sore.
To make a green Salve. By Wilsons Wife. Take Rosemary, Time, Lavender, Dill, Bawme, Brooklime, Yar∣row, Lovage, Smallage, Vervain, Camomile, Orpine, Plantane, Night∣yard, Herb Robert, Lingua Serpentina, otherwise called Adders∣tongue, Polipody, otherwise called Fern that groweth on an old oak, Wood-binds, otherwise called Hony-suckles, Daisies, Comfrey, of each a handful. All these Herbs must be taken and beaten smal, and put in a quart of Verjuice, or more if need be; straine these together, and take the juice thereof; then take two pound of new wax, a pound of Colofony, a pint of Oyle Olive, a pound of pitch, a pound of May butter, and seeth all these together till they be molten; and it must be well stirred upon the fire for run∣ning over, till it be thick and molten all. Then take a gallon of running water, and put the water in a clean vessel; and after take a yard of linnen cloth called minster of the strongest for a strainer, and two persons to hold the strainer over the water, and another with a ladle to take the Salve, with the other things together sodden, and strain all into the Water, then let it be cld, then take i up, and make thereof round balls as ye think best, then take the oyl or May Butter, and chafe your hands withall, and work the balls of wax in rolls. For to make the Oyntment for the same. First, Take the juice of all those Herbs above written for the Salve, Herbs and all, and shred them as Herbs to the pot, and put them all in a pan, and take a gallon of oyl Olive, and two pound of May but∣ter, and half a pound of new Wax, and put all these together in the pan with the Herbs, and let them stand all together nine dayes, and stir them once every day; then seeth it on the fire till the wax and the Butter be molten together, then strain it into a clean vessel, and leave nothing in the strainer: this is sufficient for the Oyntment. If ye cannot have all these herbs, take as many as may be gotten. God help in every cure. Amen. This must be made between May and Bartholomew Tide. Put your Oyntment in any earthen pot that hath had oile or fresh grease in before. How you shall use a Fraction, otherwise called a broken bone. If the leg or arm be broken above the knee or the elbow, then take running water, as hot as you can suffer it, so that it seeth not; and if it be over hot, then take a quantity of water that is cold, and put there∣to, so that the Patient may suffer it, then take a clean linnen cloth, and
put it into the hot water, and then bathe the broken place with the cloth and the hot water together, till the flesh be hot under your hands, and change the colour into red; then take a cleane linnen cloth and dry the place that is hurt; then take heed how you set the bone right. You must lay him right upon his back in his bed where he shall rest; if the leg be broken beneath the knee, then let a man take the foot and the heel in his hand, and strain them right out, so that the knee and the half of his leg, the ankle and the two great toes, and both his heels be right set, every joint with the other, then it must needs be sure set. Then must you make a Plaister of your Salve, and lay it upon the place that is hurt, as close as you can; then you must take a lin∣nen Roller of half a quarter broad, and Roll the place that is hurt three or four times about with the Roller, as close as you can; and then set on the Splints, as hereafter in the next leaf by the signs fol∣lowing: and these suffice both for legs and armes. For a mans Ribs that be broken. You must bathe him in warm water, as is aforewritten; then set him upon a stool upright, and lay one of these Plaisters upon the sore place, then roll him hard with a Roll of a quarter of a yard broad, of good stiff cloth, and so let it lye eight or nine dayes ere you open it, then dresse it again in like manner (except the water) until he be whole; but he must beware for straining of himself. If the Channel bone be broken, bath it with water, and lay on a Plaister, and set on a splint that is made therefore, and roll it hard a crosse, and truss up his arm with a Napkin to his brest, and every eight or nine dayes renew the Paister till it be whole; also take heed that ye eat neither milk nor butter for none of these same Fracti∣ons. Also these Fractions that be broken, in what place soever they be, let no Oyntment come neer the place that is broken, for the Oynt∣ment will let the knitting: spare no Oyntment in other places near unto it at all times when you opn it; for it will comfort the sinews and vains, and ease the Patient of pain and unquietnesse. And for to set the legs sure, you must take five splints, an inch broad, and an inch and a quarter and half quarter long; and line your splints with white cotton for ease of the leg, then lay on each side of the leg two plins, and one splint under the lg; and then make three bos of a Bow-string, and also thee pipes of an Elder stick,
every pipe being three inches long; and when the first bout is on the legge, then put the bouts double through the pipe, then take a little round stick made fit for the same; and when it is through the pipe, then whirle it as strait as the leg may en∣dure it with the stick; and the other two bouts to be used in like manner, which is thus done to keep the splints fast to the legges, and every pipe to be  with the stick. The Figure and Proportion of the three Elder Pipes into which the little round stick is to be put. This is the Figure and Compasse of a splint to be made for the Brandle-Bone in length and breadth.
A Drink to knit these Fractions. First, Take Comfrey, the leaves in Summer, the roots in winter, and stamp them, and strain them with a pint of Ale, and let him drink a draught blood warm next his heart nine mornings; for lack of Comfrey take Daisies in like manner. For all manner of aches that come of colds, or bruises that fall down into any place by means of an Ague. Take the Oyntment, and annoint the place that is diseased five or six dayes, then bathe him in warm water, and lay a Plaister upon it; and let it ly on six daies; if need be, take it off, and make a new Plaister. Do the like to all sinews sprung or wrinched. A ready Remedy for any wound or cut, o∣therwise called Wound-water. Take a handful of Sage, as much of Wood-binds, as much of Ce∣lendine, and seeth them together i a gallon of running water to a pottle, and then strain them, and then seeth the water again, and put thereto a pint of honey, and skim it clean, and then put to it a handful of beaten Allome, and a penny worth of beaten graines, and then suffer them to play a while on the fire; and af∣ter put the water in a glasse, and it will preserve much longer; and wash the wound every day at morning, noon and night (if you will) with the water; and if the wound be corrupt, shake the glasse that the grounds may make it the more stronger; and if it be a fresh wound, take the clear water: at every washing you must cover the wound with a Plaister of Wax, and over the wax lay a linnen cloth, or else a bladder. Probatum est. To stanch a Wound that bleeds excessively. Take a piece of Martlemas bief, or of salt bief, as much as will cover the wound, and broie it on the fire upon a Gridiron,
and lay it in the wound as hot as the Patient may suffer it. And for lack of bief, take red nettle tops bruised in the hands, with a little gray salt, or else a piece of salt Bacon, and lay it to the wound in like case; which Bacon is a good healer. For pricking of a Thorn or Nail. Take Wheat-flower and Red-wine or Claret-wine and Honey, and make thereof a Plaister, and it will keep the sore from festring, and make it whole in a short time. For a Felon. Take Rue and bruise it, and put to it the yolk of an egg, and two or three cornes of gray salt, and a little Honey and Wheat-flower, and make a Plaister of it, and lay it to the sore, and it will make it whole. To make a Plaister for a man or woman that hath a weak stomack, and cannot digest. Take Mints green in the time of the yeer; and for lack of green, take dry Mints, and Wormwood in like manner a good handful, or two handfuls of each, and White-bread crumbs, and boil them well with Malmesey upon the fire, so that they burn not; and then make two linnen bags, and fill each of them with these Herbs when they be sodden, and sow up the bags, and wring the bags as dry as you can, and then lay one of them to the stomack, as hot as you may endure it. A Medicine for a Scald head. Take running water, and flower of Rye or Wheat, and scrape chalk and rosen, and a little honey, and boil them together upon the fire till it be very thick, and strike it upon a strong linnen cloth, as you do a Plaister, and clip the hair as close as you can, and then lay the Plaister on it twenty four hours, and let it be pulled off as shortly as you can, and then clip the hair down againe, and lay on more where you see most need; and when you take off the Plaister, then annoint it over with honey afterward, and cover it till it be whole, and it shall be whole within three plaisters.
To distil Waters truly, taken out of Mrs. Dawsons Book. Primroses Primroses must be distilled leaves and flowers. Fennel. Fennel must be distilled both herb and root. Hysop. Hysop must be distilled Herbs and Flowers. Camomile. Camomile must be distilled Herb and flowers. Walwort. Walwort the Herb and the Root, and stamp them. Strawberries. Strawberries the fruit stamped with Vineger. Mulberries. Mulberries, stamp the fruit, and mix with it Vineger, and so still them. Wormwood: Wormwood must be gathered in May, then stamp it, and lay it in strong Vineger to steep, and so still it. Celendine. Celendine must bee distilled both herbs, flowers and roots.
Fumetory. Fumetory must be distilled Herbs and Flowers. To distil Damask Water. Take a peck of Rose leaves▪ and three handful of dry Lavender, two handful of Marjoram, one penny worth of Ireos, i. e. Oris pow∣der, and Damask powder two ounces, one penny worth of Cloves; put all these things together into two pottle of Conduit water, and let it stand in steep seven dayes, and then still them. A Water to take out the Sawce or Flegme out of the face of a Man or Woman. Take a pint of Rose water, and put into it an ounce of good brim∣stone, and let them stand so together for the space of six weeks, incor∣porating them in a glass; and stir them every day, and let them stand in the Sun the six weeks daily; then take a feather or a faire linnen cloth, and so wash it by the space of fourteen dayes; and it shal take it away outwardly; but the Patient all these fourteen dayes must drink Whey mixt with Water of Fumetory, and that will take away the root and cause inwardly. To make a Water called Maids-milk, good for the Canker and saucy Flegm. Take a certain weight of powder of Licorice, and boil it in good Vineger, then take it and still it in a Stillatory, and keep it in a ves∣sel of glasse; then take as much of Sandiver and do in the same man∣ner, but seeth this in fair clear water, and stil it as you did the other; but you must not still both Waters in one Stillatory, for if you do, the last will be best. And when these Waters be made, put each Water by it self, and when you list to occupy it, put three drops of the one to three drops of the other, and if it be as it were fair curds of milk then it is good. This Water is good to make the skin neshe, and the vi∣sage fair, it is good for all risings in a mans Yard, for the Canker and sawcy flegme.
To make a red water that is precious for all manner of sores. Take tanwesse a gallon, of the first wort a quart, of lye made with wood ashes a quart, vineger a quart; mix all these together, then take a quarter of Roch allom, and a quarter of tops of madder, and mingle them well together, then set them on the fire, and stirre them boiling for a very small space, then put it into an earthen pot and cover it till you need; it is good for all manner of sores both new and old. A water for divers sores. Take the urine of male children, or else white wine vineger that is very sowr, for that is best, and put into the vineger wood ashes, and unquenched lime, and seeth them together, until the third part or more be sodden in, then let it coole and stand still till it be clear, then take sal Armoniack, sal Gemme, sal Nitre, and allom plumme of each a like much, make them in fine powder, and cast them into the decoction and stop it will. This water killeth any canker, it destroyeth wenns, webs in the eye, dead flesh and such like. An Intret that will heale any wound that is green; the intret must be powred into the wound blood warme. Try it with a Cocks head. Take a good handful of Betony vervain and pimpernel of each a like much, beat them in a mortar small, and seeth them in a gallon of white wine to a pottle, and then strain it through a strai∣ner, and cast away the herbs and put the liquor again into the pot so for to boile, and cast a pound of clean rosen or of clean cood resolved in a little of the same liquor and cast thereto, and let them seeth together, then take an ounce of virgins wax, and resolve it in womans milk that suckleth a manchild, and cast thereto, afterward put thereto an ounce of mastick, and an ounce of Frankinsence, and let them boil together till it be wel melted, then take it from
the fire, and put thereto half a pound of Turpentine, and stirre it wel til it be cold, then take up that that fleeteth above, and annoint thy hands with oyle Olive or with fresh grease, and bath it well against the fire as thou wouldest do wax til it be wel mingled, and then keep it, for it is precious. Ointments to cleanse wounds, and heale and recover the flesh. Egrimony beaten and mixed with old Bores grease or oyle, and laid upon the sore, purgeth it in an instant; and cleanseth the flesh. Plantane, Weybred, Hysop, Southernwood, Woodbinds, and Rue. Wax, Rosen, Hony, Allom, white Frankinsence, Verdegreece and Guilts grease. Ad vermes excutiendos de quocunque ulco vel vulnere. Accipe succum lanceolatae, pentorobon, & Egrimoniae, & coque cum melle tamdiu ut spissetur, adde pulverem viti albi, & be∣n comistae; tolle ab igne ut infrigidetur, & licinium ibi intinctum, ulco ubi vermis est intromittatur, & post horam exient vermes & in licinio invenies, tunc locus lavetur cum urina pueri virginiis & cum aceto, & extergatur. Ad probandum utrum caro in ulcere sit mortua vel non. Fac Unguentum de melle sebo arietino & succo plantaginis, & pone super ulcum, & invenies carnem mortuam nigram, & bonam carnem pulchram.
For a bruise or straine. Take the grounds of ale or beere, and wheat branne, and chick∣weed, and lay it to the grief three times a day upon a red cloth of a reasonable thicknesse. To make conserve of rhadish roots. Take the roots and scrape them clean in pieces as long as a fingar, and lay them in water two daies, and change the water two times in a day, at noone and at night; and for ten pounds of roots, take six pound of sugar, and a pint of Rosewater, and a pint of clear water, and boil them together halfe an hour, then put in the roots and let them boile together two hours. Conserve of Cherries. Take for ten pound of Cherries, six pound of sugar; and a pint of Rose water, and a pint of common water, and then take your sugar, your Rose water, and your common water, and set them over the fire, and stirre them well till they melt, and then put in your cherries, and let it boile an houre, and then put it up. Orange parings. Take the parings of Oranges, and lay them in water three daies, and three nights, and change the water every day once, and then take for four pounds of parings, three pounds of sugar, and a pint of common water, and seeth it together an houre, and then take it from the fire, and let it coole half an houre, and then put in the Orange parings, and let them boile together three houres softly, and then &c. To make marmalade. Take quinces and pare them; and pick out the cores and seeth them very tender in water, and strain them through canvas of eight pence the elle, and let them stand in the vessel wherein they be strained, then take of the water that they are sodden in, and take the white of
two eggs, beat them, and put them into the same water, then take sugar and put thereto, and let them seeth together halfe a walme, then strain it through a blanket linnen, then put the syrup and the Quinces together, and boil them till they be very thick, and stirre it well for burning, and put it into a box. For two pound of quin∣ces one pound of sugar. For deafenesse. Take an ounce of oyle of wormwood, and put it in an earthen porrenger, and put to it the green blades of onions shred small, so many as that oyle will cover, set it on the embers, and let it sim∣ber a while, then take it off, and strain it, and put it up in a glasse, and drop a drop or two into the ear, and keep it warm stopped with little wool. For any Ʋlcer. Take sheeps dung, and shred it smal, and sheeps suet, and shred it smal, and boil them in plantane water, then strain them and put it up in a pot, and make pledgits, and lay to the sore. A medicine to heale all Aches, except the Gout; and it will ease the paine thereof, coming of any cold. Mrs. Dinne of Heydon. Take Rosemary flowers, Thime, Lavender, Dill, Baume, Brooklime, Yarrow, Lovage, Smallage, Vervain, Plantane, Nightshade, heb Robert, Lingua Srpentina, Pollipody of the Oak, Woodbinds, Daisies and Comfrey, of every one of the said herbs two handfuls. All these herbs must be cut smal, and put into a pottle of ver∣juice, and so let the herbs steep in it all night, and the next mor∣ning put them into a pan and set them on the fire, then take fine wax one pound, one pound of Collifony, a pint of Oyle O∣live, a pound of Pitch, and a pound of May butter; and so seethe all these things together, until they bee well melted,
and take heede you stirre it well for running over; then take a gallon of fair water in a clean vessel, and so straine it over the wa∣ter, and there let it remain until it be cold, then take May butter, and oyle olive, and make it up in rolls. Probatum est. A Medicine for the Rheume to drink dayly, or when you will. Take a handful of Rosemary, a handful of sage, and a handful of Betony, bind them together with a thred; and when your Ale or bear hath wrought, and is ready to be clayed or bunged up, then put in the herbs with a nutmeg finely beaten in powder; if your vessel contain above six gallons, then put in two nutmegs, and keepe it close stopped till you drink it, this is most excellent by ex∣perience against the Rheume. The receipt of the green oyntment; good for Stitches and Aches. Take Rue, Sage, Rosemary and Bay leaves, of each halfe a pound, of Camomile and Dill, Lavender, pick of each two hand∣fuls, chop all these smal, and beat them in a mortar so small as you can, and put to them three pints and more of good sallet oyle, and stirre them together, and put them into an earthen panne co∣vered, and let it stand nine dayes, then put them into a broad pan, and put thereto three pounds of Deer suet, or else so much of Sheeps suet that hath been sweetly tried; but you must put in the suet first with the herbs, then let them boil together upon a soft fire, al∣waies stirring them with a hasel stick, until you feel the herbs pearch∣ing, which wil ask three hours or thereabouts; then take them off and straine them into some other pan, and so save them in pots or boxes while you have occasion to use them: this is to be made in May or June for all the year. For a Stitch. Take the leaves of he Hull for the man, and for the Woman the leaves of the shee Hull, and air them very dry, and beat them to pow∣der, and put thereof in your broth or drink, that is very good to brak the Stitch be it never so great.
To make a Pompillion which is good for all manner of Aches. Take a gallon of popler buds before the leaves be fully grown, beat them in a mortar, and put thereto four pounds of May butter; beat them all together and let them stand a rarifying nine dayes, then boile it softly and strain it through a strong lin∣nen cloth put into an earthen pot, and preserve and annoint the place where the ach is. The Black Salve. Take of wool oyle one pint, of white lead finely beaten and searced one pound, of Wax halfe a pound being cut in sma pieces, then set the wax and oyle upon the fire, until the wax be melted, then put thereto the lead, stirring it alwaies upon a soft fire, having regard lest you spill thereof in the fire, for if you do you lose all, for it will not leave burning till all in the pan be consumed: and when it hath boiled til it be changed as black as pitch, then take it off and coole it in the aire, stirring it still til it be so stiffe you can stir it no longer, then you may take it out and make cakes therof, and keep it for your use. This salve is good for the Ach in the back, or for any other place of the body, for the Gout and swelling in the leggs, if you take a linnen cloth and dip it in, being melted and made hot, and so apply it to the place, keeping it thereto so long as it will abide on; then you must take anew and use it in the same wise and so apply it, until you find ease; it is also very good for bruises and sores. For the Canker, never so great. Take a good handful of Woodbind leaves, the flowers, pick them but wash them not, and a handful of red Sage of vertue un∣washt, stamp them both together in a mortar, straine out the juice as hard as you can, put it into a little pipkin, and put thereto as much allom as a good hasel nut, and a quantity of English honey, boile these all together and stirre it stil, and as it doth rise, scum off the white scum stil with a feather; and when it is well boiled▪ take
it off, stirring it till it be cold, and when you will occupie thereof, take a little and warme it in a sawcer and annoint the place with your finger, eating nothing in an hour after, and if the Canker be very much eaten, then use to annoint it also before you goe to bed, not drinking after it. For the stinging of a venemous beast, or biting of a mad dogge. Take five or six dragon leaves, or some of the roote, stampe therewith a little bay salt, and lay them on a cloth to the place that is hurt. For the black Jaundies. Take for one man three penny worth of liquorice, two penny worth of cummin, three penny worth of red fennel roots with the crops, a good handful of white endive, a pottle of good Ale; take the liquorice and the Cummin, searce them and beat them, beate the red fennel root with the crops thereof, and the handful of en∣dive, boil them in the Ale from a pottle to a quart, give it to the patient to drink it as warm as he may drink it, he must not drinke in four hours after if he may forbear it, and must exercise himselfe all the day after, that he may have occasion to sweat. An excellent good Balme. Take of the best Aqua vitae halfe a pound, of the clearest Tur∣pentine six ounces, of oyle of Roses one pound and a halfe, of Olem Ptroslinum one ounce, boil them all together til the Aqua vitae be consumed, adding in the end a quarter of an ounce of fine allom, as much mastick beaten into smal powder: and last of all in as subtil powder as may be made of Verdegreece, a quarter of an ounce, ever stirring it, but boile it no longer after the Verdegreece is in; if you keep it in a glasse stopped, it will last twenty years in his vertue; when you will have a wound glue quickly together, warm this balm in a sawcer, and with a little lint wash the wound; then close it together, and in a short space it wil incarne and glue the wound together, if it be your chance to slit a wound, wash if first
with this, and it will cause it to grow together in short time. For the worms. Take Aloes Saccatrin, Harts horn burnt and beaten to powder, worm-seed, of each a like, and drink it with Muscadine or Malm∣sie; you may take it in a Caudle. For a pin and web. Take a handfull of Hemlock, and stampe them small, put thereto a good deale of bay salt, and beat them together, if the pinne and web be in the right eye, bind it to the left wrist, if in the left eye, to the right wrist. A Gargle for the throat. Take a few Plantane leaves, of the stones of raisins, of the rind of pomegranates, seethe them in faire water, and straine them; then put thereto a little clarified honey, and seethe it a∣gaine. To make oyle of Worms, which is good against wrinches and shrinking of sinnews. Take a pottle of good sallet oyle, four handfuls of red Rose buds, the yellow cut away, two handfuls of the flowers and leaves of dil, set them in the Sunne a rarifying, then take a pint of worms called the towches, slit them, and scowr them in water, and then in white wine; boile them in the oyle with the hrbs on a soft fire a good space, then strain them and preserve it in pots; it wil be kept seven yeares. For the Frenzy. Take the juice of Smallage, verjuice or vineger, oyle of Vio∣lets or roses put together in a vessel of glasse over the fire, and lay it hot to the patients side, but scumme it first.
For Tetters. Take hannybee burnt and made in powder, and mingle it with the juice of the root of affodil, and it wil be a sufficient ointment for it. A Medicine to lay to the wrist for the Ague. Take Featherfew, Sage and bruise them, an half penny worth of pepper, a little spoonful of Chimnie soot, and the white of an egge, mingle them together, and lay it to the wrist. For the Canker. Take a pint of Woodbind water, a spoonful of honey, as much roach Allom as a hasel nut, and two or three crops of Rosema∣ry, as much Sage, and the rind of a pomgranate, and let them seethe together until almost halfe be consumed, and then wash the sore withal three or four times every day luke warm, til it be whole, with a fair linnen cloth, and his finger, and so rub till it bleede; but at every washing he must change his cloth, and this wil heal it. Probatum. To heal or cleanse any old or new wound or sore. Take greene Ashen bowes, and burn them to ashes, then take three pottles of running water, and so make thereof lie, then take that lie and put therein one pottle of Bartwaies, then set it on the fire, and take one pound of roch allom, and halfe a pound of madder and beat them to powder, then put the powder into the lye, and let it boil till half be wasted, and let it stand nine dayes, and it will be clear and fine.
For sinnews that be shrunk. Take three spoonfuls of water of snailes that beare their hou∣ses on their backs, and as much womans milke, as much May∣butter, mingle these together, and make an ointment, and lay it to the sore. To make a common Glister. Take mallows, violet leaves, beets, mercury and parietary, of every of them a handful, of wheat bind an handful and a half, and boil all these together in a little water till they be tender, then presse them and strain them, and to a pint of the decoction, put an ounce of Cassia Fistula ready drawn, two ounces of clarified honey, the weight of a groat of salt, and three ounces of sweet sallet oyle, all these well mixt and conveniently, it may be well applyed for a glister. To stanch blood. Take parsley, and bray it with the black colly of a brasse pot tha is used to the fire, and lay it to the wound or broken veine; or if you bleed at the nose, put it into your nose. To cure the bloody flux. Against the bloody flux of the wombe, mingle a little sugar and a dram of mastick at the most, and give it to the patient, and after that give him Rose water, or wine, or mastick that cloves have beene sodden with. For them that pisse blood. Take Ambrose, Saxifrage, Parsley, with the rootes of wild tansey and water cresses, even portions, stamp them all together, and strain them, and temper it with a young Cows milk, and drink it four or five times morning and evening; this is a principal medicine.
To make one sleep. Take five or six spoonfuls of womans milk which giveth a man∣child suck, as much red Rose water, mingle them together; then take a cloth the breadth of the forehead, and the length to the tem∣ples, and wet the cloth therein, and when it is wel wet, wring some∣what of the liquor out, for over much wetting the face, and so lay the cloth over the temples, and ever as it drieth wet it again with the liquor. For the same. Take womans milk, red Rose water, and vineger made of red wine, and mingle them all together, but somewhat lesse of the vi∣neger then of the other, and the medicine is very good if the heat be very great. For the same. Take a spoonful of oyle of Roses, as much Rose water, halfe a spoonful of red vineger, temper them all together, and with a soft cloth annoint the patients forehead. A Water for the eyes. Take a stone which you shall buy at the Apothecaries, called Lapis caluminaris, burne it in the fire at the least six or seven times red hot, then quench it in white wine, then beat the stone to powder in a morter till it be fine, then put it into the wine and strain it together through a fair linnen cloth, when it is cold, put two or three drops into one of your eyes, and lie still up∣on the same side so long as you can, then dresse the other eye as be∣fore, you must take of the stone the quantity of a big walnut to a pint of wine, and seeth the stone together with the wine till halfe be consumed, then put it in a viol of glasse, and it wil last six months.
For the same: proved. Take Lapis Caluminaris halfe a pound of the whitest you can get, burn it in the fire red hot, then take a pint of white wine of Anjou, and put the stone in the wine, and let it lie therein till it be cold; againe put in the fire as hot as before, put it into the wine, then take it out and let it dry, and then grind as much as you intend to do or occupie of it, into powder very smal, take the powder in a pewter dish the quantitie of a nut, and put thereto halfe a pint of the said wine so stirred, put it into a glasse bottle un∣wickered, and when you occupie it, shake it, and with a feather put it into your eyes two or three drops, holding after your eyes very close, lying upright, not going into the wind two hours after, and in the heat of the year lay out the stone in the Sun, and it will preserve it. A water for a running Canker. Take two gallons of faire water, and almost a peck of good ashes, boil it til you have a strong and slippery lie, then take it from the fire and straine the liquor from the ashes, set the liquor to the fire againe, and put to it a dish ful of bay salt of a pint, a handful of wormwood, as much Centry, a quarter of a pound of white lupines, boile them all together a good while, when you use it, make it hot, and take two pretty bolsters of cloth, foure times double a piece, wet the bolsters in it, and wring it in your hands somewhat dry, and bath it so sundry times at a dressing, then say on your clout and roll it up all hot: you shall know a Can∣ker or a Gangrena by the stench. To make a purgation for a dog. Take an ounce of Simcodds of Alexandria, you must lay them in steepe in a quart of running water; you must bruise your Simcodds, put thereto an handful of Mercurie, of violet leaves and mallows a handfull of each, the weight of two groats of annis seeds bruised, they must lie in steepe all night, in
the morning take them out and seeth them from a quart to a pint, you must take halfe a pound of blanched Almonds beat and strained with the said liquor; when you will give it him, you must put in an ounce and a halfe of Syrup of Roses, and luke warme, fasting, give it him, and he must fast after it three houres. Mr. Docter Coldwell his medicine for the dropsie. Approved. Take very strong Alewort, five or six gallons, one ounce of Annis seed, three ounces of Carrot seed, three good roots of Har∣tichoak wel washed, then slit them in pieces, then must you put your seeds and roots into the Alewort in an earthen vessel, so set it on the fire, and let it not seeth too fast, but until halfe your liquor be spent, then must you cleanse it through a strainer, and so set it a cooling; then you must put very good yest in it; all this being done, put it into a sweet pot, and by any meanes drink no o∣ther drink til you be whole: This Medicine helped one Wye of Kent. A medicine for the Cough. Take a quarter of a pint of Malmsey, and a good quantitie of fresh butter and a Nutmeg, and put it in a fair dish, so boil it on a chafingdish of coales till it come to be a salve, and so annoint your stomack with it against the fire; then take a Colewort leafe and hold it against the fire, and take a little butter and melt it, and with a feather rub it over the leafe, and so lay it to your stomack, and it shall cure you. Proba∣tum. To make a Tysand for them that be stopped in the stomack. Take a gallon of fair running water, halfe a handful of outlansh barley, or three handfuls of English barley, hull
it as you doe wheat to make firmity: take a stick of liquorice cut small and bruised and scraped, two spoonfuls of annis seedes and bruise it, also a handful of parsley roots scraped, and the pith pulled out, and cut in pieces an inch long, half a score of figgs clo∣ven into halfes, a pound of raisins of the Sunne the stones pul∣led out, halfe a pound of prunes, a quarter of a pound of currans; put all these things into the water aforesaid, and let them seeth til half the water be consumed, then take it and strain it into another pot to boile it again in, and put thereto a little vi∣neger and Rose water, so much as you shal think fit, a pretty deal of Sugar candy, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, and a little Set∣wel, and let them all boile a while together, and drink thereof blood warme morning and evening first and last, and you shal find great ease. An approved Medicine for a swelling. Take womans milk, and the pap of an apple, the crums of a Manchet, and make thereof a poultesse and lay it to the sore, and for a quinsie you may put thereto a little sallet oyle or oyle of Roses. To stanch bleeding of a wound. Take the powder of brown paper, and put thereof into the wound and lay upon it upon it the white of an egge. A medicine for the heate of the eyes. Take a new laid egge open at the top, and put out all that is in it, and fil the shel ful of the juice of housleek, and let it boile upon embers, and scumme it with a feather, boiling it til it be very clean, then put to it as much allom as the quantity of a hazel nut while it is boiling, and then wash your eyes there∣with.
A medicine for the plurisie. Take a handful of flax seed, and seeth it in milke till it be thick like a salve, and spread upon cloth, and lay it to the same side where the paine is two or three times, till the patient find ease. A medicine to stanch blood. Take the dung of a hog hot, and apply it to the wound, and it will stanch the bleeding presently. For the same. Take unset Isope and stamp it and strain it, without washing, and put it into the nostrils of the partie, and so into the wound or any o∣ther place that bleedeth. For a Canker or an old sore. Take a pottle of white wine, as much running water, a hand∣ful of plantane leaves, a handful of hony-suckle leaves, a handful of Betony, a handful of Rosemary, and a handful of Broome; boile all these together till halfe the liquor be consumed, then put in a penny worth of Allom, and when all is boiled together, put in a penny worth of Camphire, and preserve the same in a strong earthen pot. A medicine for the Ptisick of the Lungs. Take a gallon of sweet whey, a handful of Solomon, roots and all, a handful of Avent roots and all, and two handfuls of Longwort which groweth in a garden, roots and all, an handful of Bullocks song∣worts, of the youngest leaves; then take your whey, and cla∣rifie it on the fire, wash the herbs and scrape the rootes very cleane, but slit the rootes of the Avents and the Longworts, then seeth them all together in the whey, until one quart of the
Whey be consumed, and drink thereof when you go to bed at night if you can, and in the morning fasting. Use this all the month of May. A Medicine for wind or hurling in the head, or an Impostume. Take a handful of Marigold leaves, stamp them and strain them, then take a little black wool, and dip it into the juice of the Mari∣golds, then put it into your eare, preserve it so that you warme it not. An excellent Plaister for all manner of aches, for as soon as the Plaister is on, the ache is gone. Take unwrought Wax two pound, Deers suet half a pound, Fran∣kinsense four pound, Cloves two ounces, Mace two ounces, Saffron half an ounce, Rosen, Turpentine, running Pitch four ounces, melt that which is to be melted, and beat the rest to powder, mingle them well together on a soft fire, except the Cloves, Mace and Saf∣fron; then take a pottle of red Wine, and by little and little poure it into the Salve, stirring it well together, when it is molten, strain it into a clean pan; then strow in your powders, Cloves, Mace and Saffron, stir it well together a good while, and let it stand till it be cold; then make it up in roles; when you have occasion to use it, strike it on leather, and lay it on the sore place. A Vomit for short breath, or stopping in the Brest. Take a dram and half of powder of Betony, with five measures of water, that is, about a goblet full, and drink it fasting. A Medicine for the Collick passion. Take two drams of the powder of Betony, with three or four Pep∣per cornes, drink these with old wine warmed. A Medicine for the Bloody-Flux. If it be by weakness of heart, or disposition to swound by heat that is in the members of the bulk, take Sugar of Roses with Rose water.
A Medicine for faintnesse of the heart or swounding. Drink Rose water, and bedew your face therewith. Also Rose water is good to put in Oyntments for the face; it taketh away spots and smoothes the skin: and dry Roses smelled at the nose, comfort∣th the braine, and quickneth the spirits. To stay Vomiting. Seeth Roses in Vineger, and wet a spunge therein, and lay it to the stomack. A Medicine for the Falling Evil. Seeth three drams of the juice of Rue, with a little wine, and give the Patient to drink. A Medicine for a sudden swelling or strain. Take milk and new cowe dung, and boil them together till it be thick, and then make a Plaister, and lay it to the sore till the swelling be asswaged. The Kings Medicine for the Plague. Take a handful of Sage of vertue, a handful of Herbagrace, a hand∣ful of Elder leaves, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain them through a linnen cloth with a quart of White-wine, and a quantity of White wine-vineger; mingle all these together, and drink thereof a spoon∣ful every day nine dayes together; and after the first spooneful you shall be safe for twenty four dayes. And if it fortune that one be strucken with the Plague before he hath drunk the Medicine, then take this aforesaid with a spoonful of the Water Scabious, and a spoonful of Betony water, and a quantity of fine Treakle, and put them all together and drink it, it will expel all the Venom; and if it fortune the Botch doth appear, then take the leaves of red bram∣bles, and the leaves of Elder, and Mustard-seed, and stamp them to∣gether, and make a Plaister thereof, and lay it to the Sore, and it will draw out all the Venom, and so cure it by the grace of God.
For the Mother. Take three or four handfuls of Fern that growes upon houses, and seeth it in Rhenish-wine, then put it into a linnen cloth, and so hot as you may suffer it, lay it to the Navil four or five times. To make one sleep. Take powder of Mastick and temper it with Vineger, and annoin the pulses of the head and hands. For a shaking Ague. Take an earthen pot with hot water, and let the Patient lay him∣selfe downe and cover him warm, and this pot fast at his feet, and it will put away the shaking. A Medicine to stop a Lack. Take a new laid egg, and put the white clean away from the yolk, and put to it half a spoonful of Aqua Composita; you must stir them well together, and give it the Patient to sup up, and it will stop it. A Water for a sore mouth, or any other Sores. Take a handful of Daisies, as much of Violet leaves, a handful of Avens, and as much of Sowthistle, a little Mugwort, a handful of Bryar leaves, and a little Rosemary; seeth all this in running water, and put a little Allom in the seething, when it is half sodden away, then put three pence weight of the powder of Bole armoniack, a little honey, and so let it seeth a walm or two, then strain it, and in time of year put in Rose leaves, and Columbine leaves. A Medicine for the Morphew in ones face. Take new milk, the crums of white-bread, Red-rose leaves caked, and a Lemmon or two shred, steep them altogether and distil them in a Limbeck and use the water as is appointed.
A Medicine against Melancholy. Take the bone in a Harts heart beaten into powder and drink t in White-wine. To make a Derge for the Lungs. Take a quantity of Anniseeds, and Licoras, Alla Campana, Su∣gar Candy, Date stones, of every one a like, a little Ginger; take and beat all these in a mortar, saving the Date stones, beat them by themselves, and then sift them through a searce, and it will be powder. For bleeding at the Nose. Take half a pint of running water, and a pint of milk new from the Cow, two or three spoonfuls of Rose-water and a little Sugar, and seeth it unto a pint, and then drink it in a morning fasting luke-warm. For the Flux. Take Plantane seed, and drink them either with Beer or Red∣wine morning and evening for two or three dayes. For the Morphew. Take Fumetory, and make thereof a posset, and drink of the pos∣set Ale in the morning fasting, sweating two hours after it; after sweating, take and drink the powder of Sene, and Anniseeds, and Sugar, sodden in Ale, a good draught the same morning. Then take a new laid egge steeped in White-wine-vineger twen∣ty four hours, and prick the same egg and annoint the Morphew with that which cometh out.
A Fume for the Head, to be applied to the Ear. Take a quart or more of White-wine; boile in that a good handful of Camomile Herbs and flowers together, two spoonfuls of Commin seeds bruised a little, then put all this boiled into a stone pot or jug, with a narrow mouth; you may make a cover of paste for it, or of clay, and a hole in it to put a Swans quil therein; through this quil you shall take the Fume so hot as you can suffer it in at your ear; and so long as the liquor doth send any hot breath, which will be about half an hour, then with a warm linnen cloth wipe away the moisture from the Ear, and stop it with wool, dipped in Oyl of bitter Almonds warm: do this in the mornings only, and let the wool abide in the ear till the next morning. Another Fume of Vineger, to be applyed at the Nose. Take a pint of White-wine-vineger, put to it two spoonfuls of Bean-flower, and let it stand. Use it thus: Take a tile stone or brick red hot out of the fire, and powre a lit∣tle of this Vineger being stirred (that the flower may mingle with it) upon the tile or brick; hold your head over it, and take the fume at your nose five or six times every morning and evening; this should be done in your Bed-Chamber, that the fume may alter the aire thereof also. Another Fume to be taken at the Nose. Beat Amber into gross powder, and pot so much as you can take up with two fingers upon hot embers; take the smel thereof only at your going to bed, and let your night-quoif be perfumed with it. An excellent Mellilote Plaister for hard swel∣lings or to cure sores. Take green Mellilote bruised, ten handfuls, boil it in a pottle of White-wine to the wasting of half the Wine, and strain it; then put thereto of Rosen one pound, of Wax as much, sheeps tallow four ounces, of Turpentine three ounces, of Mastick one ounce; and boil all save the Mastick unto the wasting of the juice more then half; then bruise other six handfuls of Mellilote, and put them to while it is boiling, and stir it well till it hath had one walme or two; then take it from the fire, and strain it while it is
hot through a strong cloth until the stuff and Gums with the juice be all come out, and when you may handle it, put thereto your ounce of Mastick finely powdered; then make it in roles, mingling your Mastick in the handling thereof. To make Oyle of Hemp, good to drive out the Ague from any outward part of the body. Take green Hemp gathered in May and shred it very small, then boil it in fresh butter, till you think the strength of the Herb be boil∣ed out therein, strain it through a cloth into some pot or pipkin, and annoint the place where the swelling or Ague is, with the Oyntment hafed in against the fire. To make Oyle of Swallowes, good for all manner of Aches. Take ten or twelve young Swallowes ready to flye, stamp them in a stone Mortar with their feathers and guts together, with Lavender Cotten, Balm, Speermint, red Sage, Camomile, Wild Strawberry leaves and wild Time, of each a handful; but let these herbs ly one day unwashed after they be gathered; and then stamp them all toge∣ther with the Swallowes til no feather be left whole, put thereto a good quantity of May-butter or fresh butter, and let all stand one night in the Mortar; the next day boil all these together very softly three quarters of an hour or an whole hour, then strain it through a clean linnen cloth into a clean Vessel, and keep it for your use. An approved Medicine for a sore brest, or an Ague sore, that will both draw and heal. Take the yolks of four new laid egs, put thereto a spoonful of Vi∣neger, of Oyl of Roses three or four spoonfuls, of Bean-flower one spoonful, stir and beat them well together that no flower be seen, then set it on a few coales keeping it stirring till it be somewhat thick, then if the brest or sore be hard or swelled, annoint it with Oyl of Roses, or the thinnest of the Plaister with your hand very warm▪ and make a Plaister of the stuff and lay it on the sore so far as the hardness or redness goeth, so warm as they may well suffer it, and keep it warm,
dressing it thus every day; and if it be taken in time, it wil heal it with∣out breaking. A Soveraign Water for an old Sore. Take six penny worth of Roach Allom, and as much green Co∣peras, put them in an earthen Vessel and boil them on a strong fire of coals so long until it be grown to be a stone; then take a pretty piece of that, and beat it into powder, and set on a quart of fair run∣ning water upon the fire, and when the water is ready to seeth, put in a little of the powder, and it will fry like Oyl, and so long as it doth fry, put in a little and a little, for when the water is strong e∣nough, it will fry no more; then take a little of the water and wash the sore, but it must be luke warme, and then wet your lint in the same; but if it be an old sore that is festered, and full of dead flesh, put of the powder into the sore. A Soveragn Remedy to draw out a thorn, or for an old sore, the Gout or Siatica. Take Rosen half a pound, and as much of Perrosen, of Virgins wax half a pound, of Olibanum four ounces, of Mastick 4 ounces, of Camphire 3 drams, of Turpentine 3 ounces. Then take all your gums aforesaid, every one by themselves; then take your tallow and your wax, and relent them together on the fire; that done, put your Rosen, then your Perrosen, then your Olibanum, and last of all your Ma∣stick; and when all is relented together on a soft fire of coales, then strain it through a strong canvas cloth with two sticks so hard as you can into a pottle of White-wine, then relent it over the fire a∣gain; and then take it off and let it cool, and when it is almost cold, annoint your hands with Oyl of Almonds, and work it into roles like roles of Wax; and in the time of working thereof, cast in your Camphire beaten into fine powder; you must beat two or three Almonds finely scraped with your Camphire, or else a wild nut beaten together.
An Oyntment good for Aches, Bruises, Stiches, Cricks, Gouts and lameness, and starkness of sinewes. Take in May Sage and Rue of each one pound, Bay leaves and Wormwood of each half a pound, Rosemary two handfuls; all these Herbs must be shred so small as may be; then put thereto, of sheeps suet clean picked from the skin three pound, fine shred also; then stamp all these in a Mortar of stone so long til they come unto one substance, then take it forth, and put it into a fine bsen or pan, and put thereto of sweet Oyle Olive a pottle, and work it well together, that it be well mixed; then cover it close, that no aire come unto it the space of seven dayes; then take and set it on a soft fire, and let it seethe softly, alwayes stirring it till the leaf or herb be parched; then strain it through a canvas cloth, and after put thereto of the Oyl of Spike one or two ounces, and stir it, and when it is cold, put it up in fair broad mouthed pots, and reserve it for your use. For a green Wound or cut. Take Valerian a good handful, and stamp it with White wine, that you may stamp out all the juice; then take Rosen and beat it to powder, and put the juice to the Rosen, and then boil them together, then take it off the fire and powre out the liquor from it, and take half so much Wax as Rosen, and Sallet Oyl only as much as you think wil suffice to melt all together with a soft fire; then take it off the fire, and put in a spoonful of Turpentine, and stir it together, and keep it. To make Oyle of Exceter. First you must gather a pound of Cowslip-flowers in May, and picked clean, you must put them into a fair Vessel of glasse, and so much Oyl Olive as will cover them, then cover your glasse close until you may gather all these herbs following; viz. Calamint, Saint Johns wort, wild Sage, Egrimony, Southernwood, Wormwood, Pe∣niroyal, Lavender, Pellitory of Spain, Parietary, Rosemary, Camomile, Herff leaves, Bayes, the youngest Lilly flowers, Wild-Oliver, Sin∣green red Mints, of each a handful; all these Herbs must be gathered in the midst of June. Then put them all in as much White-wine as will cover them, but first dry the blossomes from the oyl between your hands; then stamp all your herb together, and seeth them in the Oyl, and then steep them in white-wine one night, then put the Oyl
and them together, and seeth them til a quantity of the Wine be boiled away; then strain them and put the oyle in a glasse, for there is no other vessel will hold it. When you do boil these herbs, you may put more Oyl to them; It is good for all old Diseases that are in the sinews, for wrenches, strains, or any old disease. To make Swallowes Oyntment. Take twenty Swallowes, Camomile, Lavender Spike, Balm, Strawberry strings, Valerian, Tutsan leaves, Sages of Arfice, strings of Vine, Roman Wormwood, French Mallowes, knotted grass, Wal∣nut leaves, Howfe, Ribwort, Rosemary tops, Honey-suckle leavs, Plan∣tane, red Rose leaves, Lavender Cotten, tops of Bayes, of each a handful, stamp them all together, and then put in halfe a pint of Sallet oyl, and a quart of Neatsfoot Oyle, halfe a pound of Culln Wax and some cloves beaten small, then boil it on the fire the space of six hours, and then strain it through a canvas cloth into a dish till it be cold, and make a little hole in the middle that the water and bloud may soak out. To make a green Salve to heal any sore. Take a pound of Rosen, half a pound of Turpentine, one pound of Cullen Wax, or Maiden Wax being not wrought, halfe a pound of Sheeps tallow molten and strained, twelve spoonfuls of fine Sallet Oyl, and melt all together on the fire; then take Smallage, Plan∣tane, Orpine, Bugle, Valerian, of each three handfuls, and a good handful of Rugwort; chop all these smal, and grind them af∣terward in a Mortar, then put it into the liquor on the fire, and let them seeth all together on the fire half an hour, and in the seething put a good quantity of Rose water, then strain it through a canvas cloth into a dish or platter. A precious Salve for a sore, wound or malady. Take Rosen and Perrosen, of each half a pound, of Virgins Wax and Frankinsence, of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick one ounce, Hearts tallow a quarter of a pound, Camphire two drams; melt that which is to be melted, and powder that which is to be powdered, and searse it very fine, and boil them over the fire, and then strain them over the fire through a canvas cloth into a pottle of White-wine, then boile the wine with the other Ingredients together; then let it
cool till it be no hotter then blood, then put thereto a quartern of Turpentine, evermore stirring it til it be through cold; but ever∣more beware your stuff be but blood warm when you put your Tur∣pentine to it, for if it be hot, it marreth all the stuff; and make it up in roles, and keep it to your use. The best, and most precious Salve that can be made. It hath these properties, It healeth old and new wounds, it suffe∣reth no corruption nor ill flesh; it healeth all head-aches, all singing in the brains, all Impostumes in the head or body, swellings in the ears or cheeks, sinewes, stomack, or sprent, pricking with a thorn, it draweth out broken bones, it helpeth the bitings of venemous Beasts, it healeth all manner of Botches, Festers and Noli me tangere, ache in the liver, reyns or spleen, swellings of members and Inflammations. An Oyntment for one that hath a bruise from a horse. Take Elder flowers, and beat them smal in a Mortar with Bean∣flower bolted very fine; grind them together til they are very smal, then take them forth and put them in a glasse, and put thereto Sal∣let Oyl, and so let it stand until you have need of it, for the older it is, the better it is; and therewith annoint the Patient against the fire. A perfect way to cool and help the liver, and to take away the pain of the heart-burning. Take Endive, Succory, Burrage, Buglosse roots and leaves of either half a handful, green Polipody, Poppey roots two ounces, twelve Damask Pruins, one ounce of Currans, seethe them in three pints of fair running water to a quart, then mingle with it one ounce and an half of Sene leaves, half an ounce of fine Rubarb sli∣ced, and tye it slackly in a piece of fine linnen cloth; seeth them to∣gether ten or twelve walms; then take it from the fire, and when they be almost cold, strain them easily through a cloth, but crush be∣tween your fingers hard three or four times the Rubarb; then min∣gle with this liquor the juice of Lemmons and Sugar, so much as will make it pleasant. Take at the first the quantity of half a wine pint luke warm fasting, and fast two or three hours after it; if it give above three stools in one day, drink less the next day. To make an excellent good Water for many Diseases. Take a gallon of good Gascoigne Wine, then take Ginger, Ga∣lingale,
Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, of every of them a dram; then take Sage, Mints, red Roses, Time, Pelitory of the wall, Rosemary, Wild-Time, Wild Marjoram, Penniroyal, Camomile, Lavender, Rosasolis, Adments, Piony, Montane, of each a handful; then beat all the Spices smal, and bruise all the Herbs, then put all into the Wine, and let it stand stil therein twelve hours, stirring it divers times. Then stil it in a Limbeck, and keep the first water by it self, for it is the best; then will there come a second water, which will be good, but not so good as the first Water, which must be kept likewise by it self; and this water will be the better, if it be set in the Sun all the Summer; and you must draw of the first Water but a pint, and of the se∣cond as far as it will run. For the Stone. Take the blood of a Fox and make it in powder, and drink it in Wine, and without doubt it shall destroy the Stone; and if you wil not believe, take a stone and put it into the blood of a Fox, and it will break. To make Balm Water of the best. Take two gallons of strong Ale, two pound of Balm, a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, and a quarter of a pound of Licoras bruised in∣to powder; put all these into a pot, and let them stand twelve hours stopped very close; after it hath stood so long, then still it in a Lim∣beck; but in any wise you must take heed your fire be not too hot at the first; save the first half of the Water by it self, for that wil be the best; and after the first half (so neer as you can ghesse,) is stilled, take away the fire for the space of half an hour, and then adding to it again a soft fire, the rest will be a quart, and that is the most it will make in the whole. A Water for the Plague. Take Rue, Egrimony, Wormwood, Celendine, Sage, Bawm Rosemary, Mugwort, Dragons Pimpernel, Marygold, Fetherfew, Bur∣▪net, Sorrel, and you must have them of like weight; then soak them in the best White-wine you can get two or three nights, and after wring the herbs from the Wine, and distil the Herbs by themselves; and after still the Wine, and this is good for Agues; put it not to the water of the herbs, for that with a little Treakle or Mithridate shall drive away sickness from the heart.
For a prick with a thorn. Take Southernwood, and stamp it and mingle it with Boars grease and lay the same to it, and it wil both draw and heal. For the swelling to take it away. Take a handful of Mallowes, and almost half a handful of Chick∣weed, shred these small, and seeth them in a quart of fair running water, and thick them with Barley meal, stirring it till it be thick, then lay it unto the swelling twice a day as hot as the Patient can a∣bide it. To make a Balm, which will heal a green Wound within four and twenty hours. Take two spoonfuls of white Turpentine, and one spoonful of run∣ning water, and beat it together until it be very white, a little Oyle of Roses, and beat all these together, and you may keep it good four∣teen dayes, but no longer; if it be a wound, dip lint in the same, and lay upon it▪ if it be a thrust or prick, make a Tent, and dip your Tent in the same. For burning or scalding. First wash the wound; take Sage and seeth it in running water, and it will take away the heat immediately; then take Sage and Hartstongue and Sheeps dung, and fry it with Sheeps suet, and an∣oint it with a feather. For the biting of a mad Dog. Take Garlick, Salt and Rue, and stamp them all together after the manner of a Plaister, and lay it to the wound, and give the Patient Treakle to drink three times a week. For the biting of a Hound or Dog. Take Mint, and salt it well, and lay it to the wound, and it shal heal wonderfully fair. For the cutting of Sinews or Veins. Take knot worms▪ and stamp them, and lay them to the wound in Plaister wise.
To stanch the strong bleeding at the Nose. Take an eg, and put out all the meat, and set the shel in the fire un∣til it be black, and then make fine powder of the same, and with a quil blow it into the nose, and it will stanch the bleeding. To make a Water to help Sheep, though they be infected. Take a pottle of running water, and put therein a good handful of Herbagrace, and as much Ground-Ivy, and as much of the greene pill of Elders, the outside being first scraped away; then boil all these together til it be a quart; then strain it, and wring the juice well out of the Herbs; then put the water, and three penny worth of Treakle, and a penny worth of English Saffron beaten fine, and stir them all well together; then give to every sheep two spoonfuls of the same Water. An approved Medicine for the Stone. Take a gallon of new milk from a red Cow, and thereto put one handful of Pellitory of Wall, one handful of Wild Time, one hand∣ful of Saxifrage, and a handful of Parsley, two or three Rhadish roots sliced, a quantity of Phillippe Pendelow, roots and all; steep all these in the night, the next morning distil the milk with the Herbs, with a moderate fire. The use of taking the Water. Take of the Water six spoonfuls, and of Rhenish or White-wine five or six spoonfuls, a little Sugar, and some slices of Nutmegs, make it luke warm, and drink it fasting, and fast after it three hours, using temperate exercise; take twice or thrice together every fortnight if need requireth. For uncurable aches, and pains in the Joints. Take all the whole horn that a Buck casts off, the later, the better, cast away the scraps, leave nothing but the horn, cut the same in pieces then seeth the same in a gallon of fair water til it be come to a pint, or something more, then cast away the pieces of the horn, and then let
in the vessel stand until it be cold, which then will be like a jelly. And when you will ocupy thereof, warm some of that in a sawcer, and then annoint the place therewith by the fire morning and even∣ing, and let that drink in by the heat of the fire, and it will heal in nine or ten dressings. This is very true. For falling or bruising a mans body. Take Egrimony, Betony, Sage, Plantane, Ivy leaves, Roses, Parsley, stamp them together, and mix Wine thereto, give it the Patient of∣ten to drink till he be whole. A true and tryed Medicine. For the Palsie. Take Lavender and seeth it in running water, and then strain it, then drink half a pint daily first and last for the space of a fortnight, and it will heal them. For the Ach in the huckle bone, called the Siaica. Take a pound of good black Soap, one pint of Aquavitae, halfe a pint of Sallet Oyl, and a quarter of a pint of the juice of Rue, seeth them all together over an easie fire, until it be something thick, & that it may be made in a plaister, then spread some thereof upon a piece of leather, and apply it to the ache or pained place, and let it ly thereon three dayes and three nights, and then if the pain be not gone, apply such another plaister thereto, and let it ly as long as the former, and it wil help it certainly. To take the Ague out of any sore. Take an ounce of Fennegrick, as much of Lin seed, two or three spoonfuls of Wheat-flower, a pint of new milk; beat the seeds several, and boil them til they be in thickness that you may spread it in man∣ner of a plaister. An approved Medicine for the bloody Flux. Take a pint of Milk newly milked or more, and the inner rind of an Oaken bark, and some of the inner rind of a black thorn, and three roots of Plantane, three roots of wild Daisies, the powder of a Panter so much as you can take upon an Angel, and two or three sprigs of Time, then boil them a good while all together, and then put therein some sticks of Cinamon, and half a Nutmeg, and a little Sugar can∣dy, so let them boil, and then take three sheets of fair paper, and break them, and let them boil with the rest, and then put in eight or nine bramble leaves, and then take another sheet af paper, and put therein,
and three little pieces of wheaten bread, and let it boil after a good while, and strain it through a cullender into a cup, and drink it fasting in a morning, at noon and at night for the space of two or three daies together. To make Oyl of Cream for burning or scalding. Take a quart of Cream and seeth it til the Cream be divided from the Whey, and then scum off the Cream, and lay it in a fair dish, and when you wil use of it, take a little of it in a sawcer; and melt it, and then annoint the place that is scalded under your Ivy leaves and up∣on them, but first you must boil your Ivy leaves till they be soft, and lay them on the fore twice a day. To make Aqua Mirabilis & pretiosa. Take Gallingale, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Cardamoms, Mace and Nutmegs, of each one dram, and of the juice of Celendine eight ounces, and mingle all the powders with the said juice in a pint of A∣quavitae, and three pints of White-wine, and put all these together in a Stil of Glasse, and let it stand so all night, and on the morrow di∣stil it with an easie fire as may be. Of all Waters this is the best, for it dissolveth flegm in the Longs without any grievance, and healeth and helpeth the perished Lungs, and for other divers griefs about the stomack and the Lungs, a most approved water. In the Summer use one spoonful once a week, and in the winter two spoonfuls. To make Rosa Solis Water. Take a gallon of the best Aqua Composita, and put it into a gallon glasse, and put thereto a pottle of the herbs called Rosa Solis cleane picked, and put it in the Sun three or four dayes being close stopped, then take an ounce of Cinamon bruised, an ounce of Ginger bruised, a quarter of an ounce of whole Mace, two spoonfuls of Anniseeds bruised, two sticks of Licorice scraped and bruised, one pound of white Suger candy, and twenty Dates cut in smal pieces, and put them into another gallon glasse, and put thereto your Aqua Composita, strained from your Rosa Solis. To make Aquavitae. Fil a pottle ful of clean red wine, and put therein the powder of Ci∣namon, Cloves, Ginger, Parietary, Nutmegs, Gallingale, Spikenard, Mace, Quinbilois, Grains, Sage, Mints, Rue, Calamint, Long-pepper,
Carraway, Pennyroyal, Cummin, Fennel seeds, Smallage, Parsley, Horewood, of each a like quantity, of Dragons more or less as you wil have it: stil all the waters in a Limbeck with a soft fire; and look that the Stillatory be wel luted or pasted, so that no aire get out, and make your fire of coales, and reform the water out of a Limbeck into a glasse. For all manner of bruises, swellings and broken bones. Take Brooklime, Chickweed, Mallowes, Smallage, Groundsel, stamp them with Sheeps tallow, Swines grease and Cummin; put therto Wine Lees and Wheat bran; fry them together, and lay it to the grief hot. A Drink good for Bruising. Stamp Egrimony, Bitony, Sage, Plantane, Ivy-leaves and Parsly together, mix Wine therewith, and give it the Patient often to drink. Against Burning. Stamp Maidenhair, and seeth it in fresh butter, strain it, and annoint the Patient therewith. Another. Beat Oyl Olive with water til it wax very white, and annoint the place therewith, or take black or gray Soap and lay it to the sore. An Oyntment for burning with Gun-powder, or scalding. Take a quart of Boars-grease, two handfuls of Groundsel, two or three heads of Houseleek, and stamp the Herbs together, then put to it two handfnls of Sheeps dung new, and two handfuls of Goose dung, stamp them all together, and fry them, and being hot strain it into an earthen pot, and with the liquor annoint the burned place. An excellent Receipt to make Wormwood-water. Take two gallons of Sack-Lees, two gallons of Ale, half a pound of Licoras, halfe a pound of Annisees, four handful of Wormwood,
one handful of raisins of the Sun, and nine or ten figs, and let them stand one day and one night, and then stil them in a Limbeck. In the curing of a wound five things are to be observed or noted. First, To take away the thing that sticketh in the wound, as arrow, bullet, thorne, or any such like thing. Secondly, To joyne those parts of the wound, which do not shut or close together. Thirdly, To keep close that which you have so shut together. Fourthly, To preserve the substance of that part. Fifthly, To stay and mitigate all evil accidents. A potion to stanch blood. Take Lapis hamatites one ounce, Bole Armoniack, Dragons blood, of each an ounce, Manus Christi an ounce, Plantane water two ounces, let a potion be made. To stanch blood outwardly. Take Frankinsence and alloes, of each two ounces, the white of an egge, Rose water a little, and beat them together, then take fine flax, and some hair of Hares skin, and make a pleget, and dip it in the aforesaid liquor, and then apply it unto the wound. Another way to stanch blood. Take Bole Armoniack one ounce, Terrasigillata one ounce, of flower of wheat three ounces, of Gypsus and slaked lime, of each four ounces, of Frankinsence and alloes, of each one ounce, make thereof a powder, and mix it with the white of an egge, and use it accor∣ding to art. To break the Plague sore. Take bramble leaves, elder leaves, and Mustard seed, stamp them together, make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the fore, and it will draw out the venome, and heale the sore. An excellent medicine for a Plague sore. Take a Cock Pullet, Chicken or Pidgeon, and pluck off
the feathers of the taile and rumpe, then lay the bare of the pullet to the sore, and the pullet wil gape and labour for life, and at the length die, and continue and lay other pullets as long as any die, for when the poison is drawn out, the chicken that is laid to it will live, the sore presently will swage; the first pullet will make the plague sore very soft, whereas before it was very hard, and the other wil draw out the venome. To make King Edward the third his Pomander against the plague. Take of Labdanus fined one ounce, of Storax Calaminta dissol∣ved, Roses, Cloves, Mace, of each half a penny weight; of Amber one penny weight, of Cinamon and Camomile the weight of five pence, and dissolve them to powder, of musk one penny weight; you must dissolve the Labdanus with Mirrhe and virgins wax, and all things as is aforesaid made to powder, and mingle them together with oyle of bay, and let them be heated on the fire, then let it stand while it be cold, and make your balls of what quantity you wil. To draw the sore of the plague. Take two Lily roots, and a handful of sowre dough, two handfuls of mallowes, one handful of linseed, stamp all these together smal, and boile it in a quart of wine lees til it be thick, then lay it an inch thick upon leather broaderthen the sore, and let the borders of the lea∣ther be plaistred with Shooe-makers wax to make it cleave, and it shal bring out the botch in 24 hours, and break it shortly. For the Plurisie. Take brook-lime, sheeps suet, and a little fair water, fry them together in a frying pan, and make thereof a plaister, lay it to the patients side, and it wil draw out the corruption; the best remedy against the Plurisie is to be let blood. A good medicine to bring forth the smal Pocks, Meazels or purples Make a posset of Ale with milk the curd being taken off, put therein a handful of red fennel, and the same being sodden toge∣ther, strain it; put thereto a quantity of a Nutmeg, of fine treakle, a little setwal, and a little English Saffron, and being mingled to∣gether, give the patient to drink warm.
For him that cannot hold urine. The braine of an Hare given in wine to drinke, causeth the patient after divers times received, to hold his urine; Filberts roasted are wholesome against the distillation of the same; the like doth Galingale beaten to powder, and drunk with a little white wine or Ale; also the lights of a kid eaten, and some part plaister wise thereof bound about the Navel, doth with-hold the distillati∣tion of Urine. To take away the spots of the smal Pocks. Take an ounce of Oyle Olive, half an ounce of Venice Turpen∣tine, half an ounce of Sperma ceti, melt them together when it be∣ginneth to boil, take it from the fire and let it cool; rub therewith the black spots, and continue the same til the holes be filled. For the Quinsie in the throat. Take elder leaves, bay salt and Cummin, beat it together, and put it in a cloth, and lay it to the grief warme, and let it be chan∣ged once in 24 hours, and it wil cure you. To purge the reins. Wash halfe an ounce of Venice Turpentine, in plantane or Rose water, then mix that with fine Sugar, make thereof four or five balls, and eat three fasting in a morning; some use to drink a little white or Rhenish wine after. To destroy a ringworm. Take a red dock root and pare it, and then lay it in vineger till it be wel steeped, then rub well upon the ringworm; if the ring∣worm be very rank, take powder of brimstone and put it in vinegar, temper them wel together, and ub the ringworm withal, and it wil destroy it very quickly. Another for the same. Take Gumme with which you make ink, put it in vineger, and let it remain there until it be melted, and then annoint the ring∣worm therewith, and it wil destroy it; but there is nothing better then the leaves and juice of Wicotiane.
Against the Rheum in the Head. Stamp the roots of white Beets, and strain the juice thereof into a glasse, and put the quantity of half a spoonful thereof into your nose fasting in a morning, closing your eyes in the time of the working thereof, and stopping your nose, it shall break the rheum into your mouth abundantly, opening the passage of the head without grief; beware that you let not the rheum go down, but spit it out, lest it of∣fend your inner parts. An excellent Medicine for Sinews that be shrunk. Take a handful of Smallage, as much of Mallows, stamp the herbs together, and mingle them together with Neats-foo-oyl, and let them so stand five or six dayes, then boil it a quarter of an hour, and strein it through a cloth, and anoint the Patient therewith. For a cold Stomack. Take a crust of brown bread, and toste it against the fire so hot as you can suffer it, wet it well in strong Vineger, and lay it to your stomack. For the Winde in the bottom of the Stomack. Take the branches of Fennel, stamp and strein it, put thereto a little Treakle, white Sugar, Anniseed-powder and Cinamon-powder, mingle it together, and eat of it many times in the day. Good for the Stomack. Red Mint, red Rose leaves dryed, Cummin, Sugar, Sage, Worm∣wood, Mints, Calamint, To vomit every quarter, or in great Hunger: To stand after meat, take Galingale, Nutmegs, Pepper, Mastick. A Medicine for a Stitch. Take Malmsey luke-warm, and the powder of Cummin, and drink it.
To asswage a sting or present swelling. Anoint the place swelled with oyl de Bay, and after that is dried in, take new Butter, white Wine and Bean-flower, thick it upon the fire, and make a Plaister thereof. A Medicine not onely to cure or break the Stone, but also to purge the same, that you shall never be pained with the same again, if you use the same daily. Take the rowes of red Herrings, and prickle Holly leaves, drie them in an Oven, and beat them severally to powder, then searce them, and put them together (of each a like quantity) then put to it the powder of Grounsel and Broom-seed, of each half as much as of the other powders; mingle all these powders together, and drink in white Rhenish-wine, Ale or Beer, morning and evening, a good spoonful of this powder: you may use this powder in Broths or Pot∣tages, the oftner the better; you must keep the powder alwayes drie in a pipkin by the fire, or otherwise. To cause one to sleep. Take four spoonfuls of pure Rose-water, and as much Vineger, two spoonfuls of oyl of Roses, half a handful of Rose-leaves made in powder, then take crums of leavened wheaten bread, and make a Plaister of all this, and lay it cold upon the Temples and fore-head. Another. Take a Rose-ake upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, with a little Vi∣neger, sprinkle a little powder of Cummin on the Rose-cake as you warm it, then lay the Rose-cake to the Temples of the sick, and it will cause sleep, and ease the head-ache. For a Strein. Take Pisse, and put thereto Brook-lime and Sheeps suet,
and boile them wel together, and bath the patient therewith so hot as he can suffer it, then lay the herbs upon a red cloth and lay it to the strain very hot. A salve for wounds and sores to draw, cleanse and heal wounds of sinnews, joynts, impost humes, Cankers, and to draw out a thorn or Iron. Take of Betony, Vervain, Pimpernel and plantane, of each a handful; stamp these herbs together, and seethe them in a gallon of wine, until two parts be consumed, then strain it and set it on the fire again, and put thereto pitch, rosen and virgins wax, of all the quantity of a pound, by even portions, and three drammes of Ma∣stick in powder, and seeth it til it be thick, then take it from the fire, and put thereto a quantity of Turpentine, stir it til it be cold and use it. For cooling of a sore. Taking the juice of Sorrel, Marigolds, and mallows, and as much vineger as the juice is, wet a cloth therein, and lay it to the sore, and shift it as it drieh. For scabs, itch, and wormes. Annoint your self with the water that droppeth from the vines. For wambling of the stomack. Take fennel and smallage roots, of each a like quantity, min∣gle them with wine, and drink thereof. A good powder for the strmack. Take powder of fennel, Annis-seeds and Elicampana, temper them with Aqua vitae, and dry them again, and eat a quantity thereof evening and morning. This Powder breaketh flegme, ope∣neth the brest, and causeth good digestion, and causeth him which useth the same to look young again. An excellent Serecloth. Take two penny worth of oyle of Turpentine, then weigh it, afterwards take Bores grease, sheeps suet, unwrought wax and ro∣sen, of each so much as the oyle of Turpentine weigheth, remember to clarifie the bores grease, and sheeps suet, but each severally; then melt all together, and keep it close to use.
An excellent medicine for the Stone. Take broomseed, ash-keys, hop-berries, otherwise called wilde eglantine, stone crop, saxifrage, orange pills, the lights of a Fox, the crops of red thime, the crops of red nettles, the crops of red oaks in the spring, and elder flowers; dry these eleven by the fire, beat them to powder, and put of every one the like quantity together, and mingle them wel, take hereof at a time as much as may be contained in a hazel nut shel, and put it into a cup of ale or beer (as you like best to drink) over night, and let it stand covered, and in the morning stir it wel and drink it fasting, and afterward use some moderate exercise, and abstain from meat and drink three or four hours. For the Stone in the reins or bladder. Take the shel of an egge where a chicken hath been hatched, bea∣ten to powder, this drunk with white wine, breaketh the stone in both places. It is held for a great secret, that a piece of glasse burnt seven times, and seven times quenched in Saxifrage water, afterwards beaten smal, and drunk in white wine, breaketh the stone wheresover. For swelling about the fingers or nails, or the joynts. Take flower, the yolk of an egge, hony and Hogs grease, beat it to powder together, and make a plaister. For a sore Throat. Stamp Collombine and Cinquefoile, and strain them with milk and drink. To draw out a thorn. Take the bark of Hawthorn, and seeth it in red wine, til two parts be consumed, then pour out the wine and stamp the bark small, and temper it with bores grease, fry them together, and make a plaister, and apply it so hot as you can suffer it. To fasten the teeth, and cleanse them. Wine or water wherein the leaves of a damsen tree, or the rind of the root hath been sodden, fastneth the teeth, and keepeth the mouth from all paine.
To cleanse the Teeth. Seethe the roots of vervaine in old wine, and wash your teeth therewith, and it wil cleanse them and fasten them. For the Tooth ach. Dry Ivie berries and beat them to powder, put it in a fine linnen cloth, and lay it to the aking tooth. To pluck out a tooth. Seeth the brains of a Hare in red wine, and therewith annoint the tooth, and it wil fall out without paine. To make a Tooth fall out without paine. Put in the hollow tooth ashes of wormes, or of Mousedung, or of a Backs tooth, or put in the juice of great Celendine, o the brain of a Patridg, and annoint the tooth on the outside; or the pow∣der of red corral put into the hollow, wil make it fal out. Another to cleanse the teeth. Take Sage, wild Marjoram, Rosemary, of each one handful, pel∣litory of Spain, Ginger, cloves and Nutmegs, of each the weight of two French Crownes, sprinkle it with white wine; still it and wash your teeth therewith. Another. Rub your teeth with honey, and the ashes of a vine that never are grapes, or steep mallow roots a day in water, afterward wrap them in paper, and dry them in embers, or else put them in the o∣ven when the bread is drawn out, rub the the teeth therewith, and continue it, for there is nothing that lesse offendeth the teeth, and cleanseth better in time. To cease vomiting. Take red mints, sage, womans milk or Cows milk, stampe and straine it together, give it to the patient to drink cold, and the vo∣mit shall cease. A powder for the Collick and Stone. Take wild Thime, garden Thime, Meadow parsley, garden parssy, ashen keyes, watercresses, red mint, stone crop, growel, of each a like much, dry them like hey, and beat them to powder, and
let the patient drink thereof in posset ale or caudel, and it wil helpe him of the collick presently. To make a Searcloth. Take a pint of sallet oyle, halfe a pound of red lead finely bea∣ten, boil these together til they be black, then put to it a quarter of a pound of virgins wax shred small, and let it melt, then dippe your clothes in it and smoth them, and keepe them for Sear clothes, but before you put in the virgins wax, drop some of this upon a sawcer, and if it come off clean, then it is boiled enough, and when your clothes be dipped, hold them over a panne of water, till they be cold, then stretch them out upon a board wet with milk, and sleek them with a sleek stone, then roule them up and keepe them for very good searcloths to lay to any sore when it is near whole, to draw the ach and venome from the bone, and it is good to dissolve any hard swelling. To make Rosemary water. You must use this water in all points, as you do the balm water, but in stead of balme you must take a pound and halfe of Rosemary flowers, tops and all, and as much red mint, you must lay some bricks or weights upon the cover of the Limbeck, or else the strength of the water wil burst it open; you must keep the body of the Lim∣beck very temperate with wet cloths, and keep cold water in the top of it. To make Cinamon water. Take a gallon of Gascoine wine, one pound of very good Cina∣mon and bruise it, one pound of fine sugar, one handful of Borage flowers picked from the green husk, one handful of red Roses the white taken from them, one handful of Buglosse flowers; lay all these in steepe four and twenty hours in a brasse pan, stopping it ve∣ry close, that there can come no aire out of it, then set it upon the fire, and when it begins to seeth, set on your Limbeck, and stop it very close with rie paste, remembring when it is very hot, to put out that water, and put in cold, laying on the out side, and on the bottom of the Limbeck wet clothes. To make Irish Aqua vitae. Take to a quart of raw Aqua vitae, a quarter of an ounce of Ginger fliced, a few raisins of the Sun stoned, two or three Nut∣megs sliced, a good quantitity of Sugar, halfe a dozen of Cloves
bruised, three or four good sticks of liquorice bruised, three or four dates sliced, you must let it stand 14 or 15 dayes before you drink it, and then it wil come to his colour, the older it is, the better it is. For the clearnesse of the sight of the eyes. Take Fennel, Vervain, Roses, Celendine and rue, of each two ounces, and distil water of them, for this water is wholesome for all manner of sore eyes, and it is called water Lambard. A medicine for an Ach or sinnew that is shrunk▪ Take a handful of the tops of Rosemary and Camomile, take them and chop them small; boil them in a posnet, and put in a good deale of Aqua vitae, and a good deale of May butter; and when they be boiled, strain them. For an Ancombe. First take halfe a handful of herb grace, a good halfe handfull of ragwort, two or three parsley roots, blades and all, and take out the pith, stamp them with Bores grease with a little bay salt, and so use it to the patient. For the pain or heat in the eyes: Take seven roots of daisies, leaves and all, and half a handful of pearl wort, and seven plantane leaves, wash them all clean, stamp them and strain them into the white of a new laid egge beaten well together, take a little flax and wet it wel in the same, and when you go to bed, bind it on with a cloth, likewise two hours in the mor∣ning before you rise. To make the smal Pocks come forth. Take two penny worth of Saffron, and put it into two little bgs, and lay it under the arm holes, and it shall bring them forth. An excellent powder against the worms. Take of the best Aloes Cicatrina, of the lesser centry, of worme seeds, of each an ounce, of dried wormwood halfe an ounce, make them into fine powder, and give it either in Malmsey or milk, the quantity which is to be given, is from hale a dramme to a dram and a halfe.
To clear the voice. Mustard seed put into dry figs, and given to the patient to eat in the evening, doth dissolve the grosse humors, openeth the stopping of the lights and the conduits of breathing, and cleareth the voice. To make vineger. Put into your wine a little salt, pepper and sowre leaven min∣gled together; or heat a tile or steele often, and put it in wine▪ or put in a rhadish root stampt, or put the roots of beets stampt in∣to the wine; but you must not have your vessel full of beer or wine that you mean to turn to vineger, for if the vessel be full, it will hardly turne the vineger. A Water to digest melancholy. Take Borage, Landebeef, i. e. Bugloss, Harts tongue, Calamint, Centurie, Scabious, Thime, Isop, Savory, Mugwort, Rose∣marie, the flowers of the tenderest Woodbind, of each a like quan∣tity; distil them and drinke the water morning and evening, first and last. To cleanse blood. Take Borage, landebeefe, Fumitory, Scabious, Tor∣mentil, the roots of parsley, Rosemarie, pimpernel, avens, Mar∣joram and Baulme, distil them, and drinke thereof morning and evening. A water to coole the liver. Take Endive, Liverwort, Pennyroial, Fumetory, Scabious, Sorrel, water of Lillies, Borage, Sanders, Lettice, Puslane, Vi∣lets and red vineger, and distil it. For all manner of Worms. Take grownsel and plantane with the rootes, stampe them and straine them with Malmsey, give it to the Patient to drinke hree dayes together, and it wil kill all manner of wormes. For Worms. The scraping of a Harts horne drunk in a little vineger▪
killeth the wormes or else the rind of a Pomegranate, and the roots of an ash sodden in white wine or ale, of each a like quan∣titie and drunk fasting in the morning, killeth the worms wonder∣fully. For a wound that is healed above, and sore underneath. Take barley meale, the white of an egge and honey, and mingle them together, and make a plaister therewith, and apply it to the fore. To bring wounds that rankle, into good temper, and to cease the burning and aking. Take the juice of Smallage and plantane, of each a like quantity, honey and the white of an egge, a like quantitie; put thereto boulted flower; and stirre it together til it be thick, let it come to no fire, but apply it cold to the sore, and it wil cease the aking, cleanse the wound, and heal it fair, and bring it into very good temper. An hasty healer of wounds. Take Frankinsence, and as much fine rosen beaten to smal powder, and put thereto a little oyle of Roses, and mingle it well till it bee soft like oyntment, and apply it with lint. To make a drink that healeth all wounds, without plaister or ointment. Take Sanacle, Millefoil, otherwise called Yarrow, and Bugle, of each a like quantitie; stampe it, and temper it in white wine, and give it to the patient to drinke thrice a day and it wil cure him; for bugle keepeth the wound open, and yarrow cleanseth it; but Sanacle may not be given in any case to him that is wounded in the head, for it will kil him; but it may be given to him that is wounded in any part of the body else, and it will heale it. To stanch the bleeding of a wound. Mingle Bole Armoniack with the white of an egge, and lay
it to the wound or in time of necessity, a collope of Martimas beefe or bacon broiled upon the coals, and lay it to the wound, and Bole Armoniack laid to it when it is first hurt, stancheth the blood. To take away warts. Purcella rubbed upon the warts, pulleth them up by the roots, of his owne propertie; also an oak Apple stamped and tem∣pered with good tart vineger, destroyeth warts and tetters. For an Angnaile. Mell Galbanum, Turpentine, and red wax melted in an Oster∣shell; drop thereof a little, so hot as you can suffer it, being fist pared; and clap thereon a piece of Leather, or else first droppe it on the Leather, and then apply it; or else cut away the corne, and droppe thereon a droppe or two of black snaile, being pricked with a pinne, and put thereto the powder of San∣difer. To make Wormwood water. Take of the young crops of Wormwood two pound, of liquo∣rice sliced and a little bruised, halfe a pound, as much Annis∣seed; steepe it all night in foure gallons of strong Ale, and af∣terwards distill it. To kill childrens wormes. Give them to eate Rubarbe preserved, or Peach flow∣ers preserved, or the juice of a Citron, or Lemmon, or powder of Carduus Benedictus, or the decoction of it, the seede of Egrimonie, with the juice mingled and made in little pills is very good. To make clarret water. Put into a pinte of Aqua vitae, three ounces of Cinamon scraped very small, the space of three dayes afterwards straine it softly through a linnen cloth, then put to it an ounce of Sugar, and the third part of old Rose water, keepe it in a glasse bottle wel stopped to your use. This water is verie good for a woman after her travell to keep her from swounding, vo∣miting, weaknesse of the stomack, shortnesse of the winde, to
make one voide water, and for most womens diseases. To draw a bullet out of a wound. Make a tent of a piece of a quince, or for lack of quince, of Marmalade dipped in oyle of eggs put it in the wound, and it wil draw out the bullet. To restore wine that is sowre. The seede of porret keepeth wine from sowring, and if it bee sowre, it restoreth it againe, Cabbage rootes will also turn sowre wine, or vinegar to wine, as some write; how truly, the experi∣ence will shew; I cannot tell. To joyne cut sinnews. The rootes of white Lillies beaten with honey, joyneth sinnews together that are cut, the leaves also, and flowers of grown∣sell beaten and mingled with fine powder of Frankinsence, healeth all wounds, and especially of the sinnews. For a Stitch in the side and stomack. Take some leaven, Rose leaves, Rose water and vineger, a little mints, and the tops of Wormwood, boile them all toge∣ther till they bee thick like a plaister, then spread it on a linnen cloth, and put upon the plaister some nutmeg grated, and lay the plaster to the bare skinne where the paine is. An excellent medicine for the run∣ing of the reines. Take of red Amber the weight of six pence, of red coral in pow∣der two ounces, of garden cresset seedes one ounce, tenne inches of the pith of an ox back, four cap dates, taking away the cap and inner skin, one stick of Cinnamon, four ounces of fine Sugar, boile all these together in a quart of Muscadine, from a quart to a pint and halfe, then straine it into a cleane bason, putting to it two spoonfuls of red Rose water after it is strained, and it will bee a jelly, so you may eat it as you eat jelly, or you may warme it, and ake two spoonfulls at a time, as many times a day as you will, the fter the better.
To kill any Canker. Take the blar of a Slow tree a good quantity, and put thereto wa∣ter, and seeth them together until they be thick and black; and put thereto honey, and stir and temper them with Vineger, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the sore where the Canker is For the Scurvy. Take Scabious, Plantane, Watercresses, Bitony, of each a handful, and as much salt Scurvy-grass as of all the rest in quantity; wash them clean and stamp them in a fair bowl when they are well swing∣ed in a cloth from the water. This done, when they are well beaten, put to four quarts of Beer or Ale; then strain it into a close bottle, then bruise three or four cornes of long Pepper, and put it into the bottle, and drink of it every day three or four times in the day, ever shaking your bottle before you take your draught, because of the sub∣stance and strength of the drink; and it shal cure the Patient by the grace of God. The tokens of this Disease is; They shal be lame, in great ache and rottenness in their flesh, their teeth fall out, and so impaired in strength, that they shall seem past all recovery, and very faint, not able to feed themselves; and yet I have seen this Medicine cure them. Ʋnguentum album Camphoratum. Take of the Oyl of Roses one pound and a half, of white Wax two ounces, of Cerus made in fine powder six ounces, six whites of eggs, of Camphire dissolved in Rose water two ounces. Make your Oyntment after this manner, Melt your Wax and Oyl of Roses to∣gether on the fire; and when they be melted put them in a brazen Mortar, and stir them about with the pestle until they be through cold, then sprinkle your Cerus lightly on it until it be all in, then mix and stir them wel together, and put in your Camphire, and last of all your whites of eggs, stirring them and compounding them sufficiently to∣gether. So your Oyntment is made. The Black Oyntment. Take of fine Oyl Olive one pound and a half, of new Wax four ounces, of black Rosen, stone pitch, and Gum Seraphive of each two ounces; Mastick, Olibanum, Galbanum, Frankinsence, Turpentine, of each an ounce; dissolve your Galbanum and your Gum Seraphive in strong Vineger, and cleanse them from their drosse; then beat
your Mastick, Olibanum and your Frankinsence into fine powder, then melt your Oyl, Wax, Pitch and Black Rosen all together; and when they be wel melted, put in all your othe things; and so your Oyntment is made. The Vertue: it hath force to draw, and also to make whole. For a Bruise. Take Camomile one handful, half a handful of Bay salt, as much Wheat-bran, and besprinkle all these with Vinger and fry them in a pan, and lay them to the bruised place so hot as you can. A Water for a sore mouth or a Fistula. Take a pint of Red-wine-vinegar, half a pound of honey, two oun∣ces of Allom, one ounce of Verdigreece, and four penny worth of Cam∣phire, boil them all together. This observe, that when you put in your Verdigreece the Medicine wil look green, but in any wise let it boil until the scum look red like brine, (I say, as the scum of brine) scumming it. To help a mans Members that do swell. Take a pint of Ale and a farthing Manchet of white-bread, and grate it very smal, and put it to the pint of Ale, and put to it three spoonfuls of honey and a handful of Rose leaves, and boil them til they be plaister thick; and then bind the plaister to the grief softly and surely for remaining, and let lye two dayes and three nights, and it wil asswage the swelling, and mollifie the hardneffe thereof. To make a red Plaister; that will dry up a Wound and soder flesh together. Take a pound of old Swines grease, a quarter of a pound of the juice of Plantane, a quarter of Celendine, and boil them together and strain them through a cloth: take four ounces of Mastick, and a little Ro∣sen; then take Bole Armoniack, Sandragon or Sineper, each 5 drams, also Frankinsence and Colosane each 4 ounces, take them, and min∣gle them together, and put thereto 4 ounces of Turpentine. And this Oyntment is good. For the clearness of the eye-sight. Gather red snails and seeth them in clean water, and gather off the grease, and put it in a Viol, and annoint therewith the eyes earely in the morning and late in the evening.
Another. Take red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Vervain, Meadow hair, Enswage, En∣dife, Sengreen, Hilwor, red Fennel, Celendine, of each a quantity, and wash them clean, & lay them in good White-wine a day and a night, and then distil them. The first water wil be like Gold, the second like Silver, the third like Allom. This Water is very good for all manner of sor e eyes, for a Web, Pearle or haw. A Medicine for the swelling of the eyes that cometh of cold, and for bleared eys, and for clearing the eye-sight. Take Egrimony, the leaves of Vervain Fennel, Rue, Roses, and put them in a Stillatory, and sprinkle on them good White-wine, and distil it, and if you wil make it strong, put to it the leaves of Gali∣tri num, and another Herb called Mrsus Galinae, that is to say in English, Chickweed, that beareth a red flower. A good Plaister and Medicine for an ache, and to draw out bruised blood, and for all manner of griefs. Take salt Bacon of an old Swines flitch▪ and melt it in a pan, and let it stand a while til the salt be fallen down to the bottom; then take the clear away, and put it in a pan, and as much Virgins Wax, and put Rickets and Mastick thereto, but first grind them to powder and weld them together; and ever stir them wel, and when that is cooled, that you may put your finger therein, then put thereto as much pwder of Brimstone as them both, and stir it wel til it be thick as honey, and put it in boxes, and when thou hast need, do it on a cloth or eather, and lay it to thy wound A Medicine for a child that is scalded with its own wa∣ter, or for a womans brest that is curdled. Take Wax and Dears suet, and Lavender Spike, and boil them to∣gether, and let it stand til it be cold, and it wil be a Salve. A pre∣sent Remedy. To make Oyl of Camomile. Take the flowers of Camomile a handful▪ and put them into a pint of Oyl, and cover it close, and set it in the Sun six dayes, then set a skillet of water over the fire, and let it seeth; then set your pot of oyl
therein, and let it seeth four or five hours; then take out your pot and strain your Oyl, and put fresh flower thereto, and so set it other seven dayes in the Sun; then put it into the water as is aforesaid, and strain it again, and put fresh flowers thereto, and set it eighteen dayes in the Sun, and keep it all the year with those flowers; and when you list to occupy it, strain as much as will serve your turn. This Oyle is good to repel all swellings, bruises, and to take away hardnesse, ceasing the pain. To make Oyl of Bay. Take your Barberries, and use as your Camomile is used aforesaid; and for other Oyls, take the herbs, flowers, using them as the other a∣foresaid. A very good and gentle Glister. Take two drams of Sene, one dram of Anniseeds, half an ounce of Polipody, Hollioak, Mercury and Camomile, of each a handful, two handfuls of Barley; and seethe all these in two pints of running water, til it come to a pint; then strain it, and put to it of Jera-Composita two drams a spoonful of hony, and one of the Oyl of Ca∣momile, a little salt, a piece of butter. A Water very good and comfortable for a cold sto∣mack▪ Take a gallon of good White▪wine, and these Spices following, Ginger, Galingale, Anniseeds, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Fennel∣seeds, Caraway seeds, of each one dram; bruise them somewhat smal; and these Herbs following, Rosemary, Wild-Time, Wild-Marjoram, Organ, Puvedge, Mometaies, Camomile and Lavender, of each a handful, Sage, Mints, red Roses, Time, Pellitory, as much as of the other abovesaid; then put them all into an earthen pot with the Wine, and let them stand twelve hours, stirring them about often∣times; then distil them in a Limbeck, and keep a pint of the first Wa∣ter, the which is the principal, by it self; and the next by it self; then use one spooneful of this Water, with Beer or Ale, for it hath preserved many of a long time. To make a Woman that hath a dead child within, imme∣diately to be delivered. Take of a Bulls gall the quantity of an Almond, and mix with it two spoonfuls of Wine; and let her drink it, and she will avoid it strait.
For the swelling of the Cods. Take the powder of Cummin seed, and Barly meal, with hony of each a like quantity, fry them together with a little sheeps suet, and bind the same as a Plaister all about the Cods, and it will help it. To help a stinking breath that cometh from the stomack. Take two handfuls of Cummin seed, & beat it to powder, then seeth it in a pottle of White-wine till half be wasted; then give the party a good draught thereof first and last as hot as he may suffer it; and it will make him have a sweet breath within fifteen dayes. Probatum. The root of Pellitory of Spain chewed between the teeth, will purge the head, and fasten the teeth very well, so that it wil help the head and tooth-ache if it be used four or five times in a day two or three dayes together. Probatum est. The gall of a Partridge annointed once in a month on the Arte∣ries of the head Temples, so that it may penetrate and sink in, doth profit very much for the confirming of the memory. Simeon Sethy. Ʋnguentum de Althaea. Take of March-Mallow roots two pound, of Linseed, or Flaxseed, and of Fennegrick, of each a pound, Oyl Olive four pounds, of Wax one pound, Venis Turpentine three ounces, of Rosen six oun∣ces; beat your roots and your seeds, and put them into a gallon of fair water, and let them infuse four dayes, then seeth it on the fire until it appear a viscous and skinny Musculage; then strain it, and take off the said Musculage, and put it into your Oyle, and let it boile over the fire till the watry substance be consumed. Then add to your Wax and your other things, when they be all melted to∣gether, your Oyntment is made. It is good against all swellings whatsoever, it will dissolve and sof∣ten. It is hot and moist, and therefore in hot causes it ought to bee allayed with Oyl of Roses and Populion. Ʋnguentum Aureum. Take of yellow Wax six ounces, Oyle of Olive two pound and a half, Rosen and stone Pitch, of each two ounces and a alfe, Tur∣pentine two ounces, Frankinsence and Mastick, of eah half an ounce
Saffron two drachmes, and then make up your Ointment. It doth join together wounds safely and soundly, and hath also an especial effect in the curing and cicatrising of all Ulcers. The Egyptian Oyntment. Take of Verdigreece made into fine powder five ounces, fine Ho∣ney clarified fourteen ounces, of strong Wine-vineger seven ounces, boil all together on the fire, continually stirring them until it be thick and it look of a purple colour, then your Oyntment is made: It is most excellent against old wounds, it taketh dead flesh from a Sore without any pain. An approved distilled Water against Deafnesse. Take of the juice of Betony and Onions, of each six ounces, of Rosemary-leaves two handfuls, oyl of bitter Almonds four ounces, and one white grosse Eele chopt and cut into small pieces; mix them together, and distil it, and the Water which cometh thereof keep in a clean glasse, and drop two or three drops thereof into your Ear four or five nights together. An excellent Plaister to splint a broken Leg or Arm. Take of fine Myrrh, Dragons blood, Olibanum minima, of each two ounces, of Terrasigillata, Bean-flower or Bean-meal, Mil-dust, of each four ounces, bole Armoniack six ounces, make all into fine powder, mix and compound them well together, and keep it close in a Bladder till you have occasion to use it; and when you have need to use of the said powder, mix some of it with the whites of Eggs, and make it in the form of a soft Plaister; and the Leg or Arm being set as it ought to be, spread this same Plaister on Tow, and apply it to the grief round about, so splint it accordingly, and by Gods grace you shall have good successe. A most excellent Confection which is very good for many inward Diseases, especially for all Fluxes of Blood, from whence soever they flow; also for them which have great pain in their Backs and Liver. Take of Cinamon, Cassia lignea, opium, of each two drachms, Mirrh,
white Pepper, black Pepper and Galbanum, of each one dram, let them be stamped and mixed with a little clarified Honey, and made in a lump; give thereof at night two round Pils somthing bigger then a Pease in the pap of an Apple, and let not the party drink in two hours after, you may give it three nights together without danger, if the party be strong; if he be of a weak constitution, give it every other night. An excellent Oyl of Balm. Take of fine cleer Turpentine one pound, and put it into a glasse, and warm it over a soft and easie fire until it wax liquid, and put therein by little and little with mixing or stirring it, the powder of Frankincense five Dramms, of the powder of Lignum Aloes, Ma∣stick, Cloves, Galingal, Cinamon, Mace and Cubebs, of each two drams, the leaves of Ivy made into powder six drams; put all the pow∣ders together, and mix them all with the said Turpentine, made li∣quid as before; and when they be well incorporated together, set on the head of the Limbeck, and stop all the joints of the same very wel, and set it on the ashes, and put under it an easie fire; and when it beginneth to distil, let it drop away a little, for the first drops are lit∣tle worth; then put the receiver to the nose of the Limbeck, and close them well together that no Oyl get forth; then at the first will come forth a cleer and white Water, which keep by it self; then will come forth a second Water, which is better, of a heavenly and airy colour, which keep by it self; then receive the third, which is best, which wil be yellow and thick like Honey; keep this also by it self: The first is called the Water of Balm, the second the oyl of Balm, the third is the true Balme. The first vertue thereof is, that it burneth; the second is, that if you wash your face and nose therewith every day three times, it per∣fectly cureth the rheum, it cleereth the sight, it comforteth the sinews, if you wash therewith the hinder part of the head, it comforteth the Memory: this doth purifie both flesh and fish, it bringeth an app∣tite, it comforteth the stomack; if you take thereof morning and evening a drachm in white Wine, it consumeth the flegm, it cureth a stinking breath, as well coming of the stomack as of the brain; it cureth the biting of a Toad or Serpent, if you anoint the grieved place; it cureth any kind of Scab or Tetter▪ if you put three or four drops of it into your Ear, and suffer it there as long as you may, it
cureth all swounings and noise in the head; if you mix this with an equal portion of Germander, onely the juice, and put thereof three or four drops four times a day into the Ear, it cureth any kinde of Deafnesse, it cureth blearing and watry Eyes; it cureth (if you wash therewith) all Imposthumes and superfluities, and it is good against cold Humours, all pains of the Teeth, and maketh them white; it cu∣eth all wounds in the Head, being washed therewith thrice a day; all Fistulaes and Cankers, the Kings-evil, or any other biting sore, being washed therewith thrice a day; it cureth all Gouts that come of a cold cause, annointing it, and laying a linnen cloth dipt in it, and applied to the grieved place; it helpeth the Emrods, and falling out of the Fundament, it is good for all bruises by fall, or otherwise, and is good also for the Palsie. Gallens cold Cerret. Take of white wax one dramme, oyle of Roses four drams, melt them together, and when they are melted, take them from the fire, and stir them together til they be cold, then adde to it a quan∣titie of white wine vineger, so stir it together in the vineger untill it bee white, and then it is made. It doth mightily cool all bur∣ning Agues which doth come of the heat of the stomack and liver, if the stomack be annointed therewith; it is also good against pain in the head, if the Temples be annointed therewith; and also against paine and heat in the back if the back bone be therewith annointed. Ceretum Santalinum. Take of red Rose leaves twelve drams, red Sanders ten drams, of white and yellow Sanders, of each six drammes, Bole Armoni∣ack seven drammes, white wax four ounces, Ivorie foure drammes, Camphire two drammes, oyl of Roses one pound, melt your wax and oyl together, your other things being made into fine powder, and mix all together. It doth most chiefly separate all flegmatick, distemperate and hot humors from the stomack, liver, and all other parts of the bodie. A Powder for a cold stomack, which ex∣pelleth all pains. Take of chosen Cinamon two drams, Ginger half a dram, Cummia seeds, white pepper, Galingal and Cloves of each one dram, Mace one scruple, Nutmegs six grains, fine Sugar an ounce, and make  into fine powder.
An Ointment for the stomack. Take of oile of Wormwood four ounces, oyle of Spikenard and Mastick of each two ounces, of Cloves dried, Cardamoms, Mints, Mace and Mastick of each two drams, of red Rose leaves four scru∣ples; wax as much as is sufficient to make up your ointment ac∣cording to art. For an Ague. Take Featherfew, Smallage, Celendine, Elder buds and herbe grace, of each a like quantity, stampe all these together, take a little Nutmeg, a little Frankinsence and bay salt, beate all these together, and lay it to the wrist bloud warme. For a Felon. Take Ragwort, Rue, and Bores grease, stampe them together and apply it to the grieved place. For a Rupture. Take Knotwort, Ribwort and Comfry, of each a good quantity; dry them and make them into powder severally, then take of each powder severally of like quantity, then take as much powder of Annis seeds finely searced as halfe your other powders, mingle all together and give the patient every morning in Malmsey as much as wil lie on a six pence; also the place must be annointed with oyle of Spike, and keep him wel trust, and apply the poultesse following. A poultesse for a Rupture. Take a pint of red wine, half a pinte of stone honey, a hand∣ful of Wormwood, as much Rue, a penny worth of Cummin, bruise them and thicken it with a penny worth of beane meale wel bolted, make a plaister thereof on a linnen cloth, and lay it to evening and morning as hot as may be endured, within few dayes the wound or hole wil be more large and purged, and the matter that keepeth forth thereby mollified and made more easie to goe up; and after it be cleer up three dayes, and so kept with your truss, use the above∣said drink, and keep the patient continually trussed. For aches and swellings in the Knees coming of cold. Take a quart of Malmsey, a handful of Thime, boil them together
and when it is half boiled, put to it a good piece of sweet Butter, and boil altogether from a quart to a pinte, and when you go to bed bath your Knees therewith, and wet a cloth three or four double therein, and lay it to your Knees as hot as you can suffer it all night; use it seven or eight times and it will help you. For Aches in your Legs, Arms and Shoulders. Bruise a little Speerage, and lay it within a little round compasse upon the place which aketh, and it will raise a blister; then take off the speer-grasse, and lay on the place Ivy-leaves, and they will draw forth the Humour that causeth it. Against all Agues. Anoint the soles of your feet and hands with oyl of Scorpion, and likewise the Fore-head and Back-bone before the fit cometh; it cureth quotidian, tertian or quartan Agues. To purge the Back, and to cleanse the Reins. Take one Fennel root, two Parley roots, pith them, and put to it a handful of Pellitory of the wall, wash all very clean, and boil it in posset Ale, and drink it when you go to bed, and also if you awake at midnight. For the heat of the Back. Steep Sanders and rose-leaves in rose-water all night, then wash your Back with it, and it will take away the heat, and greatly comfort the Reins. To cool and strengthen the Back. Take oyl of Almonds, red rose-leaves, Violet-leaves and flowers, of each a like quantity, bruise them in a Mortar, and put all together in a glasse, and let it stand three or four days in the same; then anoint your back therewith, and it will both strengthen and cool it: Keep this Oyl well stopt, and renew it with roses three or four times, and it will last all the yeer. For Biles, Felons or Ancoms. Take Wheat-flower, Boars-grease, May-butter and Sage, stamp it all together, and make a Plaister thereof, and it will both ripen and draw it; and if it be fried it worketh the better: Or else take a pint of sweet Milk, set it on the fire, and put thereto Sheeps suet smal shred,
a handful or two of Oatmeal small beaten, boil it till it be thick, then spread it on a fair linen cloth, and lay it on as warm as you can suffer it to the Sore, and it wil break it suddenly without pain: when it is broken, lay a little Turpentine on a piece of Leather pricked ful of holes, and it wil draw and heal it. To keep a Brest from breaking, if it be not too far gone. Take Clay without stones, and knead it with sharp Vineger and the yolks of two Eggs and a little English Saffron, and work it in the Clay; and take as much of it as wil cover the rednesse of the Brest, and use it cold. Some Brests have no colour, and such are not lightly saved from breaking; but if your brest be red, it is the better. To break sore Brests. Take white Lilly-roots and a piece of leaven, seeth them in Milk til the Lillies be very soft, then spread it plaister-wise on a linnen cloth, and as warm as the party can suffer it, say it to the brest morn∣ing and evening. To heat a Brest when it is broken. Take a handful of Parsley, and a good slice of the fat of bacon, and stamp them together, and put the yolk of an Egg thereto, and plai∣sterwise spread it on a cloth, and lay it to the brest; but the best thing for the cure of the brest is Wicotian stamped: whereof more here∣after. For a Cough. Take a great Apple and cut out the Core, and put into the same a good quantity of butter, a little English Saffron dryed and beaten to powder, the quantity of a Nutmeg of suger-candie; which being done, cover the Apple, rost it soft, and eat it to bed-ward, and in the morning; but eat not in an hour after it. For a Canker in a Womans Brest. Beat Goos-dung and Celendine, and lay it to the sore, and it wil cleanse the Canker, flea the worm, and heal the sore.
For a Canker in the mouth. Take the juice of Plantane, Vineger and Rose-water, and wash the mouth with it. To kill a Canker in the body. The roots of Dragons dryed and made into powder, and drink thereof in White-wine the weight of nine pence, fasting in the mor∣ning, three dayes together. For a Canker in the Hands or Joints. Take the roots of Primrose, stamp it with clarified honey, and lay it on the Canker Plaister-wise, and change it morning and Even∣ing till it be whole. For the Dropsie. Take Lumbardy and Lovage, stamp it, and make a posset there∣of, and drink every morning the space of a month or six weeks; this cureth the Dropsie. For the Pin and Web in the Eye. Take a handful of Herb Bennet, two spoonfuls of Bay-salt, stamp them together, and lay them to the veynes of the wrist of the con∣trary arm, and let it lye twenty four hours, and so use it four or five times. For a stripe or rednesse in the Eyes. Distil Strawberry leaves, and wash your eyes, and drop in a little thereof morning and evening. To destroy Earwigs in a mans Ear. Take the juice of Wormwood, Rue and Southernwood, of each a like quantity, put it into your ear and it will kil it, or any other ver∣min that is creeping in the head, being used four or five times, so you stop your eares with some of the Herbs. To cure the Emrods. Take a handful of Parsley with the roots, stamp it wel, and put to it Oyl Olive, let it stand a day; then strain the juice from the drosse a aoint the grief against the fire, and keep him warm.
For the Bloody Flux. Take a pint of Red-wine, the yolks of five new laid eggs, Cina∣mon a good quantity, a little Sugar, a good quantity of the pill of a Pomegranate, dryed and beaten to powder; boil all these in a plat∣ter til they be somewhat thick. Let the Patient drink of it morn∣ing and evening, and as often in the day as his stomack will serve; and it wil stop him be his Flux never so great. For the going out of the Fundament. Stamp red Nettles, and boil them in an earthen pot in White-wine til half be consumed, let the party drink of it warm, and lay the Herbs to the Fundament as hot as he can. To cure a Fellon. Take yest that remaineth in the bottom of a barrel, a handful of Groundsel stamped, a good piece of the sourest leven that you can get, boil it together to the thickness of a Salve, and apply it to the Fel∣lon as hot as you can suffer it, for it wil both break and heal it. For Defluctions in the Eyes. Lay upon your forehead a plaister made of Snails mingled with the powder of Frankinsence and Aloes well stirred til it become as thick as honey. For a stie in the Eye. The juice of great Celendine mingled with honey or wo∣mans milk, taketh away the stie. For sore Eyes that have a skin grown over the light. Take a new laid egg, and put out the yolk, and the white, but not wipe the Cream out that doth hang on the shel; then take a handful of Clever grasse, stamp it and strain it with a little Orange water, and put it into the Eggshel, and set it in the Embers, and put to it a piece of white Copperas as big as a Hasel nut, and a little honey. For the going out of the Fundament. Heat Apostolicon at the fire, and touch the Fundament therewith and it shal go in incontinently; use this three or four times as it cometh out.
For the swelling of the Fundament. Rosemary-leaves stampt and applyed with warm clothes, asswageth the swelling, being often applied to it. For the Falling Sicknesse. The powder of Harts-horn drunk with Wine, healeth it; so doth the Egg of a wilde Raven drunk with the juice of Rew. For the Fistula. Take Cloves, Pimpernel, Valerian, Mousear, herb Robert, Tansie, seeth it all in white Wine, and give it to the Patient to drink twice or thrice a day. To purge and cut Flegm. Take Eight spoonfuls of Rose-water, four spoonfuls of Conduit-wa¦ter, two spoonfuls of white Wine-vineger, two ounces of fine sugar, boil all these in a porrenger on a Chafing-dish of Coals, scum it clean, and drink it luke-warm. For spots in the Face. Set a Lemon to the fire, and the water which wil sweat out of it cleereth the face from rednesse and spots. For a Fistula. Oyl of brimstone healeth Fistulaes, Tetters and Cankers of the Mouth, touching the sores with a fether dipt in the Oyl, but it is ve∣ry painful to the Patient. For the running of the Reins. Take the Ladles of Acorns dried and beaten to powder, a spoonful of it, and drink it every morning in Ale warmed, and keep your bed two hours after. For the Siatica. Heat Cowdung in ashes in a vine leafe, or in a Cabbage leafe, and lay it to the grief. For the noise in the head. Take a Clove of Garlick, pil it, and prick two or three holes in it, and dipt it into fine hony, and put it into your eare, and put a little
black wool after it, and lie on the contrary side each night, and so let it continue in your ear seven or eight dayes and it wil expel the hu∣mors out the nose, and restore your hearing. For the ring-worm in the head. Let the ring-worme of the head be washed with strong vineger, and after sprinkle thereon the ashes of the rind of Woodbinds. For the giddinesse in the head. Wash the head with the decoction of three leaved grasse, and lay a plaister of the herb to the forehead; misselto stamped and laid plaster wise, draweth out corrupt humors of the head. To kill lice in the head. The powder of Harts tongue drunk in wine, doth suffer neither lice nor nits to live on the body, much lesse if it be made into oynt∣ment. For the heart. Take Borage flowers, bugloss flowers, and red rose flowers, of each two drams and a halfe, Rosemary flowers, Dil, Violets, dry Balm, Mints, red coral, of each one dram, make a bag thereof in Sarcenet, for it is very good. For the trembling of the heart. Take the powder of Borage flowers, Nutmegs, white Amber, the bone of a stags heart and Cinnamon, mingle all together, of each a like quantity, and drink thereof in Beer, Ale or Wine, mor∣ning and evening. For the paine of the Emrods. Make an ointment of oyle of Roses washed in Violet water, fresh butter, oyle of Lin-seed, the yolk of an egge, and a little wax, no∣thing is better to asswage the paine, then the perfume of scrapings of Ivory. To stop the Emrods. Drinke a dram of the powder of red coral with plantane water, Porret leaves sod and laid to the place, asswageth the swelling and paines: the roots and leaves of little Celendine boiled, doth heale the Emrods, Piles, Cankers, Warts or hard swellings coming of cold.
To dissolve any hardness. Boil red worms with Hogs grease and Oyle of Roses; annoint the place, and it will take away any hardnesse. Against the yellow Jaundies. Take a big Apple and cut off the top, so as it may cover the Ap∣ple again, take out the core, and put into it sweet Butter, a good deal of Turmerick, and a little English Saffron, and roste it very tender, and let the Patient eat of it three or four mornings together, or more if need be. Also take Celendine, English Saffron, and the powder of Ivory, and boil them in White-wine, and drink thereof a good quantity mor∣ning and evening for seven or eight dayes. For the black Jaundies. Take the gall of a Raven, dry it, and grate it to powder, put a quantity of it in a spoon, temper it with Bear or Ale, and drink it fasting. To ripen an Imposthume. Take the roots and leaves of Mallowes, the roots of Lilies and crums of white-bread, boil all together and strain it, and put to it the yolk of an egg, and a little Saffron; but if the Imposthume be cold, you may add to the Plaister Alla-Campane roots, flowers of Camomile and a little leaven. Secondly, Lay to it Wheat chewed a long time. Thirdly, Oyl of Wax ripeneth Imposthumes, taketh away aches, comforteth and suppleth hard sinewes; and it is also good against the Palsie. To stop the Lask. Take a quart of Red-wine, Mints and Bawme, of each a handful, a good quantity of Pomgranate pills, a penny worth of Cinamon powdered; all these being boiled in the said Wine, make Almond milk of it, and drink of it sundry times. For the Morphew. Take the juice of Celendine, and mingle with it the powder of Brimstone, and lay it to cold where the Morphew is.
For the Mother. Take out the core of a great Onion, and put thereto a little Oyl O∣live and juice of Wormwood; then cover it, and lap it in a paper, and set it in the embers till it be soft; then take it out, and put in as much honey as it wil receive, and lay it to the bare Navel plaister wise, and let it ly there twenty four hours; then take a hanful of Cinqfoil, boil it in White-wine, and let her drink thereof a good draught. For a sore mouth. Boil Cinqfoil in milk with a little Allom, and hold your mouth over the milk, and when it is blood warm, wash your mouth there∣with, and gargarize your throat therewith. For stubbing with a rusty nail. Take Allom and white Honey-suckles, and make thereof an Oyntment with May butter, and put the said Oyntment in the sore, and lay it Plaister wise. Fo the pricking of a Needle in a Joynt, the hole being stopped. Take fine bolted flower, temper it with White-wine, Beer or Ale, boil it together til it be thick; and lay it to the sore as hot as he can suffer it, and that will both open the hole and draw out the filth, and close it up again. For pricking in a sinew, with a needle or knife. Heat Oyle of Roses and lay it as hot as you can suffer it to the place, and bind black wool about it and you shall have remedy and find ease. To draw out a Nail or Thorn. Heat Turpentine in an Oister shel, wet a little lint in it, lay it hot to the sore and change it often. If it begin to rankle, annoint the sore with the juice of Cinqfoil; or else take Beer or Ale, and let it boil til it be thick like a Salve, and then lay it plaister wise to the grief. The first Salve of Tobacco. Take a pound of the fairest leaves, wipe them clean with a dry cloth and stamp them; then take half a pound of sheeps suet, pull off
all the skin, cut it smal and melt it; to the which put in your leaves stamp'd, but not strain'd, boil it with a very soft fire, or else in a kettle or pot of seething water, til all the watry substance be con∣sumed, then strain it. This Salve is good for Wounds, Cuts, Can∣kers, Scabs, Redness or Buttons in the face, because its vertue is to cleanse and dissolve, being not hindred by mingling with o∣ther things. The second Salve of Tobacco. Melt Rosen, new Wax, and Turpentine, of each three ounces, when it is molten, put a pound of fair leaves stampt, but not strained, stir it well, and let it boil five or six hours, with a very soft fire, or else in a pot of fair water, till the watry substance be consumed; then strain it with a course linnen cloth, and put it againe into the Posnet with half a pound of Venice Turpentine, and stir it well, but let it not boil; when it is cold, put it up, and keep it close stop∣ped. The Vertue. This Salve is better to make the flesh grow, and fasten wounds, and to dissolve Imposthumes and Swellings, to assage aches in the joynts or any other place. The Balm of Tobacco. Take Tobacco leaves, stamp them and strain them, put the juice into a strong glasse, with the like quantity of Oyl Olive, stop it ve∣ry close, and set the glasse in boiling water, until it be all turned to Oyl; or else set it long in the Sun, or bury it six weeks or longer in a horse dung hill, but it must be very well stopt, or else it will have a very ill sent; and remove it from place to place: or if you wil, you may put it in the Oven two or three times in an earthen pot, after∣wards strain it, and you shall have a Balm or Oyl of no lesse vertue then the quintessence of Tobacco, for all the effects this Herb can work any kind of way. A Turgation for the Back. Take a pint of White-wine, one ounce of Sene, four ounces of Raisons of the Sun stoned, a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, three or four roots of Polipody of the Oak; put all these into the White-wine one whole night to steep, hn boil it til it come to one good draught, and let the Patient rin: it luke warm
To make compound Oximel. Take a pottle of good stone Honey, a pint and half of White-wine Vineger, a pottle or five pints of Spring-water, five Parsley roots, five Fennel roots, and five Smallage roots, the cores being taken out; then take the roots of Kneeholme two ounces, the roots of Aspera∣gus one ounce, Fennel seed, Smallage Seed, of each half an ounce, these roots being shred, and the seeds somewhat bruised, must be steep∣ed in a pottle or five pints of running water twenty four hours; then boile it in the water, from the said five pints to a quart; and be∣ing strained, you shall put thereto your honey to be clarified and boiled therein; after put thereto your vineger, and let them, with a very soft fire, boil together till it come to the thickness of a Syrrup. A spoonful thereof taken every morning, doth cut and divide all grosse humors, purgeth the Liver, the Reins and the Spleen, taketh away all obstructions, moveth Urine, and provoketh sweat. An Oyntment to be made in May, which is good for the stiffnesse of the Joints and shrinking up of Sinewes, for the pain in the Back, the stitch in the side, for the stopping of the Liver and Spleen, or Ague fallen in a∣ny part of the Flesh, if it be taken before it grow to an Imposthume, for bruising and knots: it will also take away swelling and blackness. Take Rue, Sage, Wormwood, Fetherfew, Bay-leaves and Plantane, of each a like quantity, beat them in a Stone Mortar till they be small; then take Neatsfoot Oyl, and put it to the herbs, and put these herbs in an earthen pot, and let them remaine rot∣ting two or three months with the Oyle; then when you will try it, take more Neatsfcot Oyle and put it to the Herbs, so that the Herbs be so thick, that you be scant able to stir it; and set it on the fire in another Vessel, and let it simber three quarters of an hour, and stir it for fear of burning; then strain it, and keep it in pots for your use.
Oyle of Mastick. Take a pint of Oyl of Roses, two ounces of Mastick beaten to powder, a quarter of a pint of Red-wine; boil all together till the Wine be consumed, then set it in a glasse in the Sun, and when you wil occupy it, strain it. To make Oyl of Roses. Take a pound and half of red Rose leaves, cut away the whites, and stamp them small, and put them in a glasse or earthen pot; put thereto a quart of Oyl Olive; and let the glasse be full of Oyl and leaves within an inch of the top, then stop it close with past, that no air come into it, and set the glasse in a pot full of Water, as high as the Oyl is, and no higher; and et the glasse fast that it fal not, with some Hay under it that it break not, and let it seeth in the pot til the water be half wasted; then take the pot from the fire, and let the glasse stand in it without removing til it be cold, afterward take out the glass and pour out the Oyl, and put it in another glass, and put fresh Rose leaves to it. This manner is to be observed in making Oyl of all other Herbs. Oyle of Almonds. Take Almonds, blanch them and stamp them, and put them into an earthen pot with a cover of paste well stopt; then put it into a brasse pot that doth seeth with water, so it doth not overflow the earthen pot, and the heat of the water wil turn the Almonds into Oyle when it is strained. In this sort is made Oyl of all manner of kernels. Oyl of Camomile. Take the flowers of Camomile, stamp them, and seeth them in Oyl, and when they be well sodden, strain them through a cloth. This Oyle is good for Aches. To make Oyl of Eggs. Roste twenty or thirty Eggs hard, take off the whites, and rub the yolks in your hands, then fry them in an earthen pan leaded, with a soft fire, stir them often til they be red, then presse them,
and you shal have abundance of oyle. This oyle is good for all manner of spots of the skin, to heal Tetters, Fistulaes or deep wounds, for aches, to make the skin smooth, for chops in the lips or hands, to take out spots of burnings▪ and to make hair grow. To make Oyl of Roses without Oyl Olive. Put red or Carnation Roses in a glass very wel stopped in a dung∣hil the space of a month, and the oyle will be very sweet. To make Oyl of Wheat. Press your Wheat with a clean pair of very hot tongs, and the oyl that cometh from it is good for Fistulaes, Cankers, spots in the skin, and for scald heads using it alwayes warm. To make Oyl of Anniseeds. Take a good quantity of Anniseeds, cleanse it from all dust, then grind it, and beat it in a Mortar; when it is wel beaten, put in∣to every pound of seed one onnce of water or wine, and beat it again till it be wel mingled, then put it into a frying pan, and stir it on the coals till it be so hot that you cannot suffer your hand in it; then take it out, and put it into a strong piece of course cloth, and presse it very well in such sort as you shall make oile of Anniseeds. To make Oyle of Tartary. Take the crust that sticketh on the sides of White-wine Ves∣sels, for that is the best, beat it to powder, and then steep it in very strong Vineger; or if you have not Vineger, it may be done with∣out steeping: wrap it in a Bullocks bladder, or hogs, or some other bladder, put it under the embers, and so let it remaine til it be white; you shall know if it be enough, if it look clear and burn your tongue a little, then put it in a linnen bag, made like an Ipocris bag, and hang it in some Cellar or moist place with a glasse under it to receive the oyle or water; but if it stil not, presse it out. The oyle healeth Tetters, Scald heads, and all manner of scabs, and taketh away all spots in the face, hindereth the falling of hair, and also maketh that grow which is fallen, and taketh spots out of lin∣nen if it be rubbed with the oil thereof warm.
A Plaister to draw out broken bones out of any part of the body. Take Betony, Vervaine and Rue, stamp them, and mingle them with honey, the white of an egg and Rye-meal, with a little Wheat-flower, and make a Plaister, lay it cold thereto, and it will draw out the bones, cleanse the wound, cease the aking, and asswage the rankling. For the Palsie. Take the powder of Poppy, of Pellitory of Spain and Ivy, of each one ounce, the powder of Sage two ounces; and let him use of this powder in his pottage. For the lameness in the side coming of the Palsie. Boil a great quantity of Sage and Hysop in running water, and bathe the side therewith, and bind the Herbs to it as hot as may be suffered. A Medicine for the Palsie, that taketh away the speech. Take Sage leavs and Primrose leavs, and if it be in the Winter, take Primrose roots, beat them together of like quantity, strain it with stale Ale, and give the sick a good quantity thereof to drink. A Preservative for the Plague. Take of Sage or Herbagreace, of Elder leavs or red Bramble leaves of each a handful, stamp them together, and strain them through a cloth with a quart of White-wine; then take a quantity of Gin∣ger, mingle it together, and drink thereof morning and evening a spoonful. A Medicine for the Rhume. Take a pint of Red-wine-vineger, and half a pint of White-wine-vineger, a handful of the chips of Lignum vitae, of the roots of Polipodium two ounces, burnt Allom the bignesse of a Wall∣nut; seeth all these together, till a quarter of it be sodden away,
then strain it, and put thereto halfe a quarter of a pound of English honey, then seeth it again til the hony be melted, then put it into a glasse, and when you wil use it, put the quantity of two spoonfuls into a sawcer, and the bignesse of a hazel nut of English hony, and warm them together, then put a fine linnen cloth about your finger, and rub the roof of yourmouth as far as you can well reach, or the place grieved. To take away pimples out of the face. Take of Rose water, brimstone, very fine beaten, Coperas burned and beaten to fine powder, and starch a little quantitie, put all these together in a glasse close stopped, and when you would use it shake the glasse, and with a fine linnen cloth wipe your fa. A purgation for flegme. Take halfe a handful of Elder flowers, dried in the time of the yea, and put them into a mess of pottage, and it will move three or four stooles; your flowers must be dried in the shadow, and put up close in a box or earthen pot. A very good salve for a sore, cut, or boile. Take of mead wax, sheeps tallow and rosen of each halfe a pound, Perrosin and Frankinsence, of each four ounces, halfe a pound of Collifony, halfe a pint of Sallet oyle, a pint of Muscadine, Be∣tony, Pimpernel and Vervain, of each half a pint of the water. First cut your wax and melt it, then beat your gums, and shred your Tal∣low, and put it to your wax, letting it boile on a soft fire, then put in your juice with the wine and boil it, then strain it, and put in your oil and boile it a little longer. The Composition of the most precious oile called Oleum Magistrale. Take a quart of the best and oldest white wine that may be got∣ten, of the oldest oyle Olive three pints, then put thereto these flow∣ers and herbs, of Hypericon halfe a pound, Carduus benedictus, va∣lerian, and the lesser sage, of each four ounces, of every one of these you shal take the flowers and the leaves, if it may be had, then let all these things steepe in the aforesaid wine and oile twenty four hours, and the next day boile them in a well nealed pot, or in a copper vessel upon a soft fire, until such time as the wine be all con∣sumed, alwaies stirring it: after you have thus done, take it from the fire and strain it, and in the straining put in a pound and a halfe of good Venice Turpentine, and boil it together on a soft fire a quarter
of an houre, then put thereto Olibanum five ounces, myrthe three ounces, Dragons blood one ounce, and let it boil til the gums be all dissolved, then take it up and let it stand until it be cold; then put it into a glasse bottle and let it stand eight or ten daies in the same, and so keep it for your use. The said Oyle, the older it is, the better, and of greater effect; you must apply it as hot as may bee, for by this means you shall the finelier pierce and heale the wound the sooner. The manner to apply the same Oile according to the quality or dis∣ease, doth consist in these things following; to the patient, to the ound or disease, and to the diseased part. First, the party must not keep straight diet in either eating or drink∣ing for weakning of his body, but as he was accustomed before he was hurt; yet if it be a body filled with humors and given to a feaver or o∣ther inconveniencies, he must use his meat and drink with discretion; if he drink wine, it must be allayed with water. 2. If the wound bee green the party ought to keep his bed, or at least his chamber, without taking any air which might hinder its operation. 3. He must keep an order in his lying, he must not alwaies lie on one side but turn as wel on the wounded side, as on the other, especially an hour before he be dressed, to the end the humors may descend to the griefe. 4. He must endure he oyle as hot as he can, for it is the nature of the oyle to be applied seething hot, for the hotter, the stronger it is in operation., and he must abstain from the company of women, because it will bring a great inconvenience unto him; and not only for the time of his curing, but also twenty daies after if the wound be great. A preparative to the said Oyle. To prepare the wound before the applying of the said oyl, take good white wine, and boil it with a handful of incense, which is only to comfort, with which you shall wash the wound as hot as he can suffer it within and without, then wipe it very clean, with a linnen cloth, before you apply the oile which shal be shewed you, and the time when you shall apply it, and when the aforesaid washing shall not be used. The time of dressing a wound. It is necessary, that if the wound do come by any bitings or brui∣sings, that they be dressed twice a day, and likewise by any other; that is to say, in winter at eight in the morning, and three in the after∣noon;
in Summer at ten in the morning, and at foure in the af∣ternoone: if it be a green wound you shal not need to change it a∣gain til next day at the same hour. The difference of the diseases. The wounds and diseases do differ: some are old and some new, some in one part, and some in another, as in the head, armes, or legs, and other parts, which cause the wounds to differ, as shall be shewed hereafter for the better understanding hereof. The use of the implaister that is to be applied with the Oyl upon the diseased partie. First, for wounds in the head, you shal shave away the haire two or three fingers broad about the place of the wound, then stay the blood with lint or tow dipt in the same oile, with the which you shal fil the wound, and upon that apply a linnen cloth two or three double which shal cover all the place as far as the hair hath been shaved a∣way, being steeped in the prepared wine before mentioned, and af∣terwards wrung out, then roll it up. This ought to be applied at the first dressing; also you shal note, that if the wound be very great and dangerous, by means whereof there may issue a flux of blood, you dress it but once a day the first and second dressing; and for the time forward at every dressing you shall wash the wound with the wine aforesaid, both within and without, keeping it very clean with a fine linnen cloth, then afterwards you shal fil the wound with oyle and cover it with lint steeped in the same, and upon that apply a linnen cloth two or three double round about, being dipped in the oyl, and then upon that again lay another cloth moistned in the said wine, and wrung out as aforesaid. This is the particular order of all manner of wounds, and must be used til such time, as you perceive the wound is upon healing, and then you must dip lint into the said oyl and apply it to the wound, and over that lay a plaister of Diacu∣lum Magnum, and it shal close and heal it up perfectly. Before you have throughly healed the wound, take this Experiment following. Take of the five opening roots of each one ounce, of the roots of mader one ounce and half, of the leaves of Endive, Succory, Bo∣rage, Buglosse and Egrimony of each one handful, of Carduus Be∣nedictus, Nepe and Pennyroyal of each one handful and a halfe, of
the three cordial flowers, of each a little handful, of Annis seeds, Fennel seeds and carra way seeds of each one ounce and a halfe, of Pollipodie of the Oak two ounces, of Cene three ounces, of Ear∣thanus seeds beaten two ounces, boile all these in eight pints of faire water, til five pints of it be consumed; then cool it, straine it, and clarifie it according to art, and give every morning to the pa∣tient four ounces luke warme, and observe the rule as you ought to do in taking a purgation; and in so doing you shal finish and heale your cure perfectly on warrantie. A secret unknown for the purifying of, and clean∣sing the skin of the face, or other parts of the body, distilled and approved. Take six new laid eggs, half a pint of Malmsey and a young Piegeon not wholly feathered, halfe a pound of Cheese coming from the presse made of new milke, eight Oranges, oyle of Tar∣tar foure ounces, Cerus made into powder one ounce, Gumme Arabick and Mastick, of each one ounce and a halfe, water of beane flowers eight ounces, rice foure ounces steeped in halfe a pine of Creame one day and a night, cut the Oranges in pieces, and stampe them a little, then put all together with the Creame and Rice, and distil the same with an easie fire, and keep the water distilled in a cleane glasse close stopped, and use to rub and wet your face therewith every evening when you go to bed, and every morning wash it clean with water distilled with beane flowers; use this four∣teen daies or three weeks, and you shal find it an excellent thing. To take spots out of the face. Put seven eggs in most pure and strong white wine vineger, and let them lie so long therein til their shell be as soft as their inner skins, and mix therewith foure ounces of mustard seeds made into fine powder, then stampe or grind all together, and therewith let the face be often annointed: it is good before you use this ointment, to take an apozema which doth purge, open and qualifie the heat of the liver, and in short time it wil cure you. To purge flegm. Take liquorice, horehound, Isop, syrup of Roses, dried Violets
and poppy, of each one ounce, and make thereof a syrup, and take it evening and morning on a liquorice stick. An easie and general purge. Take of Sene one ounce, Agarick two drachms, Annis seeds one penyworth, one race of Ginger sliced, the flowers or tops of Borage a smal quantity, the Agarick must be thin sliced; put all these into a pint of white wine, cover it close and set it over the hot embers all night, and in the morning give it a little walm, so as it be made hot, and then straine it; then take it in the morning with foure spoonfuls of syrup of Roses, putting in a quarter of an ounce of Dia∣phenican, and so take it two mornings; if you find the purge too strong for you at the first taking, leave out the Diaphenican at the second taking; but the Diaphenican is a very necessary thing, and of no danger. The next day after you have purged, take a draught of Malmsey, but eat a quantity of Mithridate. A Syrup for the Lungs and Cough. Take of horehound three handfuls, liquorice two ounces, Maiden hair, Isop, Savory, Colts-foot and pennyroal of each one handful, Annis seeds and Fennel seeds of each one ounce and a halfe, raisins of the Sun stoned half a ponnd, figs twenty, a penny worth of Eli∣campane; seeth all these in a pottle of running water, until it be sodden away, and then strain it, and put to it two pound of sugar, and a quart of hony clarified, seethe all these together til it come to a thick syrup, then take it off, and when it is almost cold, put a quantity of Arras powder to it, for it is an excellent Syrup. To make oyle of Vitriol. Take Vitriol, and make it into lime, and then put it into Aqua vitae, and let the Aqua vitae cover it and no more, and then distil it after art, then set it in the Sun to draw out the Aqua vitae, or else in a cold balneo, and when the water is clean out, distil the Vitriol againe, and you shall have the finest oyle of Vitriol that can be made; put into your Vitriol halfe a tile beaten into powder, for that wil cause the ile to arise the better.
A Balsome to cure wounds. Take of Turpentine one pound, of Aqua vitae eight ounces, of pure Frankinsence, of Mastick, of mirrhe and of Sarcocella of each one ounce, of oyle of bayes two ounces, all these being beaten and mixed together; put them into a retort strongly luted and set into ashes, and the fire made by degrees; there wil come forth water and oyl which you may save by a glasse funnel. Probatum. To make your Lute. Take fat clay and horse dung, of each one pound, sinders of the Smiths anvil half a pound, mix these and work them together with broken beere, and in the working thereof mix a little bran, and the whites of two eggs, all these being tempered together, make a perfect lute. Christ his Balme to cure wounds. Take of Oyl Olive one pint, of old red wine three pints, mix these and distil them, add thereto of the liquor of St. Johns wort, six ounces, minium four ounces, distil the whole for a month in Balneo Mariae. To make oyl of Tartar another way. Take white wine lees and dry them, and beat them to powder, and fil a Gold smiths crucible, and set it amongst coles til it begin to wax black, then take it out of the fire and let it coole; then take it and bind it in a linnen bag, and hang it over the vapor of boiling water the space of this done, hang the bag in a glasse with a wide mouth, so that the bag touch not the bottome of the glasse, and the water or oile called Tartar wil drop down by little, and the sooner, if it stand in a very cold and moist Celler: this pow∣der the Gold smiths do call Arguil. A precious balme to cure wounds speedily. Take of the flowers of Rosemary and St. Johns wort, of each one handful, put them together into a glasse bottle almost ful, then fil up the glasse with perfect oile, stop it close and set it in the sunne twen∣ty daies and nights also, and when the oile hath gotten the colours of the flowers, strain it out, and put to it one dram of Ginger, and one scruple of Saffron dissolved in white wine, then set it in the Sun other twenty daies, and then keep it for your use as a precious jewel.
A water for the shaking palsie. Take of bay berries, of Rue and of Sage, of each a like quan∣titie, bruise, and distil and keep the water for ten daies; then di∣stil that water again with Aqua vitae; after that they have been put together fourteen daies, with this water annoint the Temples, and wash the palms of your hands, and those parts that shake, morning and evening. A special Balsome to cure Cankers, Fistulaes, Leprosies and the disease called Noli me tangere, by dressing it twice a day with this oyl, it healeth a Carbuncle or boil, being put into the wound, it bringeth out broken bones, and cureth ruptures. Take of cleer Turpentine one pound, of white Incense four oun∣ces, of Gumme Bdelium six ounces, of Bay berries four ounces, of Mastick, of Galingale, of Cinnamon, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, and of Cubebs, of each one ounce, mix them all together, and distil them in a glasse Limbeck. The blessed balme or water for wounds. Take of Cleer Turpentine one pound, of the whites of Eggs sod hard, fourteen ounces; rosen of the pine apple tree six ounces, of chosen mirrhe three ounces, gum of the Ivie tree two ounces; all these being by art brought to powder, and mixed together, put into a retort, and distil it according to art, which wil be done in four or five and thirty hours; of this you shall have water and oile; the oile blackish, which after the separation wil become red. This oyl besides curing wounds, it causeth hair to grow again on the head and beard; it also helpeth the paine in the back and reines which cometh by retention, by applying a glister prepared with a little of this oyle, for it worketh upon the Kidneys. An excellent water for the Rheume. Take of Isop, Savory, white horehound, Ireos, Lovage, Beto∣ny, Sage, the leaves of trifoile, which hath maine thick, sweet leaves, as big as a nut, of each halfe a pound, all these being grosly bro∣ken, put into a glasse bodie, on which pour so much of the strongest sack as wil cover it a finger thick, infuse it for three daies, and distil if.
To make Aqua realis. Take of yellow brimstome, roach Allom, of salt gumme of each one pound, of boras and Mastick, of each one ounce, distilled vine∣ger four ounces; these diligently beaten in a mortar and mixed toge∣ther, and put into a glasse bottle wel luted, and continuing the fire greater and greater unto the end; this water wil be white and trou∣bled, strain it through a linnen cloth, and keepe it in a glasse close stopped, putting into it two grains of musk, dissolved in half an ounce of Rose water, and after the setling wil this water be cleer and sweet. The vertue of this water is, it cureth all manner of ulcers, sores and griefs hapning within the mouth, by washing it therewith. It maketh the teeth white presently by taking a mallow root and dipping into this water, and rubbing the place with it. A very good drink to scowr the reins, and to cause one to make water. Take half a pint of Goats milk, of Thime and Parsly, of each half a handful, boil it in the milk and make thereof a posset with white wine, and then strain out the cleer and drink it. Another Aqua realis for the Morphew. Take of white Tartar, and salt Peter, of each two ounces, grind it to sine powder, and lay it on a heap, and make a hole in the midst of it, and put a live coal in it, and there wil come forth an oile, with it annoint the Morphew. A singular medecine for the dimme and skinny eies, and for the pin and web therein. Take a new laid egge, and break it in the lesser end, and take out all the substance of the egge very clean, then with a Knife cut the yolk asunder in the midst, then fil the shel with fair water, & put to it three grains of rectified white coperas, with four grains of fine sugar; then set it on the fire, and let it boil til the white scum be all risen up to the top, taking it up with a feather as it riseth; then pour it out into a glass til it be cold, then strain it through a fine linnen cloth, that the dregs may be severd from the water; use this water morning and evening, two drops in one eye at each time is sufficient.
A Medicine for the Tooth ach. Take of the inner rind of Elder and Alehoof, of each one handful, Frankinsence a little quantitie, Ginger, Stavesacre, pepper, roach Allom and bay salt of each a like quantity, with as much Aqua vitae as wil boil the herbs soft, with one spoonful of hony: put it into a lin∣nen bag, and heat it in Aqua vitae, and apply it to the gummes. An oyntment for an ach or swelling between the joints or other place. Take the herb called Semper vivum and cut in pieces, and distil it, whereof you shal have a pint of water, or neer so much, put the water into a pound of Turpentine to infuse it for foure and twenty hours; then distil the whole, whereof you shal have water and oile, temper them together warme, and so annoint the place grieved before the fire. Probatum est. An ointment to take away heat and blisters, and bladders of the smal pocks: take it in time. Take one ounce of peach kernels burned and beaten to powder, the juice of plantane and housleek, of each halfe an ounce, of cerus a dram and a half, and make your oyntment hereof. A singular potion for the gravel and stone, proved and found excellent. Take a quart of white wine, of pessel seed, and cherry stones, of each a handful, beat them smal, and put them into the wine, and let it seethe til it come to a pinte, then take it off and strain it, the drink being warmed, drink thereof morning and evening, at each time four ounces. A medicine for the flux, and loosenesse of the belly. Take a pint of new milk, and put into it foure plantane leaves clean washed, and let them seeth a little together, then take six or se∣ven blades of large Mace, and let it boile to halfe a pinte, then take out the leaves and wring them, and cast them away, and let the rest be your meat; then for your drinke take a pig of tenne or twelve daies old, stick him and flea him warme; then take the
four quarters and four ounces of large Mace, and distil them in a Stil, first lay downe one quarter of pig, and then one ounce of mace &c. This water must be your drink according to the rules of Physick, for it hath been often approved true. A special oyntment for the Itch. Take of white lead one ounce, white coperas halfe an ounce, grind them on a marble stone to fine powder, then take a little black soap, with as much oyl olive as in the stirring together wil make an oint∣ment, use this by annointing the wrist and hams of the thigh when you go to bed. For a Stitch. Take six bay-berries, and stamp them very smal, and put them into a quarter of a pint of white wine, warm it and drink it. A water to procure sleep. Take of white and black poppie seeds half an ounce, of white wine two drams, of the gal of a Hare as much, of pure Aqua vitae four oun∣ces, let these be put together, and infused for three dayes, and then distil it in Balneo Mariae, one drop of this in a spoonful of Lettice water procureth sleep for one hour, two drops procureth two houres, &c. A very good Poultesse. Take of Mallows, Chickweed and Ivie lvaves, of each a hand∣ful, chop them all together with a little sheeps Tallow, with one handful of meale, and four ounces of Cummin; let all be cut toge∣ther, and boiled in milk. A medicine for the Quinsey. Take a pint of new milk as it cometh from the Cow, and set it on the fire in a posnet, then take a good handful of Sage, wash it clean and put it into the milk, let it boil til the sage be tender; then having two tiles indifferently hot, lay the sage between them and squeee it a little, and apply it to the place grieved, keeping the neck very hot; then let the patient drink so much of the milk as he can. And he being gone warm to his bed, lying with that side upward which is grieved: pour so much of the milk into his are as you can, using this morning and evening, and with Gods help he shall bee well speedily.
To make a tooth fall out. Take the root of henbane, and rost it in the fire, and lay it to the tooth very hot and it wil fal out: the fittest is to stop the tooth if it be hollow, with a piece of the root. A speciall water against the Stone in the reins or bladder. Probatum est. Take of the seeds of Lemons and Oranges, of each four ounces, of Saxifrage three pounds, Balm, Philopendila▪ pellitorie of the wall, Sparagus, Crisom Isop, Fennel roots, parsley roots, of each two ounces; stamp them together, and make them into the forme of a liquid oyntment with the juice of Lemons, then distil it til the matter remain dry, the body being the day before purged of crude and viscous humors, then take of this water morning and evening four ounces four daies together, or more if need shal require; and you must refraine moist and cold meats. To cure a Fistula. Take the ashes of shooe leather very wel burned four ounces, green coperas four ounces, of burnt allom two ounces, then take a stone which you shal find amongst the Smiths sinders like Antimony, and it shieth like gold, take thereof two ounces beaten and ground very smal on a marble stone so fine as is possible; then put all together, and take of the second cream of Cows milk, and mingle with the powders, then make a tent of lint according to the sore, & annoint the tent, and put it into the mouth of the wound; and as it worketh, it wil dry the conduit of the Fistula, and bring it to a grosse substance, and make it to break out into boiles, as the pipe leadeth; and if the Fistula be in a fleshy place and deepe, it wil open it and draw it ou cleane, but if it do run upon a bone, or between the ribs, it wil break it out in boiles as it runneth. Probatum est. To cure a Felon. Take the crums of leavened bread, vineger, bay salt, black soape, deere suet, and a little rue, boile all these together, and being ve∣ry hot, lay it to the sore. A good Salve for many sores. Take a pound of the juice of Betony, smallage and plantne, put it
into a panne, of new wax three ounces, white incense, pitch and rosen, of each two ounces: boil these together til the juice be some∣thing wasted; then take it from the fire, and strain it through a lin∣nen cloth, and when it is almost cold, add to it three ounces of Tur∣pentine, and temper it all together, make it up in rolls: if the wound be deep, wash it with warm white wine and hony boiled together, and if it need tenting, make one of Tow. To cure an Ach. Take of Sallet oyle and Aqua vitae of each one spoonful with an onion, beate them together very wel, strain them, and take the oyle thereof being warm and annoint the place. To cure a sore mouth. Take the leaves of hony suckles, sage and the tops of Rosemarie, and bruise them very wel, then boil it with hony, vineger, and burnt Allom and a little water, and wash your mouth therwith. A Searcloth for old wounds. Take a pint of Sallet oyle, halfe a pound of wax, as much red lead, a little sack; boile them til they look black, and then make your Searcloths; the wound being washed with white wine and honey boiled together healeth mightly. A salve for a wound that festers inwardly. Take Bores grease, vineger and honey, and boile them together a little, then take the powders of rosen and Frankinsence, and make a plaister or tent as the wound requireth, warm it, and lay it to, and when it is wel drawn, use the other salve. This is an especial salve to cure a prick with a thorn or nail. A Poultesse to break a boil or bunch. Take of Brooklime and smallage a good quantity, and seeth them wel in running water, with a sufficient quantity of oatmeale, and thereof make a plaister. A very good Salve for a wound or sore, it also easeth the Gout. Take of Rosemary, Groundsel, and mallow leaves of each a hand∣ful, pu them into a quart of fair water, and let them seethe till
more then half be wasted; then strain it through a linnen cloth into some fair vessel standing upon a chasingdish of coals, then put to it a quantity of Sheeps suet clarified, unwrought wax, Sallet oyl and Turpentine; let it all boil til it be thick, and it wil make a Salve; then strain it through a cloth, and keep it for your use. A Medicine for one that bleedeth inwardly. Take a good quantity of the juice of Nepe, and let the Patient drink thereof, and it will cause him to cast up bloud presently. An outward Medicine for Wormes. Take Wormwood, Rue, Leeks and Fetherfew, and fry them with a little Ox-gal, and make a Plaister thereof, and apply it to the Navel. To cure the Cramp. Take Oile of Violets, Hollyoaks, and Swines grease, of each a like quantity, and make Oyntment of it, and with it annoint the place grieved. The Water of Saint Johns wort. This Water drunk morning and evening, two ounces at a time, prevaileth against the Apoplexy or depriving of senses; the Water mixed with the powder of the root, or Seeds or Water of Piony, and drunk thrice a day three ounces at a time, helpeth the Falling sick∣nesse, also it prevaileth against the trembling of Members, if they be laboured with the same twice a day: this Water drunk with Red-Wine, helpeth all manner of fluxes of the belly; and being drunk morning and evening, healeth all manner of Wounds if they be wash∣ed therewith, and applied often with a linnen cloth wet in it. An excellent Salve for an old Sore. Take of Lapis Chellonitis, Rosen, Wax, and red Bole, of each two ounces, sheeps suet four ounces, Camphire two penny worth; then take an earthen pot, and put in your Suet, Rosen and Wax, boiling them with a soft fire til they are molten; then take your Bole, and Lapis Chellonitis, beat it to powder, then put your Camphire into a mortar, and put to it two spoonfuls of Sallet Oyl, bruising them toge∣ther, then take your Rosen and Wax from the fire, and let it stand til it be cold; then take your powder with your Camphire, and mix them together stirring them with a clean stick til they be tl roughly cold.
To take away dead flesh quickly. Take the juice of old Leeks, put into it a little of the powder of White-wine Lees, and with green Wax make a Sale, d pply it often to the sore; and to fret away a Wen, add to this a  drops of Oyl of Vitriol. A good Water for a sore mouth or thrat. Take the leaves of Marsh Mallowes, and boil them in  and Honey, with a little Roach Allom, let it cool, and with it  e mouth and throat. To heal Ringworms, Cornes, and sores of the feet. Take Liquid Allom and boil it in honey, and being clear, when it is hot, annoint the grief; but first let the grief be made neat for the purpose, as washed and cut. A special Medicine for the Emrods. Take an ounce of Frankinsence, bruise it a little; then take ano∣ther ounce of the inner rind of Elder, and bruise them both together, and being well bruised, take a little quantity and put it into a cha∣fing-dish of fresh coals, and let the Patient sit over them; and when that is out, put in more coals, and also of your Medicine by the space of an hour; and thus at three times using, all will be wel. A very good Medicine for an Ague. Take of Bay salt and of white Frankinsence, of each two ounces, Smallage one handful; beat all together, and lay it to your wrists two hours before the fit cometh. A Medicine for the Siatica, or any ache. Take in the beginning of May before the tenth day, the leaves and crops of young tender Broom, two great handfuls or more, and half a handful of the crops, pound them very smal with four or five spoonfuls of the sharpest Vineger you can get, and strain it through a linnen cloth, and put thereto half a pound of unwrought Wax, four penny worth of pure Mastick, and as much as a Tennis ball of Ro∣sen, then put thereto a quart of Barrowes grease finely tred, or Neats foot Oyle; boil all together in a Chafer on a soft fire, stirring it stil
for the space of an hour, and then strain it through a cloth, and put it into a Gally pot or two, and keep it a year or two til you mean to use it; and when you use it, where your grief is most, take as much at once as a hasel nut, and chafe it upon your hand, and not by fire, and so rub and chafe your grief a quarter of an hour together, and if it dry in, take more as much as a Pease, and chafe it wel; then lay on it a hot linnen cloth, that is worn and soft; then lay on that a white cotton cloth a little warmed, and swathe it fast, and keep it warm all night; do thus twice or thrice together, and you shall find ease An excellent Salve made of Soap. Take a pint of Wine-vineger, and put it into a Bason, and set it on the coals, then take half a pound of Castle-Soap, and scrape it into the Vineger; and let it boil til the Soap be melted; then put to it two spoonfuls of Sallet Oyl or Neatsfoot Oyl, and let it boil half an hour; then add to it 4 ounces of common treakle, then let it boil softly til the Vineger be boiled away; it wil ask two hours, stirring it til it grow thick like a Salve, and that you shall know by dropping a little on a cold stone; and if you will make an Ointment hereof; then take a piece of this Implaister, and put it to any Oyl according to your purpose, and melt them together. A Plaister for any Siatica, Gout, or Ache in the body, Limbs or Joints. Take of new yellow Wax, of Deers suet, of Pitch and Olibanum, of each one pound, of Frankinsence two pounds, Mastick four oun∣ces, beat all these gums very fine, every one by it self, and searce them through a fine hair Searce, so as you may get through all the sub∣stance, keeping every gum severally; then take your Deer suet, Wax and Pitch, and set it over the fire in a brass pan, and then your Frankinsence til it be molten, and last of all your Mastick; you must observe that every Gum be severally molten before you put in another, and stir every Gum wel in the putting in, and when it be∣ginneth to arise, and all the Gums well molten together, take it off the fire, if not, it wil all run over; then take a strong canvas cloth, and sowe it like a Jelly bag▪ and strain it through (your canvas must be somewhat fine) into a broad pan, that it may not stand past two fingers thick, and when it is cold you may make it up in Roles, and fold it up in paper, and keep it for seven yeers if you wil▪ Spread this Salve on a piece of leather, and lay it to the place grieved.
A Water for sore eyes that are cut or hurt. Take of Ground-Ivy and three leav'd grass that beareth a red flow∣er, of each one handful, stamp them together, and take a new laid Egge, and make a hole in the top, and pour out the meat, and fill it full of running water, and take a piece of white Coperas, as big as a Pease, and put it into the Egg shel with the water, and set it on the fire, and when it boileth, scum off the froth with a feather; then mingle it with the aforesaid herbs, and skimme it, and drop of the Water into the Eye three times a day, and it wil help you by Gods grace. An Oyle for any Gout, Siatica or Ache. Take a pottle of Sallet Oyle, and put it into a gallon glasse, then take one pound of Rosemary flowers, and bruise them in a Mortar, and so put them into the Oyl, and stop the glasse very close with Wax, and let it stand in the Sun til Midsomer, that you may have the rest of the Herbs belonging to it; and then take one pound of the buds of red Roses before they be much blowne, cutting away all the white and yellow tops, and refuse, having a full pound of them in weight: Then take half a pound of Dil, and half a pound of Saint Johns wort, only the flowers, half a pound of Vervain; bruise all these Herbs in a stone Mortar, and put them into that glasse of Oyle, and stop the glasse close againe, and then let it stand nine or ten dayes, or longer if need be, until there cometh a showre of raine, whereby you may gather Earth-wormes; then take a quart of those Wormes, the largest you can get, wash them, and scoure them with White∣wine, and afterwards let them crawle up and downe a cloth or two, whereby they may become very clean from all their slime, this done, take those wormes with half a pound of Lavender Spike, and ten young Swallowes out of the nest, the fattest you can get, and beat them very small in a stone Mortar, till you cannot discern any fea∣thers or guts at all, then put them into your glasse of Oyle, and stir them all together, and so let them stand a night or two; then take your Oyle and your Herbs, and all that is in your glasse, and put them into a fair pan or kettle, with a pint of the best Malmesey and half a pint of Aqua vitae, and set it over a soft fire of coals till the Aqua vitae and Malmesey be well wasted and consumed; then take it from the fire, and straine it through a strong linnen cloth
that is new, and put that which you have strained into another faire pan, or if you will, some earthen Vessel or glasse; and so set it on the fire again, and when it boileth, put into it of Mastick fine∣ly beaten to powder two ounces, with as many Cloves bruised, and a little quantity of Mace somewhat pounded and bruised together, and then let them boil all together with a sot fire neer half an hour, and then take it off, and when it hath stood a while, and is something cool, put it into some close Vessel of glasse, somewhat thick, and so stop it very close againe with Wax, and so let it stand about nine or ten weeks; and after this you may take and use of it, but still to keep it close stopped with Wax. The herbs aforesaid must bee well squeezed and mingled together with the hand, and so to be used as a∣foresaid. This is to be made in the Spring when Rosemary flowers are full blowne. A Remedy against the Plurisie. Take an eating Apple, the best that can be gotten, and make a hole in it, taking away some part of it within, so that the hole pass not through, put into the hole three or four grains of Frankinsence, cal∣led Olibanum, then cover again the said hole with the piece you took off first, and so roast it in the embers that it burne not, but that it may wax tender; then take it from the fire, and break it into foure parts with all the Frankinsence in it, and so give it to the Patient to eat, it will by and by cause the Imposthume to break, and heal it cleane. For a Woman that hath a sore∣nesse under her side. Take Hilwort, Alesander, Parsley, Lovage, red Fennel, Smallage, Burnet and Grummel, of each a like quantity, and seeth them in white-wine till half be wasted, then strain it, and let the sick drink thereof first and last warm. For the Megrim▪ Imposthume, Dropsie and Feaver in the Head, and for all manner of Aches in the Head. Take of the Root of Pellitory of Spain four penny weight, of Spikenard a half penny weight, and grind them together, and boile
them in good Vineger, and take a saucer ful of honey and five sau∣cers full of Mustard, and mingle them together, and let the Pati∣ent use thereof half a spoonful at once, and hold it in your mouth a pretty while, and then spit it out into a Vessel, and after take another, and do this ten or twelve times, and a good while after you have ea∣ten, at noon, a little before even, wash, and after take ten or twelve more, spit into a bright bason, and when you go to bed, wash clean your mouth, and drink a draught, and go to bed; use this Medicine for three dayes. For the Yellow Jaundies. Take wormes called Mads, and cut them in pieces, and let them lye in Herbs all night to scoure themselves, then take them and rip them up, and wash the earth from them▪ and the slime both within and without, and dry them with a cloth; then take a hot tile stone and lay the wormes upon it til they are so dry as you may beat them to powder, and take of the powder in White-wine fasting in the mor∣ning, and sweat after it. To break a Carbunkle, and all other Botches beside. Take Bay-salt, dry it, and beat it into powder and searce it through fine Tiffany, and incorporate it with the yolk of an egg, and lay upon the sore. A Water for a sore mouth, and to wash a wound. Take a gallon of running water, of Sage, Woodbind leaves and Celendine, of each one handful; boil all together til it be half con∣sumed, then strain it, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Roach Allom finely beaten, and a pint of English honey, and boil it to the consumption of half, and so use it. An Oyntment for a Tetter: Take of green Coperas as much as a Walnut, of Allom halfe so much, and put them into a pint of running water, and boil it to the consumption of half, and annoint the Tetter with it twice a day, and keep warm. For a swelling in the Neck. Take Chervil, Vineger, Wax, and old grease, and melt them to∣gether, and lay them to the pain as hot as you can abide it.
For swelling of a veine. Take Wheat-flower, and the juice of Ash, with Sheeps suet, and make a Plaister thereof. For a pain in the Yard, and swelling thereof. Take Betony and seeth it in Wine, stamp it, and make a Plaister, and lay it thereto. To take away Venom and Poison out of a Wound, made by some poisoned Arrow, or other Instrument. Take Assa foetida and Galbanum, of each one ounce; and steep them in Vineger the space of a night; then set it to the fire to distil, and strain it through a linnen cloth, mixing with it two ounces of Unguentum Basilicum, and lay it to the wound, and it will draw un∣to it selfe, and kil the Venom, that you may heal it with any other Plaister. An Oyntment for aches in men or womens backs, or any other place. Take a great brass pot ful of fair water, and set it over the fire; then take an earthen pot, and fil it full of black Snails, and cover it with a parchment skin, that no air come forth, and put it in the pot, so covered, with water, that it may seeth in the brass pot, and thereof wil come an Oyl which you must use where your grief is. To make Emplaistrum Aureum, for all manner of Wounds. Take Pitch, Grecia or Colofonia, and White Incense, of each a like quantity; let it be wel stamped and mixed with the whites of Eggs; then annoint a piece of Parchment with this, and wring the Wound wel with your two fingers to make the blood come forth, and lay the parchment upon it; bind it fast. A Medicine for the Head-ach, and to cause one to sleep. Take a piece of a Rose-cake, and cut it fit for the Head before, that is, the fore head, and take half a spoonful of Vineger, two spoonfuls of the juice of Lettice, and set it in a dish on a Chafingdish of coals, and heat the Rose cake in it; then press out a little between two trenchers and lay upon it the powder of Nutmegs, and apply it to the forehead.
The skinning Water that destroieth Tetters, the Serpigo, and such other Diseases, in any part of the body. Take strong White-wine-vineger a quart, Litharge of Gold finely beaten and searced one pound, mix them together, and let them infuse in a vessel three or four daies, stirring them together twice every day; then let it settle a day, and take the clearest of it and put it in a Vial or double glasse. The Congealer. Take fair water a pint, Sal Gemmae two ounces, common salt a good spoonful, boil all until the Salts be dissolved, then put the clearest into a glasse. The use of the Waters. Take of the first water three parts, of the second one part and a little more, and put them together, and it will be an Oyntment; lay it on the place that you would have skinned, or on the creeping Tetter, and it will heal it. For a long Ulcer that lacketh nothing but skin∣ning, and wil not be skinned, it will heal it. A Powder for a Fistulae. Take green Coperas, and burn it in a Goldsmiths Crucible, two ounces, red Mercury sublimed one ounce, grind them both together on a Marble stone, till they are become very fine and subtil. The use of it in the time of the Cure. Search the Ulcer with your probe to know the length and depth of it, that you may prepare your Tent, and annoint it over with Po∣pulion, and dip the end in your powder; dresse it once in a day with powder, and other two dayes with Populion to remove the asker; and thus enlarge your Tent til the work be known to you: so long as it casteth a buckly or malt water, or gory, stinking or bloody matter, still use your powder until it come grosse and white matter; and then apply Mundifiers or Cleansers, whereof you shall be taught: The Ulcer cleansed, then use Incarnatives, as your green Balm and others, and rather shorten your Tent then otherwise til you are assu∣red of the victory for sigillation, sealing or skinning: for which your Water above written is most excellent.
Lucatella his Balsom▪ TAke Venice Turpentine one pound, best Oyle Olive three pints, yellow wax eight ounces, of naturall Balsom one ounce, Oyle of St. Johns Wort, and red Sanders in Powder Ana one ounce, Sack six spoonfulls; first cut the Wax, and melt it on the fire, and then take it off, and put Turpentine to it, having first washed it in Damask Rose-water thrice, and having like∣wise mingled the Sack and Oyle together, put altogether again over the fire, alwayes stirring it till it begins to boyl, and have a speciall care that it boyleth not over the fire, then let it cool for a night, and a day, or more, untill the Wine and watry sub∣stance be all setled to the bottom, then make holes in the Cake, and let the water run all out at the holes, which being clean run foth, st it on the fire again, adding unto the Balsom, and St. Johns Wort, and when it is molten put to it the red San∣ders, and stir it well, that it may incorporate, and when it first begins to boyl, take it off the fire, and stir it along time till it be grown thick, and cold: It is good for inward and outward wounds, annointing the parts about the soar: It healeth burning and scalding, and it healeth Fistulas and Ulcers being applyed warm with Lint. An excellent Plaister to conglutinate a Wound. TAke Burgundy Pitch, Brimstone, and Olibanum Ana one ounce, beat it severally to fine powder, and searce them, and mix it with such a proportion of the Whites of Eggs as will make the same to the firmness and substance of a Plaister, and apply to the Wound. For a Rupture in a Child. TAke Senacle, and bruise it in the hand till it be soft, and lay it to the place ill affected, put a thin clout and truss on it, Probatum Cosin Newton. An excellent Salve for Wounds. TAke a pint of Rose-water, a quarter of a pound of fine white Cake▪ sop, cut it smal, and stir it over the fire with the Rose
water till it be molten and thick of a white colour, then put to it four ounces of Venice Turpentine, two ounces of white Frankincense in fine powder, and let it dissolve, then put in a pound of white Lead in fine powder, and stir it continually, and now and then put to it in the boyling a little Rose-water, that it may be of a whitish colour, boyl it at the least four hours. To destroy Rats and Mice. TAke a pennyworth of Rats-bane beaten and searced, a spoon∣full of Oatemeal beaten and searced, as much clowted Cream as wil make it into a Past, Sugar half a spoonfull, work it very well together, and bake it in little thin Cakes on a Fire-sovell, first buttered that they may not stick to it. For a Rupture in a Child or man, from Mrs. Eliz. Cha∣non of Oystherg, Probatum. TAke a quantity of Featherfew, and with fresh Butter washed make a Poultice, and apply it warm, and if that force it not back, then make use of a Snakes skin, and apply it, and it will do it. The Plaister to the Poultice. TAke burnt linnen a good quantity, and with honey, and Bean flour, make it into a Plaister, and spred it on Leather, and apply it, and wear a Truss. The Powder to be given inwardly. TAke of knot Grass and Shepheards Purse, and Doves foot, of each a like quantity, dry them, and make them into fine powder, mingle with it a little powder of Licorice and Ani∣seeds, and give of it in Plantane water to the party broken in the morning fasting, the quantity of as much as will lye on a shilling. A Medicine pproved for the redness of the Eyes. TAke a new-layd Egg, and break a hole in the top of it, and pour out all the meat of it, and fill up the shell with red Rose-water, and set it on the Coals, and put into it as much
white Copperas as two little beans, and as it boyleth strike of the scum and froath of it with a feather, and when it hath boyled well, strain it through a fine linnen cloath, and let it stand and settle; then drop of the clearest into the eye, four or five times a day, but especially when you go to bed, if the humour fall a∣bundantly into the eyes, then fill the hole of an hard Egg (when the Yolk is taken out) with Commin-seed bruised, and bay Salt, put it in a linnen cloath, and vvear it as hot as you can suffer it at the nape of the Neck. A Dyet drink for the Spleen. TAke of Violet leaves a large handfull, of Borrage leaves and Balm of each two handfuls, Borrage Roots sliced a handfull, of Tamarisk a handfull, and half Licorice scraped, and sliced tvvo ounces, a six pennyvvorth of Saffron, Raisons of the Sun stevved half a pound, put all these into a linnen Bag, and hang it in three or four gallons of nevv Beer vvhen it hath al∣most done vvorking, and let it stand ten daies, and then drink a draught in the morning fasting, and at four of the Clock in the afternoon, and at night going to bed as long as it lasteth. Probatum est. The Cramp water. TAke Wormvvood, Featherfevv, Sage, Spicknard, Perevvinkles Camomile, Savory, Rosemary, and Bayes, of each a like quan∣tity, vvith tvvo spoonfuls of Aniseed, red Fennelseed, and Ca∣ravvayseed, half a spoonfull of the povvder of Elacampane, put all these into a pot of strong beer over night, and the next day distill it in a Limbeck. An approved Medicine for the Scurvey. TAke of Clivers tvvo handfuls, of Watercresses, Sea purslane Sea-vvormvvood, Sea-beets, Catstail▪ and Egremony, of each three handfuls, of Licorice and Aniseeds, of each an ounce: Then brew seven or eight gallons of strong Ale, let it be vvell boyled and put into a Ferkin a vvorking all night, take out a boulfull of the Ale at night, and lay all these Herbs stamped, (the Annis and Licorice well bruised) in the boul all night to steep, and in the morning strain it all into the Vessell, and
stop it up three or four dayes, and afterwards drink a good draught therof in the morning fasting, and at four in the after∣noon, and at meals if your stomach will beare it: Probatum est. An approved Medicine for Convulsion fits. TAke sweet Marjoram, Cpress wood, the root of Piony and Ireos, & finely powder them, and searce it altogether likewise of a mans Skull two ounces double prepared, of the best Syrrop of Roses, with Agarick, six ounces of oyle of Dill, and Orrac, of each two ounces, powder of Piony one ounce, powder of Messeltoe of the Oake one ounce, Spirit of Amber two ounces, black Cherry-water a pottle. First, purge the stomack gently with three spoonfuls every morning, for a fortnight together with the Syrrop, after the two first daies take an hour before as much of the Cra▪ Human, as will lye on a Groat, mixt with three spoonfuls of black Cherry-water: The third day as much of the Messelto with the water, and so continue it, but first take a little Lambskin with the Furr, and cut a little peece of it, as much as will cover the head from the forehead to the Crown, and no further, then take of the oyle of Dill and Ireos, and mix in it the four first powders, and make the same pretty thick, then bath some part of it into the Lamb∣skin-furr, and bath the head well with the other part, from the forehead to the Crown, and then lay on the furr, but first warm the Oyles and Powders together in a Savvcer, bath the furr once a vveek, but the head once a day, and likevvise the pit of the Poll you must bath vvith the Spirit of Amber three drops at a time, keep your self laxative reasonable, and use no vvinndy mea, nor melancholick, but if it be possible those that feed on Hills, or Feilds, and Mutton and Lamb. For a woman with Child. LEt her take every day in the morning betimes as much of the Powder of Cra. Hum. Doubly prepared as will lye on a 3 d. mixt with two spoonfuls of black Cherry-water, not taking a∣ny other thing within two hours after, and let her avoid windy meates, as Beef, Veal, Pigg, and waet-fowl; at night when she goes to bed, let her make Cherry posset-drink, and then boyl well in it Marjoram, red Sage, Hysop, and Bettony, of each half a handfull, strain it and drink it cold. VVhen the Child is born, give it of the Cran. Hum. in one
spoonfull of black Cherry-water, as much as will lye on a half∣penny, and give of it every second day. Hang about the Childs neck if it be a boy a root of single Piony, if a Maiden a root of double Piony bruised and put into a little bag, and let it be put under the left arme-pit by day, and hang down by night to the pit of the stomack. Let the Nurse take of the same Posset-drink once a day for a month, as is prescribed for the mother, as a little black Cher∣ry-water now and then a spoonfull at a time. For the Worms in Children, Probatum. TAke a little Mithridate, and spread it on a peece of leather, and strew in it a little powder of Alloes, and on it four drops of Spirit of Wormwood, and apply it to the bottom of the stomack. For a Rupture. Juice of Cumphry drunk with beer fasting, the Rupture first put up cureth it. An Oyle: TAke a pint of Oyle made of the oldest Neets-feet that you can get, of the youngest Bay leaves a handfull, a pretty quantity of the tops of Rosemary, a little quantity of Camomile, two pennyworth of Cynamon, six Cloves, a little Mace, four drops of naturall Balsom, put altogether in a Skillet, and boyl it together along space, and stir it well, and then put in your naturall Balsom, and so take it off the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, and take of the clearest of it; Probatum. Goodman Hawken of Ashill in Devonshire by himself and others. Take a large quarter of a spoonfnll of the Oyle above written, and put it into halfe a pint of the strongest Beere you can get, beat it very well untill the Oyle be so wasted, as it appears up∣on the top of the Beer no bigger then small pins-heads, then put into it the finest flour of red Wheat that you can get, and temper it so as all the clods of the flour may be brokn, and set it on the fire, putting into it two spoonfuls of pure Honey, and let it boyl, stirring it continually, and in the boyling put to a pretty quantity of Barrows grease, let it boyl to the perfect con∣sistance of a Poultice, and apply it as hot as the Patient can en∣dure it on a linnen Cloath, first annointing the place affected with a little of the Oyle.
For Swelling and Aking of Knees. TAke Crums of white-bread, and stamp them with Honey and Wine, and lay it therto. To make Oyle of Elder-flowers TAke Elder-buries when they be ripe and put them in an earthen pot, and set it in Hors-dung nine or ten daies, and therof you shall have an Oyle good for Aches. For the heat in an Ague. TAke Whey as it cometh from the Cheese, set it on the sire, and skim off all that shall rise of it, then take a handfull of Borrage, another of Buglas, another of five-finger, and seeth them all in the same Whey, and then put in two Whites of Eggs to clarify it, then strain it into a fair pot, and give it the Patient to drink when he is in his fit of hear; for this  know hath done much good by experience, it will keep him moist, and bring him to a very good temper, and let him not in the time of his sit have too much light, for it is very ill for the head: Proba∣tum est. For an Ach. TAke the Gaul of an Oxe, and so much strong Aquavitae, and the juice of Wormwood, and boyl all these together, and then keep it in some clean Vessell, and when any man needeth therof, take some in a Sawcer and warm it, and take a linnen cloath folded round, and rub the Ach therwith as hard as you can. A wonderfull Plaister for Soar Breasts. TAke leaves of Mallows, and Wormwood, of each a handfull, boyl them in water untill they be as tender as the pap of an pple, then lay them on a board, and let the water run from them clean, then cut them small with a Knife for they will not grind for fat, then stamp them with a pound of old Swines grease, and temper them together till you may not know the one from the other, this Plaister is most precious for soar paps that rot, of all others it matureth and moderateth not only the pain in the paps, bnt also in hard botches and Boils, under the Throat or Arm-holes, or in any place of the body where it lyeth hard in
the flesh, this must be layd to luke-warm in a linnen double cloath changed twice a day, look substantially on this Plaister, for it hath no peer in such things. To dry the milk of a womans Breasts. TAke a quart of dregs of strong Ale, three handfuls of Sage, an handfull of Groundsell, boyl them together half an hour, then take clarified Sheeps Suet, and leaven of—old, and put these two into the Herbs, and stir it till it be thick, and put therto two spoonfuls of Vinegar, then lay it upon a Plaister, and so lay it to her Breasts. A Medicine for a man that is burned with a Harlot. TAke an old flaxen cloath that is clean washed, burn it and make powder therof, and take oyle of Eggs, annoint the soar holes therwith, and fill them full of that powder, and it will heal it in short time. For a man that pisseth blood. TAke Parsley, Ambrose, and Bursa-pastoris, of each alike▪ stamp them, and drink therof three daies morning and eve∣ning: Probatum est. For a stinking breath. TAke two handfuls of Commine, and beat it in a Morter to powder, & then boyl it in good Wine from a pottle to a quart, and let him drink it, and within sixteen daies it shall help him▪ For a Child that is broken. TAke the juice of Comphry, Daysie Roots, Polipodium, Rib∣wort, of each like quantity, Orodionum, and a pint of Mal∣mesie, and boyl it with the juice of the said Herbs, till it come to half a pint, and give it to the Child to dink nine daies. For to stanch bleeding. TAke the powder of Corrall mixt with Gum-Arabick put it in water of Plantane, and drink it cold, and it will stop the bleeding in any place of the bod.
To stanch blood. TAke Varvain, and dry it, and when occasion shall serve beat it to powder, and snuff it up, or blow it up in tbe nose if a Vein be broken in the body then drink it, drink it also for the Bloody Flux. For the black Jaundice. TAke a pint of Malmsey, and put therto the juice of nine branches of Sallendine, and a Sheeps-turd strained into it when it is new dunged, and long Pepper, English Saffron and Turmerick, and put these together, and give it the party fasting: Probatum est. For a Canker in a womans Pap. TAke Culver-dung, powder of burnt Wheat, Honey, Virgin Wax, Flowers of Barley, and of Beans, and Linseed, boyl all these together in Wine or Vinegar, putting therto Rams Tallow and make a Plaister therof, laying it to the Pap that is soar, A Confection of Honey and Violets. TAke the flower of Violets one part, and of Honey three parts, boyl them with a soft fire, this is singular good in hot Agues, for it maketh the Patient moist and laxative, and as∣wageth the driness of the Stomack and the Breast. A Confection of Sugar and Vinegar Simplex. TAke of Sugar one pound, the juice of Pomgranats eight ounces, of Vini four ounces, boyl it on the fire till it come to a perfect Syrrope, this is very good for Tertian hot Agues, and Quartaines in the Springe time, it purgeth Choller in the stomach. The Nature of Comphry. TAke Comphry when the juyce of it is dronken bruised and lay to the fore it will knitt it together, even a broken bone.
To make Damask water. TAke Lavender and Red Roses as much as you will fill to the Stillatory, and grind them in a Morter, and put thereto Orace and Cloves, and so much Ginger beaten in pouder, and strow it among your Herbs in the Stillatory, and receive that water close, and use the water three spoonfulls evening and morning, also if you have need it is good to put in your eyes to make you see clear. A very Excellent Medicine against Deafness. TAke Mint, Sage, Penniroyall, Rosemary, Sope, Mugwort, Camomill, Milfoyle, Yearrow, or Nosebleed, Herb St. John Wormewood, Sothern wood, Centorie, of each of them a handfull, boile them in a clean pan, with as much good white Wine as there be Herbs, and let it boyle together untill the third part be diminished, then cause these Oyles following to be made, old Oyle two Ounces, Oyle of Leeks, Oyle of Al∣monds, of each of them one Ounce, of the juyce of Rew halfe an Ounce, of Malmesey one Ounce and a halfe, put all these in a long necked Glass or violl, and let it boile with a small fire untill the juyce, and the Malmesey be almost consumed, then take it from the fire, and put into it these Drugs following, well beaten into pouder, that is to say spicknard, Collaquintida, the stone of a Beaver called Castoreum, Mastick of each of them a graine and a halfe. Stop well your Violl that nothing take vent, then put it into a pan full of water, and make it boile the space of three hours, then take it from the fire, and powre the said liquor into a Platter which you shall set in the Sunne, and leave it there untill it become cleare, and having strained it through some fine linnen cloth, and pressed out well the sub∣stance you shall put a graine and a halfe of Muske in a dish, and incorporate it by little, and little with the said Oyle, and then keep it in a Violl well stopped with Wax and Parchment, after this take the pann with the said Herbs, and heat them up∣on the fire, then take for a coverlead, a fonnell made of white Iron, and when you go to bed cover the pann with the said fonnel, and see the pan be good, and hot, then by the little hole above, let the Patient take the smoak into his Eare, by the space of halfe an houre. This done, heat the said Oile untill it be luke warme, and let it drop into his Eares two or three drops, and stop his Ears with a little Muske, Bombast, or Cotton, let
him fleep thereupon, now he must in the receiving of the per∣fume or smoak in his Eare, let him have some dry beans in his mouth, and after he hath chewed them, spit them out again, that in chewing he may open the conduits of his ears & by the grace of God, he shall find himselfe healed in few dayes, provided that the disease be cureable, if in any case this help not, you need not seek any other remedie in the World if a man have a∣ny humming, or noise in the Ears, let him use this Medicine, and you shall see with Gods help a wonderfull thing, for it will heale the deafeness of a man, though he have had it thirtie yeares, so that he be not borne deafe. Let him use also Pills to purge his head, and to eat good meat alwayes, this is a present remedy against deafeness taken out of the secrets of the Reverend Master Alexes of Piemont. A Water to dissolve swelling in the bowells, and super∣fluity of fatt. TAke two Gallons of running water, and set it on the fire, and put into it two pound of red-fennell, and two Ounces of An∣gelica, and a quantity of Commine, and boile these from two Gallons to one Gallon, and less of water, and take this every day fasting in the space of twenty daies, the greatness will waste of the superfluity of humors, and also of the grosness. Sounding or Tinkling in a Mans Eare. TAke the juyce of Bettony, or of Worme wood, and warme it, and drop it into thy Eare, For watering of Eyes. TAke the juyce of Plantane tempered with Rose water, and drop it in your Eyes warm, the same effect worketh Rose wa∣ter, the juyce of Lilly roots tempered with the juyce of Plan∣tane, and this will do you good. For a stopping in the Eare. TAke a red Dock, and a few Ash keyes, and boile it with white or red Wine till it be consumed to the third part, poure the juyce luke warme, the Patient lying on one side, and it will make him heare.
To provoke Flowers. TAke halfe a handfull of Origanum, one quarter n of Cala∣mint, one quarterne of Marjarum, halfe a handfull of Mug∣wort, boile all those in white Wine, and straine it, and drink it nine dayes, and nights, first when she goeth to bed, and when she riseth, and five dayes after, take Mugwort a good quantity, and boile it in running water, and cast it in a large Vessell, and let her set of it to the Navell, a good space, and shee shall have it perfectly, and drink after her comming ont a certaine of Mithridatum or Treacle of Genoa with white Wine. To purge young gentle flowers. TAke Violet flowers dryed, one handfull of Raisons of the Sun, the stones picked out, boile them in a pint of Clarified Ale, to the wasting of halfe of it, then take the yolk of an Egge, and when you have strained it, take thereof as much as will suffice for a draught into the same, while it is warme, and drinke it in the morning. To make a Woman have her flowers. TAke Origanum, and drinke it with Wine sodden together, and it bringeth forth flowers, and if you drink Mother▪wort water, otherwise called in Latine Arthemesium Mater herbarum in morning and Evening at each time two Ounces, it bringeth the flowers in women, it must be distilled in May at the latter end, and the leaves stripped of the Reed Arthemesium is good for many other things. To stop the flowers. TAke and drink the juyce of Bursa Pastoris, and put part of the Herbs into thy privie parts, and Waybread together, and it shall stop them. To stay the Flowers. TAke the yolk of a new laid Egge, and a quantity of Bay salt and a penny worth of Saffron in pouder, and some redd
shearing flox of the Tuckers, and mix all these together in a bowle, and spread it upon a brown paper, and put it upon her Navell cold. A Julep of Roses. TAke of Rose water foure pound, of fine Sugar sodden, and clarified two pound, and so make your Julep with a soft fire. This quencheth the thirst in hot Agues, and doth aswage both the Liver, and the Heart, it doth resist Corruption of humors, and keepeth a man whole. A Julep of Violetts. TAke water of flowers of Violetts three pound, of fine Sugar boiled, and clarified two pound, mingle them and boile them with a soft fire: This is a present remedy in burning Agues, and to those that hath a hot Liver, or heart, and it helpeth▪ also those that have any roughness in the wind pipe or throat, and against the Plurisie and dry Cough. To break an Impostume in a Night and a Day. TAke the flowers of de Luce, and the flowers of white Lillies, stamp them, and temper them with honney, and boile them with Ale, or Wine, and drink it, and it shall break it, and avoid it downwards. For the black Jaundise. TAke Gandors Dung, and straine it into Malmesey, and a farthing worth of beaten graines, and drink it fasting blood∣warme. An approved Medicine for the Yellow Jaundise. TAke a quart of stale Ale, take halfe a spoonfull of the juyce of Savin, and a little English Saffron the Inner bark of a Barbary tree, the pouder of Ivory, and take of Goos dong that goeth abroad, and straine it into it, and boile the m altogether, and give it the partie luke warme fasting.
For the black Jaundise. TAke a handfull of Sage, a handfull of Rosemary, and bruse out the juyce of it with a little stale Ale, and take a sawcer full of sharp Vinegar, and put thereto as much Treackle of Jenes as a Nut, and chafe it in the Vinegar till it be consumed, and put thereto as much pouder of Waltaris as a Nut, and chafe all those together till they be blood warme, and so drink it. To make hard leggs soft and smale, though it be never so hard. TAke Mill, Barley flower, Wheat flower and boile them in Milke, and then put thereto sheeps tallow, honney and Bar∣rows grease, and boile them very thick, and apply it hot. Pro∣batum est. For young Children that have the Liver grown or the Wormes. TAke an Elicampane Root, and crops of Wormewood, and beat them together with Licoris, and a little Anniseeds and then put it into a Cup with Ale, and straine it, and if it be a child or old person, let him drink every morning fasting three dayes. To know whether a man shall live or dye. TAke Mouse eare, and let him drink it, and if he cast it up he shall dye, if he keep it, the contrary, also take his Urine, and cast it on a green Nettle at Evening, and if you find it green in the morning he shall live, and if the Nettle be dead, he shall dye. A red Plaister to drie. TAke Littargie of Gold three Ounces, Oyle of Roses, Oyle of Violetts a pound, and a halfe, of Calaminaris, of Terra si∣gillat, of red Lead foure Ounces, of Camphire, one ounce, and therewith make your plaister this doth dry Boiles and sores cleansed.
A Syrrup of Tart Pomgranats. TAke the juyce of tart Pomgranats, two pound of Sugar clarified three pound, and so make your Syrrup, this is good a∣gainst hot Agues of Choller and flegme. To make Syrrup of Buglas. TAke the juyce of Buglas fined foure pound, of Sugar three pound, and so make your Syrrup, this doth comfort the stomack, and maketh one merry, and it is given against soun∣ding, and fainting of the heart. A Syrrup of Drye Roses. TAke of the infusion of drie Roses, and of Sugar two pound, mingle them, and make a Syrrup, this doth much com∣fort the stomach, and bindeth them that have the bloodie Flux. For the Shrinking of Sinewes. TAke Marsh Mallowes a handfull, of Rosemary tops as much, and stamp them together, and after put thereto May butter molten, and so mingle them together, and so let it stand ten daies, then boyle it with a soft fire, untill the strength of the Herb be gone, and when it is so well sodden, take it, and wring it through a Canvass Cloth, and so put it into a stone pot of earth. For swelling in the Armes or any other place. TAke Commyn, Linseed, and boile them with sweet Milk, and Oatmeale, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the swelling. To stanch the bleeding of the Piles▪ TAke and drinke the juice of Millfollie, for that is proved, also put to the powder of burned Garlick, and the evils shall dye also to destroy them take oyle of Roses and Frankincense, and
Honey, and make Oyntment of these, and put it with thy finger into the Fundament, if it be a friend thou wouldst help in hast, add Myrrhe therto, and after annoint thy Fundament ther∣with, and for the going out of the Evils, boyl Frankinsence and water, and wash the Evils therwith, and let thy breath go up into thy Fundament, and he shall be whole: Probatum est. For a Woman travelling with Child to make her soon be delivered. TAke Bettony, and Date-stones in powder and drink it, and she shall be soon delivered. To do away a Wenn, and not to cut him: TAke and bind it fast then take Verdigrease, Sulphur, Soap, oyle of Eggs, Alome, and Hony, and temper them together & lay it therto, and it will go away without doubt: Probatum est. For all manner of Wounds and Soares. TAke here the most pretious Salve in the World, and it is so precious held, that it healeth doing any tent in al manner of Wounds, be they never so deep of themselves and the same Plaister will heal one hundred women, and if it be well kept, and alwaies do no more, but chafe it between your hands a lit∣tle, and lay it over another cloath, and cut it as long as the Wound, and look that the Wound be washed morning and eve∣ning with white Wine and red, and the seventh part with Ho∣ney, boyl it together and wash it warm, and each time make your Plaister hot in your hands, but make it clean before you chafe it, and then lay it on, then take a little and do it into the hole of the Wound, and all the filth of the Wound shall arise up by the hole of thy Plaister at the filling, and if the Wound ake for pain or difficulty of suffering, take a little oyle Olive and pour into the Wound, and it shall never ake. The making of the said Plaister for Wounds or Soares. TAke beaten Plantane, and Smallage of each of these Herbs take a pound of the juice, and do it in a Pan, and do thereto three ounces of clean new Wax, that came new from the Hony, and two ounces of Incense white, and clean and melt them by
themselves with a soft fire, then put in the Incense therto, and boyl them together till all the juice be wasted in, and alwaies stir it fast, then take it from the fire, strain it through a cloath, and then take three ounces of Turpentine, and temper them to∣gether, and when it is cold, take it up and keep it as Gold. A Water of Pismires Eggs. OUr form in Latine, the best manner to gather the Eggs is, you shall set Dishes of Tree in three or four heaps, wheras the Pismires dwelleth, and the Dishes shall be well covered with leaves of Trees, then they bear the Eggs into the dishes, and when you will take the Eggs away, uncover the dishes, and take a little stick, and knock upon the dish, then the Pis∣mires shall run out for fear and leave their Eggs behind them, these Eggs distilled in a Limbeck in Balneo Mariae, three or four drops of the same water put into deaf eares, and left, cau∣seth hearing again, and is good also for the piping of the eares. A water of Birch-juice. IN May peirce a hole in a Birch-tree, and set under a Glafs or any other Vessell, and there will come forth water, and that water you shall distill in a Limbeck. The water is good for all Wounds dressed therwith, and Clouts wet therin, and layd upon the Wound, the vvater dryeth all open Soars, if it be layd theron. For One that pisseth blood. TAke Parsley, Gromell, and Bursa-pastoris, of each like much, stamp them and strain them, being tempered with a quart of good milk, and so let the Patient drink therof three dayes, at evening and morning, and it will stench the blood. To make a singular Oyle for an Ach▪ proved by Edward Kendall. IN the Rogation week take Hors-mints, and shred them very small, then take Pigs Morde, and fry the Mints therwith till they do change their colour, then take it and strain it into some
thing that you will keep it in all the yeare, you may make it any time in the yeare, and it will be very good, but the Roga∣tion week is the best. To make Cordiall Lozanges to break wind. TAke Aniseeds two Drams, Gromell seed, Broomseed of each one Dram, the Kernells within the Ash keyes halfe a dram, pouder this very fine, and with foure ounces of Sugar, and Rose water make them, which being used will break wind this must be made as other lozanges are. Probatum for the head-Ach. TAke Bean flower, and pouder of Commin, of each like quantity, and boile it in strong white Vinegar, till it be thick, then lay it in a linnen bagg to the nape of thy neck behind, so hot as you may suffer it▪ For a woman to have her Flowers TAke Sage, Rew, Mugwort, Sallendine, and Maiden-haire of every one halfe an handfull, of Turmerick, one penney worth of Safron make them all into pouder, and bole them together in a pottle of white Wine with six peniworth of white Sugar, and straine it, and drink it milke warme, eve∣ning and morning untill all be spent. For a Woman that hath her flowers stopped. TAke a pottle of Vinegar, two hand fulls of Harts horne, two handfulls of Bugle, thre handfulls of Isop, and boil all these in a pottle of Vinegar, and let the woman sit over it, first make a plaister as followeth. Take a good quantity of Cowdonge, and strong Vinegar, and mutton suet, and boile it, and spread it hot upon a cloth hot, and lay it upon a linnen cloth from the womans Brests unto her Knees, and so leave it one whole night and then let her sit upon the bath aforesaid.
Another for the same. TAke young Isop, Maiden-leek, English Saffron, red Fen∣nell, Clary, a little black Sope, stamp and strain them, and drink it, and plaister the Herbs hot to her belly. To cause a Woman to have her Flowers: TAke Germander, and Goose glisters, the roots of English Saffron, of each a great handfull, the roots of Elacampana thin sliced one ounce, of Liver roots scraped and thin cu halfe an Ounce, of Tyme, and Savory, of each half a handfull, of Commin, and Anniseeds, of each one spoonfull grosly bruised; mingle all these together, and let them boile in a Pottle of white Wine, with a soft fire to a pinte and halfe, then strain it, and wring out the Liquor hard, and to every draught hereof put the waight of a penny in Cynamon, asmuch of Jett, seven or eight blades of English Saffron made to fine pouder, and one spoonfull of melted honney. After you have mingled all these things together with this liquor blood warme, three or foure mornings before the time of your wonted griefe, drink a good draught thereof, and cover you warme, and if sweat may be gently provoked, let it be done by the space of one houre, or as your strength will beare, and use this monethly. To cause a Woman to have her Flowers. A Medicine that never failed, but beware that shee be not with Child. TAke the root of an Hearb called Gladinum, and boile it in Vinegar or Wine, and when it is well boiled set it on the ground, and let hir stand over it, so that no ayre may goe a∣way, but ascend into her privitie. Another of the same. TAke an herb called Collerage, and boile it in white Wine and when it is boiled, let the Patient sit over it, so as the steame may ascend into her privity, as hot as she can indure it, and when she goeth to bed let her lay thereof to her privitie, so hot, as she may suffer it, and it will heale her by the grace of God.
For a Woman delivered with Child. TAke Date stones, Commin, Graynes, English Saffron, make of all these a pouder, and drink it with Malmesie o stale Ale. For to make speedy after throws. TAke yolks of new laid Eggs, and make thereof a Caudle with Ale, and put thereto a little Cynnamon and English Saffron, and when you have boiled your Caudle take a hand∣full of Vervayne, and stamp it, and straine it, and give the same to the woman, and she shall have speedie remedie by Gods grace. Another for the same. TAke a Catt, and let her blood in the hinder huckle, three drops in a little drink, and so give the woman it some what warme. Another for the same. TAke three drops of the blood of the Navell string, and a little gods-speed ground in drink, and give it the woman warme. Another for the same. TAke the pouder of Frankincense, and three drops of a holy Candle, and three of Urine, and put in a draught of Ale, and so give it her to drink warme. For the white Termes or Nature. TAke a small quantity of white Campies stamp them, and straine them with Clarret Wine, or red Wine, and make a Posset thereof, use to drink thereof.
For a Woman that hath her belly swelled with her Terms. TAke the red berries of Archangell, and put them in a Cup of white Wine all night, and in the morning straine them and drink them five dayes before the New, and so continue them, until the Prime be past, morning, and evening. For a burned Yard. TAke a quart of Smiths water, a handfull of Sage, a good quantity of Allom, a Sawcer full of honey, and boile them to a pint, and strain it, and with a Serring inject it into Pe∣nis. Probatum for the Tooth-ach. TAke a pint of water or a quart, and a handfull of Rosemary, and another of Isop, and a Sawcer of Honney, an ounce of Alom, and boyle all together, till halfe be consumed, and straine it warme, and wash the tooth therewith. An approved Medicine for him that cannot make his Water. TAke ten or twelve Bees, and stamp them, and temper them with Ale, and give the Patient to drink, and he shall make water forthwith. Probatum est. To take away the hardness in a womans Milk, and to cause her milk to run. TAke Dandellion, Sage, Plantane, of every sort of these herbs one handfull, then chop them together, and fry them in Clarret Wine till they be soft, and then take it up, and plaister it upon a cloth, and steke the Plaister with raw Creame, and lay it to the Best warme.
To drye up a womas Milk. TAke a quantity of Sage, stamp it, and strain it with a quart of white Wine, and so warme it, and drink it, and let her go to bedd, and lye on the sore side, then take the Sage, if all be strained out, and put them between two shilling stones, the stones must be hot, and put them upon her brest, and use it morning and evening, three dayes, and three nights, For him that cannot hold his water. TAke a pottle of Muskadine, a handfull of Clary, half so much of Neperiall, and so of Mary golds, and a little quantity of the Mores of Camphir, cut in fine slises, and bruise the herbes, a little in you hands, and put thereto two or three Nutmeggs, and so much in quantitie of Cinamon, and cut it in peeces, and fix Dates cut, and the stones picked out, and the white within and some Sugar to make it pleasant, but the less Sugar you put therein the better, and so boile it till halfe be consumed, and drink thereof morning and evening. A plaister for the same. TAke of every kind of Plantane a handfull, that is Rib wort, and two other kinds three handfulls of Bursa-Pastoris, and so much of Dill, and boile them all in red Wine or stale Ale, till the Herbs be soft, and then put the Herbs in a linnen Bagg, and so lay it to the lower part of the Reines, so hot as you may suffer it, and so keep the liquor, and when the plaister is cold, or after an houre take that away, and put thereto another hot bagg, or else heat that againe in the liquor, and so change it three times in one day, after every houre, leaving the same but one houre, before you change or heat it, use this eight or nine dayes together, and once in two dayes make new also Serringe with raw milk once or twice in a day. Another for the same. TAke Turpentine of Jene, the seed of Occulis Christi, the the pouder of Nehperill, and of Clary, wash the Turpen∣tine
in white Vinegar, and take of each sort of the pouder e∣quall porcions and so mingle the pouders, and the Turpen∣tine, then eat of the pills five or six at a time, and eat be∣tween every one a little pill of Dragons blood, and so use it morning and evening. A Medicine for the after throws when a Woman is de∣livered of a Child. TAke of Wormewood; Motherwort, and Elder leaves of each a handfull, a quarter of a pound of Beane flower, two yolks of Eggs, boile it together in a quart of water till it be thick, plaister it, and put it to her Navell. A drink for her also. TAke Mother-wort, and Chicken-weed, of each a like, pound and straine them in Ale, or other drink, and give it her to drink. A Medicine for a woman that have a cold stomach before or after Child bedd. TAke a quantity of Callomanus Aromaticus, Cloves, Nut∣meggs, Galligand, and Cynamon, of each a like quantity cut in peeces not very small, put all these together, and then divide them into three parts, and then take a reasonable draught of white Wine, and put therein the one part of all the said stuffe, and let it be warmed luke warme, and let the Patient drinke it, in the morning fasting, and lye and sweat one houre after or more, but shee may not sleep and use this two mornings following, and so the third morning. For a scald-head whatsoever kind it be. TAke Rew, Feather-few, Tansey, Wormewood, Laven∣der Cotten of each a handfull, wash them, and swing out the water and stamp them fine, and frye them in a frying pan
with fresh butter, that never touched Salt, and strain it through a fine cloath, and annoint the head every day, and wash it once in a week, and it will be whole by Gods grace. To make a woman conceive. TAke powder made of Boars stones, and give it her to drink after her flowers, and she shall conceive, also take the sha∣ving of Ivory, and drink it, and it shall make her able to con∣ceive. To make a man have lust to a Woman: TAke Fennell-seeds, and Skirwith, of each two ounces, grind it and mingle it with new Cows Milk, and make Pellets ther∣of as big as Beans, and take three at night and three in the morning; first of all annoint thy Members with Oyle, and the juice of Morrell and Vinegar, and mingle them together. To know if a man shall live or dye. TAke the Sickmans water, and let a woman drop there in her Milk, and if it mingle with the water he shall dye, and if it swim above the water he shall live. A Drink for an Ague. FIrst keep the Patient watm, then take Succory, Burrage, Lettice, Violets, and Endive, two good handfuls of the Hull, and boyl them in three quarts of fair water, untill it be consu∣med to a pottle, then let the broath run through a fine cloath, without bruising the Herbs that the broath may be clear, then to a pint of the same, take three spoonfuls of White-vine∣gar and drink of the same continually, without drinking any o∣ther drink, so neer as you may, and also make the Patients mea with the same Herbs, if it be not delicious, then put in some white Sugar.
A Powder for an Ague. TAke foure ounces of Orange Pills, one ounce of Sage, one ounce of Bay Berries, two ounces of Nutmegs, beat all these together into a fine powder, you may give it all times, this powder a little before the Fit to a man a grain waight, to a Child half so much, with Ale or Beer very warm, in this time it is better to begin with decoction of the Herbs as you have a∣bove, put it to no more drink then may be taken at once: To make washing Balls. TAke white Soap of the finest four pounds, and cut it fine, and Sanders two ounces,, Cloves two ounces, Benjamine one ounce, Musk twenty grains, mix them with Rosewater, and a little Oyle of Spike, and so make them in Balls. An excellent Medicine for the Collick. TAke six spoonfuls of Aqua Compositua, and as much Vine∣gar, and a handfull of Rosemary, and as much Sage, put your Aqua▪Compositua and Vinegar upon a Chaffin-dish of Coals between two dishes, and put your Herbs into it, then take a broun Coast and toast it hard, and dip it into your water, and Herbs, and lay your Herbs with the toast upon a linnen cloath for fitting your Belly, and lay it a little under your grief, as warm as may be suffered, and lye down the space of an hour, and it will take away the pain, look that the Herbs be next the grief, and rest upon it: Probatum est. For the Pin and Web in the Eye. TAke a pint of ripe Strawberries, laying them in a pint of Wine two daies, then bray them, straining them through a clean cloath, then taks a stone called Lapis Callaminaris, as big as a Doves Egg, and make it red hot in the fire, and quench it in the same liquor, and let it stand by the space of nine daies, then cleanse it, and put the liquor in a little Glass, taking a fea∣ther, and dip it in the Liquor, and wash your Eye that is soar.
To make water for soar Eyes. TAke a pint of Whit-wine, and take so much of a stone called Lapis Callaminaris as an Egg, and lay it on the fire till it be red hot, and then put it into the Wine; and when the stone is cold, lay it in the fire again, and make it red hot, and put it in the Wine again, and heat it so often, and put it in the Wine a∣gain, untill it break in the VVine as Sugar, and then put it all together in a Glass, and drop it in your eye, and if you take but half a pint of VVine, put therto but half so much of the stone, use this as aforesaid. To make ones face fair. TAke the Blossoms of Rosemary, and boyl them in VVhite-wine, and when you list to be fair wash your face with it, and if you drink of the same it will make your breath sweet. To clear the Skin. TAke the Marrow of Swines feet, and Rosewater, and Cows Milk, and mingle these together, and warm them luke-warm, then annoint your face therwith. To make Hair grow if it be long a coming out. TAke a good number of Bees that be labouring to make Ho∣ney, dry them, and make them to powder, then put them in common Oyle, and mingle them together, and with this Oyntment annoint the place where you will have hair, and cer∣tainly it will come without pain. Oyle of Wormwood. TAke the buds and tops of VVormwood, and of the juice four ounces, of oyle of Olive three pound, put it into a Ves∣sell of Glass, and set them in the Sun by the space of fifteen daies, stopping the mouth, then boyl them four hours, and then strain them well, and you must strain them three times after∣wards, and so keep them, this doth comfort and bring heat to the cold members, it fortifyeth the stomach, and causeth a good appetite, it openeth Obstructions, and healeth Diseases which
cometh of cold, it causeth the destruction of Worms, and bring∣eth them forth if it be mixt with Oyntments and Plaisters, and laid to the place. Oyle of Worms. TAke the Worms of the earth half a pound, of the oyle of Olive two pound, of Wine two ounces, boyl them altogether, and make Oyle accordingly; this comforteth the Sinews that are vexed with cold, and for the Ach of the Joynts. A perfume for Gloves. TAke oyle of Almonds of the sweetest, and put it into a pot with these powders, a little Musk, a little Storax, Callamintum, Nutmegs, Gilliflowers, and make them in powder, put them into the Oyle of Almonds, and set it to dry in the Sun in a Glass by the space of eight daies, and stir it with a stick every day then wet your Gloves in Rosewater three times, and let them dry again, and the last time when they are dry, annoint them with the Oyle and powder after it hath stood eight daies in the Sun, and your Gloves shall have a notable perfume▪ For the Pin and the Web. TAke three handfuls of red Fennell, and wash it, and then swing it in a clean cloath, so that there be no water left in it, then stamp it, and strain it through a fair cloath, and take two spoonfuls of new Honey, or else good English Honey, and put therto a spoonfull of good Rosewater, or else of fair water, then put the water and the honey together on the fire in a Sawcer, and when it boyleth skim it, and when you have Clarified it, let it cool a while, when it is somwhat cold, put the juice and it to∣gether, and strain it through a fair cloath, and put it in a Viall, and take therof three or four times a day to dress the eye with∣all, and when you use it put in some womans milk. To make one to sleep. TAke Lettuce-seed, and bruise it small with womans milk, and the White of an Egg, and lay it to the Temples of thy head.
For the Tooth-ach TAke a Gaul that groweth on a Tree, and take as much of it as your hollow tooth will receive, and pare off the out-side, and put it in your tooth till your pain be past, and if it draw too much take it out, and scrape of the filth, and put it in again. A good water to make one well coloured. TAke the flowers of Beans, red Roses, wild Tansey, Honey suckles, with the Whites of Eggs, bray them a little, wash∣ing the face and hands with this water. The properties and operation of Rose-water. 1. ANd if you drink Rose-water with Sugar, it will asswage all heats. 2. And if you drink it with water of Cottidony, and Feather∣few and Sugar, it will destroy all manner of Jaundise. 3. And if you annnoint your Temples of your head, it shall ease the head-ach. 4. And if you mix it with the juice of Fumytory and black Soap, it will destroy the Morphew. 5. And if you drink it fasting it will make a sweet breath, clear the sight, and comfort the nature. 6. And if you boyl white Copperis in it, and wash your eyes without and within, it will destroy the Pin and Web: 7. And if you drink it with the juyce of Mint, Hysop, Sugar, and Licorace, it will destroy the Tissick. 8. And if you drink it with the juyce of Sothernwood, and Fennelseed, it will destroy the Cough, and all manner of evils in the Breast, and quencheth all heats in the Stomack. For watering Eyes. TAke red Colly▪leaf, and annoint it with the White of an Egg, and lay it to the watering Eyes, when thou goest to thy Bed, and it shall heal them. For a womans quick deliverance. TAke and drink the juyce of Vervain with red Wine, and she shall lightly be delivered▪
To make a Tooth fall out. TAke water Frogs, and as many land Frogs, and take out their bowels, and wash their bodies elean, and boyl them in fair water, when the water is cold take off the grave, and with a lit∣tle on your finger touch the tooth, and it shall fall out. For a Tettar. TAke Vinegar, Brimstone, black Soap altogether, and rub it with it two or three times a day. To take Fish. TAke Assifaetia, Milk, Honey, VVheat flour, and make an Oyntment, and annoint the bait and thy hook. Against spitting of blood coming from the Lungs or Lights. TAke the juice of Mill foil two ounces, of a bloodstone burned to powder two drams, and give it the Patient to drink with VVhite-wine, or Ale cold. To cure a Vain broken in the stomach and breast. TAke wild Angellica, Egremony, Sanicle, Cinqfoil, Strawbury leaves, Rib-wort, VVoodbine leaves, Dasie roots, and leaves—Dandelion, white Comfry, Scabious, Sowthernwood, white bottles, Spermint, Oake-buds, Bramble-buds, Plan∣tane—Take so much of all these as will make six hand∣fuls (taking an equall portion of each) and steep them in a gallon of fair water for two hours, then set them on the fire, and let them be boyled untill half be consumed, then put to it a quart of VVhite-wine, and let it boyl a walm or two, then take it off, then strain it, then set it on again, and put to it a pint of pure Virgin English Honey, then let it boyle to Clarify the Honey, then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, put it up in a Glass, let the Patient take four or five spoonfuls luke-warm, two hours or at least one hour before Dinner, and Supper, and
at going to bed, I verily beleive that the continuance of this will cure him, let him in the morning ear before it a good mouth∣full of the Conserve of Comfry roots, if his stomach agree with such things. This from Sir Kenelme Digby. For the wind in the Stomach. TAke Venice Treacle, and a little Conserve of Roses, and make a Pill of the quantity of a small button, and take it after a light Supper, and it will case or cure the wind; Sir Kenelme Digby. An experienced Medicine for the Stone, Mr. Henry Pelham TAke White-wine, and make a Posset of it, then take the Curd off it that it be clear, then take the juice of red Nettles, being pounded, and strained into the Posset so much as may not oftend the stomach, if it be so strong of the Nettles, put more Posset un to it, or put to some Sugar, if you make this in Winter, the Apothecaries hath the water of red Nettles, or the Seeds which use as the juice, you may take it in your Fit or otherwise, its no matter though yon cast it often, before you keep it, it will break the Stone into a gravell, or at least much abate the roughness of it, that it shall not fret. A water for the Stomach, poysons, small Pox, or any Sur∣fet, or falling, or Convulsion Fits. TAke of Sallendine, Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Mugwort, Worm∣wood, Pimpernell, Dragon, Scabious, Egremony, Balm, Scordium, Century, Carduus Benedictus, Bettony, Rosa-solis, of each a good handfull, Angellica roots, white Henbane roots, Turmentile, Zedoary, Licorace, of each half an ounce, slice the roots, and wash them, and the Herbs shake and squeeze the wa∣ter out of them in a cloath, then shred them and steep them two daies and nights in as much White-wine as will cover them well, and let the Vessell b close covered. Take it out and distill it, and keep it close in a Glass or Bottle, and when you use it, give it luke-warm to the Patient, with a little Sugar in∣fused,
to a Child two or three spoonfuls is sufficient, and to a strong body 4, 5, or 6. It is an Experimented Cordiall, you may use a little Mithridate in it; these Simples are to be ga∣thered in May, and then distilled, or in the beginning of June. For a blood-shotten bruise over the Eye, by Mrs. Con∣way approved. TAke Sugar-Candy, and beat it as small as you can into pow∣der, then put it into a Quill, and so blow it into your Eye a few dressings infallibly cures it by my own experience. For the deafness in the Eares. TAke of a Hare new killed the Urine out of her bladder, and drop it into the Eare, and it is a speedy remedy: A Plaister for the Sciatica, approved by Mrs. Church. TAke a pound of Burgundy Pitch, a quarter of a pound of Virgin Wax, a quarter of a pound of Rozen, two ounces of Frankincense, two good spoonfuls of Aquavitae, of ordinary Turpentine two pennyworth, put all these together, and boyl them very softly that they do not run over, and being reasonably boyled, then set it by, untill it be somwhat cooled, and sit to spread, and then spread it thin upon a brown paper of the finest, for handsomness unto the Patient, and then apply it to the place pained, not heating the Plaister at the fire, but holding it on with your hand, that the heat of the hand and the body may make it cleave too, and let it lye on, untill of it self it fall off, and then apply a new implaister, as occasion shall require: Pro∣batum. To cure any Pain or Knob arising in the hand, or other part. TAke of Sperma-Ceti, and mixe it with some Aquavitae, not too much, for the Aquavitae is to much drying, annoint the place with it morning and evening, and it is an experienced Cure.
A Syrrop for a Cold by my Lady Cook the younger. TAke half a pint of good Anniseed water, or Aquavitae, put a quarter of a pound of Sugar into it, set them in a broad dish, that will not melt, on a Chffin-dish of coals, when it is warm take it off the fire, then burn it with a fired paper, as you do Wine, stirring it with a long stalked spoon or Ladle, when it leaveth burning, let it cool a while, and then put into, it a quarter of a pint of red Rose-water, keep it in a Glass, and let the Patient take two spoonfuls of it morning and night. To make the Oyle of Adders-tongue. TAke a peck of the Herb called Adders-tongue, chop it very small, and put to it a pint of the best Oyle Olive, then let it boyl untill a good quantity of it be consumed, then strain the Herbs from the Oyle, and put up the Oyle for your use, first wash the soar with Beer and Verjuice, and annoint it with the green Oyntment, and drop with a feather some of the Oyle into the soar, then lay on a Plaister of the green Salve: It importeth not to know the Cause but the Cure, how ignorant were Physitians in the cure of the Pox, as long as they went by Science, after Experience had taught us the use of Lignum vi∣tae, they were cured without knowledge of the Origen of the Disease; or Cause why the Medicine healeth, the knowledge of secret Causes and natural Operations vain and impossible. For soar Eyes, by Sir Francis Swift. TAke your own Water, boyl it in a dish on a Chaffin-dish of coals, cover it with another dish, and even as the dew riseth and sticketh upon the Dish, take it off with a feather, and put it into a Glass close, and as you need drop some of it into your eye, and lay a cloath wet in it upon the eye: this did heal blood-shot eyes with a skin upon them, and specks in them when their sight was almost gone, when many other ex∣perimented Medicines failed, and in vain used.
For the Cramp in Foot or Leg, or any other place. TAke and bind the place with a List of new red cloath about the place affected, and it will in short time take away the pain, and it will not often come again. To take away a stopping Cold from the heart. TAke a Nutmeg, and grate it, and some Aquavitae and a little fresh butter, put it in a dish upon the fire, and warm them together, then take a cloath three doubled, and dip it in the war∣med Liquor, and lay it at the pit of the Stomach, and it is a per∣fect remedy▪ For a Gaul with riding. TAke the slime that is left in a ditch, or any other place where water hath run, by the Rain, or any other cause, and annoint it therwith, it is a present remedy. Another for the same. TAke leaves of Eldar, and put them into your pocket when you ride, and you shall not be gauled at all. An Excellent Medicine for the Eyes by Sir Kenelme Digby. TAke a new-laid Egg, and roast it very hard, then slit it in the middle, and take out the Yolk, then take some Alome and beat it into powder, mix it with Honey, and make a Past with it, and put it into the hollow of the Egg being warm, then hold the Egg in your hand between two Trenchers, but do not squeeze it, and there will come out a juice as clear as water, which you must let drop into some spoon, take a drop of that water and drop into the Eye, and it is a present Cure for any Disease that breedeth in the eye. For an Ague. TAke Parsley stalk, a good quantity, and pound it and take the juyce o i, and put it into posset drink or warme
White-wine, drink it, you may put Sugar in it to make it ellish the better, and the virtue of it is to procure Urine, which will take away the venome of the Disease, take it as your Fit cometh upon you, eirher in a hot Fit or a cold. To make a Liquid Caustick. TAke half a pint of Soap Lees, called Lixivium, and of black Soap the quantty of a small Wallnut, and set it on the fire, nd stir it together, and being ready to boyl, put to it of the powder of Unslackt Lyme, as much as will make it of a good consistance, and if upon long keeping it grow to thick add more Lixivium to it, and keep it close stopt in a Glass: An excellent Vulnerary Drink for many Imperfections and Diseases. TAke Avens, Buglass, Cinqfoil, Comphry, Dayses, with the Roots, Dandelyon, Egremony, Bettony, Mugwort, Plan∣tane, Ribwort, Spermint, Bramble tops, Strawberies, and Vio∣let-leaves, Scabious, Hawthorn-ops, Southernword, Oake-leaves, and Woodbin-leaves, Wormword, Angellica, and white Beets that grow in the Corn-fields, of each half a hand∣full: Boyl them in a pottle of spring water, with a quart of White-wine over a soft fire to the consumption of half, then strain it, and add to it of discummed Honey a pint, & set it over the fire again to boyl a walm or two, and scum it again, and so keep it for your use, and give six spoonfuls of it morning and evening, or more, according to the strength of the Patient; It throweth out all shivers of bones, or other thing fixed in the flesh, it cureth old or new Soars, and it cleanseth the bones from all filth, and scurff in the Fistula or Evill: It maketh the flesh close soundly from the bottom, it cureth by cleansing of the blood and by making a dry Soar run much at the first, and afterwards dryeth it, healing without rankling, proud flesh or heat▪ It is good also for a dry Itch, and singular-in the cure of wo∣mens breasts.
To make a water for the Eyes: GAther in the month of May one pottle of the dew of Barley before the Sun doth rise, then put therto half a quarter of an ounce of white Copperis, and half a quarter of an ounce of white Salt, boyl these till it come to a quart, then let it cool and put it into a Glass, and stop it close, and when you use it, drop a drop into the soare Eye: it will keep a year or two. To make the Tobacco Salve. TAke green leaves of Tobacco, pound, stamp them, and strain them, then take Bees Wax in the Comb unmelted foure ounces, Venice Turpentine, Rozen, and Salet▪oyle, Ana three ounces, then boyl all these together till the juyce of the Tobacco be infused with the rest, then strain it through a fine linnen cloath, put not in the Turpentine till the liquor be but warm, and then keep it in a Galley-pot for your use. For the Head-ach. THe Oyle of sweet Marjoram to smell to, and a drop of it put into each eare cures it, two drops of Spirit of Rosemary put on the mould of the head asswageth the pain. The powder of the Ashes of Rosemary will make the Teeth white, and cureth the Gums. For a Fellon or hot Swelling. GRounsell leaves, and stalks pounded, and a third part of so much in fresh Butter, or water boyl'd together till it be soft, spread it thick and lay it on the Soar somwhat warm, shift it once in four and twenty hours. For the Rickets. TAke new Ale or Beer that hath little or no Hop in it, and turn it into small Firkin or Pipkin which hath a Spigge,
put Barm to it that it may ripen, and being ripened, draw ou a stone Jugg or Bottle full, and put therin such a quantity of Tamarisk, bark of Ivy, and Bark of Ash as may give it strength, then stop it up, and when it hath stood four daies give of it to the Child to drink fasting, at Meals▪ and at all other times when it desireth to drink. Be sure when you begin one Bottle to fill another as you did the first, that the lst may be four daies old before it be entred upon. For a Canker although it be never so far gone. TAke white Copperas, and Alome, as much more Alome as Copperas, burn them together in a Fire shovell untill they leave boyling, then take it, and pour off the out-side, and make it into a powder, if the Canker be old, let it be washed with Canker-water, then lay some of this powder upon it, but do not rub it, nor swallow it, you may lay it on with a Salt Slike, twice or thrice dressing will cure it. To make Bully's Oyle. TAke Herb-grace, and red Sage, of each one pound, Worm∣wood, and the tender tops of Bayes, of each half a pound, chop them small, but wash them not, three pounds of Sheeps Suet hot our of the Sheep, stamp altogether in a Morter, untill it be like a Salve, not one thing to be discerned from another, then temper into it a quart of the best Oyle Olive, and a quart of the best Neatsfoot Oyle, put it into an Earthen Vessel stopped close, and so let it stand in some cool place eight daies, then boyl it on a soft fire, keeping it stirring, and when it hath boyled an hour and an hall, put into it four ounces of Oyle of Spike, after this let it boyl, till it look very green, so strain it, and put it into a pot for your use. To make the Sear-cloath to the Oyle. TAke Oyle-Olive half a pint, red Lead five ounces, boyl it and stir it, untill it be black, then put to it two ounces
of Dears Suet, one ounce of Deares Marrow, one ounce of Sperma-Ceti, one ounce of Bees-wax, boyl all together untill it be thick enough to hang on the linnen cloath, you dip it in∣to it, and wrap it up for your use: When you use it warm the Ole in a Sawcer, and chafe it hot into the place grieved, lay  ar-cloath upon it for any bruise or strain: For an Impostume in the Breast or Sto∣mach. TAke roasted Onyons, and spread them on a Plaister, and lay them to the Breast, or Stomack, where the paine is, and shift it with new Plaisters, morning and Eve∣ning. To open the Liver, Spleen and avoid Choler, and help the Tertian Ague. TAke a quart of White-wine, and boyl therin a handfull of Germander, half an ounce of Cene, a quarter of an ounce of Fennelseeds, if you put therto as much Parsley-seeds, it doth not only open the stopping of the Liver, and Milt, but also help∣eth the Strangury and Stone. For the Meagrim. TAke Marjoram, and rub it in your hands untill it be of juice, and with the juice of the same rub the Temples, untill they do smart, and it will help you. For a Soar Breast, by Mr. Cockman. TAe a Sheeps-head with the Woollon, boyl it in a good quan∣tity of water three or four hours, take the cleer broath, and put as much whole Ryce into it as wil boyl it to the thickness of a Poultice, breaking the Rice as it boyleth with a woden slice, when you find it to be very soft take it off the fire, and put to it two Yolks of Eggs beaten with a little Saffron, and somthing more then a spoonfull of Oyle of Camomile, this Powltice is to be applyed warm before the Breast be broken, and laid on a∣bout
the thickness of two fingers, that it may come off moist, cutting a hole in the cloath for the Nipple, this Poultice is to be shifted every twelve hours, and you are to continue it a day or two after▪ the breast is broken. The Plaister. TAke Goats▪ dung, dry it with a gentle heat, pound it very small, and searce it, then take English Honey (if the Ho∣ney be hard canded melt it on the fire) cooling it again like Syrrop, then put in as much of this powder to it as will thicken it, but not to stiff, apply this warm morning and evening, with∣out tenting the Breast, if in the Cure it grow hard or swell a∣gain, apply the former Poultice for three or four dayes, and then this again. To keep Milk from curdling. LEt there be boyled somtime in her broath a bunch of Mints and Parsley, and a little Cynamon and Saffron, and now and then a little Mint water, drink it warm with sufficient Sugar: If there shall be knots in either Breast or Swelling. TAke new-milk, and Oyle of Roses by equall portions, and thicken those with bread of a Manchet grated and boyle them to a pap, and use it plaister-wise upon the breast so grie∣ved. But if with taking cold, inflammation should happen with any redness. THen use the former poultice of Rice the place being former∣ly annointed with Honey, and a little Aquavitae warm'd to∣gether. Admit the worst should happen, and that by accident Im∣postumation should be caused and grief grow so as it must be broken. THen boyl in Milk, and Oatemeal a good handfull of Mal∣lows, with as muth Bryer leaves, and the head of a Lilly
beaten small, till it be to the thickness of a Poultice, and where you feel the greatest pain in that place, lay on (before the Poultice) a chief of Saffron, which will break it in that place, and when it is broken use the Poultice still some two dressings, then afterward apply your known Medicine, which certainly will heal it. Against the biting of a mad Dog: TAke six ounces of pickled leaves of Herb▪grace, four ounces of the best Treacle, or Mithridate, four ounces of pilled Garlick, four spoonfuls of scraped Tin, stamp the Garlick, and Herb grace together, and then put in the Mithridate, and mingle them well together, then take a pottle of good Ale, stale and not sower, nor too new, boyl all these together in the Ale with the Tin to three pints, then strain it, and give of it three or four spoonfulls at a time, three times a day, for nine daies together. And to a Christian-body bind the Feces which are left of the straining to the place bitten. A present remedy for the Bloody Flux. TAke a fine linnen cloath, and put a litle Woll in it, and make a little button of Subposita, dip it in Aqua-Composita, and put it up once ot twice, and it will help. For the Piles. TAke a quart of good Claret-wine, and a good quantity of Mallows, boyl it into a pint, and set over it, and la the Mal∣lows to the place as hot as may be suffered, you must put to it a good peece of sweet Butter in the boyling. An excellent Glister. TAke the Urine of a healthfull body one pinte, one spoonfull of Fennell-seed, as much Wheat-leaven as
as a Wal-nut, let those boile one walme, then straine them, and take it in a Glister. A speciall Medicine for a Tetter. TAke Gum Arabick, and steep it in the strongest Vinegar you can get, let it lye still till it be consumed, that it rope like Sirrup, then lay it on the Tetter with a Feather not washing it of, but as it dryeth wet it, if it be in a place where the cloaths rubb it off, then wet a broune paper soft, and lay it between, dressing it twice a day. For the Scaitica or paine in the Joints. TAke halfe a Pint of the Marrow of a stone horse, and as much Rosemary as will be fit to boile in that, bruise it, and boile them together on a cleare fire a very little while, when tis boi∣led straine it, and anoynt the Patient with it against the fire, and with Gods help it shall cure them in twenty foure hours. You may have it at the Dog-house in Finsbury fields. A Receipt for the Green sickness. TAke a pottle of white Wine, and one handfull of Rosema∣ry, and as much Wormwood one ounce of Carduus seed, and one dram of Cloves, still all these, and drink halfe a pint at a time, morning and evening, and walk after it: A Purge. TAke Rubarbe one dram and halfe, slice it, and steep it in foure ounces, of Succory water a day and a night, then straine them, and put to that is strained Sirrup of Roses three ounces drink it at once.
An Excellent Julip to be taken in a Feaver▪ TAke a pint of Burrage water, put into it three drops of Oyle of Vitrioll, and two drops of the spirit of Sulphure, a little Sugar, and juyce of Limon according to your tast, drink nine spoonfulls at a time to quench your thirst. For an Ague: TAke a Limon, and squise out the juyce, put to it a spoonfull of Aqua vitae, and as much loaf Sugar, drink this in the be∣ginning of the cold fit. For a Cold. TAke the pulpe of three or foure Apples roasted, and put it on a Plate, make a hole in the middle, into which put a spoon∣full or two of Aqua via, set this over a Chafin dish of coals, and when it is warm ier it, hold your head over the steame, and take it in at your mouth, and nostrills while it will burne, then put a penny worth or two of Sugar Candie, and try to fire it againe, when it will burne no more eat it, this must be taken to bedward. A gentle Purge. TAke a pound of blew Figs of the best, slice them in the middle, take a pound of Damask Rose leaves, two pound of fine Sugar beaten very fine, lay a layer of Sugar, a layer of Roses, a layer of Sugar, and a layer of Figs, the proportion of Sugar being equall to both the other, put them into a Gally pot, tye them close, and set them in the Sun, take of this a spoonfull in a morning, and it will give a stool. For the inflammation of a Wound. TAke a handfull of Groundsell, a handfull of brad plantane pound them, and straine out the juyce, and put a spoon full of honney, halfe an ounce of Venice Turpentiue, mingle all these with a little wheaten flower, so laying it Poultis wise dip∣ing your tent in it.
An excellent Sear-cloth for an Ach in the Back, Side, or any limbe of the Body. TAke a quart of Oile of Roses, one pound of yellow Wax the newest you can get, three quarters of a pound of white lead three quarters of an ounce of Camphir, of Frankensence halfe a pound, of Gum Mastick halfe an ounce, o Turpentine halfe a pound, one ounce and a halfe of Nut Balsom, the white lead, Camphir Frankinsence, and Gum Mastick must be ground very small, every sort by it selfe, on a Painters stone. Take a Skil∣let of cast mettall, or a pan, and set it very safe on the fire, and put in first the Oile of Roses, and let it boile up one walme, and then take it off▪ and be very carefull you let it not run over, for feare of firing the house, then take the Wax and cut it in small peeces, and put it into the Oile, and stir it still. Then put it on the fire againe, and let it boile up till the Wax be melted stirring it stil, and then take it off, and strew in the white Lead by little and little, stirring it still. Then put it on the fire againe, and let it boile againe three or foure walmes, stir it still then take the Gum Mastick when you have taken it of againe, and mingle it with a little Oyle of Roses, and stir it still, and let it boile a walme or two, then take it of againe, and put in the Frankinsence, and stirr it still, and let it boile a walme or two, then take it of againe. And take the Camphir, and put it in, and let it boile altogether the space of five houres in all up∣on a soft fire of Charcole from the beginning to the end. Then take it off the fire and mingle the Turpentine, and the Balsome together and put it in, and stir it a quarter of an houre, but let it boile no more. Then take an Ell of Dowless, and dip it in,▪ and make the Searcloth. And when the rest is almost cold rowle it in one peece together, and it will be as good at twentie years end as at the first, it heals all manner of Aches, Bruises, Spraines, and Cuts, and also it will draw the Scurvy out of the flesh, your gum will not be ground very small, but in boyling it will melt. Be carefull in the boiling for if it take fire it is unquenchable.
An Electuary of Sarsafras. TAke of rasped Sarsafras of the root six ounces, of chosen bruised Cinamon three ounces, boile these in Balneo in a double vessell close covered, in three pints of Fountaine water forty eight hours, then strain these hard, and put to this refined Sugar three pound, boile these to the consistance of an electu∣ary, then add these pouders following, being finely scarsed, fine pouder of Sarsafras one ounce, Nutmegs foure scruple, Amber Greese one scruple of excellent chosen muske halfe a scruple, make of these according to Art an Electuary, and put to it of the Oile of Cynnamon twentie or thirty drops, and la∣bour them well according to Art, take often of this so much as a good Nutmegg, this is an exceeding good Electuary to open obstructions, to dissolve windeness, to open the Liver, splene, Kidnies, and to comfort the hart, and spirits: For the Splene. TAke a pound of Wax a penaiworth of Turpentine, a little Rosen, two spoonfulls of the juyce of Wormwood, & of spear Mints, boile all these together, in boyling stir them well, and in stirring put thereto two penniworth of Cloves, and Mace beaten into fine pouder, then poure it out into a dish of faire cold water, worke it well with your hands, till you have made it like a salve keep it in readiness, and when you feel any paine in your sides Brest or Stomach, apply thereof a little on a Leather for four∣teen houres, but first you must annoint your Side with the Oyntment following, and then lay the plaister where the splen is. The Oyntment. TAke a pound of Neats foot Oile, or a pound of fresh Butter, temper therewith two penniworth of Cloves, and Mace only bruised▪ put also thereto one spoonefull of the juyce of Sage so much of Mints, let them gently boile in the Oyle with herbs, use it warme, and it will ease the paine.
A Pouder to eat for the Splene. TAke a spoonfull of Aniseeds, and Licoras in pouder as much grosse Pepper so much Ginger, temper them with Sugar, and Rosewater, use to eat a little of this when you feel paine or stiches in your sides. An excellent Ptysan drink for the shortness of breath. TAke French Barley, (boiled, and changed in two or three waters) three or foure spoonfulls, A Fennell, and a Parsly root or two picked, and sliced; Raisons of the Sun stoned, and Currants of either a quarter of a pound, Figgs, and Dates of each seven or eight, Anniseeds, and sweet Fennell seeds bruised of either a spoonfull, Maiden haire, Scabious, and dried Hysop, of either an handfull, large Mace, a blade or two; and Licoras bruised or sliced the waight of a shilling, let all those be boiled in an earthen Pipkin with six pints of running water close co∣vered with a gentle fire, untill the third part, or almost halfe the Liquor be wasted, then let it be strained ou, and settled, and of this Ptysan drink twice a day a quarter of a pint or more at a time, in the morning, and at foure a clock in the afternoone. For the yellow Jandise. TAke the Urine of the patient, how far distant soever, and make a past with it, and the ashes of Ash, divide the lump into seven or nine small Loaves, or heaps, make a hole with your singer on the top of each of them, and poure some of the same Urine into the holes, and put a third of Saffron into each of them, and with your fingers close up the holes at the top, then set them by in some safe place, and the Patient will reco∣ver, this hath been often tryed with good success. To draw out a Thorne. TAke the gaule of a Barrow Pig, and apply it, and it will draw it out. Mary Brent.
A Syrrup for a Cough. TAke Turnips and rost them in Embers, pull of the skins, and squese out the water, and make a Sirrup of it with Sugar-Candie, and use it as other Sirrups for that purpose. For a Straine. TAke common Clay, and mix it with wine Vinegar, warme it, and spread it on a cloth, and apply it to the part. A Dyet Drink. Take the simples following of each one a handfull. Bugle. Senay two ounce. Great white Bo∣dell or Ox ye▪ Wild Dayses. Dandelion Redd Avens Red bramble∣leaves. Wood Bettony: Mugwort. Plantane. Ribb-wort. Wormewood. Egremonie. Divells Bilt. BOile all these in two quarts of white Wine untill it come to a quart, then straine it through a fine strainer, and put in∣to it the quantity of foure spoonfulls of honney to make it pleasant, put it into a Bottle, and stop it close, and drink it a mornings fasting an houre before Dinner, and an houre before you go to Bed foure sponefulls at a time. This Drink is for old wounds, green wounds, Bruises, or Aches, or other diseases arising from these things a∣foresaid, and hath, and will cure the Cancer. For the Gout. TAke seven graines of Musk, and seven of Amber greece, and seventeen graines of well dried Cloves, and one and twenty graines of the best well dryed Varina Tobacco, or other good Tabacco if you cannot get Varina, beat the Cloves, and the Tobacco into a very smal pouder, and mix it with the other two and take it morning and evening in each Nostrill, the quantity of a great pins head or there abouts, the Tobacco, and the
Cloves must be searsed, and so waighed before you mix them: You must make but halfe the quantity at a time. To break the Stone in the Kidneys: TAke a Hare and flay him quick, receive all the blood into skin, and then burn both blood and skinn, take the Ashes thereof, and put them in the Patients drink, and that will break the Stoneif, you will make proof thereof, temper the said Dishes with water, and put therein as hard a stone as you can get, and it will break it. A Lute. TAke Lome, Horse dung washt, Smiths sinders, flocks, mix all these together, and beat them with an Iron till they be well incorporate, some Ox blood, and a fourth part of Clay to that of Loome, with this Lute your pot, or Still, being bound about with Wyre that it may stick to the pot. To make Sirrup of Gilly flowers. TAke a quart of Conduit water, and put it in a Vessell of earth Pewter, or Silver, and make it boiling hott, but let it not boile, and as soon as ever you have taken it from the fire, put into it twelve ounces of Gilly flowers, and let them infuse in it, two nights, and a day, then make them boiling hot againe, and then let them coole, but keep them both times close cove∣red, when it is cold, straine it through a Canvas strainer, and then put to it three pound and a halfe of good Sugar, and et it on a soft fire that the Sugar may dissolve, it must be boyling hot, but not boile, and you must scum it very well when it is ta∣ken off the fire, and cold, during the time the Sugar is in it on the fire stir it often. To make Conserve of Roses. TAke a pound of Red-rose budds, and dip the white ends, and in a stone Morter and with a wooden pestoll pound them very small, then put to them Roses three pound of good Sugar, put in your Sugar by degrees, and beat it very well, untill it be incorporated then put it up in pots for your use.
To Distill Roses. TAke sixteen pound of Roses, and put into a Limbeck, and with a soft fire, from that quantity of Roses, draw foure Gallons of water, the first Gallon is best, the next is reasonable, the third good to mixe with better, the fourth only good to put into a still of fresh Roses, and observe at this last running, the spirit will come in to the Limbeck, you must put water with the Roses, if in a Still put no water to them: In distilling of all sorts of simples, let them be done in a Still, and from a stillfull draw not above a Gallon of water, and put no water into the Still. A Pill to purge the head. TAke of the Trochis of Alhandall and Diagredium ana, two Drams, of the pills of Aureareum, and Cochiatinum of each halfe an ounce, mix these together, and with the Chymicall Oyle of Cloves, and sirrup of Roses solutive, as much as will suffice make a Mass of pills the doss is one scruple or halfe a dram. An approved Medicine to cleare the Reines of gravell or the stone, and also to clense them from all slimy matter which cause the Gonorra or Defluxion of seed. Mr. Green the Emprick. TAke smooth Holly, rest Harrow roots, horse Radish roots drie the Roots in an Oven, and then burne them to a pouder with the holy in a dripping pan. Take of each a like quantity or weight. And if the partie be troubled with a Semi∣nall defluxion, then let him take with the aforesaid powder a Nutmeg grated, and the yelk of an Egg for three nights af∣terwards let him use the powder only, this powder is to be ta∣ken in white Wine.
For the Gout and all Aches. TAke oile of Spike, oile of Petro, oile of Sulphur, and the oile of a Silver Eele, which is made by hanging the El with a thred over the fire, and then it will drop this oile. For the Splene. TAke the water of the flowers of Beans. Probatumest▪ For the Jaundise. TAke in the morning fasting if it be a man, lice out of a fe∣males head, and drink them with white Wine and Sugar, and a little Nutmeg. And take in the evening pouder of wormes as much as will lye upon a groat Mag. Perlo. gr. 3. in white wine. Probatum Goodwife Pelham. For a looseness and Flux. TAke the white of an Egg, a Nutmegg, and mingle them, and make them into a paste. Probatum, Pelham. Another for the same. TAke the Conserve of Red Roses one ounce, the bark of Pom∣granats, dust of Sumach one ounce, Mummy, the Syrrup of dried Roses, a little of the water of Mints, Conserve of Damsons. For the Mother and wind of the Stomach. TAke Plantane, Chicory, Borage, Egrimony, the leaves of Violets ana M. 1. let them boile in three pound of Fountaine water, till the third part be consumed, then straine them, and then put to them halfe a pound of white Sugar Candy, and beaten Caryophill an ounce, let there be infus'd halfe a pint, then straine them, and when it is cold add to it one halfe pint of Vinegar.
For a lameness in the Limbs, Leggs, or elsewhere occa∣sioned by Cold. LEt the Patient hold the part affected in hot graines, as long as they can, it will cause to sweat it out, then anoynt the part with Nerve oile▪ For fleame in the Stomack and a Cough. TAke Lohech Sani. q. v. Oyle of Vitriol, and a little of the flower of Sulphur, or Bmstone, and Conserve of Bettony. For a weakness in the Back or a Gonorrhaea, or Running of the Reines. TAke the Extraction of Rudii halfe an ounce, of sweet Mercury, five graines, mix them, and make pills of them, then take the Conserve of Red-Roses one Ounce, of the best Bole Armonack three ounces, of dryed Terebinth being beaten to pouder two ounces, mingle them, and make an Electuary, take it early in the morning. For a Foot pained and swollen with the Gout, the humors falling down thereto. TAke the Oyle of Hyppericon, the Oyntment of Mallowes, and the Empl▪ of Paracelsus. An Astringent Medicine for the Reines. TAke the feet of a Hare, dryd in an Oven very dry, and beat them to pouder. For a Cleanser and a strengthener, ad idem. TAke the Oyle of Turpentine in Milk. For a Liver that is rotten as a Sheep. USe the decoction of the male Scabios, it is long and sharp, and jagged▪
Fluxing Pills. TAke Turbith minerall gr. x. for the first in Mithredate gr. xiiij next gr. xx. purge the Patient three or foure dayes be∣fore, and three or foure daies after, then a dyet drink of Sar∣sa. &c. the purge before let it be extract Rudii pil. Cochiae Creni. Tartae. To correct the Ulcers, use Smiths water with unslaked lome, and a little sublimates, and a little Alum, the night before you raise the Flux, give the Patient a dose of Laudanum Paracelsi; and in the morning a draught of warme broth. Against the superfluity of the Menstralls. TAke the graine of Chermes one scruple: Of red Sanders halfe an ounce. Of Carabes one scruple. Of Nutmeg two scruples. Of the fragments of Smaragdi five graines, with three ounces of fine Sugar, make Trage. For the bloody Flux. TAke red Wine, Plantane water ana. lib. 1. Cloves xij. Cy∣namon one ounce, let them be boiled altogether. For any of the three kinds of Dropsey. TAke the leaves of Laurell, dry them in an Oven, and pou∣der them, give the Patient as much of the pouder as will lie upon a Groat, if you pull the leaves upward, it causeth vo∣mitting, if downward, then it worketh downward. Probatum▪ For a Bnrning or Scald. TAke the oyle of Eggs. Probatum. Against paine, and Ach in the Joynts. TAke Chamedreos, Camepiteos, Gentiana, ana. three oun∣ces fol. rue secca. foure ounces, make all into fine pouder, this must be administred after the body hath been well purged▪
and is usually given one spoonefull in the Winter time in white Wine, and in the Summer, with distilled water. For the Flux. NEw milk two pound, Plantaine water, one pound boile the milk and put in the water by degrees, and boile it with refined Sugar. q. s. For the Hemorrhoides. TAke the root of flaggs boile them in water, and let the Pa∣tient sit over the steame thereof, and it shall cure him: Probatum Mr. Molland. For the sweatings caused by a Hectick feaver or other wise. TAke Saint Johns-wort, Centory ana. a penny worth, boile them in Posset drink, and drink thereof morning and eve∣ning. Mr. Herrick. For a paine in the head caused through cold. TAke sweet Marjoram, red Sage, muld in a pint of Sack, then add thereto Cons. Arthos and Mithredate. For the Gonorrhaea. Mr. Mosse. TAke five drops of Turpentine in four ounces of Milke. Tum. TAke Hares feet, dry them two or three times in an Oven clawes, and all, beat them into fine powder, and give the Patient thereof one ounce in any liquid thing. For a Plaister to the Back: TAke Oxecroccum q. s. and Mastick in pouder.
For a Palsey. TAke Lavender water, and the Oyle of Hypericiexterm. To discuss a hard tumor on the breast, &c. TAke the ashes of Bean straw, and with Mallowes, and other discussive hearbs make a Lixivium, and apply the stupes to hot continually. For a Scald head. TAke ship Pitch make a plaister of it, then Ʋnguentum Nutri∣tum will cure it without faile. For Pimples in the face caused by little wormes, &c. Master Mosse. TAke Bay salt, dry it by the fire, or in an Oven, and beat it to a fine pouder, and then mix it with fresh butter, or some Oyntment, viz: Ʋng. popul. For the Convulsion fitts, an excellent and never fai∣ling Medicine. Mr. Hubbard. TAke black Cherry water two ounces, of the blood of a Cats Eare eight or ten drops, mingle it, and let the Patient drink it at one draught. Doctor Butlers Receipt for the hearing. Probatum est. TAke the Urine that is found in the Bladder of a Hare two drops or three, with two drops or three of oile of Amber, or oile of bitter Almonds:
To stanch the bleeding at the Nose. TAke bole Almanack, Sanguis Draconis, and terra Sigilata, mix them with the white of an Egg, and apply them to the nape of the Neck, if it be a man that is so troubled, dipp a cloth in Vinegar, and apply it to the Codds. For the wind Collick. TAke the stones of a Boar, and dry them to pouder in a soft Oven, then searce them very fine, and give the Patient, the quantity that will lye upon a Groat, in any liquid thing, but if the Patient be very weak it will purge him. For the Piles. ORpine pounded and stampt, with May Butter, is a pre∣sent remedy, let the Patient sit over the smoak of Fran∣kincense. For the Hemorrhodes Dector Listers prescript ion for Mr. Gestick. TAke of the pils of Bdeleum one ounce, with Trochii of terra Lemina two ounces with the Mussellage of the seed of Quences with Rose water extracted, let it be made into peices, of which let him take a scruple twice in a day, one before dinner and one before supper about halfe an houre. For the same. TAke Dates, one Dram, two pound of the water of Barley, boile it till three parts almost be wasted, then put into it of Cynamon halfe an ounce, then strain them, and let him drink every morning a draught, three or foure hours before he eate any thing. A Glister for the same. TAke of Red Roses six ounces, of Plantane, Knotgrass, Daisy Roots, Symphiti, Tapsa, Barbart▪ let them boile with one
pound of of Milk, put to it of Sugar two ounces. For the Hemorrhoids from Doctor Maurice Williams. TAke half a Dram of Rhubarb mixt with the Gelly of Quin∣ces. For the Hemorrhoides Doctor Lysters prescription. TAke a good handfull of Millfoyle or Yarrow, and poure on it in a fit Glasse a quart of very hot water, and so let it stand all night, in the morning drink a large draught, and so the rest the next morning, this continue for a moneth renewing it every other day. Make a decoction of Mullen, Dogs-tongue, Yarrows Plantane leaves, and Bryar leaves, and use to inject it every night go∣ing to Bed with a good large Sying, and keep it, it may be used also in the morning. Also take the root of Doggs Tongue and roast it under the Embers, lapping it in a paper, & bruise it, and make a little Bagge (a long one) of it, of lynnin like a Suppo∣sitorie, and put the root into it, and so put it into the fun∣dament, keeping it there long, if any swelling, or paine be out∣ward, apply the root so raosted to it. I could advise him to drink that infusion of Yarrow for his ordinary drink. For a Pinn and Web. TAke Barx, and powder it, and blow it into the Eye, and it will cure it. Probatum Mr. Gestwick. A Receit for your Stomach when it is watrish, or when you cannot disgest your meat well. TAke a quart of Aquavitae, and put it into a Jugg, then take a pound and a halfe of the best Cherries you can get, and the stalkes being pulled out, put them in the Jugg to the A∣quavitae, and stop it alwayes very close: When you will use it, take one or two Cherries, and halfe a spoonfull of the liquor at night going to bed. Probatum est.
For the Stone. TAke half a peck of Hemp seed, steep them in a pottle of Re∣nish Wine, and let the Patient drink therof when it is strain∣ed. This Medicine cured Mr. Woodals Daughter of the Stone, and another in Racket Court in Fleetstreet. For a Consumption. TAke a red Cock, pluck him whilst he is alive, then cut off his head and legs▪ exenterate him, you must not wash him, only dry him with cloaths and bake him with other things, as Anni∣seeds Licorace, and with such other as are good against a Consumption. The Receipt of the Lady Savills water to wash her face with, sent for out of Italy. TAke a great Limbeck, and put into it 1. lib. of Snail water 1. lib. of white Rose-water, 1 lib. of Lemond water four oun∣ces, of Bean flower water, four ounces, of white Tartar four ounces of the powder of Calke, two ounces of Gum Traga∣gant in powder, four ounces of Rice in powder, as much of French-barley, one pound of new Milk, the Whites of thirty Eggs, 1. lib. of Honey, put them all into a silver or earthen Ba∣son, and beat them. For the Rickets, an approved Medicine, Mrs. Dim∣mock. TAke a quart of Muskadine, or rather Aligant, and boyl in it the Gaul of a red Oxe, be assured it be a red Oxe, and bath them therwith, and dip cloaths therin, and bind about the Joynts. For to purge the Body, ad idem. TAke Rubarb and Ribwort.
For a Consumption. TAke Milk and Fountain water, and boyle them together, and let the Patient drink therof for his ordinary drink, let him eat milk and bread for his dyet. A Gentlewoman was cured of this Disease by this dyet, using it eleven weeks toge∣ther. For the running of the Reins. TAke of the best Mastick, powder it, and let it be ground well with red Rose-water, and take a quantity therof in the Yolk of an egg fasting. For the Stone, and to provoke Ʋrine. TAke a Clove of Garlick, bruise it a little, and let it be infu∣sed all night in White wine, and in the morning let the Patient drink the same: Probatum, Mrs: Hagger. For the Piles. TAke Raisons of the Sun, and beat them, and spread them up∣on Scarlet, and apply them to the place affected. For an Ache. BOyl white Caranna in Muskadine untill it comes to a Salve. To help a Woman in Labour. GIve her a Date-stone that hath a perfect round circle, with half a Nutmeg in a draught of Renish Wine. For the Fits of the Mother. TAke Conserve of Garyophyll one ounce, Mosch: one grain M.
For weakness. TAke three ounces of Barley, two ounces of Harts horn, thir∣ty Grains of Saffron, boyl all these in a Gallon of Conduit water to a pottle, strain it, and sweeten it with Syrrop of Vi∣olets. For a soar mouth or throat. TAke a pennyworth of Syrrop of Mulburies, and a penny∣worth of Honey of Roses, mix them with a half pennyworth of Plantane water, and use it. The expression of Rheubarb. TAke of the best Rheubarb three drams, or the weight of two shillings, cut it into little slices, put this into a silver Boul or Dish, put to it three spoonfuls of Corance clean washed and dryed, then put to these four spoonfuls of Cichory water or of each so much as will fully cover the Rheubarb, and Corance, let them thus stand in steep sixteen or eighteen hours, then strein the thinner liquor from them, and punn the grosser sub∣stance in a wooden dish, and with a wooden Pestle, and then express or squeeze out the juyce to the other, punn it the second and third time that you may have the whole moisture, take therof two spoonfuls in the morning, and as much in the afternoon about four of the Clock, and drink after each taking a little Draught of White-wine. An Oyle. TAke four and twenty Swallows, and put them quick into a Morter, put to them Lavander, Cotten, Camomile, Knot∣grass, Balm, Valerian, Rosemary, Woodbine-tops, the strings of Vine, French Mallows, the tops of Ale-hoof, of Strawburies—Plantane, Walnut-leaves, Sage of Virtue, two tops of young Bayes, Hysop, Violet leaves, fine Roman Wormwood, of each a handfull, two of Camomile, two of red Roses, beat all these together, and put them to a quantity of Neatsfoot oyle or May-butter, two ounces of Cloves, grind them and put them together, then mingle them, and put them into an earthen pot,
stop it very close with Dough, that no ayre come forth, and let it stand nine daies in a Sellar, and then set the pot into a pan of water, and let it seeth eight or nine hours, and then strain it, and so keep it. To preserve green Plumms. TAke green Plumms, pare them as thin as you can, then flit them on one side to the stone, then prick them over, put them into cold water as you have pared them, to keep them from growing black, then put them into hot scalding water, with a small quantity of Sugar, and let it stand so close stopped till that water grow blood-warm, then take them forth of the wa∣ter, heating it again, and add more Sugar therto, and when it is grown hot as before, then put your Plumms to it, and let them stand close stopt as before, till the water grow blood∣warm, then take out the Plumms, and let the water run clean from them, then take as much clarified Sugar as will cover them, and so boyl them leasurely till they grow very soft, then take them from the Syrrop and lay them on a fair board, and put them into an Oven after the bread is drawn, turning them every day till they grow dry for your use. An Electuary. TAke three ounces of Corance well washed, Damask Pruens three ounces, boyl them in a quart of the decoction of Magi∣strall Sena, the preparation wherof is under written, till the de∣coction be consumed, then make therof a Pulp, wherunto add one ounce and half of Cassia purified, one ounce and a half of Sugar, of Violets one ounce and a half, of the Electuary of Se∣bestens one ounce, Rheubarb two drams, mingled with foure drams of Syrrop of Roses Solative, and take it in the morning a dram. The preparation of the Magistrall Sena. TAke Oriental Sena, Polypode of the Oak each one ounce, Co∣rance one ounce and a half, Damask prunes of the best, ten, Cynamon and Ginger of each one dram, Anniseeds two drams, of the flowers of Violets, Buglass, Borrage, a handfull and a half, then take two pints and a half of water, in which Batley hath been well boyled, into which being well strained
you must first boyl the Polypode of the Oke, afterward the Prunes, Corance, and Anniseed, thenthe Violets, Flowers of Borrage, and Bugloss, each according to their degrees, which you must strain when it is hot, and squeeze it a little, into which you must put presently, the Sena, Cynamon, and Ginger, and keep it hot so twelve hours, then give it one good boyling, and strain it, and squeeze it very well for your use. Aquapendente his Pill, as it was delivered me by his A∣pothecary in Italy. TAke of Aloes, Cyratrine one pound, juyce of Roses, ten pound, put the Aloes into an earthen dish well glazed, and put theron a part of the juice of Roses, mingling them very well, and place them in the Sun till they come to a consistence, then put upon it more juyce of Roses untill it thicken, and upon each pound of Aloes you have, put the ten pound of the juice of Roses, being carefull to hang over the dish a fine vail of Silk, that flyes or dust may not fall into it, you must often times in the day when you have placed it in the Sun, stir it with a woo∣den or silver Instrument, and leave it so in the Sun till it grow solid and firm. To cure a Consumption and all Ʋlcers, even inward: It purifieth the blood, and cureth Morbus Gal. &c. TAke three quarts of Fountain water, and steep in it a whole night one ounce of China sliced, with half a pound of Rai∣sons stoned and well washed, with three quarters of an ounce of English Licorace fliced, and as much Anniseeds, and set this on the fire after the infusion aforesaid, till half be consumed, let it boyl softly in an earthen pot well glazed, with a narrow mouth. The first day take it after this manner; In the morning fa∣sting a good draught warmed, drink no other at your meat, but then drink it cold, and at night drink another draught warmed when you go to bed. The second day take the same quantity of water, and infuse in like manner one ounce and a half of China, with the rest of
the Ingredients aforesaid, boyl it and take it as formerly. The third day take two ounces of China. The fourth day two ounces and a half of China. The fifth day three ounces of China, and so continue with that quantity of China during the taking of it, which must be for the space of one and twenty daies: If you find it bind your body too much, in stead of Raisons take Damasck Pruuns stoned: but as soon as you find your body so lible again, use Raisons as before, the day before you take this drink, you must take a purge of Sena, Manna, or Rubarb, the tenth or twelfth day you must take the same purge again, and so likewise purge at the end of one and twenty daies, du∣ring the taking of this you must eat dryed meats, and forbear Fish, Sallets, and Broaths, though somtimes you may eat boy∣led meat. For to cool the Liver. BOyl Liver-wort, Egremony, Suckory, Wood-sorrell in running water untill almost half be consumed, then sttain it, and put to a draught therof a spoonfull or two of Syrrop of Violets, and so drink it. A Cordiall against the Consumption. TAke four spoonfuls of red Rose-water, four spoonfuls of White-wine Vinegar, and fix pence waight of Saffron, steep them for half an hour, and then strain it, and put therto half a pound of Sugar, and boyl it to a Syrrop, and take therof a spoonfull at a time, as often as you will. A Powder for a Fistula. TAke of Alome, of green Copperice, of each two pound, and put them into a well leaded pan, and let it boyl to a water, and when it is all dissolved put into it of Verdigrease beaten, and searced into fine powder four ounces, stir it all well toge∣ther, and let it boyl till they come to a hard body, and being cold beat it into fine powder, and mix with it four ounces of Bole armoniack in powder, and keep it in a Box for your use.
To make the water. TAke a gellon of Smiths water, and set it on the fire, and when the Pipkin begins to boyl shake in as much of the pow∣der as will lye five times on a shilling, the powder being all in, let the water boyl a walm or two, then take it from the fire and put it into a Glass, and use the clearest of it, putting on the soar a Diapalma Plaister: Probatum. For sharpness of Ʋrine. MAke a quart, or three pint of cleer posset drink, with smal Beer or Ale, boyl in the same Posset-drink a pretty quan∣tity of March Mollow roots, as much Licorace sliced, some Pompeon-seeds sliced, and a little Anniseeds bruised, boyl the posset-drink from three pints to a quart, drink a good draught of that when you go to bed, and fasting in the morning. If Urine be very sharp, put into the posset-drink before you drink, two ounces of Syrrop of Althea, or oyle of sweet Al∣monds new drawn. A powder for Worms: WOrmseed four ounces, Senna one ounce, Coriander-seed prepared, Harts-horn, of each one ounce, Rheubarb an ounce, dryed Rheu two ounces, beat them into powder. It may be taken from ten grains to an ounce. 1. To make an Esker fall off, Unguentum Dialthea mixt with Ʋnguentum Basilicon an. part. eq. and applyed. 2. To dry up an Ulcer and to skin it, use Ʋng. Diapomfo. ung. de fec atinum Rubrum, un ex Antimonia. 3. To Incarnat a hollow Ulcer, according to the constitution of the body, use Basilicon mixt with Precipetate, and a little Lyne∣mentum Arcei, and often times unguentum Apostilorum by it self. 4. To dissolve hard swelling prceeding of a cold cause, you must use hot Oyntments and hot Implaisters, as Oxicrocum Pa∣racelsus,
and in hot Swellings cold Oyntments, as Oyle of Ro∣ses, ung. Triphermicon, and cold Implaisters, as Dia palma. 5. To break an Impostumation, you may do it by Incision or Caustick, as you find cause. 6. To take away dead flesh, burnt Alome mixt with Mercur. precipetate applyed on it with dry Lynt: 7. To scale a foul bone, you must do it with a Cauterising Iron, or with Egiptiacum and Spirit of Wine mixt together: First, lay on the edges of the Soar upon the flesh dry Lynt, and then make a thick Pledget of fine Towe, and dip it in the Egip. and Spir. being made hot: And so apply it and bind it close. 8. To cleanse a foul Ulcer, apply Egipti. hot, or Apostilorum. To make Basilicon. TAke of liquid pitch, Rozen, Wax, Oyle, Mutton Suet, of each like quantity, and melt it on a soft fire, and add to a little Turpentine, and its made. Lynementum Arcei. GUm Elemi, Venice Turpentine, of each an ounce and a half, Hogs▪lard one ounce, Sheeps Suet two ounces, min∣gle all together, and on a gentle fire incorporate it together with a Spatula. Diapomfoligos. TAke Oyle of Roses four Ounces, white Wax one ounce and a half, washed Ceruce one ounce and half Pompholigos plumbi usti and washed, of each one ounce and a half, Olibanum 2. ounces dissolve the Wax in the Oyle with a gentle fire, and when it is dissolved take it from the fire, and put to it the other Ingredi∣ents, working them together in a stone Morter to the form of an Unguent.
Ʋn. desecat Rubrum. LApis Galli. Terra sigill. of each two ounces Lytharge of Gold and Ceruse of each one ounce and a halfe, Campheire halfe an ounce, Wax two ounces and a half, the Oile of Roses, and Violers of each three ounces, dissolve the Wax in the Oyle, and set it to coole and work in the pouders with a Splatter, and at the last ad the Camphire dissolved in a little of the oyle of Roses or Rose water. Take yellow Wax one pound, Sallet oyle three pound, Ve∣nice Turpentine one pound, red Sanders one Ounce, wash the Turpentine in Rose water, and wash the oyle in Sack or good white Wine. Then melt the Wax, and put the Oyle with the Wine into it, and the Sanders, and boile it gently, untill all the moysture is gone, then straine it while it is whole, and keep it. This Balsom healeth a wound in 24 houres, if you put it in while it is green. It healeth all scaldings or burnings whatso∣ever, but it will smart. It is excellent for the running of the Raines, if you give it once or twice by it selfe. And then mingle Cynamon small pounded with it, and give it in red Wine. How to make a Cordiall Electuary for a stuffing or short∣ness of breath. TAke a pint of the best hony you can get, set it on the fire, and scum it clean, then put into it a little bundle of▪ Hysop, being bruised, a little before you bind it up, let it boyle till the honey taste wel of the Hysop, then strain out the hony very hard, and put into it of Angelica oot grated or beaten small, the weight of six pence, of Elicampane root grated or beaten small, the weight of six pence, of Ginger pared and beaten small the weight of two pence, of Pepper beaten small the weight of two pence, of Licorish scraped dryed and beaten small the weight of eight pence, of Annyseeds beaten small the weight of eighteen pence, put all these into the honey, and let them boile a little space, stirring them all the time, then poure all into a clean gally pot, and put three spoonfulls of Aquavitae to them, stirring all
together till it be cold, then keep it close covered for your use: when one is troubled with a stuffing or shortness of breath, let them take some of this Electuary with a bruised Liquorish stick often out of the gally pot, and they will find much good by it, for it is a most excellent and cordiall medicine, which Queen Elizabeth used to take for these infirmities. For a Feaver. TAke a handful of Spermint, an handful of Wood-sorrel, and half a pound of the best blew Currants, wash them well and put them into two quarts of running water, and let them boyl untill half be consumed, then pour away the liquor from all the things, put half an ounce of Syrrop of Violets to it boyl the Herbs again, and strain it through a thin cloath, and use it. For the Eyes. TAke Copperace one ounce, white Salt one scruple, put them into twelve ounces of water, and stir them altogether, after that being done, let it stand untill it be cleer, then drop one drop into the eye. Aloes two ounces, Myrrhe one ounce and a half, Saffron half an ounce, and make them into Pills. To make a water for the Stone. TAke a gallon of new milk of a red Cow, and put therin a handfull of Pellitory of the Wall, a handfull of wild Tyme, a handfull of Saxifrage, a handfull of Parsley, and two or three Radish-roots sliced, and half a handful Philependula roots sliced, let all these lye in the milk one night, and in the morning put the milk and herbs into a Still, and distill them with a moderate fire of Charcoal, when you are to use the water, take a draught of Renish or White-wine, and put into the Wine five spoon∣fuls of the distilled water, a little Sugar and Nutmeggs sliced, drink it off in the morning fasting, and fast two hours, and keep your self walking and going up and down, the next day meddle not with it, but the third day do as you did the first day, and for every other day for a weeks space. This water must be made in the month of May.
For a Plaister. TAke of Plantane, Featherfew, Tansie, and Houseleek, of each a like quantity, stamp them and strain them, take of that juyce a pint, set that over the fire in a Skellet, thicken that with Bean meal, let that boyl to the consistence of a Poultice, but in the boyling put in a good spoonfull of Honey; this is for a Plaister: For the Glister. TAke clean posset-drink a good quantity and boyl in that Vio∣let leaves, Mallow leaves, Mercury leaves, Hollyoke leaves, Camomile, Mellow-lack flowers, of each a handfull, a spoonfull of Anniseeds and a spoonfull of sweet Fennelseeds, bruise that, let that boyl well in the posset-drink, strain that and take about a pint of that liquor, and put to that of loaf Sugar or other such two ounces, two ounces of Syrrop of Violets. For the cold flegm and stone and pain in the back. TAke of live Honey a pint, boyl it and skim it well, then put to it of the seeds of Parsley, of the leaves of Saxefrage and Pelletory of the Wall, of each half an ounce, of Hysop-water, of Plantane water, of each one ounce, mix these with the Ho∣ney, and boyl it gently untill it come to be a perfect Syrrop: Take this upon a stick of Licorace. For a Cough. TAke Anniseed-water, or strong Aquavitae half a pint, boyl it upon the coales in a silver Dish, and put to it a quarter of Sugar beat to powder, then set it on a fire, and let it burn con∣tinually, stirring it still with a spoon or slice, untill it come to be a Syrrop, then put to it of good Rose-water four or five spoon∣fulls, and then let it boyl untill it grow thick like a Syrrop, and add to it of the juice of Licorace half an ounce. A most precious and approved Balsom for any old Soar, or green Wound. TAke of Venice Turpentine one pound, of the best Oyle O∣live three pints, Virgin Wax half a pound, of Sanders four
ounces, Sack half a pint, Litharg of Gold finely powdred and searced two ounces, wash the Turpentine in a pint of red Rose-water, untill it be clear, and wash the Oyle in half a pint of Rose-water; the Wax must be sliced thin, and boyled in a pint of red Rose-water, untill it have well purged it self, then skim it clear, and take it from the fire, and let it stand untill it be cold, then take the Wax out, and poure out the water, and put the Wax into a Skellet, and set it again upon the fire to melt, then put in the Turpentine, and oyle, with halfe a pint of the best Sack, and boyle it two or three walmes, then take it from the fire, and as soon as it beginneth to grow cold, take the Sanders and shear them in, and strain them together, untill it come to a thick substance, when it is through cold, take a gally pot and put it into it, and set the pot in a hole in a harth that may be covered for the space of two Moneths, and with the heat of the Fire, it will become a perfect Balsom, of the colour of Clarret Wine; The first melting of it, must be over a soft Fire of Charcole. A present Remedy for the bloody Flux. TAke some great Almonds, and dry them upon a new Tile with the skins on so dry as they may be beaten to pouder, and let a little broth be made of a little mutton, wherein boyle a little plaintane and Knot Grass, and let the child drink of the broth with a spoonfull of this pouder of Almonds. When she is weary of this Broth, make her a little Papp with new milk and flower throughly well boyled together with a little Plantaine and send to the Apothecaries for some conserve of Slowes. Also take the leaves of Rosemary, boyle in some strong red Wine Vinegar, and bind them to her Navell with a linnen cloth, and by the grace of God this will help her. Also let there be a Brick made red hot in the fire: and when it is red hot, take it out and put it into the bottom of the Close stoole, putting upon the same Brick whilst it is hot, two or three spoonfulls of old Malmsme, and let the Child sit upon the stoole and receive the fume into her body.
For the Dropsye. TAke of Red Sage a quarter of a peck clean washed and dri∣ed in a cloth▪ then chop it, and beat it small; make a Pye of Rye paste, and put into it the herbs aforesaid, with halfe a quarter of a pound of Lignum vitae small shred beaten, or in chips, upon the top of the Sage in the Pye, with a cover of the same paste, and then put it into the Oven, untill the next morning, being thorowly baked. Then take two Gallons of Ale, or Beer, which the Patient liketh best, but Ale is much the better; for that it provoketh Urine most. Then take the Pye as hott as may be out of the Oven, and hastely put the Pye down to the bottom of the Tub, wherein the Ale▪ is, that rhe Pye be all covered over, and so keep it down, and stop the Barrell or Tub close, and let the Pye lye in it twenty four hours, then straine what you drink, and drink so much as you haue an appetite to, it may be drunk at all times, day and night; but not any other drink. They need not ob∣serve any dyet, but eat what they like best, but I advise from gross meats, as salt meats, and Baked: This Pye will serve twice but fresh is better. The Purge that must be taken with it. TAke for a Man forty graines of the best Jollop grated, and of Sedoary five graines: For a woman, thirty Graines of Jollopp and five of Sedoary. This to be taken fasting in a mor∣ning, in a quarter of a pint of White wine or Posset drink, made with Ale, or Beer, but Ale is the better, and this to be taken one week, the Patient must keep with in doares that day they take the purge, and not drink any thing after it un∣till the Physick hath done working, which may be about twelve of the clock if it be taken early in the morning. Take a pound of double Pionie flowers pich them clean, put them up in strong white wine Vinegar in a gally pot, stop it close, and set it by, then take a pound of Cowslip flowers, pick them clean, and put them in Vinegar, and tye them close, then take young Swallows at the lest eight or ten score out of their nests, and stamp them very small, either in a stone Morter or milch boule stamp with them foure ounces of Nutmegs foure ounces of Cynamon, two ounces of Mace, half an ounce of
Cloves, two ounces of Pionie seeds, six handfull of Roses, a quarter of an ounce of Castoreum, then take a brass pot, and lay three or four e handfulls of Rose-mary in the bottom, and put in all the ingredients into the pot, and put a handfull of Roses, on the top then put in as mueh perfect good Vinegar as will co∣ver it, let it stand twenty four hours close stopped then set on your Limbeck upon the pot, and distill it with a soft fire, stamp the flowers that were in steep amongst the Swallowes feathers gutts, and all, and if it be to sharp you must sweeten it with Su∣gar. Castoreum not to womenwith child, three spoonfulls nine mornings together, gargle it in the mouth as long as you can, and then let it down fast two or three houres after it. To prevent Abortion. TAke Unguentum restringens Farnelii, Diacal, Scithius of each a like, dissolve them together, and make a plaister thereof for the back. The making of Aloway pills. TAke two ounces of very good Aloways; and put thereto a quarterof a pint of the Juyce of Red Roses with two spoonful of Vinegar, then set it in a soft Oven after the bread is drawn til it be dissolved, then strain it hard, through a faire cloth then, set it in the Sunne or in warm embers, till it be thick like a conserve, stirring it three or foure times a day; then take Nutmeggs, Cynamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Quinbibes, of every of these a Ducket weight of Astrabake halfe a Ducket weight, bruise all these as you would for Ipocras, and lay them in three quarters of a pint of Muscadine three daies, then strain it, and after beat the spices as small as can be, and grind it with the same wine againe, and strain it againe, and wring it as hard out as can be, then put that wine to your Conserve Alowayes, and let it stand so long in the Sunne or Embers till it have drunk up that, and come to a Conserve again, stirring it often then put it in a close pot, and keep it to your use, it is the better if you strain into it of the juyce of Violetts, Burrage flowers or such like in the time of the drying.
To restore Nature. TAke a handfull of Knot grass, Dasie roots, and leaves as much, beat them both together in a morter, take twelve Dates and beat them with the rest, then take a dishfull of the pith of an Oxe back, the yolks of six new laid Eggs, and beat them altogether, then take a pottle of Muscadell the best you can, and put it into the same, and stir them well, then put it in∣to a faire Vessell, and seeth it till halfe be consumed, put in Mace, Nutmegs, Cynamon, and Sugar, drink thereof every morning, and evening warme. For a sore Cough, by the Lady Sussex. TAke of white Sugar-candie a good quantity, of Raisons of the Sunne stoned, a good quantity, grind both together in a stone Morter, till they become like a Conserve, and so eat of it. Also you must take Capons grease, and a good quantity of Rosemary, being made small, and boile both it and the Capons grease together, till the Rosemary have lost it's strength, and then straine it and keep it in a pot, and take some of it, and annoint the Chest up to the throat before the fire, that done take black wooll and warme it, and apply it upon the place annoin∣ted and so keep you warme. A Dyet Drink against the Kings Evill, or for any other that will take Physick, if a child have any bunches or Kirnels about them. TAke plaister of Froggs without quicksilver and Paracelsus, of each an equall quantity, spread it upon Lynnen Cloath, prick it full of holes, and change it but once a fort∣night, and take the Dyet drink according to directions. Take a quarter of a pound of Guyacum, two ounces of Sarsa∣pirilla, set it on the fire with a gallon and a pint of Spring wa∣ter, let it simper on a soft fire twelve houres, then put into it an ounce of Harmonaick, as much Annyseed, as much of Li∣coras fliced, let it infuse till it comes to a pottle or a little more, then put an ounce and halse of Sena in it, and let it boyle once through, take it from the fire presently, put into it halfe an
ounce of Rubarb sliced, Cowslip flowers, Bettony flowers, Rose∣mary flowers of all one handfull, a quarter of an ounce of Cy∣namon bruised, then take it from the fire and cover it close twelve houres, then straine it with a course Cloath betwixt two and put it into bottles, put the ingredients into the pot againe, and put a pottle of smale Beer into it, and cover it, let it stand til the first be drunk up. You must drink a good draught in the morning an houre after take some Broth: if you can take it in the after noone. Let the child eat Naples Bis∣ket. You must not send this Bill to the Apothe∣caries but only a Note with the Names of the things. An Excellent purge. TAke three of foure Pippins, pare and slice them in thin slices, then take a stick of Licorish and scrape and slice it in thin slices also, then put them in a pint of Conduit water, and boyle them till all the strength of the Lickorish and Apples be boyled out, then take them out, and set the water or liquor away in a clean pann or pot till it be cold, then at night take foure drams of your best Sena and pick it, and two drams of your best Rubarb, and slice it, and halfe a dram of Ole of Tar∣tar well prepared, and put them in the Liquor, then stir it well and so set it away till the morning then strain it and drink it, to be sure keep your selfe very warme. Excellent purging Pills. TAke an ounce of juyce of Roses, and as much of your best Al∣loes, and put them together in an Earthen pan, and set them in a Chimny Corner (where there is a fire kept) for four or five dayes then boyle them up a walme or two, and then being in∣different cold, role it into Pills when you will use them, about foure a clock in the after noone, take one two or three according to the constitution of your body.
A medicine for the falling sickness. TAke a good handfull of single red Piony roots, and a pottle of Sack, stamp the roots very well, and put to them a penny worth of Saffron, and when they be very small beaten, straine them with the pottle of Sack so long as they do white, then put it into a Bottle and stop it very close, and when you use it shake it very well that the best stay not at bottome, and three dayes before the change of the Moon, you may take of it eight or nine spoonfulls at a time fasting, and if you will three dayes after the change also every full Moon take it, in the like man∣ner as before: Take also one of the greatest roots and cut a slice of it like a hart, and put it into a little Bagge, and hang it about the Patients neck, let it hang on the left side as neare the hart as may be, and weare it as long as it will last. You may beat the Roots two or three times the bet∣ter to get the substance out of them. To cure the French Pox. FIrst draw from the partie nine ounces of blood, the next day let him purge, and the third day use the unction which is thus made. Take quicksilver and quench it with fasting spittle in a Mor∣ter, then add to it a little Unguentum martiatum▪ and beat it with the Quicksilver, and last, ad your Hogs grease and work all to gether with the Pestle till it become very stiff and of ablewish∣colour, and that the quicksilver be quite extinct and incorpora¦ted into the oyntments. You must anoynt the bottoms of the feet very well, with the Leggs, Thighs, Armes, Hands, Arme∣holes, and shoulder blades by the fire, and then lay him to flux in his bed covering him up very close leaving only a place to breath out, you must do it three or foure times, or more accor∣ding to the constitution of his bodie, that he may spit at the mouth soundly, and when he beginneth to be sore in the mouth, let him turne on the other side, and have a speciall care of taking cold during the time of his flux, after he doth flux well and his mouth is becom very soar, you must wash it with Barly∣water
and honey of Roses mingled together, his diet must be all warme meats such as he can take, and remember that you touch not his belly, nor back with the unction, For if he should it would presently bring him into a scouring which will kill him. You must use the unction but every other day. And after his mouth is whole and sound, that he may eat flesh meat, let him take the diet for the space of a Moneth, but betwixt it and the dyet, he must purge well▪ and so begin to drink, refraining from all other drinks during the time of his being in dyet. And if he be costive that he must take some pills in the time of his diet he may then without danger that day drink some small Beer or else not. The Dyet drink. SAssaperilla slit and cut small foure ounces, Guiacum three ounces, Sassifrage root cut small, two ounces of Licorice one ounce of Annis and sweet Fennell seed bruised, of each one ounce, Harts horne and Ivory of each one ounce and a halfe of red Sanders bruised small two ounces, let these druggs be set to steep a night and a day in some convenient pot close cove∣red, and set it over a good fire the space of six houres in eight quarts of water to the consumption of halfe, and let it coole, and so straine it forth through a woollen strainer, and when the partie have done with his diet. Let him purge and be let blood if he be not too weak, but howsoever take from him some five ounces. The Diapalma Plaister. TAke of Hoggs grease clarified one pound, old Oyle, Ly∣tharge of silver ground small, of each a pound and a halfe, of white vitreoll burnt and poudered two ounces. Put your oyle in a pan and shake in you litharge very gently continually stir∣ring it over a soft fire till it be incorporated, then add to it your Hoggs greace, and let it (altogether) boile a good space on a gentle fire, that it may not turne black, stirring it either with a Spatula of Oak or Box till it come to the consistence of a
Plaister, and last of all shake in your powder of burnt Vitrioll, and let it have a walm or two, but be carefull of your fire that it be not too quick, for then it will turn black and so cast it into water, and work it up with your hands, and make it up into rolls. To make the green Oyntment; Lady Constable. TAke of red Sage and Rue, of each a quart, the youngest Bay leaves, and Wormwood, of each half a pound, pick them, wash them, cut them, and bray them well in a fair Morter, then take three pounds of Sheeps Suet hot from the Sheep, mince it small, and beat it with those herbs till all be of one colour, then put it into a Boul with a pottle of the best Oyle O∣live, working them altogether till it be a little soft; Then put it into an earthen pot, stop it close eight or ten daies, then seeth altogether in a fair pan on a soft fire, and when it is half sodden, put to it three ounces of Oyle of Spike. Being all well boyled together, strain it through a Canvas bag into a gally∣pot, covering i close with a Parchment, and a leather on the top of it. With this Oyntment annoint any place grieved, rubbing till it be dry: Take heed of burnig it in boyling, therfore be stirring it continually, and boyling it softly upon an easie fire, till it be all of a green colour. The Effect. IF you annoint the stomach it helpeth digestion, and expelleth all Obstructions, rub some of it on the small of the back, it helpeth the stone, the quantity of a Pease chafed into the eare, and stopt close with black wooll, helpeth all pain therin. It is good against Aches, Fellons▪ swelling of Wounds, the Tooth∣ach proceeding of any cold rhume: It is good against the Cramp, Sciatica, It helpeth any bruise, or strain of sinews or veins. It helpeth all kind of stitches, burning, scalding, stifle, or strain in man or beast. It is only made in May, and will be∣ing close kept last many years, with carefull and close keeping it.
To make syrrop of Quinces excellent good for the sto∣mach to be taken at any time. TAke of Quince-seed, in all three pounds, slice them, of Cy∣namon an ounce, of Cloves and Saffron, of each the weight of two pence, of liquid Aloes one ounce and a half bruised, of Benjamin half an ounce beaten, put them into a Glass Still, pour on them seven pints of Sack, then set it in a pot of water with wrethes ofhay to stand upright, then put on your head with the Receiver, paste it close with dough, let it steep all night, in the morning make a fire under it, let it still till you have almost a pint in the Receiver, then take away your fire: When it is cold that you may take up your glass, then strain out your syr∣rop, then put to it four or five pounds of Sugar, boyl it to a syrrop, the put in the water, let it not boyl above a walm or two, so put it in your glasses, keep it close for your use. It is against vomiting, or to digest any thing against the stomach, or to pro∣cure a stomach taken before meat two spoonfuls of it self or in Wine, to strengthen the back. For the Plague. TAke half a pint of Sack, half a pint of ordinary Wormwood-water, half a pint of Walnut-water, Venice Treacle as much as a Walnut, and a spoonfull of Gum powder beaten small and so mingle them altogether very well, and put it in a glass, and take two spoonfuls in the morning, and fast two hours after it, & so drink it at night if infected, otherwise once a day is enough: It fails not to bring out the soar of those infected, and to pre∣serve those which are not infected. Probatum, Lady Capell.
Against the noise in the head which hindereth the hearing. TAke black wooll from under tbe eare of a Sheep, and drop on it three drops of the best Aquavitae, and stop both your eares with it, and renew it once in two or three dayes, if the head be moist oftner, till your eares be freed from moisture at night is best to do it; purge your head in the morning with white Hellebore walking in a good aire, snuff it up into your nose, and keep warm after it, if the noise be caused of hot exhalations out of the stomach, then are not these things proper. Doctor Burges directions against the Plague. TAke 3. pints of Malmesie, and boyl therin one handful of Sage one hand. Rue, until a pint be wasted, then strain it and set it on the fire again, & put therunto one pennyworth of long Pep∣per, half an ounce of Ginger, a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, 4. pennyworth of Treacle, a quarter of a pint of the best Angeli∣ca water, take it alwaies morning and evening half a spoonfull, as a preservation, and if you be infected, take two spoonfuls and sweat therupon. Probatum est. For a Flux. IF your Disease continue, you must take every second or third day a Glister made after this manner. TAke of new milk from the Cow half a pint, of Rose-water six spoonfuls, juice of Plantane four spoonfuls, the yelk of an Egg, Parsley-seed one spoonfull very small beaten, add Dill∣seed the like quantity beaten, Sugar four spoonfuls, mixt these together, and indifferent warm give it about eight in the mor∣ning. An Electuary. TAke one handfull of Angelica, and 3. spoonfuls of Harts-horn scraped, boyl them in water untill they be a little tender,
take them out and pound them in a Morter, and put therto Su∣gar, eat this electuary, the quantity of a Hastle Nut every mor∣ning and evening last. For the strengthening of your Liver, and to take away the malignant peccant sharp humor. TAke once a week half an ounce of Rubarb cut in thin slices, and laid four and twenty hours a steep in four spoonfulls of Sack, add four of Succory or Endive water, and so take it. For your Dyet. AVoid all sharp biting things, and such things as are too viscous and slimy, warm your drink with a little plate of steel hot in the fire. In any difficulty of Ʋrine. TAke Parietary, or Pellitory of the walls, and Rue, and cut them, and with Eggs make a Tansie or Pancake of them, fry this in Oyle of Scorpions, and Oyle of Rue a like quanti∣tie, and clap it unto the lower part of the belly from the Na∣vell downward as hot as the diseased partie is able to endure it. And upon occasion let it be reiterated. A Medicine for the Falling sickness. TAke a gallon of the best Sack and a pound of ponny roots scrape them clean and pound them very small, and put them into the Sack, and let them steep three dayes, stirring them sometimes, then straine i and keep it in bottles, and let them drink every morning a good draught stirring it before they drink. Take halfe a pound of Sugar and some of a yelks claw being filled and then pounded as much as will lye in your hand then take long pepper, and rase pepper and white pepper, and of the yelks claw and one Nutmeg, a rase of Ginger, a little quan∣tity of Parsley seeds, and as much Aniseed, some Pioney seed,
and some of Pioney rootes dried and grated put them into the Sugar and make lozenges, and after every draught take a lozenge. The Pioney roots that hath leaves without saggs is best: September 27. 1629. A Potion to heale all inflamations in the throat, Tongue, or Gummes. TAke the leaves of Plantaine, Sage, Shepherds pursse, Sink∣foyle, and Woodbynd, of each one handfull, the tops of Rosemary and brambles of each a little handfull, Roch Al∣lum and French Barley of each one ounce, English honey six ounces, boyle these in a pottle of faire water and a quart of white wine to the consumption of a third part of the liquor, then strain it to keep in a glasse bottle for use. Bruise a little handfull of Wormwood in the covering, and put it into a stone bottle with a quart of ordinary Beer to infuse all night, drink therof a draught in the morning strained, do this often in the winter. To make Tobacco Water. TAke a pound of good leafe Tobacco: steep the same in six quarts of Muskedine with a pound of juyce of Licorace and a pound of Annyseeds the space of 24 houres: Then distill the same, and it will make a quart of strong water, and a quart of the smaller. For sharpness of Ʋryne. TAke a peece of a neck of Mutton or Veale, or a Chicken, or if the party be weak, a Cock, make broth of it, and put into it of Endine, Plantane and Succory leaves, of each one hand∣full tyed up together, drink thereof a good draught fasting be∣fore and after, walk after it, also take halfe an handfull of the flowers of water Cresses, black or yellow:
To make one leane. MAke a great pye of Rye meale, a peck, fill it full of Savory, and two or three handfull of Roman worme wood, bake it, break it all a peeces when it is cold, and put it into a Kilder∣kin of new Ale or beer, when it is eight dayes old, drink of no other drink. Probatum. A receipt for to make Lozenges. TAke halfe a pound of the best loaf Suger, two peniworth of English Licorace beaten small to pouder and two penny∣worth of Gumdragon, steep'd a while in a little Rose water war∣med untill it dissolve and then clense it through a cloath. Then work them altogether with a spoon in a woodden Cup till you may roule it in your hand (and not hang) Then make them up in small balls, and lay them upon Plates and drye them by the fire or in the Oven, when the bread is out: For Piles, Probatum. TAke a new Tile and lay it over the fire, and make it red hot, and then take it off, and cast the small pouder of Frankin∣cense, and then stir over the smoak thereof as close as you may, that no ayre go out under them, and then the savor thereof shall go therein, and destroy them, and do this two or three times, till thou findest ease. For the Piles. TAke sweet Butter without salt, and the juyce of Bay leaves, and seeth them together, and makean oyntment thereof, and annoynt the place where the greife is. For the Piles to stench blood. TAke and drink the juyce of Millfollie for that is proved, also put to the pouder of burned Garlick and the Erills shall dye, also to destroy them, take oyle of Roses and Frankincense, Honey, and make an oyntment of these, and put it with the fin∣ger to the fundament, if it be a friend thou wouldest help in
hast, take Myrrhthereto, and after annoynt the fundament there∣with, and the growing out of the evills seeth Frankincense and water and wash the evills therewith and let the breath go up into the fundament, and the party shall be whole. Probatum est. Mrs. W. China Broth for a Consumption. TAke the root of China sliced, one ounce of Harts horne sha∣ved, and of the shavings of Ivory of each half an ounce, and of Sassifrage sliced two drams, put all these into an earthen pip∣kin, with five pints of faire spring water, let them steep over warme Embers twenty four hours, then put to them a Fennell root, and a Parsley root sliced and picked, of the leaves of Maiden haire, and Borrage of each, one handfull, leaves of E∣gremonie a handfull, two or three sprigs of Tyme, and as much Rosemary, the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss and violets, of each a little handfull, fix Dates stoned and sliced, forty Raisons of the Sun stoned, three spoonfull of Currants, and a Cock chic∣ken the intrailes being cleane drawn out, the back opened, the skin taken of, and the bones bruised, at the first boyling, scum it carefully, boyle away almost two parts of the liquor, then straine the residue and reserve it for your use. Let it have no thicking but a crust of bread, a quarter of a pint will be enough at a time, being used in the morning fasting for a breakfast, and fast two hours after, and in the after noon at foure a clock when your dinner is digested. The Lady F. Receipt for the same. TAke a quart of house snailes, break of their shells, wash of the slime with a little water and salt, and then wash them in two or three waters, boyle them in a pottle of new milk untill almost halfe be consumed, then strain it lightly through a thin cloath, and take every morning fasting almost halfe a pint and fast two houres after, and as much at four a clock when your dinner is digested, this must be used three weeks or a moneth together.
Another for the same. TAke an ounce of white Ginger, a quarter of an ounce of Mace, halfe a quaiter of an ounce of Cloves as much of Cynamon, and as much Saffron, stamp all these very small to∣gether to pouder, mingle them with a pound of the finest Su∣gar pounded very small, then take a new laid Egg of a black Hen, and put out the white eleane, temper the yelk with some of the pouder aforesaid, so as the partie may well gulp it up, then fill the shell with broun bastard and Cydonia water, and drink it up, this must be done three daies together, Cydonia water is the water of Quinces distilled For a Squinancie or soare throat. TAke of running water and white Wine ana one pint, put to a dosen Figgs and half as many Jews Ears, boile it to nere the Consumption of halfe straine it, and put to it one halfe ounce of Mell Rosarum, gargile it three spoonfulls one after another as hot as may be suffered, then apply the Figgs and Jewes Eares outwardly in a fine cloath to the throat. Probatum est, Mr. Triaply. For the falling Evill. TAke the brains of a Wesel, and dry it to pouder, and put it into some pure Vinegar, and temper them well together, and give that to the diseased person to drink, morning and evening first and last. Probat. Also the skull of a dead man, whereon Moss groweth, being taken and washed very clean, and dryed in an Over, and then beaten to poude, will cure this infirmity be the disease never so antient, but the skul must be of one that hath been slaine, or died suddenly, or of one that was hanged. Probatum est. The making of Ung. Nutritum or Triapharmacon. TAke an Earthen Pipkin, and put in it a pint of the best white wine Vinegar, then add to it of Lytharge of Gold finely
ground to pouder a pound▪ and halfe, and let it infuse a week, stirring it once a day, then take the purest Oile you can get (if you would have it cool very much, take Oyle of Roses) put▪ of it into a wooden boll two spoonfulls, and as much of the thin∣est and clearest of your infusion, and with an woodden Spatula incorporate it to the thickness of an ointment, and so put more Oile and more infusion as you desire to make in quantity, it is excellent for all hot inflammations, and impostumations for you cannot make a more cooling ointment. For an Ʋlcer on the Topp or foreskinne of the Penis. TAke a little of this Triapharmacon mingled with a ittle Ʋn∣guentum Album camphoratum, and annoynt the soar with it, and it will both coole and dry up the ulcer approved by my selfe. For bleeding at the Nose. TAke Franken cense two drams, Aloes one dram make them in∣to fine pouder, and mix them with the white of an Egg un∣til it be as thick as hony, then commixe the soft haires of a Hare with it, and apply it to the Nose, and to the Nostrill which bleedeth. Another proved. TAke the blood which commeth out of the Patients Nose and burne it in an Earthen pot, then make it to pouder, take of it three drams Bolearmonack one ounce Camphire one scruple with the white of an Egg and a little Vinegar make it thick like honney and lay it to the forehead and put it to the Nose. Another approved. TAke the mossiness of Willow, the soft haires of the belly of a Hare small cut. Sanguis Draconis in pouder a dram, mix them with the white of an Egg, add to them if you please the fine pouder of Pomegranats there must be a linnen cloath dip∣ped into the aforesaid medicine, and put up to the Nose.
A good Medicine for the Stone, approved by Mrs. Cranmor. TAke one handfull of Pellitory of the wall, one handfull of Sarsifrage, one handfull of wild Tyme, one handfull of Gar∣den Parsley foure or five Raddish roots sliced, foure spoonfulls of Fennell seed bruised. Wash all these herbs together and dry them in a faire lyn∣nen cloath, and shred them a little when they be dryed, and at night take a gallon of new milk warme from the Cow, and put it in an earthen pot, and put all the herbs into it and the Fen∣nell seed with it stopping it very close, and the next morning put it into a common Still and keep a reasonable good fire all day under it and stir it often. You must take foure spoonfulls of this water and three spoon∣fulls of white wine with a little Sugar in it warmed luke warme at the fire to be taken three daies before the full, and three dayes before the change through the yeare. This is to be stild in July to serve all the yeare, two stillfulls will serve all the yeare. This Medicine forthe Stone is to be taken in any time of the Moon when you feel paine. TAke one spoonfull of an herb called the Golden Rod rubbed to pouder to the yoalk of an Egge raw rosted, sup it up fasting three mornings together, this Medicine is to be taken in any time of the Moon when any paine is felt fasting an houre after you take it. Proved by me Ursula Atkins▪ For the biting of a madd Dogg for either a man or beasts. TAke three ounces of pilled Garlick. Six ounces of Rue, of London Treakle foure ounces, of scraped Tyme foure spoon∣fulls, boyle them in a large pottle of strong Ale, that it stale close covered with a soft fire, boyle it to three pints, strain this, and give nine spoonfulls to drink every morning for nine dayes
The wound-drink to be made in the midst of MAY. SOthernwood, Wormewood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Sanacle plan∣tane, Dandelion, wood Betony, Ribwort, white bottle, Daysie roots, and honney Succles, Avence Hawthorn, Beets Egtemony oaken leaves, bramble, and wilde Angelica, Cumfry, mints, Scabious, Strawbery leaves, Sinke foile Violet leaves, you must take of these one handfull and put them into a pottle of white Wine, and a gallon of cleare running water, boile them altogether till halfe be consumed, then straine out the li∣quor from the hearbs, then put to it a quart of Honey, and boile it againe, and so put it in a Glass close stopped, and when you need it take three spoonfulls thereof, first in the morning, and last in the evening, untill he hath drunk a quart thereof. The Vertues. It is very good for scarres new or old, for wounds in the body laying upon them a plaister of hony, and Wax for womens breasts, and putrified bones cau∣sing them to skale, for ach in the stomack, and to break an impostume causing it to come out, it draw∣eth bullets out of a Souldiers body, and healeth the place of the issue, also it hath been divers times ap∣proved for stopping of blood. A Purge. Pulvus Sanctis one dram in white wine or posset Ale. For the heat fo the face. FUmitory one Pottle, bitter Almonds one ounce, sublimate in fine pouder Litarge and ceruse ana two drams, add one dram of Camphire in dust, beat your Almonds, and straine the Fumitory water through them, then infuse the rest in that water, and straine it as you use it, anoynt your morbes, and pestles with oyle of sweet Almonds, and that will beat your Camphire to dust.
For Deafeness. CAstarum in pouder, Mithridate, and Oyle of bitter Al∣monds mixt wherein dip a little taint of black wooll, and re∣move it once in 24 hours. For the Spleen. MEllilot Camomill ana 3 M. Parsly Roman Wormwood, plantane Ditany ana 1 M. beaten small, Rosen one pound, Wax twelve ounces, Sheeps suet one pound white Wine one pint, melt them, and let them stand seven dayes then boile them, and strain them, take hereof the quantity of a Wallnut, and spread it on Leather, and let it lye till it fall off of it selfe. A very good Purge. SUccory water, and white Wine ana a quarter of a pint, Ru∣barb a quarter of an ounce, Agaricks one dram, Sene three dram, s Lignum, Aloes, Mace Cynamon ana two drams, slice your Rubarb, and Agarick small, and bruise the rest, but not your Sene, put them in a Pipkin over the embers all night close stopped them, boile them to halfe, straine it, and dissolve there∣in one ounce of Manna then straine it againe, and take it fasting at six a clock in the morning, and fast till one, but drink often after it begins to work, warm broth. Probatum est. For a Consumption. TAke two pound of Parsneps, and pulpe them, put to them halfe a pint of faint Cynamon water or else Muscadell, put to them two pound of Sugar answerable to your Pulpe, boyle them to the consistance of an Electuary, then add to it three drams of Aromaticum Rosa∣rum one shilling six pence; Dierodan abatis, one shilling, Aroma∣tium giriofilatum one shilling sixpence, Dimargaridium calidum, ana three drams, red Sanders halfe an ounce, oyle of Aniseeds a scruple, Oyle of Cynamon twelve drops, take hereof morning and e∣evening, the quantity of an Nutmegg upon a knives point. Probatum Mr. Hutton.
A Balsom. TAke of old oyle Olive three ounces, of cleare Venice Turpentine eight ounces, of cleare picked wheat one ounce, and halfe of Saint Johns wort with little holes in the leaves like prickings of Needles two ounces, of the roots of Carduus Benedictus and Valerian, of each one ounce, of Frankencense two ounces beat both the roots, and the herbs together somewhat grosly, and put them in an Earthen pot, with as much Sack as will cover them, and so let them stand in steep two dayes, then put the oyle, and wheat into it, and seeth them alto∣gether untill the wine be consumed, then take it off the fire, and strain it softly, putting into that which is strained the Turpentin and Fran∣kencense and so boile it together a little, then take it off, and keep it in a Glass close till you have use for it the older it is the better it will be. Probatum est. To stanch Bleeding. THe powder of Bolearmonack, put into the wound doth stanch the bleeding, or otherwise being blown up into the Nose. A Poultis. TAke Wormewood, boile it then chop it, then boile it again in the same water, then mix with it Rye meale, and a little honey, and Hoggs greace, and apply it. Take a peece of Bullocks horn with in an inch of the head, frieit with black Soap to powder. Take as much suet as the quantity of an Egg to a pound of Piony and rosen heat them, and put them into water, and make them up in Rooles. A Dyet to dry up humours. SArsaperilla three ounces Lignum guiacum six ounces, Cor∣tex guiaci one ounce, flor. stecados three drams epithimum three drams, Liquoris three drams, Raisons of the Sun one ounce, boiled six hours in two gallons of Conduit water in balneo Mariae, drink it at all times for a moneth.
Pills for the Spring. TAke Balls or Pills compounded two scruples of Cochiar, halfe a scruple of the pouder of Diagridium or Scammony corrected▪ three graines with the Oyle of Fennell with Sage and Clove Gelly flowers Chymicall, make it into five pills to be taken very early in the moning for one Dose. Pills for the Autumne. TAke the said Balls or Pills compounded two scruples, red Pills a halfe scruple, mix them with the Oyle of Clove-Gelly flowers Chymicall drops three, make all into five pills, let him take them early in the morning and sleep upon it. The most approved Pills for the Palsey. TAke these ingredients for the Palsey, of ground-Ivy, Beto∣ny flowers, Staechados Ana one ounce, dry them in the shade, beat them to powder, put to them Gumme Turpith one ounce of Spikenard graines eight, of Scammony one ounce, of Agarick two ounces Coloquintida one halfe ounce & halfe of Ginger, Sal gemme Ana gr▪ ten of Rhei one halfe ounce, in which let them be brought to a small pouder and mix them with the juice of Ivy in forme of little pills, if you please you may mix them with the Syrrup of Roses Soluble, or with Staechados, which are highly commended by Viduus the Florentine for one Dose, for the Palsey take but one ounce it works strongly, therefore to be performed with exact care and art, the party keeping within. Pills for the Gonorraeha. TAke the leaves of Seny Mastick Amber, Dragons-blood, Terra sigillat, Nutmegs Ana: one halfe ounce of Red San∣ders one halfe ounce washed Turpentine one halfe ounce with the pouder of Tormentile asmuch as will suffice, make it into a Paste for Pills.
Pills for a Purge. TAke of Pills Cochiar. and Faetidar. ana. the pouder of the Root of Jallap one halfe ounce with the Syrup of Roses So∣luble as much as will suffice, make Balls of Scamony put∣ting to three grains and a few drops of the Oyle of Clove Gil∣ly-flowers to give it a pleasant relish, these Pills are termed Ʋniversall, because they purge generally without any danger, take three or foure of them after the first sleep, and sleep upon it. Pills for the Head. TAke the Pills of Cochiar▪ guilded ana. one ounce of Scamo∣ny, one ounce with the Oyle of Fennell, Graines: 11. mix it and make it into Balls. Pills to purge. TAke Turbith minerall gr. 4: of extracted Rudii one scruple, put to it the Oyle of Clove Gelly flowers Chymick, make it up into pills for one Dose, and take it after the first sleep. Excellent Pills for the Stomach. TAke of Rubarb Elect. prepar'd Scamony ana. one ounce, Aloes-Rosat. halfe an ounce, Myrrh, Mastick ana. one ounce of Cynamon foure scruples of sweet Mercury one halfe ounce with the Syrrup of Quinces as much as will suffice, make it into a Ball, you may take a greater or lesser quantity of all and spe∣cially of the Mercurius Dulcis according to the strength of the Patient, or according to the ill nature of the disease. An Aqua Composita. TAke of strong Ale three Gallons, three quarters of a pound of Anniseeds, as much Licarish, of Fennell seeds, Worme∣wood, Motherwort, Liverwort, Parsley, Sage, Succory, Endiue, Langdebofe, Rosemary, Balme, Nepp, Time, Pennyroyall, Red mints, Mercury, Isop, Horehound, and Violet leaves, of each one handfull, and distill them as aforesaid.
There be foure dayes that Saint Bede the great Clerk telleth of. IN which if any man let him blood, or take any medicinable drink within the sixt houre or fourteenth houre after he shall dye. viz. The last day of Aprill, the ninth day of July, and the fifth day of the new Moon of August. And the last day of the new Moon of December, and who so of these dayes eat any Goose flesh within fortie dayes shall die. A good rule for blod letting and proved trew. WHo so letteth blood upon the right arme the fifteenth day of March, and the eleventh day of Aprill in the left Arme, he shall never lose his eyesight. And who so lets him blood on the right arme or on the left, the fourth or fifth day in the last end of May shall hall have no Fever that year. And who so letteth him blood on Saint Lamberts day each yeare once he shall not have the running Gout neither the Palsie, and who letteth him blood in the same Moneth and in the third day before the end of the same Moneth he needeth not to let him blood on the eleventh day of Aprill, on the which day to let him Blood on the left arme is good for the Palsie: The three Mondaies. ALso these three Mondayes whereon, if any man or wo∣man let them blood of wound or veyne he shall dye within three dayes and who so is borne on any of those dayes, he shall be encombred through stange death, viz. the first Munday of August the Munday next the end of the same Month, and the last Munday of December:
To stanch Bleeding. TAke the knotts of knot Wormes and split them and wash them with white Wine and dry them into pouder, and cast thereof into the wound and it will stanch the bleeding. To stanch blood of Veine or wound. TAke the haire of a Hares Skin and temper it with the white of an Egg and lay it to the wound and it will stanch it. Another to stanch bleeding of a wound. TAke linnen cloth and burn it into Ashes and take thereof and mix it with Sugar and so cast it into the wound. Divers good Medicines to stanch the bleeding of a wound. TAke Terra sigillata and beat it into pouder and put it into the wound. And if it stanch not therewith, lay to it a white of an Egge and flax, and put the powder upon it. Another for the same. TAke the white Moss of an Apple tree, and dry it on the fire in a fire shovell and make it into pouder, and so put it into the wound. Aud if the Patient be hot you must wett their neck with a little faire water in your hand. Another to stanch the bleeding at the Nose or of a wound. TAke Egg shells and burn them upon a hot Brick or Tyle in the fire, and beat them into pouder, and put it in the wound, or if they bleed at the nose, blow it up into the Nostrills with a Quill. Also the soft down Feathers being layed to the wound will stanch bleeding.
To know whether a man shall dye or not that hath a bloo∣dy Flux. TAke a penny-waight of Temmecrasses, boyl it and give the Patient to drink or eat in red Wine, or a part of water and do so three daies, and if he stanch he shall live, and if not he shall dye. Another. TAke clean wheat meal, break it and stamp it with water, and grind it in a Morter, wringing out the juyce, and boyl it in a posnet with a little salt, and let the sick eat it, and if he may endure it he shall live, or else he shall dye shortly. To know whether the fault be in the man or woman when they have no Children. TAke two small pots of earth and a little Brawn in either pot, let him make water in the one and she in the other, and so let them stand ten or fourteen daies, and the Urine that the fault is in will have worms in it and stinck exceedingly, if they be both clear, then by Gods grace the Medicine under-written may help to conception, (Viz.) Take Nepp and seeth it in Wine, three daies fasting let her drink it, and she shall conceive, the man doing his part. For the Kings Evill. TAke of red Sage, red Fennell, and Betony, of each like quantity, and boyl it in a quart of beer, till half be consu∣med, then strain it and put it into a bottle or glass, adding therto a spoonfull of oyle of Spike, and give the third part ther∣of to drink to the Patient in the morning, fasting after it four hours, if a maid a less portion, and so drink of it every third day once. Take also a pint of Crab Verjuice, and a peece of May butter as big as a great Wallnut, and set it on a Chaffindish of coals, and beat it together till a third part of it be wasted, and
it you must bath the Kernells and Sear as hot as you can suf∣fer it, applying upon it some good Implaister fit for the pur∣pose: Probatum Lady Capell. To wash the Morphew. TAke Scabious and Fumitory, and distill it in Butter-milk, and wash the Morphew with it. To take a Corn out of the Toe. TAke a black Snail, roast it in a white cloath, and when it is roasted lay it hot to the Corn, and it will take it away. To know when to gather all sorts of Simples in their se∣verall seasons. FRom the 25: of March till Midsomer the leaves and flowers are in season: from Midsome till Michaelmas the Crops and Herbs are in season: and from St Andrews to the 25. of March, the roots of Herbs are in force. A very good Medicine for a soar Breast. TAke of the leaves of Mallows one peck, and wash them clean, and set them on the fire in a Kettle of water of some two gal∣lons, and let it boyl till the water be sod away, then take a pottle of Ale, and a quart of White-wine, a penny wheaen loaf grated, the fat of a good loyn of Mutton finely shreded, and when the wate is sod away clean from the Mallos put in all these things, and set them on the fire again, and let it boyl stirring it continually that it burn not, and so let it boyl to∣gether til it be thick enough sodden, and then pt it into a stone pot, and stop it close, and when you would dress the Patients Breast, take part of it and warm it in a pewter dish, and spread it on a linnen cloath, somthing thick, and so lay it to the breast or stomack as hot as the Patient can endure it, but before you lay it on the breast, you must bath the breast with White∣wine warmed in a pewter dish with wo linnen cloaths, and so bath it exceeding well for a quarter of an hours space, then ap∣ply your Plaister and on it your Poultice, keeping the Patient from taking of cold: Probatum Lady Capell.
For swelling in the Cods of man or beast. TAke a good quantity of Rew, and bruise it well, and bind it close to the Cods, and dress it morning and evening till it be well. Signa Morientis. To know whither one shall dye or no. TAke the milk of a woman, and drop it in the sick bodies Urine, and if it fly above the Urine he shall live, if it sink he shall dye of that disease: Also take a handfull Rew, and stamp it with oyle of Roses, and lay it upon his head, being shaven before, if he sneeze once he shall live, if he sneeze not he shall dye: this is poved by Galen. Also if a weak man begin to tear his cloaths, and look much of his fingers, he shall dye. Also if a young man easily endure to wake much, and an old man to be given to immeasurable sleep is a token of death. Also if he turn him much to the Wall, if his nose sharpneth, and if his ares grow lythe, if his eyes grow hollow, if he sleep o∣pen mouthed, unless he have been accustomed so to do, if his womb fail, if he may see no brightness, if his sight dimmeth and his sinews shrinketh, and his heart panteth, and his breath wanteth, then death followeth. Also before death this is a sign, if the tears run down of a mans right eye, and a womans left eye. Also if the black vein appear in the forehead or under the eye. Let not blood any of these daies following. THe eleventh day of October, the last day of December, the third day of January. If any man be let blood any of these daies it is not possible to escape death. For all manner of Aches called Bullys Oyle. TAke in the month of May red Sage, and Rew, of each one pound Rosemarry tops, Wormwood, Balm, and the youn∣gest Bay-leaves, of each one pound and a half, pick them clean, but wash them not, cut them very small, and beat it along time in a Morter; then take three pounds of Sheeps Suet hot out of the belly, mince it small, and beat it with those
Herbs till all be of one colour, then put all into a fair boll with a pottle of the best oyle Olive, and work altogether till it become a like soft, then put it into an earthen pot close stopped, and let it stand so eight daies in some cool place or Sellar, then take it forth, and set it over a soft fire in a fair leaden pan, and let it seeth, and when it is half sodde, put into it four ounces of oyle of Spike, and so let it seeth again, and when it is sodden enough strain it through a new Canvas into fair gally pots, and stop them close with parchment and leather, with this oyntment ub the place grieved, and froth it till it be dryed in, as much s half a pease hereof chafed into the eare, and stopt with black wooll, helpeth the pains in the eares, annoint the Reins of the back with this, and chafe it in well, it easeth the pain of the stone. Take great heed in the boyling of it that it burn not too, and to know when it is enough, often drop two or three drops in a Sawcer, and when it is as green as may be it is enough, keep it also stopped and cool, and it will last many years: Prbatum. For the Mother by Doctor Butler. TAke Galbanum mixt with twelve Grains of Musk, make a Plaister of it and lay it to the Navell. For a Fistula, Cankar, or other old Soar, which healed the old festered Fistula in the brest of Mr▪ Tho. Wood Curate of Newington in his dayes, Probatum est. TAke a quart of new Tanners Wouse that Leather never came in, of Woodbine blossoms, of Sage, of Bay leaves, and Violets of each a handfull; a good piece of Roach Allum, seeth them, and straine them and keep the water, and make Tents and dip them in the water, and dress the soare. For Teeth that are yellow and foule. TAke Rye meale, Salt, and honey, of acha like quantity, mingle them together, and ub the teeth with it, two or three times a day, and it will cause the same to look white and clean, butyou must wash them presently with faire water, after you have rubbed your Teeth:
For the Dropsie. GIve the Patient twice or thrice a day a Glister (only) of Tobacco in an Instrument made for that purpose, which you may have neer St. Bartholmews Hospitall, or at any Tur∣ners. Approved on Mr. Edward Lacking the Minister of Limsfield in Surry by the Lady Capell. 1646. For the Scurvy. TAke halfe a peck of Scurvy grass, as much water Cresses, a handfull of Brooklime, halfe a pound of Raisons of the Sun stoned, and boyle it in three quarts of Ale till it come to three pints▪ then strain it, and put in two ounces of Sugrcandy, as much Turmerick as will lye on a three pence, and then boile it a walme or two, and so drink at morning and evening blood warme▪ For the Stone. TAke of Penny Royall and Mallowes, of each a handfull▪ Anniseeds a penny worth, boyle them in a quart of white Wine, till it come to a pint, and put to it halfe an Eggs shell poudered, a little Castle Soap the bigness of a Bean, with three or foure cornes of Pepper in gross, of Nutmeg and Sugar two spoonfulls, and put it into your mouth, and drink the Wine in the morning, the party that made this note did avoid above foure hundred stones in one fortnight: Probatum est▪ For the running of the Reins. TAke a pint of the stroakings of a Cow, and set it on the fire, and put into it a spoonfull of the pouder of Acorne cups, and when it hath well boyled put to it a sliced Date, and being boyled a little more, take the yelk of a new laid Egge, beating
it together, put it into the milk▪ and when it beginneth to simper, take it from the fire, and sweetning of it well with Con∣serve of Red Roses, put into it as much white Amber as will lye on a fix pence, and let the party drink of it morning and evening. A very good Balsome for Ʋlcers or soars either in Man or Beast. TAke a Pint of the strongest Beer, set it on the fire, and let it boyle a little, and skim it, then put into it of clarified hony two spoonfulls, Roach Allom the quantity of a Wallnut, and boyle it till it come to three or foure spoonfulls, and when you have washen the Ulcers with white Wine, then poure in the balsome, and bind it fast. Probatum est. To make a Poultice to heale any old soare or running Ʋlcer Approved. TAke of Mallows foure handfulls, of Red Sage two handfulls, wash them, and chop them small, then take a quart or something more of Milk, and set it over the fire, and put there∣in the Herbs, and let them boyle, till they be very tender, then take a quarter of a pound of Mutton suet, and mince it ve∣ry small, and let it boyle with the other stuffe till it be all mol∣ten, then thicken it up with Red wheat meale, and when you find it thick enough, let it boyle a walm or two, and then take it off the fire, and dress the soar twice a day, applying it as hot as the party can suffer it, and let him not go too much upon it. Probatum est Ri. Prine To make Mel rosarum. TAke the leaves of Red Rose buds, as many as you can press into a pint and quarter of Rose water, and set it in an ear∣then pot in warme ashes, and cover them close, and let them infuse till the Roses look pale, then straine them out, and put in the like quantity of Roses, do thus three times, then take to
every pint of infusion, two pints of clarified honey, and then let it boyle till the skum ariseth, which being well taken off with a feather, keep the clearest in Glasses for your use. A gentle Purge for a quartaine Ague to be taken a day before the fit. TAke two drams of Sene, and wring in the juice of three or foure Oringes upon the Sene over night, then next morning straine it out, and put it into a little thin broath with a little Sugar, and so drink it warme, it will give foure or five motions▪ Lady Coventry. A Broth for a Feaver. TAke a Chicken, and the bottme of a Manchet, a little May Strawbery leaves, roots and all, Sorrell leaves and roots, Dandelyon, Succory, of each a good handfull, then juice them, after they be clean washed, and put that juice into the broth af∣ter the chicken is boyled to pieces, let the juice boile a quarter of an houre, then straine it, and let the sick body drink of it halfe a pint at a time, if he be not able to drink so much, let him drink so much as he can, and as often. A very good Sear-cloth by Mr. Hendly. TAke one pound and a quarter of Deers suet, Beewax, Oliba∣num, Rozine, and Frankincense, of each one pound, Mastick, and Camphire of each one ounce, Venice Turpentine one pound and a quarter, melt all but the Camphire and the Tur∣pentine, and when all is molten, stir in then your Camphire and Turpentine, then poure all of it into white Wine, and work it with your hands in the Wine till it be yeallow, then make it up in roles; it is good for the spleene, for white swellings, and for aches. Probat: Lady Capell.
The Lime water for old soares. TAke unslackt Lime, and put it into a new Pipkin, well leaded then take another new Pipkin, and fill it with faire running water, and set it on the fire till it be ready to boile, then take it off suddenly and cast on the Lime in the other Pipkin, and so let it stand till the Lime be slaked, then poure of the cleare into a Glass, and keep back the scum and the Lime, wh this water wash the soare, and apply a lin∣nen cloath eight or ten double, wet in the said water to the Ul∣cer, and dress it thrice a day. Probatum est. An approved Aqua Composita for a Surfet, or a cold stomach. TAke of Rosemary, Isop, Time, and red Fennell; of each one handfull, of Sage and Horehound, of each halfe a handfull, a root of Ellicampane, of red Mints, Penny-royall, and Marjo∣ram of each six crops, of Licorish bruised and Anniseeds of each two ounces, then take three Gallons of strong old Ale, and set it upon the fire with all the rest of the things before named, and stir them well together and when it beginneth to boile, take the fire from under the Pot, and set your Limbeck upon it, and close it as close together as you can, and distill it with a soft fire, and keep the top of your Limbeck cold with water. To make Wormewood water. TAke the Lees of Sack or Clarret wine, and a good quantity of strong Ale, and distill them together in a Limbeck, till you have the quantity of two gallons distilled, then take of Li∣corish and of Anniseeds bruised of each one pound, Cloves bruised a quarter of a pound, steep all these in the distilled wa∣ter in a narrow mouthed Glass the space of six dayes, then the next day, or night which is better, before you do distill it again, poure it all into the pot where you meane to distil it, and steep in it a peck of Wormewood at the least, which you must break to peeces in your hands, then distill it with a soft fire as you do o∣ther Aquavitae
To make Mint water, by Mr. News. TAke of the strongest and stalest Ale four Gallons, then take as many young Spear-mints, as will fill a great Flasket, pick them very small and clean, take also four ounces of Licoris be∣ing clean scraped, Annileeds as many, Coriander seeds, and Nutmegs of each two ounces, large Mace and Cynamon of each one ounce, Ginger clean scraped halfe an ounce, bruise all the spices together, and lay them in steep in the Ale with the Mints in a great earthen Pot, for the space of foure and twen∣ty houres close covered, then distill it in a Limbeck over a soft fire, distilling halfe the Receipt at one time, and the other halfe at another time, for the pot whereout you distill must be little more then halfe full at a time. A Plaister for a broken shin, and to heale it. TAke of Plantane leaves roots and all, of Ribwort leaves roots and all, of white Dasie leaves roots and all, of each a handful, wash the leaves and roots very clean, drye them in a cloath, chop▪ them, stamp them & strain out the juice, then take a quarter of a pound of wax, three ounces of Rozin, Frankincense one pennyworth▪ a Poringer ful of fresh Butter, Sallet oyle or Hoggs grease, put al these with the juice of the Herbs into a Posnet, set it on a soft fire, and let it stand til it be all molten, then boyle it a walme or two, and stir it still, then take it off the fire, and let it coole a little, put into it a Porringer full of Tur∣pentine, stirring it very well, then set it on the fire till the Tur∣pentine be molten, and so take it off, and strain it into a Platter and make it up into rols, or keep it in Cakes. For the trembling of the hands. WAsh your hands with cold water, and let it dry in as often as you wash them, without wiping, but it were bet∣ter to lay Sage therein; If you stand in feare of the Palsie, eat every morning two or three Mustard seeds, and two Pepper Cornes. Probatum.
The black Searcloath. TAke a pint of oyle, and half a pound of white lead, and set it on the fire in a brass pan, and boyl it till it come to the height of a plaister which you may know by working some of it in your fingers, if it do not stick to your fingers, it is enough, otherwise not, when you find it to be boyled enough, then dip yout cloaths in it, and pull them cut at each corner, and when they are cold, slick them over with a Slick-stone, this Searcloath is to be ap∣plyed above the Poultice, to take away the pain, and to draw forth the humours before it fall into the Ulcer: Probatum Rich. Pyne. A Medicine for any Inflammation in any part of the body. TAke ordinary washing Soap two ounces, of fresh butter and salt of each one ounce, work it in your hand with a knife till it be well mixed, then spread it reasonable thick on a cloath, and apply it to the place, and let it lye till it crumble, for often times once dressing will serve. Probatum Lady Coventry. A Medicine for a Cows bagg that is hard. TAke ordinary Soap and a little water, make it very hot, and apply it well twice a day to the bagg, work it well in, if it be very great and hard, it will require a months time before it be perfectly well: Probatum Lady Coventry▪ A precious Balsom. TAke of Venice Turpentine one pound, of the best Oyle O∣liue three pints, Virgin Wax half a pound, of perfect Sanders seven ounces, Sack half a pint, Litharge of Gold finely powde∣red, and searced two ounces, wash the Turpentine in a pint of red Rose water till it be clear, and wash the Oyle in half a pint of Rosewater, the Wax must be sliced thin, and boyled in a pint of red Rosewater, till it hath well purged it selfe, then skim it clean, and take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, then take the Wax out, and pour out the water, and put the Wax in a Skellet, and set it again over the fire to melt, then put
in the Turpentine and Oyle with half a pint of the best Sack, and boyl it two or three walms, then take it from the fire, and as soon as it begins to grow cold, take the Sanders, stir it in, and straine them together till it come to a thick substance, and when it is throughly cold take a Gally pot, and put the substance so strained into the pot, and set the pot on the harth in a hole, that may be covered for the space of two moneths, and with the heat of the fire it will grow to a perfect balsome of the colour of Cla∣ret wine. The first melting of it must be on a soft Fire of Char∣coale. The vertue of it. It is good to heale inward, and outward wounds, inward to be injected, and outward to be ap∣plyed with fine lint annointing the place, and parts offended, it cureth, and keepeth it from inflammation; drawing forth all bro∣ken bones, and other things that might putrifie at five dres∣sings, it healeth without scarrs: It cureth all burnings, and scal∣dings both of fire and water, and all bruises being annointed with it warm. And a peece of fine linte, or linnen laid therein and applyed to the place cureth all pain, and cold through moisture, Catthas or aches in the bones, or Synews, annointing the place offended with the oyle hott, and a warme cloath laid on it, also the head ach only annoynting the Temples, and no∣strills therewith; It is good against the wind Collick, and stitch in the side applyed to it warm with hot cloaths four mornings together, allowing every morning a quarter of an ounce. It is good against the Plague only annoynting the lipps, and no∣strils in the morning before you go forth. It helpeth the Sur∣fet taking the quantity of an ounce warmed in Sack. It helpeth the bitting, and stinging of any venomous beast, drinking it in milk warme. It cureth an Vlcer, or Fistula in any part of the body be it never so deep but it requireth longer time to help the Gutts. It is good for one infected with the Plague, Measels or the like, so it be presently taken in warme broth the quantity of an ounce foure mornings together, and then sweat on it. It helpeth digestion anoynting the Navell, and stomach when you go to bed, and last of all it keepeth from Venome.
To make Salve water, which is an excellent remedy for all soare throats, and mouths, and for ulcerated Lungs if the party drink often of it. It is also for old soares, and green wounds. TAke of St Johns wort, of Sellendin, of Prunella, of Isop, of Senacle, of Red Rose buds, of Sinckfoile, of Valerian, of Smalledge, of Cullumbine, of Rue, of Bittany, of Egremony, of Serpents tongue, of Scabious, of Setwell, of Salomons seale, of Daisey leaves, and roots, of each of these three handfulls, of red Sage, of Plantaine, of Elder flowers, of Rosemary, of Cum∣frey, of Tutsane, of Bramble buds, of knot-grass, and of Rib∣wort, of each of these two handfulls, and halfe a peck of ho∣ny-suckle flowers puld from the stalk: Take all these and wash them, and put them in a pot of foure gallons of running water and boile it till the one halfe of the Liquor be consumed: Then let the water run from the Herbs through a Cullender, wring∣ing forth with your hands all the juice of the Herbs, and then boile it againe, adding thereto halfe a peck more of honey suckles, flowers puld as before, and a handfull of Red Rose buds, with three quarts of English honey, one penny worth of long pepper bruised, with three spoonfulls of Madder, a quarter of a pound of Allom, so boile it till one part of it be wasted, then put it into stone potts, and let it settle, and put the cleare in a Glass for your use. Probatum La. Capell. For the Tooth Ach. TAke a race of Ginger, and grate it very fine, and take five times so much of Licoris, and searce it to the Ginger, then put a little quantity of this powder in a quill, and snuff it up into your Nose, on the same side your paine is on, do thus some three or foure times when the pains is, and it will help you. Oyle of Aparicio for any green wound or Gun-shot. TAke of the leaves of Carduus Benedictus four ounces, of Va∣lerian roots foure ounces, of the flowers of St. Johns wort,
six ounces, Cumfry two ounces, Wheat dryed in an Oven four ounces, steep all these in a quart or somwhat more of White-wine three daies, then seeth them in a new earthen pot till half be consumed, then strain it out hard from the Herbs, and put to it three pound of oyle Olive, then seeth it till the Wine be consumed, which will require some six hours, then add to it of Venice Turpentine six ounces, of Myrrhe and Mastick of each three ounces, of Frankincense in fine powder two oun∣ces, and when the oyle is seething, strew in the powders by lit∣tle and little, and stir them a pace, then take it off the fire pre∣sently, for if it seeth any thing too long it is spoiled, then put it into a narrow mouthed glass close stopped, then set it in a Kettle of seething water with hay, and set the glass fast that it fall not, so let it stand a quarter of an hour till the powder be dissolved, let not the water seeth after the oyle is put in, but keep at one heat. If you can get of the true Tobacco, add two or three ounces to the other herbs of the leaves only of the Tobacco. How to dress the wound. FIrst wash the Wound with warm White-wine, then pour in a little of the oyle warmed, and lay over it a linnen cloath, being dipped in the oyle, and over it a linnen cloath four times doubled being dipped in White-wine warmed, and bind it up fast, so that the cloaths slip not off, dress it but once in twenty four hours. For the redness in the Face or Nose. FIrst take a Purgation for the pain of the comming of Chol∣ler, then take one pound of Isinglass, the juice of Purslen, and the juice of Plantane, Verjuice of Grapes or Crabs, of each one pint and half, with the whites of twenty six Eggs, beat them well together with the said juyces, then mix them alto∣gether, and distill them in a common Stilitory, and keep this water against all Pimples, Scruples, Wheals, Chafings and Heats that appear in the skin, dip linnen cloaths in this water, and wash the said redness therwith.
For the Frenzy and madness in the head. TAk a pint of the juice of Smalledge, with a pint of Vinegar, warm them together, then shave his head, and dip a linnen cloath in your liquor, and lay it all over this head, and when it is dry wet it again, and so use it often times, and keep him in a dark place, and he shall find ease. To make a Suppository to work effectually. TAke two spoonfuls of Honey, boyl it in a brass ladle till it become very stiff, drop some of it on a Trencher, it will be so hard, that it will roll somwhat stifly, then put to it a pretty quantity of white Salt, a quantity of Cominseeds, and some powder of Aloes, and the powder of dryed Rew, mingle them together, and let them boyl a little after you have put all these into the Honey, then make up your Suppository, and so use it. Another. TAke honey, and boyl it as before, put to it a quantity of salt, and so make it up and use it. An approved Medicine for a soar Breast. TAke a Sheepshead wool and all, and boyl it in fair spring wa∣ter, until it be boyled all to peeces, which is so long as un∣till all the vertue be boyled out of it, then take that broath, and mix it with boyled Rice for a Poultice, and make a Plaister of it upon a linnen cloath pretty thick, so thick as a mans finger: let that lye upon the Breast all day or night, and then take it off, and so do once or twice in twenty four hours, untill the breast appear somthing limber from the hardness, after take Goats dung, and pound it unto a powder, and mix it with Ho∣ney, of which make a Plaister upon a linnen cloath, which Plai∣ster put upon the soar, and change it every twenty four hours, untill it be whole, which will be, God willing, in a short time: Probatum est by the Lady Killegrue upon her self and many others.
An approved Medicine for soar Eyes by Mrs. Fermin∣ham: TAke the stone Lapis Criminalis, the quantity of a walnut, put it into the fire till it be red hot, and quench it in a pint of White-wine, heat the stone thrice red hot, and quench it in the same Wine, then stamp the stone to powder, and seeth it in the wine the space of half an hour, or till it be half wasted, then strain it through a linnen cloath, and keep it in a fair glass, if the water be too sharp, mingle it with a little red Rosewater, the stone you may have at the Apothecaries: The marrow of an old Goose wing is good for a pin and web in the Eye. An Oyle for a bruise in the Eye, or for any other bruise, by me approved. TAke a pint of Sallet Oyle, steep therin Elder-flowers, and change them two or three times as you do other oyle, so keep it, and when you need to use it, annoint the bruise often there∣with warmed, and lay the flowers on the place bruised: Probatum. A very good Purge. STeep all night warm in sixteen spoonfuls of▪ Barley water or somwhat more, of Cene leaves six drams, of Rewbarb one dram, of Agarick half a dram, of Cetrake and Maiden hair, of each three dams, a little ginger sliced, strain these in the morn∣ing easily, and put to it of Syrrop of Roses two ounces, of Man∣na one ounce picked clean, and dissolve it in the said Liquor, and drink the same warm with three or four drops of Cynamon water, and provide some thin broath to drink within three hours after. A Medicine for an Ague often tryed and seldom failed. TAke the thickest hard Soot of a Chimny, bay Salt, and Pe∣per, of each a like quantity, beat all these together, until they be small, then put in the yolk of an egg, and beat all these toge∣ther untill it be like a Salve, then spread it upon a cloath, and lay it unto both your wrists, and let it remain there twenty four hours, before you take it off, if it come again lay on fresh.
A Medicine for the Wormes. TAke the tip of a Harts horne a finger in length or more, and cast it into the fire till it be white as milk, then quench it in Vinegar, and let it drye, when you would use it, beat it into ine pouder, and searse it, then take the weight of two pence, and put it into a spoonfull of milk, warme it, and give it to the child to drink with a little Sugar. A Common Glister. TAke a pint of water, and put to it a quarter of a pint of hony boile them together, and as the dross of the honey ariseth so skim it of as that it may appeare very cleare, then take the Li∣quor, and put to it foure ounces of Oile, and the weight of six pence in salt, and so use it. A Glister to coole, and refrigerate. TAke a pint of Pthisane, thickned with the substance of Barly to the thickness of Almond milk, and put there to three ounces of Oyle of Violets, one ounce, of Melleyosett, and the yolk of an Egge, and the weight of two pence in salt. A Glister by Mr. Warth. BOile with a sheeps-head, of Mallow leaves two handfulls, of Violet leaves as many, of Anniseeds, and sweet Fennell seeds, or other Fennell seeds of each two ounces. After the Sheeps head hath boiled in a pottle of water, and is clean skimmed, put in your Herbs and seeds, and boile them together till a pinte and halfe or more be wasted, then put in a pinte of white Wine, and boile them againe, and in a pinte or less of that decoction strained dissolve of syrrup of Roses soluble three or foure ounces, and Oile of Roses, and Cammomile of each one ounce, and make a Glister without salt.
Another by Doctor Ward. TAke a good quantity of faire water, five or six leaves of Mercurie, Mallows, Pellitorie of the wall, Holliock-leaves and Violet leaves, of each one handfull, Fennell seeds, and Anniseeds of each two spoonfulls bruised, a little wheat Bran, boile all these together till the strength of the Herbs be out. Then strain it, and take a pint of this liquor, & put it in a pew∣ter dish, and set it on a Chafingdish of Coales, and put to it of the Syrup of Roses three spoonfulls, or of course Sugar, three spoonfulls of Sallet Oile, a good peece of sweet Butter, and a little salt, stir all these together till the butter be throughly melted. Then take it off, and use it as warme as well as you may suffer it, be sure that when its altogether there be a full pint of it. For the Green sickness. TAke a quart of the strongest Ale you can get, or white wine if you will, which is best, and boile in it seven or eight roots of English madder till it come to a pint, and drink up the wine at three draughts three mornings together fasting, and after it run upp and downe. Probatum. Another Medicine for the green Sickness. TAke Isop, Peneroiall, Callamint, Burrage, Germander, Tyme, Marjorum, and water Savery, of each halfe a handfull, Fennell roots, Parsly roots, and Mader roots of each three or foure, Anniseed, Fennell seed, Carrawayseeds, and Carduus be∣nedictus-seed bruised, of each one ounce, Licorish scraped, and bruised one ounce, Raisons stoned, and Currants of each one handfull, the roots of Polypodie of the Oak, cut in small pee∣ces one ounce, Cene leaves one ounce and halfe, Cloves, Cy∣namon, Nutmeggs, and Mace, of each the weight of eight pence, boile al these in three pints of running water, and a pint of white wine till halfe be consumed, then let it stand till it be almost cold, strain it hard, and add to the Liquor Sugar or Honney
sufficient to make it some what sweet, boile it a little againe, and skim it, and let her drink each morning a good draught warme. And when shee hath drank the said portion foure or five mornings together, then with in a day or two after, let her have the pouder of Hierapigra dissolved in a little white wine, or cla∣rified Ale with Sugar, warme it, and let her drink it up at one draught: A Dyet drink to help the Green Sickness. TAke of Sarsaparilla four ounces, of Cene, and Hermodacta∣lis of each two ounces, one ounce of Epithium, as much Rew∣barb, of Licorish, and Anniseeds the same quantity, Agarick halfe an ounce, Cordix three ounces, Raisons of the Sun stoned halfe a pound, of Bitony, Isop, and Amen keys of each one hand∣full the kirnells only, boile all those in eight quarts of running water till halfe be consumed, but not in the Cene, and Rew∣barb till it be off the Fire, but let all the rest lie steeped in the drink, it cureth the green Sickness, healeth the body inwardly. A Pouder for the same. TAke two penny worth of Pollipodie, as much prepared steel as will lye upon a three pence, as much Harts horne as will lye upon twelve pence, take this in the morning fasting, and walk after it til you sweat. A Drink for the same: TAke Bittony, red Sage, red Mint, and sweet Marjerom, with the pouder of Ashen-keies, boile them in a pottle of run∣ning water, til halfe be wasted; Then strain it, and drink thereof morning and evening a good draught with Sugar. An Approved purgation for a quartane Ague by W. Hampton. FIrst, Take a pint of Clarified Whay', halfe an ounce of Cene leaves, three or foure leaves of Harts Tongue, halfe an
ounce of Bugloss slours if you can have them, else take a quarter of an ounce of roots of Maiden haire, a stick of Licorish bruised, the middle bark of an Elder Tree, and of an Ash tree a quar∣ter of an ounce, a dozen Raisons of the Sun stoned, a piece of whole Cynamon the length of your finger, boile all these in an Earthen pott that hath never been used, and set the said ear∣then pott in a panne of Brass, and there let it boyle the space of two houres, cover the pot with a peece of wood, and past it over with paste, and then bind it over with a linnen cloth in such sort that the breath come not out of the said pot, and when it hath boiled as aforesaid; Then strain it when it is almost cold then take some warme broth three houres after it, and all that you eat or drink that day must be warme, keep your Chamber all that day, and come not into the Aire in nine or ten dayes after the taking of the said purgation; It is good to purge burnt Choller, Melancholly, and flegme. For a quartane Ague by Mrs. Purvey. TAke a quart of the strongest Ale you can get, three or four balls of Horse Dung, of a stone horse that goeth to grass, one or two handfuls of red Sage, one spoonfull of grosse pepper, seeth all these from a quart to a pint, then let it drain through a cloth, and if you please put into it a little Sugar, and drink thereof half an houre or an houre before the fit come, and walk after it, if not, lye downe and sweat. Probatum est. To stay the flux of ten years Continuance. TAke yarrow, and Plantane of each a like quantity, stampe them and strain them, then take the juyce of these Herbs, and put them to honney of Roses, And take this being all mingled together, and serenge the Patients body with it every time he commeth from stooll, let it be a little warme. Probatum est.
The Implaister called Paracelsus, good for a Bruise or old soare. TAke of these Gumms following Galbanum, Oppopanax, of each one ounce, Ammoniacum two ounces, let them be beaten very small, and put them into an Earthen pot that hol∣deth about three pints, and is well leaded, and glassed within, then pour upon the same Gummes, a pint of the best Wine Vi∣negar, and cover them close, and let them remaine so a day and a night, on the next morning set them on a soft fire of Coals, til they be throughly melted, continually stirring them with a Spa∣tula. Then take a peece of new Canvas that is very thin, and strain them into an Earthen Chafer that is very well leaded, and will hold about a quart, and so set them on a very gentle fire of Coales, keeping the Fire from the sides of the Chafer that the Gummes may boile untill the Vinegar be all boyled away, and utterly consumed, in the boiling of the Implaister you must keep stirring of it continually with a Spatula, lest the Gummes burn to, and when they have boild about two houres, then take a quart of Oyle Olive, and put it into a pann wel lea∣ded, and glased, that holdeth a pottle, or more, and set it on a soft Fire of Coals, and presently put into it one pound and halfe of Lithargie of Gold, beaten into fine pouder, stirring it continually, till you put in all, and when it is through hott, and mixed well together, then put in halfe a pound of new yeallow Wax cut in small peeces, and so let it boyle till it come to one firme substance which you shall finde by laying one drop of it on the side of a dish till it be cold, and when you finde it will break between your Fingers of a firme substance then it is e∣nough, Then take it of the fire until it hath left boyling, and be almost cold, continually stirring it, and so by little and little, take the Gummes that were first boiled, and with your Spatula taking the quantity of a Nut at once, put the same into the said matter, continually stirring it, til the said Gummes be all put in, and be well mixed with the other things, your Gumms will be halfe an houre putting in or thereabouts; Therefore when you see it begin to be cold, set it on a few Embers, taking great heed that it be not over hot, for then it will runne over into the Fire, for it is very hot of it selfe, but if the worst should happen,
that it suddenly begins to runne into the Fire, that you cannot stay it, have a pann of water by you, and quickly put it into the water, then take it out of the water againe, and set it on the Fire, and when these Gumms are put in, and well mixed, and melted, Then put in these things following, Bdellium two ounces, the two kinds of Aristolochia long and round, Calamina∣ris, Mirh, and Frankincense of each one ounce, beat them into very fine pouder, and searse it through a very fine linnen Cloth twice; all these pouders must be full weight after they be searsed, then mingle them together in a large paper, and poure them leisurely into the said matter continually stirring it. Then pour into it one ounce of the Oyle of Baics, and lastly put into it of pure and fine Turpentine four ounces, then take it off the Fire, and labour and stirre it at the least halfe an houre together when you put in the Turpentine; Then have some very good Oyle of Roses, and poure it along upon some clean Table, and spread it with your hand all over the Table, then poure salve on the top of the Oyle, and when it is cold you must make it up into lumps, and so labour it very much for an houre, and then make it up into eight or nine rols, and so lay them on the Table one by one until they be cold, then lap them up in pa∣pers well oiled with oile of Roses, and get a sheeps skin, and cut it into peeces to wrap upon every peece, and so bind them up with a pack thread, and being thus kept out of the wind and Sun, they will last seven years. A Medicine for the Falling sickness. TAke an old Toad, and kill him, and take out his inwards saving his Liver, and in any wise see that you take out his Gall cleere without breaking, for else it poysoneth, wash it very clean, and lay it on a Tile-stone in an Oven after the bread is drawn, dry it, and make pouder of it, and mix therewith a small quantity of Cynamon, and give it to the party in Ale or Beer warmed, as much as will fill a Hasle Nut-shell which will weigh some ten graines at one time, It must be taken after the party hath fallen of the disease, and he must fast after foure or five hours, also it must be taken once or twice about the time the party doth use to fall into the disease to prevent the comming of it. The Clawes of the Toad must be cut off: Probatum La. Capell.
For the Piles. TAke ten handfuls of Pile-wort, with the roots, flowers, and leaves, and two handfuls of Orpin with the roots, leaves, and stalks, wash them very clean, and be sure you loose none of the roots, then put them into a linnen cloath and dry them, and shift the cloath once or twice, and let them lye a day and a night in the cloath to dry, then take three handfuls of Broom blossoms, and put them to it, and stamp them in a Morter al∣most an hour, then put to it a pound of Hogs-grease, and stamp it together half an hour more, then take it and put it into a gally pot, and let it stand nine daies,, then boyl it half an hour, and then strain it out, and so annoint the Piles with it. Probatum Lady Capell. A Plaister for a bruise, be the same inward or outward, or both. TAke of Burgundy Pitch one pound, Virgin wax half a pound, Frankincense finely beaten a quarter of a pound, boyl all these together, and when they are all throughly melted, pour it into a Bason of cold water, then make it up into rolls, and when you vse it, spred it on the fleshy side of a Lambskin, and apply it to the bruised place, and when it is whole it will fall off it selfe, otherwise not Probatum Ladie Capell. A Medicine to kill a Canker in the Throat or Nose, which must be applyed to the outside of the Throat or Nose, you must lay it to morning and Evening, twice or thrice dressing will kill it. TAke Woodbine leaves, red sage leaves, & Rew leaves, of each a pretty handfull, of Elfame in Summer, the bind leafe, and flower, rather more of that then of any one other thing, washing soap as much as a walnut shell in all, as much leaven or soap, the brown bread leaven is best, put in with the leaven a little salt, stamp al your herbs, leaven, and salt together very fine, and smal, then put in your soap, and stamp it with the rest, and lay it on a linnen cloath, and bind it hard to your Throat, or to any
other place where the Canker is, the Herbs must be laid on as cold as you can. This medicine is good to kill a Fellon, or Cancker in any Joint. Probatum, La. Capell. For burning and scalding, to take out the fire, and to heal, and skin it. TAke ground Ivy, and boile it in faire water, and when it is well boiled, bath the place well with the water, and lay the Ivy leaves so sodden on the soare place, and it will kill the fire, and strengthen the place. Probatum, La. Capell. Another. TAke of shell Snailes a good quantity prick them being in the shells with a needle, set them in a faire dish, and let them stand, and within a while they will drop water, when they have done dropping, put the water in another faire dish, let it stand three or foure hours, and it will be like an Oyle, then take some of that, and annoint the sore three or foure times a day; Then take the leaves of Harts-tongue, and wet them in the same oile, and so dress it till it be whole; This Medicine will keep the sore from scarring. A Dyet drink for to purge most Diseases. TAke Bittony, Sage, Mlnt, Scrubie and Wormwood of each equal portions, bruise them, and Tunn them up in a gallon of new Ale, and use to drink of it every morning, fasting three houres after it; Also drink it foure houres after dinner, and last at night, It is good to clear the Liver, to take away superflaous moistness in the Reins, and to comfort the stomach, and the braine. A Dyet drink for many imperfections. TAke of Sarsaparilla two ounces, Sassefrage wood, Chena roots Gallingall roots, Turmentile roots, Angellica roots of
each as much, except of the Sassafrage, of it three ounces, of Harts Horn or Ivory finely scraped one ounce, Bittony, Scabi∣ous, Egremony, Marsh-mallows, and Colts-foot of each one handfull, put these Herbs into a Bagg, and drie them in an Oven after, the bread is drawn, then mingle them together with the roots also, mix therewith of Cynamon one ounce, of large Mace three quarts of an ounce tying them fast upon a Bol∣ster bagg with a stone in it, make it sinck below the yeast, being put into two gallons of Ale, and drink thereof when you please. A Dyet Ale to purge most Diseases. TAke of Cene foure ounces, Sarsaparilla two ounces, as much madder, of Organy one ounce, two ounces of Anniseeds, of Agarick, Rewbarb, and Ginger of each halfe an ounce, a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, of Scurvy grass, and red Dock-roots, of each two handfuls, bruise all these together in a stone Morter, on∣ly your Scurvy Grass must be bruised gently by it selfe, strip, and slice your Dock-roots very thin, being all well mingled, put them into a bagg, and hang them in three gallons of strong Ale when it is working, that it may work with it, after it hath stood two or three dayes, you may drink every morning a good draught fasting, and likewise about four of the clock in the afternoon. A Dyet drink to take Spring, and fall, and if need bee at other times. TAke of Cene, and Sarsaparilla of each three ounces, Guia∣cum foure ounces, Licoris and Raisons of the Sunne of each one ounce Hirmodactilis and Fennell-seeds of each halfe an ounce, Sasaphrage two ounces, Egremonie, and Bittony of each one handfull▪ Put these into a thinn bagge the roots, and seeds bruised, and then hang it in two gallons of strong Ale when it is first Tunned, it must work but once. A gentle Purgation. TAke three pints of Whay, and put thereto halfe an ounce of Cene, a spoonfull of Anniseeds, seeth these till the Whay
consume to a pinte, then straine it, and keep it, and take twelve spoonfulls of the said Whay, and put thereto three spoonfulls of the syrup of Rewbarb, and drink this three or foure mornings together. Another. TAke of Cene three drams, of Rewbarb one dram, and halfe, shred very fine, a race of Ginger scraped, put all together into halfe a pint of white Wine, and steep them therein on warme Embers all night, In the morning straine it, and put to the said Wine one ounce of the syrrup of Roses, and let the partie drink it bloud warme, and one houre after, drink some warme broth to cause the same to work upon the body. A Purgation against Melancholly. TAke two handfulls of Mouse-eare, roots and all, wash them as clean as you can, and put them into a quart of good Beer, let not the Beer be sowred or too bitter of the Hopp, seeth it till one halfe be consumed, then take a good spoonfull of Anniseeds well dusted, and clean picked, put both these into the Liquor a∣bove said, and let all seeth together a little while; Then take it of the fire, and let all the Liquor run through a strainer being pressed out to take out the strength thereof, Then take halfe a pint of it, and put to it of syrrup of Violets two spoonfulls, and so drink it, peradventure it will not begin to work in two houres after you have taken it, till you have taken some warme Broth. To make Balme Water. TAke of very strong Ale untunned three gallons, green Licoris two pound scraped clean and bruised, take halfe a pound of Anniseeds rubbed in some cloth, and the dust fanned away, bruise them; Then take a flasket full of Balme strip it, and stamp it in a morter a little, let the Ale be put into a stone pott with a narrow mouth, and let all these be infused a day and a night therein, and then distill it in a Limbeck.
Another Purgation. TAke of Manna, and syrrup of Roses of each two ounces, put them into a quarter of a pint of Mutton broth, or Chicken broth, and drink thereof, but if the purge be for a woman, then one ounce of each of the aforesaid things will be sufficient: Another. TAke two ounces of Cene, and boile it in a pottle of running water till halfe be consumed, then straine it, and put to it a∣nother pottle of running water, and let it boile two or three walms; Then put into the said broth one pound and halfe of Pruins, and one Mace, and stew them therein, and eat thereof two or three at once, more or less according as your stomach standeth for the same. Another. TAke Hirmodactilis, a little Ginger, Long pepper, a little Anniseeds, and a little Mastick in white Wine. It is mo∣derate for the stomach, and it purgeth flegme from the heart, and foreparts, it is very good against the Gout; The Sciatica and paine in the joynts.
Hereafter followeth certain most appro∣ved and precious Receipts, set down by the learned and expert Physi∣tian Doctor Martin a Kurnebeck. This Doctor was an high German borne, in profession, a Physitian, and proceeded Doctor at Padua in Italy, in the same day that Dodonius the setter forth of the great Herball did proceed, with whom he had long and fami∣liar conference. He became Phisitian to King Henry the Eight, after whose decease he practised in the City of Norwich, where after many years spent to the great help and comfort of many a one that were diseased, and to his own no little praise and commendation, he deceased. As he was singularly learned, and of exceeding good practise, so had he alwayes of his Patients a most ho∣nest and friendly care. A Dyet drink to purge easily. YOu must brew reasonable good Ale, and when it is ready to tun you must have a linnen bagge, wherein you must put of good Guaiacum two ounce, Sarsaparilla one ounce, Cene two ounces, Pollipodie bruised one ounce, Epithium three quarters of an onnce, Anniseeds three quarters of an ounce, whole Cynamon halfe an ounce, Mace halfe a quarter of an ounce, honey three ounces, Gadds of steel five or six, put
these into the bagg sow it up, and put it into a pot of two gal∣lons, and cover it, and when it is foure or five dayes old, you must drink of this Ale in a morning, a great draught at Dinner, and Supper, but if it purge much then drink of it only in the mornings. The Electuary for a weake stomach to comfort the same, and for the swelling of the Liver: TAke the Confection Diagalanga, the confection Aromati∣cum Rosatum, the confection Diacinamoni of either one ounce, and an halfe, the confection Dia margariton six drams, the confection of the three peppers halfe an ounce, the confection of Dia amsn. dia laccae, and dia curcume of either two drams, Syrrop of Mints and fine Sugar so much as is convenient, make hereof an Electuary, which you may use in the morning fasting, and at night going to bed the quantity of a Nutmegge at once. The Decoction for the obstruction of the Liver to open the same. TAke the roots of Parsley, Asparagus, Fennell, Hilder, and Polpodie of the Oke, of either one ounce and a halfe, Egry∣mony, Endive, Borage Maiden haire, Germander, Tampe∣this, of either two handfulls, Spicknard, Calamus aromaticus, of either two drams, Cinommonie three drams, Cassia linguea one dram, Avis seed, Nettle seed of either two drams, Fen∣nell seed one dram, Mellon seed and Purslain seed of either three drams, Ivory scraped one ounce and a halfe, of the three kinds of Sanders of each two drams, Liquorice two ounces Raysons one ounce, Damask prunes twenty. Boyle all these in two pints of honyed water, and one pint of Egrimony water, putting thereto in the end of the decoction Tamarinds one ounce and a halfe without Cene. Boile it to sixteen ounces without Syrops, with Sugar only to make it sweet: And so take it at four times.
An Oyntment for the Stomach and Liver. TAke the marrow of Neats-feet, the fatt of a Badger, and the Oile of a Fox of either one ounce, Tamarisk, Harts-tongue, Wormwood, the bark of Capers, Spicknard of either one Dram and a halfe, Costus, Centaurie of either one Dram. Ammo∣niacum one ounce, Bdellium two Drams, Oile de ben. one ounce and a halfe, Nutmeggs, Maces, Cloves, Galingale, Set∣wall of either one scruple, dissolve the gummes in Vinegar, and with Wax make an Oyntment, adding thereunto of the Oyntment of Broom two ounces, mix them again and aroma∣tize it. An Oyntment for the Splene being wind-swollen, turning too and fro, making you sick, short winded, and the sto∣mach to rise as it were to vomit, it is most effectuall, qualifyiug the sharp humour of the Melancholy, it is also of a good savor and smell, and of great effect. TAke Oile of Worm wood, Mints, with Lillies, and sweet Almonds of either one ounce. Fresh butter six Drams Cloves, Cynomonie of either four Scruples, roots of Ireos, Gallingale, Setwall, capers, of either two Scruples. Gum Ammonaicum, Bdellium of either one Dram and a halfe. Oyle of Maces three Drams, Musk and Amber of either three graines, make hereof according to Art an Oyntment for the Splene, adding there∣unto a little Oile of Capers. An Electuary for the stone by Doctor Martins Counsell. TAke Smallege seed, Caraway-seed, Fennel seed, Parsley-seed, Nettle-seed, of either of them one dram, Gromel-seed, Saxifrage-seed, of either foure scruples: The sponge stone, the st one called Jndiaca of either one scruple and a halfe. Burnt Glass one scruple, Nutmeggs, Cynommonie of either foure scruples, the roots of Asarum two scruples, the blood of a Goate prepared one dram, Squinant one scruple, the root of Aristo∣lochia
the round one dram. The roots of Madder one scruple and an halfe ounce, the rootes of Marsh mallows two scruples, Musk five grains, with the Sirop of Sorrell compound as much as is sufficient, make an Electuary. The description of the Eight Papers of pouder for the Stone by Doctor Martin's Counsell. TAke the pouder of Holland three drams, the pouder of Be∣nedicta laxativa four drams, of the best Rubarb one dram and halfe in fine pouder. Then mix all together, and put it in eight papers, and so take it in white wine one paper at once. A Receipt of the little pouder to purge Choller Flegme and Itch. TAke Rubarb chosen one ounce and a halfe, Spicknard one scruple, Agarick trochiscated one dram, Ginger ten grains, make a pouder to be taken at two times, one dram for a time. Take it in with wine at seven of the clock in the morning, and not to sleep upon it. Lozenges to destroy wind in the Stomach and the Choli∣ca passio, provoking water, also two three or foure to be eaten when the paine cometh. TAke Cinamome two drams, Ginger one dram, Nutmegs foure scruples, Cloves two scruples, Maces one scruple and halfe; Seeds of Rew, Nettles, Anniseed, and Fennell seed, the seed of Smirium, of either two scruples, the pouder of Philoii mesuae one dram. The confections called Diacinimum, Diapy loaloes, and Diacinomom of either one dram. The pou∣der of the confection of Bayberries two drams, with Worm∣wood water as much as will suffice, and eight ounces of Gin∣ger boiled to a height, make thereof Lozanges of one dram in waight and gild them.
The Plaister, or rather Searcloath called Oxicrotium, is greatly commodious for such as have broken Ribs; or have set shoulders, Ancles, or other Limbs being out of their Joynts, to knit or to strengthen the place again, Sinews, Ligaments, Strings, and Nerves, as I have had the experience of it in breaking three of my Ribs on the left side, and others also. TAke yellow wax, Pitch, Colophony, Saffron, of each six drams Turpentin, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Myrrhe, Frankincense, Mastick, of either two drams, Vinegar to dissolve the Gums as much as will suffice, and make herewith a Plaister or Searcloath. A Decoction for the Stone with the Receipt for the whea∣zing of the Pipes. TAke the five opening roots, of each six drams, Raisons the stones taken out one ounce, Licorace three drams, Anni∣seeds, Carni, Cominseed, of either two drams and a half, O∣riganum, Pyeryall, Calamint, Harts-tongue, of either one hand∣ful, Bay leaves half a handful, Sena one ounce and a half, Ci∣namony one dram, Tamarinds half an ounce, boyl all these in a sufficient quantity of water untill half be consumed, strain it, and add therto syrrop of the opening roots one ounce, to three ounces of the decoction. The powder following is of the same Author to break the Stone, and to expell the same. TAke the roots of Fennell, and Asparagus, of either one dram, the roots of Madder one scruple, the roots of Aristolochia the round, of Marsh-mallows, of either one dram, Licorace two drams, the stone found in the Spunge of the Sea, and the stone called Indiacus, of either one scruple, the seeds of Ameos, wild Carrot, Parsley, with Saxifrage, Fennell and Annyseed, Grom∣mell, of each half a dram, seeds of Mellons and Citruls, the husks being taken off, of either one dram and a half, Alkakengy berries half a dram, Pellitory of the wall, and Mallows of ei∣ther a dram, Polynum of the Mountain, adjantuum Pennyroy∣all, and Azarmum, of either half a dram, Goats blood dryed and prepared a dram, Bdeilium and Ammoniacum, of either
half a dram▪ the eyes of water Crabs, Cinamony, Squinant, of either two scruples, beat all these in fine powder, take therof one dram weight in four ounces of Renish Wine, or Saxifrage water. The Electuary for the Breast and Lungs, and for dissol∣ving the cold and hard flegme. TAke Nettleseed, Linseed, Pyne-aple kernels, Starch flower of either one ounce, bitter Almonds blanched 26. in num∣ber, Pepper xl. grains, Licorace, Arras roots, of either six drams, fry the Lynseed in a Frying-pan, then bat it, with the rest of the stuff, and with clarifyed honey as much as shall suf∣fice, make hereof an Electuary, which you shall use often times in the day, but especially in the morning twice ot thrice. The Syrrop for the same purpose of Dr. Martyn. MY Good Mrs. Dyx, you did request me most earnest∣ly to write you directly the Medicines which are to stay the over much flowing of Womens Terms, not such as do linger a good many daies, and be of divers colours, as white, green, pale, and black, but such as come down by great abundance of good and red blood, wherin the natural life and heat consisteth, so well as such as by naturall course are not stopt, and be much worse to such as have been with∣out them, and of sudden actions break again upon them, and put them to great sickness, as Dropsies and Consumptions, and so be dead. I did shew you indeed what good it did to my Friends, within this few months, having had the long experience before approved by my Masters and others. I did make mention unto you of an Oyntment Plaister, or Searcloath (name it and use it as you will) called the Countess Oyntment, made by the famous Medicine Doctor, named Mr. William of Varignana, to the end, if in manner of a Plaister or Searcloath it be laid unto the back where the Mother is knit, to cleave there, it will stay them by little and little, so will the Oyntment do if the
privy place and the two flanks be wel annointed wel warm, and then a soft linnen cloath to be layd to the places (and if in case, as God forbid) you, or others should run in that dis∣ease, there are many other things which must be used both inwardly and outwardly. This Countess Plaister is no∣table good for such a woman as is afraid not to bring forth the fruit conceived, to use it much now and then as they see cause, it will stay the same to the very time. If in case a∣ny should bleed to much out of the Nostrils, then a Tent made accordingly, and dipt in that Oyntment will stay it quickly, being divers times renewed, it is more requisite that the Oyntment be had in a readiness, till Plaisters and Searcloath be made. Here followeth the Receipt of the Coun∣tess Oyntment. TAke the middle Bark of the Chesnut tree, of the Oak tree and the Walnut tree, of either one ounce and a half, Mertle∣berries, the herb called Cat-tail, Nutgals, and the husks of the Beans, the seeds of Grapes, Service berries unripe, Med∣lers unripe and dryed, the leaves of the Plum-tree of the wood, the roots of Celedony, of either one ounce and a half: Beat these a little, and boyl them in eight pints of Plantane water untill half be eonsumed, strain them from the liquor (and wash the Oyles following nine times therwith) alwaies renew∣ing it with fresh water of the same decoction, untill it be all wasted up, take new Wax eight ounces: oyle of Mertles, oyle of Mastick of either one pound and a half, after these Oyles be washed, and the Wax molten with the Oyles, put in these things following, being beaten in fine powder. Take the inner bark of the Walnut tree, of the Oak tree, and the Chesnut tree, Galles, of either one ounce, the ashes of a bone of a Cows legg, Mertill berries, the seeds of Grapes, Ser∣uice berries dryed, of either half an ounce, Troches of Amber two ounces, of all these things make an Oyntment according to art.
In the mean time often times in the day and night must they drink of that Hyppocras to stay the Flux, and comfort the inner Members, wherof feebleness, faintness, and swouning do pr∣ceed. Take Shepheards Burse, Knotgrass, Plantane, red Roses Oak leaves, Horsetail, of either one handful, the three kinds of San∣ders broken, of each three drams, Hyppocras and the juice of Sloes, of either two drams, red Corral two drams; infuse these in red Wine two pints, and of Rose and Plantane water of ei∣ther one pint and a half, Cynamon two ounces, Pomgranat flowers bruised two drams, and so let them run through an Hyp∣pocras bagg six or seven times that it may be clear, putting ther∣to of fine Sugar two pound and a half, and so drink therof often times. Now you, or your Friends using these Medicines, they must now and then put in their privities one of those▪ Suppositories to leave it there until they are provoked to make Urine. Then all that be devised are little enough in such a superflui∣ty coming, yea of the most liveliest blood. These are the Pessaries: TAke Frankincense, Pomgranat flowers, Galles, of each three drams, Gum Arabeck, juice of Sloes, Amber, Harts∣horn burnt, of each three drams, Terra sigillata and Bolear∣mony of either one dram, make all these in fine powder, and so with Wooll dyed in Russet, make them up in Pessaries sewed in Crimson-silk. Of this stuff may be made a powder to sit over it many times, to receive inwardly the fume as well as they can, or with a Tun∣nell. These Lozenges following are also for that purpose to be eaten at any time. TAke the Spices of the confection of the three Sanders of the Species of Diarhodon abbatis of either one dram, red Coral, Frankincense, red Roses, of either two scruples, Sorrelseed, Sumach, of either two scruples, juice of Sloes dryed, Pomgra∣nat flowers, of either two scruples, Mastick one scruple, Bole∣armonick four scruples, white sugar 4. ounces dissolved in Plan∣tane and Rose water as much as shall suffice, make Lozenges in form of Manus Christi, every one containing one dram. Exercises, rubbing of armes, legs, neck, or the breast, must be
left, hot wine also, and spices, and sweet sawces; their broths must be boyled with binding roots and herbs, Almond milk unblanch∣ed, They may take Ale that is stale, for it is better then hopped beer. Wine (excepted) they may not drink, untill they be well stopped and sleep naturally, roast meats are more meet then boyled. And so fare you well. The Costlie Oyntment for the Spleen, being hard swolne and loaden with melancholy. TAke the juice of Sowbread, which is pressed out of the root, the juice of Brakes of either nine ounces, the juice of the crops of Tamarisk two ounces, that which is called of the Apo∣thecaries Oesepi humidi five ounces, Oyle of the flower de Luce root two pound, the Gums called Bdellium, and Ammoniacum, of either one ounce and a half dissolved in Vinegar, yellow wax six ounces, the bark of the root of Capers one ounce and a half, oyle of Spike three drams, make according to art an Oynt∣ment. These are the Herbs, Roots, and Seeds for the Bags and Fomentation for that purpose. TAke leaves of the she Hilder, and of the common Hilder, Fumitor, Harts-tongue, Ceterach, Rue, Centaury the les∣ser, of either one handfull, the bark of Caper roots, of Tama∣risk, and of both Hilders of either one ounce, the roots of Marsh Mallows one ounce, the seeds of Fencreak and Flaxseed of ei∣ther three ounces, Wormwood and wild Tyme of the Mountain of either one handfull, Hilder flowers, Rosemary flowers of ei∣ther two ounces, part of these things boyl in Smiths water and Vinegar, and with the other part make bags to bath your Spleen. If in case you cannot get Smiths water, take two Steel Gadds each of them to be quenched in water three times without Vi∣negar. The Searcloath to be made of the same Oyntment, yet must it be knit together with Wax and Rozen and Turpentine, so much as shall suffice: The Oyntment for the stomach is one ounce and a half of oyle of Maces, and half an ounce of oyle of Lillies, and oyle of Almonds which will comfort the stomach.
A Decoction for the Stone with a Receipt for the whezing in the breast. TAke the five opening roots six drams, Raisons the stones ta∣ken out one ounce, Licorace three drams, Anniseed, Carni, and Cumminseed, of either two drams and a half, Origanum, Pennyroyall, Calament, Hearts tongue, of either a handful, the leaves of Senne one ounce and a half, Bay leaves half a hand∣full, Cartamus one dram, Tamarindes half an ounce, boyl these in a sufficient quantity of water to the half, strain it and put to it three ounces of the decoction, one ounce of Syrrop of Vroots, mixing them together. Dr. Martyns Powder for the stone. TAke Fennell roots, Asparagus roots, of either one dram, the oots of Madder one scruple, the roots of Aristolochia the roundest, and Marsh mallows roots, of either one dram, Liquo∣race one dram, the stone of the Sea Spung, and the stone In∣diacus, of either one scruple, the seeds of Ameos, wild Carrets, Parsley, and with Saxifrage, Annis, Fennell, and Gromell seeds, of either one dram and a half, the seeds of Mellons and Citrulles Excorticate, of either one dram and a half, Alcakinge berries half a dram, Poly of the Mountain, Maiden-hair, Pen∣nyroyall, and Assarabacca, of either half a dram, Pellitory of the Wall, and Mallows, of either one dram, Goats blood prepared one dram, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, of either half a dram, Crabs eyes, Cinamon, Squinant, of either two scruples, beat all these in fine powder, and drink one dram therof in Rennish Wine, or in Saxifrage water. Dr. Martyns Electuary for the Breast and Lungs. TAke Nettle-seed, Lin-seed, Pyne kernels, of either one ounce, bitter Almonds blanched twenty six, Pepper forty grains, Licorace, Orris, of either six drams, fry the Lin-seed, and beat all the other together, those which will be searced, let them be searced through a searce, and with clarified honey, and syrrop of Licorace, make an Electuary, which you may use often in the day time, but especially in the morning twice or thice.
The Syrrop for that purpose of Dr. Martyns prescription. TAke Foles-foot, Maiden-hair, Hysop, of each two handfuls, Licorace, Raisons the stones taken out, of either two ounces, French-barley one ounce and a half, Figs dryed, Dates, of ei∣ther twelve, blanched Almonds forty, make herwith accord∣ing to art with Sugar, a syrrop, which you shall use every day two ounces in the morning, and at night going to bed: The Oyntment for the back. Take OYle of Dill, Oyle of Almonds, of each one ounce. Oyle of Camomile, Oyle of Scorpions six drams, Goose grease, Hens grease, of either three drams. Fresh butter two drams, Wax as much as shall suffice, make herewith an Oynt∣ment: The Oyntment for the Spleen. Take OYle of white Lilies, Oyle of Ireos, Oyle of Capers, of each one ounce and a half. Take Meal of Barley, Meal of Lin-seed, Meal of Fennygreek, of each one dram and a half. Take The bark of the root Capers and of Spleenwort, of either two drams. Roots of Althea three drams▪ Take Gums of Bdellium, Gom. Ammoniacum, Gom. Galban▪of each four scruples▪ TakeGum of Appoponax, Myrrhe, Frankincense, of each one dram:
Oyle of Capons six drams. Neats-foot oyle two drams. Badgers grease one dram and a half. Goose grease, Capons grease, of either two drams. The bark of Capers, Costus, Centaury the less Capers, of each two scruples. Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and beat those in powder which will be beaten, then melt yellow wax so much as will suf∣fice to make your Oyles into an Oyntment, and so work them together according to art. If you will have sooner ease and help, before you do annoint your side, bath well the same with two round Spunges one after the other, dipped in the decoction of those herbs and roots, e∣very Spunge two times; Viz. Take Centory the less, Rew, Fumitory, Tyme, Sage, flowers of Camomile, either of them two handfull, the bark of Capers four ounces, seeth all these together in a quart of Vinegar, and one of Smiths water, and use it with Spunges as often as you may, and as conveniently as you can suffer, and this is a good and certain remedy. A Paste or Marmalade to dissolve the flegm in the Sto∣mach for Mrs. Dyx, by Mr. Martyns counsell. TAke Dia tragacantum frigidum two ounces, and Dia tragacan∣tum Callidum four ounces, Dia Iris Salamonis two ounces, the Troch is forthe stomach one ounce, the powder of Dia peni∣diom, with the Speties, the roots of Oris, and the root of Enula∣campana, of either three drams, juice of Licorace fix drams, Smallage roots three drams, Cynamon, Macis, Cloves, Nut∣megs, of either one dram and a half, Ginger two drams, Amber greece four grains, Musk fix grains, sweet Almonds blanched two ounces, Dates one ounce and a half, roots of Setwall, Galin∣gall, of either four scruples, honey clarified, make a past accor∣ding to art, very delicate to cut with a knife as you do Marma∣lade.
A Dredge for the Flegm and Stomack by Doctor Martin. TAke the Species of Dia ambra, Aromaticum rosatum of either one dram, the Species of Diagalanga, and Diamosehi dul∣cis, and dia cinomomi, of either two scruples, Cinamom, three drams, Macis, Nutmegs, Cloves of either two drams, Long pepper one dram, roots of Enula campana, roots of Pyonie, of either one dram and a halfe, Licorice three drams, Coriander seeds prepared, Anniseeds two drams, Sugar Candie foure ounces mix all these together in manner of a Dredge. Cakes of Licorice to lay under ones Tongue to stay the tickling Cough. Take fine starch one ounce, roots of Orris two drams, Gum Tragagant in Rose Water dissolved; Juyce of Licorice of either one dram, Ginger foure scruples, Musk four grains, pou∣der of Lickorice two drams, with Hysope water, make rolls or little cakes, which you shall hold under your tongue. The common making of Juyce of Licorice. TAke Licorice clean scraped four ounces made in fine pouder▪ and cearsed, Gum dragagant dissolved in Hisop water, six ounces, let them stand together infused one whole night, or rather twenty foure hours, straine it, and after drie it in the Sun untill it groweth hard▪, then make it up in rolls or in Cakes. The Decoctions of the five opening roots purging Flegm. TAke Balme flowers, Hilder flowers, Scabious, and Rose-mary flowers of either one handfull, roots of Parsley, Fennell, Ireos, Acorus, Smalledge, Enula campana, of either fix drams, Liquo∣rice, Polipodie of the Oke, of either one halfe ounce Parsley seed, Wild Carret seed, Anniseed, Wild-box-seed of either two drams, Fennell, and Nettle-seed of either one dram and a halfe, Maiden-haire, Fumytory, Germander, Champy∣this called ground-pne, Origanum, wild Tyme of the Moun∣taine, Wormwood, Mynts, of either one handfull. Cassia lig∣nea
two drams. Cynamon three drams, Squinant two scruples, Cene halfe an ounce, Tamaryndes six drams, boile all these in five pints of faire water to the halfe, straine it and put to it Sirup of Horehound, and Hysop, of either one ounce, Oximell three ounces mix them, and drink four daies together. The purgation to use after the former Doctor. TAke Agarick not trochiscated two drams, Ginger one scruple, Salt gem three grains, Rubarb chosen four scruples, Spicknard one scruple, slice them and steep them fourteene hours in white wine▪ Wormwood, and Fennell water of either two ounces, strain them out hard, putting thereto Electuarium Indivii minoris two drams, Diaphenicon one dram, Oximell compound six drams, mix them together, and take it in the mor∣ning. The Electuary or a Paste, or Marmalade for the Stone in the Reines to break the same. TAke the Electuary called Electuarium ducis, the Electuary Liton tripon of either three ounces, the stone of the Sea∣sponge, the stone Indiacus, niter burnt▪ of either two drams, Goats-blood prepared three drams, Grains, Gromell-seed, Crabbs-eyes two drams and an halfe, the stone called Lincis two drams, seeds of Parsneps, Parietarie, Parsley, Smallage, Nettles, Asparagus, Brustus, Alkakengis, Mallows of either one dram, Bdellium, Ammoniacum of either two scruples, Cina∣mome, Squinant of either one scruple and a halfe, Oximell com∣pound four ounces, Mucilage of Sebestes broken in Gromell water halfe a pound, Sugar one pound, make of all these things a past or Marmalade. The pouder called Liton tripon. TAke of the pouder Liton tripon incolai Alexandrini three drams, take one dram with four ounces of Saxifrage water three mornings together, or in stead thereof Holland pouder one dram with four ounces of Rennish wine.
A Cearcloth for the inflammation of the Reins, and the knitting of the rawness of the back. TAke Turpentine of Venice often washed six drams, Gum dra∣gogant, Bdellium, gum Arabick of either three Scruples, A∣moniacum two drams, Musilage of Psilium, Marsh mallows-Lyn-seed of either five drams, Red Roses one scruple, Alcaken∣gie two drams trochis of terra Lemnia one dram, Capons grease three drams, Oile of Camomyle and Roses of either two drams and a halfe, Wax as much as will make a Cearcloth make it according to art to cleave to the Reyns. An Oyntment for the Reyns in the paine of the Stone. TAke Oile of Spicknard, Oile of Scorpions of either one ounce, Oyle of Saffron, oile of Quinces, oile of Fox, of ei∣ther five drams, the Species of Liton tripon two drams, oile of sweet Almonds, of Chamomile of either two drams and a halfe, Capons grease, Goose-grease of either two drams, fresh-Butter four scruples, the seeds of Gromell, the stone Indiacus, Goats-blood prepared two scruples, make herewith an Oynt∣ment for the Reyns to annoint where the greatest paine is. The Oyntment to coole the Reyns. TAke oile of Roses one ounce, oile of Quinces six drams, juyce of Plantane, juice of House-leek, juyce of Purslaine, of either three drams, Dia tragagantum, gum Arabeck of either two drams and a halfe, red Sanders one dram, Bole armoniack two drams, oile of Mirells, oile of water Lilies, of either one ounce, the foure cold seeds of either two drams, the musilage of Popie seed, and of Purslaine, of either six drams, the shavings of Ivory one dram, Camphire six grains, juice of Solanu or night-shade three drams, Vinegar as much as shall suffice to make the other to peirce more easily, mixt therewith one ounce of Gallens cold ointment, mix them againe, and if you please you may add the whites o two Eggs well beaten▪ By Doctor Martin of Kurnbeck Doctor of Physick.
Doctor Martins Order how to take his Decoction. TAke of the Decoction called my decoction of the five roots twelve ounces for three mornings. If you take this Decoction for a great cold, then after the ta∣king thereof three mornings you must annoint your stomach morning and evening with this oyntment. Take of oile of Wormwood and mints of either six drams, oile of Mastick one ounce. You must leave the Cearecloth for your stomach, alwayes up∣on it being a little warmed before. The Cearecloth is the Cerot of Galens called Ceratum Stoma∣hale Galeni. This pouder following may be taken one dram at once as they are divided in eight papers, once in a fort∣night or a Month, as necessity shall require in white Wine, Beer or Ale, not regarding the New, Full or Quarter of the Moon. It will scoure the Reins, gravell and stones, and open the Liver and the splene, and emptie the guts and Stomach. TAke the pouder Liton tripon one dram, white tartar, Sene of either one dram, Turbith the whitest, and well chosen one dram, the pouder of Benedicta laxativa two drams, Ginger and Cynamon of either one scruple and a halfe, mix them together and divide it into eight parts one dram for one part. Of Turbith take but one Dram, it will be else too pinch∣ing and nipping, and will make them to vomit ex∣treamly, and for more assurance, in stead of Turbith, I would rather that one dram of good Rubarb were ta∣ken: Doctor Martins Receipts of the five opening roots for Mr. Dyx. TAke of Rose-leaves, Bugloss, Violets of either a little hand∣full, Lettice, Endive, Cichorie of either one handfull,
Raysins of the Sun the stones taken out, one ounce, Damask Prunes cleven, Nettle-seed, Fennell-seed, Caraway-seed, of each two drams, the four great cold seeds, of each one dram, the roots of Acorus, Polopodie of the Oke, Parsley, Liquorice scraped, Asparagus, of either five drams, Oxifinicum, Sene, of either one ounce. Cinomome, Ginger of either two drams, boile all these in a sufficient quantity of water to the halfe, then straine it and put to it four ounces of the Sirrup of the five roots. For a Vomit by Doctor Martin. TAke six leaves of Azarabacca dryed, beat them into fine pouder with a penny weight in Ginger, drink this in white Wine or Al. Lozenges by Doctor Martins Counsell for the Rawness and windiness of the Stomach for Mr. Dix. TAke the pouder of Dia avisum two drams, Dia mosch. dul∣cis, and Dia Amber, of either one dram and a halfe, Dia cumini one dram, Dia cinomoni one dram and a halfe with Marioram water, and four ounces of white Sugar dissolved there∣in make Lozenges, every one to containe two drams in waight let them be guilt: Doctor Martins most notable Syrup to break the Stone which was had of Doctor Hatcher of Cambridge, for diminishing, breaking, and expelling the stone, as well in the Reins as in the Bladder, as also for purging and scowring the little gravell, you must take two ounces of this Syrup with three ounces of Saxifrage water for one draught twelve dayes together. TAk horse Raddish four ounces, Dock roots, the roots of white Lillies, the roots of Flower-de-Luce, the roots of Pyo∣ny, the roots of Restharrom, Liquorice, the roots of green Madder, the roots Aristolochia the rounder, the roots of Aspa∣ragus, and the roots of the wild Vine, of each one dram. The seeds of Smallage, carni, wild Carrot, and Nettle-seed, of each foure drams, white Saxifrage and Parsley seed, of either three
drams, Bay-berries, and Ivy-berries, of either two drams, the stone ndiacus, and the spong stone of either one dram and an halfe, Polie of the mountaine, Mayden-haire, Pyeriall, Assara∣bara, Adjantum, Saxifrage Parietarie, Filupendula of each two drams, Goates-blood prepared foure scruples, Squinnant, Set∣wall, Galingale of each one dram and a halfe, Cinamome ma∣cis, Nutmegs, of each three drams, Grumwell-seed three drams the kernells of Cherry-stones, Cherry-tree-gumme, of either one dram, the bark of Ash, of Hilder, of the Pople tree, of ei∣ther four scruples, Musk and Amber of either six grains. Let all these be sodden▪ in a quart of Renish wine and a quart of Saxifrage according to the art, put hereunto a pound and a halfe of Suger, and make a syrup as abovesaid. A purgation to be drunk called Electuarium Indivium, the lesser whereof you may drink six drams with the de∣coction of Saxifrage, Pellitory of the wall, and Parsley, with a spoon full of Anniseeds, boyled in Ale or Beer, take ten spoonfuls of the decoction, and dissolve the Ele∣ctuary therein luke warme, and so drink it upon a good day. The Description is thus as followeth. TAke Turbith and Suger of either one hundred drams, Macis, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Cinomome, Cardamus, Nutmegs of each seven drams, Scamony twelve drams clarisied honey two pounds and a halse make herewith an Electuary. The Oyntment for your back more cooling, and to drive the stone which was red in colour. TAke Oile of Roses, of water Lilies of either one ounce and an halfe, oile of Myrtles six drams, Gum Dragagant, gum Ara∣beck of either three drams. The four cold seeds both the grea∣ter and the lesser, white Popie seed, and the juice of House∣leak of each six drams, red Saunders two drams, Bole-armo∣niack two drams, Ivory two scruples, Camphere seven grains, Vinegar a sufficient quantity, boile them and make therewith an Oyntment for the Reins, putting thereunto Infrigidantis Galeni one ounce, mix them together again.
A Soveraigne Electuary for the Plague. TAke the leaves of Dittanie one ounce. The roots of Setwall, Bettony, of Pimpernell, and tormentill of either one dram and a halfe, Citron pills five drams, the Earth of Lemnia six drams, Bolle-armeny one ounce, Myrh, Lignum aloes of ei∣ther three drams, Saffron two scruples, Mastick two drams, Liquorice, Ivory, Red-rose-seeds, of each two scruples, the bone of a Harts hart, red Corrall, of either one dram, Purslayne seed eight grains, with hony and Sugar as much as shall suf∣fice, make an Electuary. You must take hereof the quantity of one dram dissolved in white Wine or Dragon water, and so drink it, or it may be eaten a∣alone by it selfe. Doctor Martin his Letter touching the Palsey. WHereas in your Letter (gentle and my very good friend Mrs. Dyx) you request me to set down cer∣taine orders and Receipts to cure the Palsie, which now and then is as well in the right side as in the left. Sometime in one part of the Head as in the Eye, Lipps and Neck, or turned on the right side or the left, as for the greatest sickness of all called the Apoplexia it doth kill out of hand, if in case it be cold and moyst Flegme, and tough Flegme, which before did overwhelme the commonsenses, reason and memory, and the remembrance contained within our brains in the Nerves. So that it taketh away our feeling, hea∣ring▪ speech and moving. And suddenly by nature to be ex∣pelled at one of these parts of the body, then must they go in hand incontinent, and with all speed, with these Medicines. If in case the Patient be young, and ful of blood in his body, (the time reasonable, blood must be taken of him on that
side which is found not above six ounces, and such a Glister ministred as soon as they can. And Hippocrass made for him to drink at any time, Oyntments in like case. Rub∣bings, fomentations to the side that is taken, Gargarismes, and Lozenges, as followeth in order: Doctor MARTIN▪ The sharp Glister for the Palsie. TAke Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Mercury, Camomile, Sage, Bettony, of each one handfull▪ Stechas six drams, Rew, Ca∣lamint, of either a little handfull, Fennell-seed, Ameos, of ei∣ther three drams. Sene, Polipodie of either one ounce, the roots of Pelletorie, Gentian, Enulacampana, Ireos, gallangale, of either three drams, boile these in white wine, and common water, of either one pint and a halfe unto fourteen ounces, straine it and dissolve therein the pouder of Hierapicra Galeni five drams, Benedicta laxativa, the Electuarie of Indea the less, Diaphenicon of either halfe an ounce, honney of Roses six drams, oyles of Laurell, Ireos, Rue, of each one ounce, salt one dram, mix all these together, and make a Glister to take often. The Hippocras for the Palsey by Doctor Martin. TAke Cinmone two ounces, Ginger one ounce, long Pep∣per, graines of Paradice, Gallingale of each two drams, Cardamomes two ounces Nutmeggs, Cloves, Maces of each two drams and a halfe. Seane two ounces. Anni-seed and Fennell-seed, of either six drams, boile all these in two pints of Malmesey, and two pints of white wine, and oe pint of Pri∣me-rose-water untill two pints be consumed, being boyled let it be strained, wringing and pressing the Liquor from the spices, put thereto one pound of Sugar, and so clee it through an Hypocras bagg, and make it Hippocras according to Art. The Oyntment for the Palsie. TAke Unguentum Aragonum, Unguentum Martiatum of either one ounce and a halfe, Unguentum Agrippae one ounce, oile
of Costus, oile of Fox, oile of wormes oile of Tile-stones, of each six drams, oile of Castor three drams, pouder of Bittony, Sage, and Pepper of each one dram. Castorium, Euphorbium, of either two Scruples, roots of Acorus two, wax as much as shall suffice to make it an Oyntment, you shall annoint the party af∣flected in the morning, and likewise at night, halfe an houre together throughly with ones warm hand, for the disease groweth of a could and tough flegme which doth stick in the muskles, and Nerves, which are not dried up, but with warm∣ness, and by comforting the member which doth remaine halfe dead. And the disease hanging long, nature is so weakned that death doth follow: And whereas you use the frictions before the anoynting, so it is more profitable, and more doth comfort the benommed member or side, i you before you use the oynt∣ment, bath him with such a fomentation, with two tilts or sponges as followeth. The Bath or fomentation. TAke Bittony, Camomile, Origanum, wild Time, Fennell, Marjoram, Garden Time, Sage, Calamint, Hysop, Lavander, Wormewood, Rosemary, Nettles, of each a handfull, Hilder flow∣ers and Ebulus flowers of either two handfulls, the roots of Pel∣litorie, Enula Campana, of either three ounces. The Inner bark of the Ash tree, and of Hilder and Ebulus, of either two handfulls, boile all these in four pints of Lye, two pints of white wine, and one pint of Vineger, and two pints of River water, Frankincense in pouder one pound, Let them be boiled to the halfe, use this decoction to be bathed certaine daies to∣gether this bath will serve many times. If after this bath and oyntment, the numness do still continue, then this Cearecloth must be applyed good and warm, and at every dressing to take it off, and lay it on again, this is most excellent and approved. The Ceare-cloth for the Palsey. TAke Bay-berries, Pellitorie of Spaine, pepper, of each half an ounce, the roots of the trew Acorus three drams, Stechas, Bettony, Hilder flowers, of either three drams, Mustard-seed, Nigella, of either one dram and a halfe, Euphorbium, Castoreum of either two scruples; oile of Costus two ounces, oile of pep∣per
one ounce and a halfe, oile of Euphorbium halfe an ounce, with Wax, Rosen and Turpentine as much as is convenient, make herewith a Cerot. Now it is most needfull to take every morning and evening these Sirups for four dayes together, and the next morning after the purgation as shall follow. The Sirupps. TAke honney of Roses, Oximell, simple Sirup of Calamnt of either foure ounces, water of Hipericon, Hysop, Fennell, Mints, of either six ounces, mix them together. Take them four daies together, morning and evening, four ounces for a time. The pills for the Purgation. TAke pills of Cochiae halfe a dram, of Hiera compound two scruples, Alephanguiae halfe a scruple, Agarick trochiscated one scruple and a halfe, turbith of the best halfe a scruple, Mi∣rabolaons chebuli one scruple, Sticados, Ginger, of either foure grains, Mastick five grains, Piony seed three grains, Castor two grains, with Lavender water make a Masse of pills, make five pills in one dram, and let them be guilt, and take them af∣ter the use of the Sirup foure daies. Also you must take of these pills often and many times purging▪ except nature help of it self considering the root of the Sickness doth proceed from the head, it shal be most requisite that his hairs be shaven, & every twenty four hours to be annointed with this oyntment, to consume those naughty humors, which else will cast him into the deadly sick∣ness called Lethargus, and to have the more moving of his tongue and lipps, he shall morning and evening at a time take four ounces of the stilled water hereafter following, and rub his temples and lips with the same. The water followeth the oyntment. The Oyntment to annoynt his head after the shaving thereof. TAke oile of Fox, of Nardus, of Euphorbium and of Nutmegs of either halfe an ounce. The juice of Saint Johns wort, of
Rue, of Sage, of either two drams and a half, Castorium, Sa∣gapenum, of either one dram and a half, flowers of Sticados, Rosemary, of either one dram and a half, Mustard-seed, Doves∣dung, of either four scruples, with Malmesey and Wax accor∣ding to art make this Oyntment. The distilled water that is to be used for the rubbing of his Temples and Lips, and also to drink as before is set down. TAke Marjoram, Hilder-flowers, Rosemary-flowers, Balm-flowers, of either one handfull, Costmary four handfuls, roots of Pellitory, Setwall, Galingale, roots of Piony, Chele∣dony, of either two drams, seeds of Hipericon, Annis, Carni, Nettle, and Fennel-seed, of either one dram and a half, steep all these in three pints of White-wine 24. hours, after distill it in a Glass-Still, and use it as abovesaid. After this it is necessary that this Gargarisme be used to draw the matter from the head, that the cause of the Disease be re∣moved, and by using the Gargarisme, the use of the moving the Tongue followeth. The Gargarisme as followeth. TAke the roots of Pellitory of Spain, long Pepper, of either two drams, the seeds of Staphesacre two scruples, Marjo∣ram, Pyeriall, Hysop, Origanum, Bettony, of either a little handfull; boyle these in a sufficient quantity of White-wine untill half be consumed, strain them, and being cleered add therunto of Oximell-Stillitick one ounce, mix them toge∣ther, and use this warm every morning. Also it is necessary to use a sweet Pomander to refresh the head, and to comfort the same. The Pomander. TAke Storax, Calamint, Labdanum, and Wax, of each five drams, Lignum Aloes, Nutmegs, Frankincense, roots of Pi∣ony, black Bysatiuae, Calamus Aromaticus, of each four scruples, Musk one scruple, Amber-greece half a scruple, make accord∣ing to art a Pomander.
Also it is convenient to use a pouder to draw up at the No∣strills to procure sneesing, which followeth. FIrst take Marjoram half a dram, Nigella half a scruple, Cloves, white Pepper and Cubebes of either half a scruple, Nut∣megs, Castoreum, white Helibor of either half a scruple, Pire∣rum four grains, beat these in fine pouder to procure Sneeing. Also it is needfull for faintness of the heart, or sencelesness in the head to use these Lozenges following. TAke the Species of precious stones, Dianthos, of either one scruple, Mates two scruples, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, Fennel∣seed, Anniseeds, of either half a scruple, Cynamon two scru∣ples, Stichados half a scruple, Setwall, Enula Campana, Ireos, of either a scruple, Sugar dissolved in Piony and Lavendar wa∣ter four ounces, make hereof Lozenges, let him take hereof now and then as occasion shall serve. Thus endeth the practice for the Palsey. Now followeth for the falling of the Evula to the root of the Tongue which hindreth the speech and swallowing, this cometh of cold contained in the head, and from thence falling down maketh all these Impediments and hoarsness also. THerfore you must use frictious perfumes in the mornings and evenings keeping both your head and body warm. Also you must use Gargarismes with Honey, Columbine, and Woodbine leaves boyled in faire water, and so strain it putting therunto a little Alome. Also if the neck be swoln, annoint it with May butter and Deer suet, also you may make a Plaister herewith and lay it
round about your neck; you must renew the same four times in a day, and if you grow worse use it eight times in a day renew∣ing the same. Also if the matter falling down cause a Boyl or Impostume to arise there, then you must take one dram of Pills of Cochiae over night, which being taken at the beginning will help all. But you must obserue, if there encrease any Inflammation in the mouth which will procure a Squinanfie, which is a sickness most dangerous, the same day, or within two or three daies after it stoppeth the wind and breath. Therefore they must straight-waies be let blood eight ounces, or ten ounces in one of the armes, or under the tongue two ounces: And if the pain continue, the Pills must be taken over night, and a Gargarisme, an Oyntment and a Poultice must be used as followeth. The Gargarisme for the Squinancy. TAke Rosewater, Plantane water, Sorrell water, prunell wa∣ter, Nightshade water, of each two ounces, Dia moron, juice of Ribes, of either half an ounce, juice of Barberies three drams▪ Vinegar wherin Sumach hath been scraped one ounce, juice of Pomegranats six drams, mix these together, and let the mouth and throat be often gargarised herewith. The Lineament for the Squinancy. TAke oyle of Violets, Roses, oyle of Lyn-seed, Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of either three drams, Ducks grease and Capons grease, of either two drams, Nigella one dram, mix these together and make a Lineament according to art to an∣noint the whole neck, and presently to apply this Poultice as followeth: The Poultice or Cataplasma for the Squinancy. TAke the Mucilage of Fenegrick, of Marsh Mallowes, of Lyn∣seed, the four great cold seeds of each three drams, the fat of a Badger, Capons grease, and Ducks grease, of either two drams, the leaves of Mallows, of Strawberies, Plantane and Ro∣ses, of either a handfull, the roots of Marsh Mallows and Cicho∣ry, of either one ounce, Violets one handfull, boyl these in wa∣ter untill they may be beaten, and so to be made in form of a
Poultice, putting therto oyle of Lynseed, Camomile, Roses, and Violets, of either one ounce and a half, let it be applyed three or four times in the day, as necessity shall require. Dr. Martyns Electuary against the Plague. TAke the leaves of Dictamnus one ounce, the roots of Setwal, Bettony, Pimpernell, Tormentill, of each one dram and a half, the Pills of Citrons five drams, Terra Lemnea six drams, Bole armony one ounce, Myrrhe, Lignum Aloes, of either three drams, Saffron two scruples, Mastick two drams, Licorace, Ivo∣ry, Rose-seeds, of either two scruples, the bone in the Harts heart, red Corrall, of either one dram, Purslain-seed eight grains, with honey and Sugar as much as will suffice, make ac∣cording to art an Electuary. Here endeth the Receipts of Dr. Martyn of Kurnbeck. Certain speciall Medicines for the Stone, the Chollick, and for the stopping of the Urine either by Stone or Strangury: For pain in the Throat, the Rheume, the Stitch, &c. approved and sent un∣to me by my Cosin Standish as follow∣eth. For the Stone. TAke Snails and lay the mouths downwards upon a Tile∣sheard, which lyeth upon Coals, take out the Snails when they are well dryed, and beat the shels to pouder, drink it in White-wine, and about two hours after shave some white Castle Soap into warm White-wine, wherof will arise a
froath which will fall again to the bottom of the Cup, then shake it together, and it will rise again, and drink it presently, the powder maketh it to break, and the drink with soap maketh it slip. Probatum upon the Lord Marquess at Mr. Noats. Another for the Stone. TAke the claws of a Porker newly scalded, pare away the soft∣ness therof, then set them in some place to dry, or carry them about with you till they be very dry, then grate a quan∣tity of it upon some hard Grater, and therto put a quantity of the powder of Alexander-seed, and drink it with White-wine, or stale Ale, as oft as you shall think good▪ Probatum A. W. Another. TAke two or three Gizards of clean Capons, dry them in an Oven, or upon some Tile sherd, and therof make pouder and drink it with White wine or stale Ale, and for the Chollick wear continually before your belly a stomacher made of Wolves skin. Dr. Smiths Medicine for the stopping of the Ʋrine, and to asswage the extream heat therof. TAke a pint of Rhenish Wine, and with the yelks of two new∣laid eggs make a Cawdle, relish it with Sugar and Nutmeg to your best content, then dissolve therin half an ounce of white Castle Soap, and drink that Cawdle at three draughts warm, in the morning one, when you go to bed the second, the next morning the third, by this you shall find great ease, both of the stopping and pain, and great comfort, without any loathsom∣ness at all. For the stopping of the Ʋrine either by the Stone or Stran∣gury. MAke cleer Posset-Ale with White-wine or Ale, seeth in the Posset-Ale a great handfull of Parsley shread, and as much Pellitory of the wall shread, and when it is sodden scrape
in a quantity of white Castle-soap, but let it not come on the fire after the Soap is in, stir it together and give the Patient to drink when he is stopped a pint at a time as warm as he can drink it, and annoint the place grieved before a fire with oyle of Roses, or oyle of Lillies, and for want of these take Sal∣let Oyle, dip a cloath in the same Oyle, and lay it warm to the place grieved, and walk after it in your Chamber if you can, and it will help in short space, God willing. Put in an Herb called Gromell if you can get it. You may use the foresaid Herbs in a thin Alebery, and put in a peece of butter after it is sodden, and let not the drink come on the fire after the butter or soap is in it, for then it is binding, if you drink a small draught it will not do so much good as a great draught. Proved upon Mr. Whithead being stopped 20. hours in extream pain, who within half an hour voidea great clods of blood and hard, and lived in ease long after, and then dyed of a Consumption. For one that maketh blood-water before it come to the extream pain of the Strangury. TAke an herb called Shepheards-pouch, and another called Knot-grass, of each a like portion, as much as you list to make the powder to serve all the year, you must gather them somwhat before Midsomer, or else soon after, and dry them out of the Sun, and drink the powder in Wine about the quantity of a little Walnut, or else in Ale when you go to bed, or in the morning when you rise, and use it till you be well: Probatum: A Medicine for the swelling in the throat. TAke a good handfull of Vervine or two, cut it small and put it in a Morter, then take ounces of Commin-seeds and pound them very fine, and lay them upon a very fine linnen cloath, and apply it to the swelling, and use it till it be whole.
Another for the throat. TAke Jewes-Eares which grow out of an old Elder and seeth them, and Collumbine leaves in milk with honey of Roses, or a few dryed Rose-leaves with a little Sugar, drink of this milk as hot as you can often times in the day and night, and lay of the said Jews-Eares in the Beer or Ale which you use to drink. Also annoint your throat with oyle of Roses warm against the fire, and card and bast the wooll of the flank of a Sheep up∣on a cloath, and annoint the wooll with the aforesaid oyle, and lay it very warm to the throat. Proved upon divers by Mrs. Eliz. Standish. For a windy Stomach. BOyl a little Camomile, wild Tyme, and wild Parsley which is called Saxifrage in posset-drink made with milk and White-wine, drink a good draught therof fasting, and to bed∣ward warm. Proved by my Brother Roper and divers others, by me E▪ Standish. For the wind▪Chollick: TAke a new-laid Egg and lay it in the fire untill it be warm, then take off the top and put as much Brimstone as a Ha∣sell Nut very fine beaten into it, stir it together with your knife and sup it off. Probatum. Another for the same. TAke a pint of Sack, and put it into a silver or pewter pot, set it in a Posnet of water to seeth, then put into the Sack seven or eight branches of Spearmint, and let them seeth together a good while, then clarifie a peece of sweet butter, and put in two spoonfuls of the clarified Butter into the Sack, and a peece of Sugar, but let it not boyl after the Butter and Sugar is put in, let them drink of this a good draught when they are in pain, and by that time the pint is drunk up they shall find ease. Probatum.
A Drink for the Lungs. TAke Burr roots, Maiden hair, and hearts▪tongue boyled in Ale, and drink therof morning and evening warm, annoint the breast with oyle of sweet Almonds, and annoint a Twilt of Wooll and lay it warm to the breast. Probatum. To stay the tickling of the Rheume in the night. TAke a new sheet of brown paper, and cut it a hand in breadth, and so long as it may cover the mould of your head, baste upon it some fine Flax, and put a peece of Frankincense on a Chaffindish of Coals, and hold the Flax-side of the paper over the Frankincense, and lay it warm to your mould every night, and when you are laid in your bed eat a little Conserve of red Roses, and if the Rheume doth tickle you, then eat a little more, but speak not after you have eaten it, and this will stay the tick∣ling of the Rheume in thrice taking it. Probatum. For the Stitch. TAke Camomile flowers, boyl them in Vinegar, twilt them wel in two baggs, and when the one is cold lay the other therto hot, and so apply them to the place one after another till the pain be eased. Also give the parry Cockle-seed that groweth in Corn beaten to powder in all his drink. Another. TAke a new wheaten Loaf hot out of the Oven, or else two wheaten Tostes, spread them with the best Treakle, and cleave the Loaf in the middle and so done, lay one of them on the Stitch, and a little above it, and the other on the paties back against the place where the Stitch is, lay them too as hot as he can suffer it, and when they are cold toast them and spread them with Treakle again, also while this is a doing take an Ap∣ple and cut of the top and take out the Coar, put therin the powder of white Frankincense and lay on the top again, roast it with a soft fire, then give it the party to eat with a little Su∣gar, one in the morning, and another at night, this will help a
Stitch, or Bastard-plurisie being taken in time. Also warm white Frankincense and make it in rolls, swallow them like Pills in syrrop of Hoarhound or Hysop fasting: Probatum. To make the black Water to kill the Itch of a Wound new healed, or about a Wound; or any Itch elsewhere. TAke the black water wherin the Smithes quench their Iron, and put therin as much red Sage as can well seeth in it, let them seeth till the strength of the Sage be in the liquor, then strain it and wring out the juice of the Sage hard into the liquor, then put in a good peece of roach Allome, and set it on the fire till the Alome be melted, keep this water, and twice or thrice a day wash the place that itcheth. Probatum. For a Ringworm or Tettar, or red Pimples in the face. TAke a Sorrell root, wash, scrape it and slice it, and lay it in Vinegar all night, and therwith wash the place often, and the longer the root lyeth in the Vinegar the better it is. To cleanse Corruption out of a Wound, and to make good flesh grow in the place. TAke the water of Carduus benedictus warm, and wash the Wound morning and night, and wet Lynt in the same, and lay to the place half an hour at evening and morning before you lay on your Salve, if the wound have any holes in it, then dip the Tent in the same water, and roul the Tent in the pou∣der made of the leaf of the same herb being dryed, but you must boult the powder through Lawn, at night put in the Tent ro∣led in the foresaid powder, and in the morning dip the Tent in Salve, this water and powder will keep the Wound from a Fistula, and from dead flesh. Probatum. If it be an even Soar without holes you shall not need but to wash it with the said water, and take a peece of sheet▪ Lead, beat it as thin as you can possibly prick the lead with a Bod∣kin full of holes, put a Tape in every corner, turn the edge of
the lead outward from the Soar, scrape the smooth side of the lead till it look bright, lay it to the Soar, and bind it therto with the Tapes, take it off even and morne and wipe off, and scrape off the filth, but beware you come not neer the fire, neither keep it too warm. Probatum upon one that had a soar legg 20. years, which this healed when other Salve could not. To make Jelly of Harts horn: TAke Raspood, Harts, or Stags horn, four ounces, of fair run∣ning water, put it together into a Pipkin and let it stand all night on the Embers, the next day bol it untill two parts of the water be consumed, and that it come to a Jelly: Then strain it through a Jelly-bag into a Skillet or Pipkin, beat the White of an Egg very well and put to it, season and sweeten it with 3. or 4. ounces of loaf Sugar, a large Mace, a stick of Cynamon, a Sprig of French Marjoram, a little sprig of Rosemary, and two spoonfuls of white Wine-vinegar, boyle these again together untill it hath the tast of the Spices, and then strain it again through a Jelly bagg into a dish or gally pot for your use. Some use to boyl a Chicken or knuckle of Veal in the water before it be infused with the Harts-horn, the same being first strained, but for a weak stomach pure water is best. A Vomit to cleanse the stomach. TAke three roots of yellow Daffadillies, wash them and cut them small, seeth them in Ale or Beer till half be consumed, put therto a little Saffron, and boyl it together, strain it, and drink therof after you have broken your fast, use it when you need, and not else. To stay a Vomit. TAke sower Leaven and Vinegar, stir them well together till they wax moist, then take a handfull of Mints and cut them small with as much Wormwood, and work all these together very perfectly, so make a Plaister therof in a linnen cloath, warm it well on both sides, and so lay it on the stomach, and it will stay it.
The Receipt of the Wound-drink. TAke Southernwood, Wormwood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Wood bet∣tony, Sanicle, Plantane, Dandelyon, Ribwort, white Bottles, Bramble-buds, Egremony, wild Angelica, Comfery, Mints, Sca∣bious, Strawberry-leaves, Cinkfoyle, Violet-leaves, Dafies, Ho∣ney Succles-Avens, Hawthorn-buds, Oake-leaves, Take of these of each a handfull, put to them a pottle of White-wine, and a gallon of clear running water, boyl altogether till one half be consumed, then strain the liquor clean from the herbs, then put to it a quart of honey, and boyl it again, and being cold, put it into glasses or bottles stopped close, and keep it for your use; viz. Let the Patient drink 5. spoonfuls at a time luke warm every morning fasting, and three spoonfuls last of all at night, untill he have drunk a quart therof. This drink is effectuall for Soars, new or old Wounds, womens Breasts, putrified bones, for ach in the stomach, to break any Im∣postume, to stanch blood of Veins broken in the body, it hath caused Bullets to fall out of the flesh, that long continued therin, with many other rare Effects. For the Stone. TAke a quart of running water, and a quarter of a pound of the best blew Currants, and wash them clean, and boyl them to a pint, then strain the Currants in a cloath, or bruise them with a Trencher, then take the yolk of an egg new laid, and beat it well, then take half a pint of the water, and brew it with the yolk, and drink it in the morning fasting, and a like quan∣tity a little before supper, this do a quarter of a year toge∣ther. For a soar Throat. TAke a pint of Claret-wine, a quarter of brown Sugar∣candy, one ounce of Mace, one handfull of Rosemary-tops, boyl these to half a pint, and strain it through a cloath, so take two spoonfull luke-warm, and gargle with it, then drink it down.
Flos Ʋnguentorum. THe intreat is called Flower of Oyntments, for it is good for all manner of maladies that are written hereafter. That is to say, for ould wounds, and for amongst all entreats it is most clensing and well soaking, and ingendreth flesh, and it healeth more in a sevenight then any other in a Month, and it suffer∣eth no corruption in a wound, nor no ill flesh to be engendred therein, and it is good for the head-ake, and for singing in the brain, and for all manner of head-aches, and for all manner of Impostumes in the head, and in the body, and for the boyling in the Eares or in the cheeks or sinews, sprong shrunk, or stark, and it draweth out any thorne, or broken bone, or any thing that is in a wound, it is good for the pricking or biting of a venemous beast, and it rotteth and healeth all man∣ner of botches without, it is good for a Cankar, or noli me tangere, and it draweth all manner of Ach out of the Liver, Spleen or Reins, it breaketh the impostume, it is good for boyling in the members, it ceaseth flux menstrous if it be layd to a womans Na∣vell, it healeth fair e the Emrods, and it is specially good to make a Cere cloth for Gouts and Aches, and for pestell botches. And this intreat is called flos unguentorum, for it cometh of Jesu Christi by an Angell to a house of Religion at the red hill in Almayn, which wrought there many marvails, and never had other medicine but this, and it is made thus following. Take Rosin and Perison of each halfe a pound, Virgin wax and Frankincense of each a quarter of a pound, of Mastick an ounce, of Harts suet a quarter of a pound, of Camphire two drams, melt that is to be melted, and pound that is to be pounded, and finely serced, and boile them over the fire, and strain them through a Canvas cloth into a pottle of white wine, with all the other Medicines together, then let it seeth till all the white wine be almost consumed, and then let it coole, untill it be no hotter then blood, then put thereto a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, ever stirring it untill it be thorough cold, but e∣ver beware that your stuffe be no hotter then blood, when you put to your Turpentine, for if it be hot, it marreth all your stuffe, and make it up in roles, and keep it to your use, for the most best and preci∣ous salve that can be made.
For the Morphew, white, or black, if it be curable. TAke one ounce of fine Verdegrice, and one ounce of Sulphur vivum, and beat them both into very fine pouder, and take two Sheeps heads that are fat, take out the brains and wash them away, then wash the heads clean, and seeth them till they be tender, then take them from the fire, and let them stand till they be cold, and then gather off the fat and meddle it with the pouder all cold, and put it into a box, and use it being new. An∣noint the sick therewith against a fire at night, when he shall go to bed, and in the morning wash it away with good Vinegar, three dressings hath cured divers. It is not to be melted, but an∣noint the Patient it being cold. It shall be good every annoyn∣ting to use one suit of linnen, for it will not out. For a Scald or a Burne. TAke one pound of new Butter unsalted, put to it a pretty quantity of Ale-hoofe, and of the green Bark of young El∣der as much, with a yellow Dock root pickt very cleane, boile all well in the Butter untill it look like a Salve. Then put to it some new Sheeps dung, and when it is well incorporated to∣gether, strain it and keep it for your use. Annoint the Place therewith melted, or made warm, with a Feather, and annoint the outside of a Primrose leafe with the same, ha∣ving first knocked down the seams, so apply it to the place, and dress it in that manner, morning and evening, and it will make a perfect Cure. Probatum est, Mr. Spiller. A Receipt for the Sciatica, or other paine in the Bones. TAke halfe a pound of the best yellow Bees wax, halfe a pound of Pitch, 2 d. halfe a pound of Deers suet, 6 d. halfe a pound of Rossen 2 d. halfe a pound of Frankencense, 4 d. two ounces of Mastick 6 d. beat all these Gumms severally, and searce them severally thorow as fine a search as you can, being first very finely beaten.
To stay the Humor. TAke a pint of Verjuice, a good quantity of Red Sage, and boyle it from a pint to halfe a Pint. A Medicine to kill a Ringworme. TAke halfe a pinte of Running water, a good pretty peece of Tobacco, and boile them together to a quarter of a pint. An easie Plaster for the Gout. TAke Black-soap as much as you think good, and the yelks of raw Eggs, halfe as much as the Soap; and mix them well in a dish till the Soap hath lost his proper colour. Then take fine flax, and spread it upon it, and lay it to the grieved place, then take the whites of Eggs mixt with Wheat flower, dyp a lin∣nen cloth therein, and lay it upon the Plaister, and bind it fast, and remove it not in foure or five dayes. Of all Medicines for the Gout this is the best as I have often proved both of men and women, it is more pre∣tious then Gold, &c. To make Gelly of Harts-horne. TAke three ounces of Harts-horne shaven thin, put it in five pints of water, boile it till it come to a pint, with a peece of leane Veale, if you make it without Veale, you must put in halfe an ounce of Harts-horne more, and so season it with what you please▪ A Receipt for the Stone. Mr. Hicks Apothecary. TAke of your Alkekengie Berries, otherwise called winter Cherries growing in Gardens: Take them and open them, and with the seeds, fruit and lease, altogether bole them either
in broth posset drink or Mace Ale, and drink of it a good draught warm, morning and evening, and it will dissolve the stone in the Kidneys and purge Gravell exceedingly. For such as cannot make water. Mr. Hicks. TAke of your Holliocks white or red, flowers and leaves, and distill them in an ordinary still, and reserve the water, and take of this about a quarter of a pint at a time mixed with a little fine Sugar, and it shall cause you to make water in your greatest extremity. Probatum est. Doctor Fryer his Receipt which he used in the time of the Infection of the Plague, and all other contagious sickness. TAke Cinamomi one dram, terrae sigillatae verae six drams, Mir∣rae three drams, Cornu Monocerotis one dram, Sem. & corti∣cum Citri, radicum Dictamni, Tormentillae, Zedioariae, sanguis Tortae Coralls rubri ana. two drams Santali flacci Iiiii. Santali rub. I ii. Benalbi & rubi, florum heliotropii ana: one dram Rasura eboris sca∣biosae sem: ocimi ossis de cor cerviana. I ii. boli orientalis two drams, Sushari albi L iii. Syrupe acetositatis citri q. s. fiat electu∣arium. The Dose for Children is one dram, which is a French Crown waight, and for elder two drams. It is to be given both before for preservation and otherwise to drive forth the infection by sweat. Let the Apothecary be carefull to put in good Druggs. A Drink for a Surfet in the stomach. TAke clarified Ale, and put therein six Sage leaves, and as many Marygold leaves, of Parsley roots, and Fennell roots, as many as you shall think fit, but rather put in a little red
Fennell instead of the roots, and leave the roots out, put in also a crust of bread and a peece of Sugar, and seeth the third part away, and so drink it. Doctor Monfords Cordiall water, TAke of Angellica leaves a quarter of a pound, Carduus be∣nedictus three ounces, of Balme, and Sage of each two oun∣ces, Licoris clean scraped halfe a pound, Angelica seeds three ounces and halfe, sweet Fennell-seeds, foure ounces and halfe, of the spices Aromat Rosatum & diamschum dulcis, of each six drams, bruise the seeds, and Licorise, and clip the Herbs, and steep them in sixteen pints of good Sack, two daies close stopped in a still or Limbeck. Then distill it with a gentle fire according to Art, After the water you have distilled hath stood two dayes, dissolve twelve ounces of Sugar Candie in red Rose water, and mingle it therewith. To make Cynamon water. TAke an Ale Gallon of the best Sack, and Sugar, one pound, Ginger one ounce, beat your spice and Sugar, and lay them one night and a day, in steep in your Sack, and stir them well together foure or five times, and then the next day distill it, and save the strongest by it selfe, and the weakest by it felfe, you must stop your still very close, when you lay your spice in steep that no strength go forth: Pills to purge the Head and Stomach. TAke of Aloe Cicatrina one ounce, three races of Ginger bea∣ten, and searsed both through a fine searse, mingle therewith two spoonfulls of English hony, and a peniworth of Mithridatum or Treakle, work them to a paste with fine searsed Sugar, And if you please make them up into pills, seven or eight of these pills taken going to Bedd is sufficient at once, or else you may keep your paste in little boxes, and take the quantity aforesaid, either in the pith of an Apple or in Sugar sopps.
An excellent plaister for the Back. TAke of gum Galban▪ and of gum Armoniack of each halfe an ounce, lay them in strong Vinegar a night and a day, and then boyle them till the Vinegar be wasted, and then strain it. Then take a thing called Gallie muscata, and Alipta musca∣ta, of each halfe an ounce, and of fine Labdanum halfe an ounce beaten in pouder, then put all them into the gummes with a little Turpentine, and boile them againe, and all to stirr it in the cooling, and mix them well together, and so spread it upon Leather, and cover it with red Sarsenet, and use it all the time of need. A Medicine to keep up the pallate of the mouth. TAke a piece of wheaten leaven and Commine seed, beaten in a Morter, a quantity of Bay-salt and red Rose Vinegar, and red Rose water, and put them into a bagg of cloth, and lay it to the mold of the head. To dry up the rheume in the head. TAke a quantity of dried Rose-leaves, the flowers of Camomile, Basill, Marjorum, all dryed, a quantity of Cloves and Mace gross bruised, a Nutmeg, and a quantity of Dill-seed, all quilt in a cap. For Mrs. Dyx. SEeth a little while, a good spoonfull of Conserve of Roses in halfe a pint of milk, then put to it two good spoonfulls of Su∣gar-candie, or good Loafe Sugar in pouder, and brew them well together there till the Sugar be dissolved, and drink it all off, to bed▪ward, good and warme, and by little gulps at once, and follow this a while, and I hope it will in time stay your Rheume. Scabious. TAke Scabious and beat it and distill it, and then beat more of the Hearbs, and put in the water that was distilled to it, and
let it stand twelve hours, and then distill it again, and then boyle the water with Sugar-candy, and so take it three or four times in a night or a day, according to your stomach, You must boyl the Barley in fair water, and when it begins to break you shall put out that water, then putting thereto a sufficient quantity of water, so that there be left a full quart, when it is boyled, then boyle the things which are sent with the other according to your Note, and being taken off and strained to a pint therof, put in both the Glasses of Syr∣rops. The China Broath. TAke Manna one ounce and an half, dissolve it in a little warm beer, and when it is melted strain it out, and add half a dozen drops of that liquor in the little glass to correct the windness of it, dink then before you eat, half an hour, or somthing more, as it works diminish or encrease the Doses in the beer brewed with herbs, the ordinary quantity should be a handfull, and a quarter of a handfull of it to a handfull of the other, and add many Gold-flowers when you have them and some Balm, and in the same vessell with the beer hang China prepared three onnces: Somtime use Scurvigrass, boyling the herbs, or the juice of the herbs, a pint of the juice in two gallons of Wort. Make broath with half an ounce of China, two drams of Co∣rall set over a few Embers in the morning, put in a peece of meat or a Chicken, after scuming add a peece of the bot∣tom of a Maucher, a sprig of Tyme, Rosemary, or a few Sage leaves, Raisons of the Sun stoned a handfull, and Currants a few, boyle them to a pint and a half, drink of it in the morn∣ing, and at four in the afternoon, or immediatly before meat. Remember Enula Campana two parts, and one part of Dock-roots powdered: Take green Walnuts, shels and all, and let them be stilled, and drink the water therof alone, or with a little Treakle, and it is good against any infection.
To draw out Infection. Take a handfull or two of Elder-leaves, and stamp them, and put therto half a dozen of Eggs, shels and all, and a good deal of the Loom of a Wall, and a spoonfull of black Soap, temper all these together in the manner of a Salve, and lay it to the hollow place of the soles of your feet, and let it lye some i▪ hours and it will draw the infection our of your body. For the biting of a mad Dogge, for Man, or Beast. TAke of Hobgoblines (which growes most commonly in Heathes about the black Lings) of Perewinckles (which growes among the Hayes commonly of Gardens) and Box leaves dryed and powdered, of each a like quantity, mixed together either in broath or posset-ale three daies before the change, or three daies after the change of the Moon in the morning fasting. To make Popylion. TAke the buds of the Popler Tree, pure water, take Hen∣bane, take Plantane take Morll—take Orpen, take Houslike, take Sempervive, take Endine, take Violets, take Water-creases, take Dayses the white and red, take Rib∣wort, take Penigrass, take Stone-crop, take Aragon, take Ton∣now. To make Oyle of Exeter Bawme. TAke a a pound of Cowslip flowers and steep them in Oyle Olive, and Calamint, Featherfew, Sage, Egremony, Southerwood, Pellitory, Camomile, Heyniff, Pellitory of Spain, Flowers of Lillies, of each an handfull, foure pound of Lawrell-leaves gathered in June, and stamp them al∣together til they are smal, then take the said flowers of Cowslips and wring out the Oyle, then stamp them with the other herbs,
then put therin White-wine a day and a night, in as much as they may be steeped in, then take the said Herbs, Wine, and Oyle altogether, and boyl them on the fire till the wine and water of the herbs be wasted away; and thus shall you prove it: Take a spoonfull of liquor at the pans bottom, and when you see no water in the spoon, then is your Medicine enough, or else set it again on the fire, then strain it through a strong linnen cloath, and when it is cold put it in a glass and stop it well, and it will serve you three years. For to help a man or woman that is bursten in the space of seven daies, and never cut him, and if he be an angry man nine daies at the most. TAke a broad Pawncher with a Tap before, another behind e∣ven against the soar, and sow within the Pawncher a good great ball of linnen cloath before the soar, and then bind fast the Taps within the great of the legg, and then seven or nine daies he shal drink 24. spoonfuls of Comfery with three spoonfuls of liquor which come from the Apothecaries called Aqua deco∣ctus Diabolus, so that the quantity of the liquor be 27. spoonfuls in all, and look you take red Comfrey for the man, and white for the woman, & let the sick drink this liquor at morning 27. spoon∣fuls, and noon, at evenings the same quantity, and use the same seven or nine daies, and look for one thing that he be well trussed, and just when he walks, but when he lyeth still; it is on great charge, so that he lyeth still, stirs not up soon, nor go about hastily, no sit down hastily, and beware that he come not upon any Horse in that time when he is in cure that he eates not Apples, Nuts, or cold Milk, for all things that are cold are contrary for him, and when he eats hot meats, let him beware of smelling meats and drinks, Goose-flesh, new Ale made with Oatemeal, nor eat not to much of no manner of meats at one meal, but wisely govern thy self till thou beest whole. And this Medicine hath healed many. Probatum est. For a Fistula. TAke butter without salt, and Verjuce without salt if you can get it, if not take the other, and with this warm, bath the out
side of the wound, and if there be a hollowness fill it with Neats∣foot oyle, and lay it over all; thus dress once or twice a day, that is approved good for a Fistula. For the pain in the back. TAke Shepheards-purse Knot grass, and Cumfery, all green, and boyl them in broath for the party to eat. Take Lettis-seed and dry it, and beat it to a powder, searce it fine, and take half a spoonfull at a time in posset-ale. A Medicine for the Cough. A handfull of Horehound, one handfull of Nip, a handfull of Hysop, a handfull of Tyme, a handfull of Balm, boyl all these in a quart of running water, and put in half a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, a stick of English Licorace bruised, and a peece Elicampana as big as ones finger, boyl all these toge∣ther from a quart to a pint, and strain it out: then put into that Licorace a pound of Sugar, then boyl it up to a syrrop, then put it into a glass, and let the party take it on a Licorace stick. To make a Poultice. TAke a pint of Cream, and thick it with grated bread, and seeth it while it be thick, then put in two spoonfuls of honey, and two spoonfuls of oyle of Roses, spred some of it upon a cloath, and lay it on as broad as the Plaister. A Receipt for the stopping of the Ʋrine. TAke three pints of Hawses, and pick the stalks and the tops, take half a pint of red Dog-berries, or sweet Btyer berries, take half a pint of Sloes, and half a pint of Cherry-stones, take a dozen of Medles, bruise all these together, and being bruised put them into eight pints of White wine, then stop up all these together in an earthen pot, and let them so stand a day and a night, and every eight hours, stir them and then stop them up again, and put it into an ordinary Still and still that, and this must be done about Michaelmas time, and when the party hath need let her take four spoonfuls at a time. This Water wil last eight years, and it is best when it is old.
For an Oyntment. DIll vervine, St. Johns wort, May wort, and Lavender Cotten, & Rose-mary tops and Bay leaves tops wild Mallows, Rew, Burrage Red sage, the leaves of Lavender, Cammomill, Mother-Tyme, Elder flowers, Smalledge and Feather-few, Sallendine, Roman wormewood, of every one of these hearbs a handfull mingled with foure pound of Hoggs grease, a pint of Sallet oile. An approved pouder for the Stone. TAke the seeds of Broom, the crops of red Nettles, the crops of red Tyme, the budds of red Oke, the Lights of a Fox, the flowers of Elders, Hipp berries, Stone Crop, ashen keys, Orange pills, Parsley seed, Saxifrage, gather all these same in their due time, drye and beat them severally into pouder, and put these pouders into sundry Boxes or Bladders, take of each a like quan∣tity, mix it well and keep it for your use. If you find it to be the stone in the Kidneys, take three spoonfulls of distilled milk-water in a Glass, put to it over night as much pouder as will lye upon a Groat, cover it all night in the morn∣ing put to it six spoonfull of white wine, stirre it well together, drink it sasting, fast and use moderate exercise an houre after, If it be for the stone in the Bladder, in stead of milke water, and wine, use only Beer or Ale a like quantity over night and in the morning. For them that make bloody Ʋrine. TAke Sallet oile, Kichin Sugar, Aquavitae of each a spoon∣full, beat them well together, and so lt the party greived drink it morning and evening thrice together; also take as much Parsel, seeds beaten very small as will lie upon six pence, and drink it in posset ale or any other liquor between the former Drinks about two or three houres after every of them.
A Receipt to make Black salve. TAke eight ounces of oyle Olive foure ounces of Bees wax; foure ounces of red Lead, put the oyle and the wax being cut into a Skillet, and melt them together, then put the red Lead into the oile and wax, and boile them with a soft fire, alwayes stirring it, and so continue it boyling till it turnes black, and begin to smell, then take it off the fire and skm it, and let it stand till it be could, and then make it up in a thick rowle for so it will keep the better. A Medicine to cure any Whitlaw. TAke a pint of butter or halfe a pint as you think you shall have occasion often to use it, and boile the butter in a fry∣ing pan, till the Butter be black, then take it off the fire, and skum it, and when you have scummed the butter clean, then put in as much Sorrel into the frying pan with the butter, as you think will drink up all the butter in the pan, and let them boyle together so long as the butter and the Sorrell become a salve, then spread it upon a Cloth the breadth of the wound, and apply it to the soare as hot as you can well indure it, change your plaster once every twenty four hours, do this without omis∣sion some three weeks or a moneth together, & you shall see the wound clense and heale, then when you shall find by the plaster that the wound be perfectly cleansed, take halfe a peck of white or gray salt, and a gallon of running water, boile these toge∣ther a good while, till the salt be all melted into the water, then wash or dab the soar with this water, as hot as you can well indure it once or twice, having twenty foure hours distance be∣twixt every washing, and after every such washing, apply a∣gaine the plaster above said, then take the plaster off againe, ha∣ving laid the accustomed time, and after that lay no more pla∣sters: but only a clean cloth every day one, and this with the help of God will cure you without all faile, provided alwayes when you see the wound look of a fresh and lively colour as it will do when the plasters have drawn and eaten out all the cor∣ruption and putrified flesh, that then you keep the wound somewhat open, with a little ball of Lint, that so it heale not too fast, and you are cleane without any doubt or danger. Probatum est.
A water to cure any ould Ʋlcer. TAke halfe a pound of Bolearmonack a quarter of a pound of white Copperace two ounces of Roach Allom, then take your Allom and Coperace, and beat them smal, and set them on the fire in an unnealed Pipkin which is a Pipkin unburnt if you can get one, and then stir them together till they be both moul∣ten, then when they are cold, put them up with the Bolearmo∣nack into a cleane Morter, and beat them into a sine pouder altogether, then make the water as followeth. Take a pottle of running water and set it on the fire in a clean Skillet till it be scalding hot readie to seeth, then put your water into a new earthen Vessell or Pitcher, then put two spoonfulls of powder into the water, and stir the pouder well up and down the water in the setling while the water is hot, that so the strength of the pouder may goe into the water, and when the water hath stood some three daies a settling, then skim off the uppermost froth upon the top of the water, and poure out the water very clean and gently from the Dregs and bottom into another clean pot or Pitch∣er, and when you have occasion use it in this manner, take two or three spoonfulls, and take it as hot as the party can well endure it, and so wash and dab the sore well withall, then get as much fresh water into another sawcer as will well wet a cloth two or three times double to cover the sore withall, and so apply it, and let it lye to the next dressing, alwayes use the water as hot as the Patient can endure it. To stop the bleeding at the Nose. TAke strong wine Vinegar in a Chafindish of coales, put three or foure cloths into the Vinegar upon the coles till they be hot, bath then his or hir privie parts a good while, and it will help immediately.
For the Emerodes. TAke scraped Lead and lay in Vinegar, and take Gilts grease and grind it on a stone together, and spread it on a cloth, and lay it to the place and it will cure you. To make a water for the stone. TAke a Gallon of new milk of a Red Cow, and put therein a handfull of Pellitory of the wall, a handfull of wild Tyme, a handful of Saxifrage a handful of Parsley, two or three Radish Roots sliced, and halfe an handfull Philupendule roots sliced let all these lye in the milk one night, and in the morning, put the milk and herbs into a still and distill them with a moderate fire of Charcole, when you are to use the water take a draught of Rennish or white wine, and put into the wine five spoonfull of the distilled water, a little Sugar and Nutmeg sliced, drink it of in the morning fasting and fast two hours, and keep your self walking and going up and down, the next day meddle not with it, but the third day do as you did the First day, and for every other day for a weeks space. This water must be made in the Moneth of May. To make Jelly of a Cock. TAke a Cock pull and wash him very clean, break the bones very well, take two Gallons of water and boile him in it▪ untill it come to a pint and a halfe, of Nutmegs and Mace a spoonfull, the Mace whole, and the Nutmegs sliced the Nut∣meg and Mace put in at first, then strain your liquor from the meat, then let it stand untill it be cold, then with a Knife skim of the fat on the top of it, then if any dregs or thickness be in the botome, take it of also, then put it into a Pipkin with such quantity of Cynamon and Ginger sliced as you shall think fit, then put to it a pound of the best loafe Sugar a sponfull of Cori∣ander seeds prepared, as being steeped a night in Sack, white wine or Rose water a quarter of a pint of Rose water, then boile them all very well together for halfe an houre or more the take the whites of foure Eggs very well beaten, poure them into the Pipkin as it boiles, still stirring of it, untill the white of
the Eggs grow black. Then take it off the fire, then put in to your gelly bag a branch of Rosemary, wetting the bag with Rose∣water, put into the bag a handfull of hard feathers upon the Rosemary, then put in the gelly into the bag, and when it is run through, put it in againe, and so do three or foure times be∣fore the fire, the last  let it run into the thing you will keep it, as in some Gally p for winter, and Glass for Sum∣mer. The black Salve. TAke two or three hundred Snailes, shells and all, and stamp them very small, then take a gallon of new milk and put them in it, put in halfe a pound of Aniseeds beaten, one ounce of small Mace beaten, a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, set them upon a soft fire of Coles and keep it with stirring untill more then halfe the liquor be consumed, then set it by a cooling, then take two pound of good pitch, a pound of Parrosen, and a pound of Rosen, halfe a pound of Wax, a pound of Turpentine foure pound of Sheeps suet tried, set altogether upon a▪ soft fire, and put into the milk that was before boild, and so let it boile till the moisture of the milk be boild away, then straine it and keep it for any old sore, bruise or thorn, or to take the Ague out of a soare▪ Probatum est. A Soveraign and approved Medicine for the Syatica. TAke one pound of new Wax, a pound of Pitch, a pound of Deers Suit, a pound of Rosen, a pound of Frankincense, foure ounces of Mastick, beat all these gums severally, through as fine a Cerce as you can get, then take your Deers suet, wax and Pitch, and set them on the Fire in a brass pan till they be melted, then put in your rosen till it be melted, then your Fran∣kincense till it be melted, and lastly your Mastick till it be mel∣ted, and besure that the one be melted before you put in the o∣ther, then stir them well together, and when they begin to boile and rise, the gums being throughly melted, take it from the fire, for if you take not heed, it will run over, then take a strong Canvas cloth, yet somewhat fine, and sow it like a gelly bag, and
so straine all the former stuffe into a faire pan that ought not to be above two fingers thick, and when it is cold cut it into peeces, and lay it up close, and it will keep good seaven years. Probatum, Tho. Fuller. For a Mad Dogge. PImpernell, Rue, Sage, and Saxifrage in pouder and given in drink▪ Another. BUckthorne or Way thorne the berries, or the inward rin in drink. A Purge. PVlvis Sanctus one dram in white wine or posset Ale. For the heat of the face. FUmitory one pottle, bitter Almonds an ounce, sublimate in sine pouder litarge and ceruse ana. two drams, and one dram of Camphire in dust, beat your Almonds and straine the Fumitory water through them, then infuse the rest in that wa∣ter and strain it as you use it annoint your Morter and Pestill with oile of sweet Almonds and that will beat your Camphire to dust. For deafnesse. CAstarum in pouder, Mithridate, and oile of bitter Almonds mixt, wherein dip a little tent of black wooll, and remove it once in twenty foure hours▪ For the Splene. MElilote Camomile ana. three handfuls Parcely Roman Worme wood, Plantane, Ditany ana. one M: beaten smal Rosen one pound, Wax twelve ounces, Sheeps suet one pound, white wine one pint, melt them and let them stand seven daies,
then boile them and strain them, take hereof the quantity of a Wal-nut and spread it upon Leather, and let it lie till it fll off of it self. A very good Purge. SUcory water and white wine, ana a quarter of a pint, Ru∣barb a quarter of an ounce, Agarick one dram, Sene, three drams, Lignnum aloes, Mace, Cynamon ana. two drams, slice your Rubarbe and Agarick smal and bruise the rest, but not your sene, put them in a Pipkin over the embers all night, close stopped, then boile them to halfe, strain it and dissolve therein one ounce of Manna. Then strain it againe and take it fasting at six a clock in the morning, and fast till one, but drink often, after it begins to work, warme broth. Probatum. For a Consumption. TAke two pound of Parsneps and pulp them, put to them halfe a pint of faint Cynamon water, or else Muscadel, pnt to them two pound of Sugar answerable to your pulp, boile them to the consistance of an Electuary then then ad to it three drams of Aromaticum Aromatiumgiri one shilling six pence, Rosatum Dia cordanabatis, each one shilling, girilatum one shilling six pence, Dimargaridicum one shilling six pence, Ca∣lidum ana. three drams, Red Sanders halfe an ounce, Oile of Anniseeds a scruple, Oile of Cynamon twelve drops, take hereof morning and evening the quantity of a Nutmeg upon a Knives point. Probatum Mr. Hutton. A Balsom. TAke old oile Olive three ounces of clear Venice Turpentin eight ounces of clean picked Wheat one ounce and a halfe of Saint Johns wort, with little holes in the leaves, like prick∣ings of Needles two ounces, of the root of Carduus benedictus, and Valeriana each one ounce, of Frankincense two ounces, beat both the roots and the Herbs together somewhat grosly, and put them in an earthen pott with as much Sack as will co∣ver
them, and so let them stand in steep two dayes, then put the Oile and Wheat into it, and seeth them altogether untill the wine be consumed, then take it of the fire and straine it softly, putting into that which is strained, the Turpentine and Fran∣kincense, and so boile it together a little, then take it off and keep it in a Glass close, till you have use for it, the older it is the better it will be. Probatum est. A Poultice. TAke Wormewood, boile it, then chop it, then boil it againe in the same water, then mix with it Rye-me ale and a little Honey, and Hogs grease and applye it. Take a peece of Bullocks horn within an inch of the head, frye it with black sope to pouder. Take as much suet as the quantity of an Egge to a pound of Pionie Rosen, heat them and put them into water and make them up in rowles A Diet Drink to drie up humors. SArsapirilla three ounces, Lignum Gguiacae six ounces, Cortex guiaci one ounce flos stecados three drams, Epithimum three drams, Liquor is three drams, Raysons of the Sun one ounce, boild six hours in two gallons of Conduit water in Balneo Ma∣riae, drink it at all times fot a Moneth. Take two drams of Passer from the Apothecary, and take the red Dock root, and boile it in wine, and take of the seeds of Pionie, and beat it into pouder, and put it into the wine and so drink a good draught. Corne being black to recover the colour. SCreen it once or twice a week with the chaf and all if it be very black take the lome of a Clay wall, dry it in an Oven, and beat it to pouder, and put it into the Corne with the Chaff, and so screen them together.
To keep Wheat after it is cleane. WHen it is in the loft for the first moneth, you must be ure to Screen it once a week, and after to turne it once a week if it lies very thick, you must set sticks in it an end to give it Ayre. A true Receipt of Mr. Gaskins Cordiall pouder, with directions how to use it. TAke the rags of pearle or seed pearle, of red Corrall, of Crabs Eyes, of Hawthorne, of white Amber, Ana a like, quantity, being all severally beaten into fine pouder, and searced thorough a fine searce, then take so much of the tips or toes of the Crabs Clwes, as of all the rest of the pouder, for it is the maine agent of the work beat and cearse them as you do the rest of the pouders, then weigh them severally, and take so much of the tips or toes as of all the other fine pouder and mix them together, then make it up in balles with some jelly of Harts∣horne wherein you may infuse some Safron more or less as you desire to have them coloured, so let them lye untill they be drye and fully decoct▪ and then use them as you have occasion, if you can have the Crabs leggs before they be boild; it will be much better otherwise they may serve being boild, so that they be in season, which is in May or September, this pouder being finely shaven o scraped with a Knife, may be taken in a spoon∣ful of Dragon water or Carduus water ten grains at a time, wash∣ing it down with another spoonfull of the same water but for a yongue child two grains may suffice. It is good to prevent the small Pox, and to put forth a disease, it recovereth those that are fallen into a Consumption, if it be taken daily for a good time together, it is good and excellent in all violent and burn∣ing feavers, and against all sorts of poison, it serveth especially against the Pestilence of the Plague, it doth extirpate the ve∣nome of the infection, wherein no terra Lemnia sigillata, Beasors stone or Unicorns horn, though taken in a double quantity can match it, it helpeth quotidian tertian and double tertian Ague, but for the quartan it is not much commended, only it may comfort the spirits, and mitigate the fits, but in any other A∣gues, it is equall to any animal or vegetable medicine whats∣ever,
it is good for the trembling or passion of the heart, it being taken in time it preserveth a man from all diseases and infections, and it worketh scarce with any sensible motion, for it neither provoketh nor giveth any offence at all to the heart, smel, taste, or stomach, it lasteth long▪ and decayeth not. Flower of Sluphur as much as you can take upon a six pence at twice, and as much Benjamin as a pease, take them in a rere Egg, the Benjamine broken as small as pins-heads, take it first and last for a Cold. For bleeding at the Nose. TAke Frankincense two drams, Aloes one▪ dram, make them into fine powder, and mix them with the White of an Egg, untill it be as thick as honey, then commixe the soft hairs of a Hare with it, and apply it to the Nose and to the Nostrill which bleedeth. Another approved. TAke the blood which commeth out of the Patients Nose, and burn it in an earthen pot, then make it to powder, take of it three drams, Bolearmoniack one ounce, Camphir one scruple, with the White of an Egg, and a little Vinegar, make it thick like honey, and lay it to forehead, and put it to the Nose. Another approved. TAke the Moss of Willow, the soft hairs of the belly of a Hare smal cut, Sanguis Dragonius in powder a dram, mix them with the white of an Egg, add to them if you please the fine powder of Pom∣granates, there must be a linnen cloath dipped into the foresaid Medi∣cine and put it up the Nose. For the Stomach grief. DRink the seeds af Hollihocks in White-wine to cleanse the stomack of rotten sinking Flegm and Melancholy.
A good Medicine for the stone approved by Mrs. Cranmer. TAke one handful of pellitory of the wal one handful of Saxi∣frage one handful, of wild tim e one handfnl, of garden parsly foure or five redish roots sliced, foure sponfulls of fenell seed bruised, reed, wash all these hearbes togeather and dry them in a faire linnen cloath and shreed them a little when they be dried and at night take a gallon of new milk warm from the cow and put it in an earthen pot and put all the hearbes into it, and the fennell seed with it stopping it very close, and the next morning put it into a common still and keep a reasonable fire all day under it and stir it often, you must take foure spon∣fuls of this water and three spoonfuls of White-wine with a little sugar in it warmed luke warme at the fire to be taken three dayes before the full and three dayes before the change through the year. This is to be still'd in July to serve all the year, Two Stilfnlls will serve all the year. This Medicine for the stone is to be taken in any time of the Moone when you feele paine. TAke one sponfull of an hearb called the golden rodd rub∣bed to powder to the yelk of an egg rere rosted sup it up fast∣ing three mornings together this Medicine is to be taken in any time of the Moon when any pain is felt fasting an houre after you ake it. proved by Mrs. Vrsula Atkins For the biting of a madd Dogg, for either Man or Beasts. TAke three ounces of pilled Garlick, six ounces of Rue, of Lon∣don treacle foure ounces of scraped Time foure sponfulls boile them in a large potle of strong ale that is stale close cover∣ed with a soft fire, boile it to three pints strain this and give nine spoonfulls to drinck every morning for nine dayes.
The wound drink to be made in the midst of May. SOuthernwood, Wormwood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Sannacle, Plantane, Dandelyon, Wood-bettony, Ribwort, white Bot∣tle, Dasy-roots, and Honey-succles,, Avence, Hawthorn Buds, Egremony, Oaken-leaves, Bramble, and wild Angelica, Cum∣fry, Mints, Scabious, Strawberry-leaves, Cinkfoil, Violet leaves, you must take of these one handfull, and put them into a pottle of White-wine, and a gallon of clear running water, boyl them altogether till half be consumed, then strain out the liquor from the herbs, then put to it a quart of Honey and boyl it again, and so put it in a glass close stopped, and when you need it take three spoonfuls therof first in the morning, and last in the evening, untill he hath drunk a quart therof. The Virtues. IT is very good for soars new or old, for wounds in the body, laying upon them a plaister of honey and wax, for womens breasts, and putrified bones causing them to scale, for ach in the stomach, and to break an Impostume, causing it to run out, it draweth bullets out of a Soldiers body, and healeth the place of the Issue, also it hath been divers times approved for the stopping of blood. Take Araperlia and Sene two drams of each, of Bettony and Ermodactila  three drams, of Bersonica, Carduus Sanctus, and of herb Maartitica one dram and a half of each, of Species Aromaticorum, and Rosati, and of Ginger one dram and a half of each, all these must be beaten to powder and mixt together, make an Electuary of these with a pound of Virgin honey well scummed, and of this give every morning betimes, or more or less according to the complection, for it should give but three Stools a day, and continue to take it 15. or 20. daies, as there shall be occasion, you need not keep your Chamber, nor be too precise in dyet. A Poultice to asswage pain, and to ripen a Soar. TAke a pint of milk and thick it with Oatmeal, put to it Lil∣ly-roots, first boyl them very soft, then bray them small with a spoon, and a little oyle of Roses, temper them well toge∣ther,
and apply it very warm. Probatum. A Digestive to heal a bite where it is broken and runs. TAke Venice Turpentine▪ and wash it very well with fair wa∣ter, mix it with Wheat-flower, the yelk of an Egg and a lit∣tle Chalk finely scraped, temper these to a Salve, take a like quantity of each, but a little Turpentine. To make a Powder of Paracelsus. TAke two ounces of green Copperace, burn it in a Crusible til the pot be reasonable hot, then take Orpimint, Verdugrease of each an ounce, roch Alome one ounce, and burn it till it be white, bruise all into very fine powder, and mix them well toge∣ther, keep it close, it will last seven years good, it hath no peer in working, for put therof into a Wound where dead flsis, and a plaister about it, and it will cleanse, heal, and dry, take it not out of the soar till it come of it self, this powder never deceiveth the Surgeon nor the Patient, for it doth no harm in the Wound, for it gathereth, healeth, and draeth, but not without biting, for if this were without biting, then it passed all Mdicines: Put all these things, into the Crusible together, and boyl them moderatly till they may be made in powder. A Medicine to cleanse the Gumms. TAke Sage of Virtue, dry it and pound it to powder, and mix it with powder of Alome and a little Sugar, rub your Gumms or Mouth with it, it prevents much harm. For a Perl in the Eye. TAke roots and leaves of Dayses, and three leaved grass, wash them clean, stamp them and strain them, then put in a lit∣tle Honey, Beer, and white Sugar-candy, and a little roch A∣lome, drop it often in the day into the eye,
To make Oyle of Ipericon. TAke eight pound of Oyle Olive, two pound of the best White wine, if you can get, Ipericon buds eight handfuls, o∣therwise called St. Johns-wort, which you must bruise in a stone Morter with the said Oyle and Wine, then put them in a glass very close stopped, and set it in the Sun the space of two daies, then boyl them in Balneo Mariae, stuffing it well with Hay that the glass stir not in the boyling, after it hath boyled half an hour, strain the said oyle through a cloath, and put new fresh buds of Ipericon into it as aforesaid; thus you must do three times, setting it alwaies in the Sun, then strain it all, and put to every pound 12, ounces of Venice Turpentine the clearest and whitest you can get, 6 ounces of Almonds, Dictani gentiana, Tor∣mentilla, Callamint, Aromatico, Carlina, Cardio sancto of each four drams, of red Earthworms four ounces, often washed in good White-wine, beat all these in a Morter, but not the worms, then put all these into the oyle, putting to every pound three pennyworth of Saffron, then put into it three handfuls of fresh buds of Ipericon, so being mixed altogether, you must set it in the Sun forty daies or in an Oven, after that it must be strain∣ed into a vessell of glass▪ well closed up, and so keep it, the oul∣der it is the better it is. The Virtues. IT is hot and dry, it maketh found, and healeth all Wounds in a short time, and Sinews being cut: It is good for burning, it easeth the passion of the stomach, provoketh Urine, easeth the pain of the bladder and the lowest part of the belly; It is good for Worms in Children, the gout, and deafness in the Eare. And thus you must use it, take a little in a silver spoon, wet a little fine cloath in it, and wring it into the Wound, and burn a linnen cloath, and quench it in the Oyle, and lay it to the Wound, and bind it up. To make oyle of Roses, Violets, or of any Herb or Flower. TAke a glass of a pint or a quart, and fill it half full of oyle Olive, and then fil it up with your flowers, and let it stand in
the Sun nine or ten daies, then cleanse it, and put it in fresh, and it will be stronger if it be made of Roots or Leaves, they must be bruised before. Oyle of Swallows. TAke young Swallows, beat them feathers and all, and take a handfull of the crops of Rosemary, of Lavander Cotten, of Strawberry leaves strings and all, of each a handfull, beat the herbs and Swallows together, and put to them a quantity of May butter, boyl them in an earthen pot, stop it close, and let it stand nine daies, then boyl it again, and strain it, and put it into a glass: To make Oleum Benedictum, or the Blessed Oyle. TAke of oyle two pounds, Storax, and Callamint, Labda∣num, Olibanum, Saffron, Gumm Arrabeck, Madder, Gum of the Ivy Tree, Alloes Cicatrina, Mastick, Cloves, Gallen∣gall, Cynamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes, of each two ounces, Gum Ellimpin, one pound of Myrrhe, Bdellium half an ounce, Gal∣banum six ounces, Spike an ounce, Rozen of the Pine-tree, Ar∣moniack, Oppoponax, of each two drams, beat all to powder that is to be beaten, and mixt it with the Oyle, and put all in a Stillary of glass with the Head and Receiver so closed, that no aire can come forth, setting your Limbeck on a soft fire twelve hours, encreasing your fire from six hours to six, till all be distil∣led; this done beat all the residence in the bottom of the Still to fine powder, and with the same Oyle distil the second, and the third time as aforesaid, and it shall be as it were Balm. The virtue of this Oyle. IT is good against Cramps, Palsies, pains of the Joynts, Colds, Catarrs, green Wounds and Ulcers, it comforteth the Spirits, openeth Obstructions, one drop in the Eare helpeth the hea∣ring. A Rosecake dipped in it and layd to the Temples, heals the Megrim, and taketh away the swimming of the head, one ounce drank in sweet Wine three daies together cureth the disease of the Lungs, and Quartain Feavers: If you give a spoonfull with Wine thirty daies together with a little powder of Popy-root, it helpeth the falling sickness, so that if the Cor∣ronal
Commissure be also annointed, it easeth the pain of the French-pox, and is good against the sting of any venemous Beast, and for all diseases of the sinews. To make Oyle of Earthworms. TAke of Earthworms half a pound, of good oyle Olive two pound, of sweet wine two ounces, boyl altogether til the Wine be consumed, then strain it and keep it: It is good to comfort the sinews that are cold, and it helpeth the pains in the joynts. The virtue of the Oyle of Dill. IT mittigateth pain, openeth Pores, provoketh sweat, resolveth Vapours, Impostumes, swellings, and hardness in any place, and if the back-bone be annointed, it easeth the pains, and growing of Feavers. The virtue of the Oyle of Rew. IT i hot, opening, resolving, and mittigating pain, it healeth the Reins, Bladder, and Matrix, and taketh the pain away, and also the Chollick if the belly be annointed therwith: A Glister made of it is good for the sinews, it helpeth the Cramp, and put∣eth away cold humours. Oyle of Elder-flowers. IT suppleth and cleanseth the skin, healeth the weakness of the Liver, and the stopping of the same, and greatly assages the Pains of the joynts. Oyle of Leaves, and Flowers of Camomile. IT is good against the Plurisie, openeth the Pores, resolveth Vapours, correcteth the evil quality of humours, is good for the sinews, and abateth the pain marvelously.
The virtue of Oyle of sweet Mints. IT comforteth a weak Stomach, stayes Vomits, moves appetite, helps concoction, and taketh away loathsomness. Oyle of Wormwood. IT is hot and comforteth the parts too much cooled, chiefly the sto∣mach, it also provoketh appetite, taketh away obstructions and kil∣leh worms. Oyle of Roses, and Rose-buds. ARe good against Inflammations, it cooleth the burning and boyling of the stomach, and fretting of the bowels, if it be given in a Gli∣ster, and to annoint the Teeth it taketh away the ach. Oyle of Violet flowers. ARe good against all Inflammations and heat. Oyle of water Lilly-flowers. ARe more cooling then oyle of Violets, and helpeth the heat of the Reins: A Medicine for the Tsick, stopping of, or in the Breast; and to open the Pipes. TAke Parsley-roots, Fennel roots, pick them and seeth them in White, or Renish Wine, till they be soft, with some uniper berrics, and when it is well sodden, strain it, and put to the Wine some Pellitory of Spain, and drink it morning and evening eight daies together. For Warts. TAke the yelk of an Egg, roast it hard, and stamp it with Oyle O∣live, or Oyle of Violets, make a plaister of it, and apply it to the Warts.
A Drink which is marvellous in working, and much commended of all Surgeons for a Fistula in the body, and it will cast out broken bones. TAke the roots and leaves of Plantane, Strawberry leaves, Hempseed, fine Bay-leaves, Sorrel-leaves, the roots and leaves of Tormentile, the root of the gret Mallow, the root of the great Coal, a good quantity of Tansey, boyl all these toge∣ther in White-wine, and put therto clarified Honey, and strain it, drink this evening and morning, till it come clear out of the Fester, and keep it open with the root Gentian, and lay theron a Coal leaf; this is a marvellous drink in working. Probatum. A drink of such force, as being given to the wounded or diseased with the Fistula, it wipeth out all filthiness in them, and healeth the Wound or Fistula, TAke red Coleworts, Fenerick, Parsley, Southernwood, Tan∣sey, Hemp, Strawberry-leaves, sweet Bryer-leaves, Plan∣tane leaves, Smallege, red Madder, Crows bill, Alome, Nuts▪ boyl altogether in White wine, and put therto a little Honey, give it to the Patient to drink early, and late, and annoint the Wound without when he hath drunk of the said Potion, and lay to the wound a leaf of red Coleworts, and keep the same continually over it, for it openeth the Wound: This is ap∣proved also. A powder for a Fistula. TAke six soles of of old Shooe; rubbed very clean, not wa∣shed, burn it on a clean Hearth with an Oaken fire brand, taking away all the ashes or peeces of the coal; or lumps of the Shoo-soles unburnt, then weigh your ashes, and put to it half so much in weight of green Coperace, half so much in weight of burnt Alome, as of the Copperace; add of the brass Coal beaten to powder, half so much as of the burnt Alome, this brass coal may be found amongst Sea-coals, and shall be discerned by the heavines of them, and hardness, and collou wihin like Oare of Gold or Brass: beat off all the black coale clean, and stamp a small peece of the yellow onely▪
wherof take the quantity before said, grind every one of these a∣part on a Painters stone, as fine as you can, then grind them over altogether, and keep it for your use close bound up in parchment. The use of it. TAke of the Cream of a red Cow one spoonfull, let it stand in a Sawcer twelve hours, and pour away the Whay in the bottom, then take of the powder aforesaid, so much as will make the Cream a liquid Salve of a gray collour, put up this in a little gally glass close stopped, then having cleansed the Soar with a dry Tent, not using any cleansing water, make your Tent an Inch long at the uttermost, then take of this liquid Salve on the point of a knife, and spred it on the Tent, and so put it in the soar, and cover it with a cleansing plaister to keep in the Tent, and dress the Patient twice a day; If it run excessively thrice a day, and if the mouth close up too soon, add to the Salve a little more Alome. Probatum. The first Dyet-drink to cure the Fistula, and many other griefs. TAke of Salsaparilla, of Saxifrage, Wood-root, of each four ounces, Cheny root one ounce, Egremony, Coltsfoot, and Scabious, of each four handfuls, two pennyworth of Marsh-mallow-roots, of Bettony, of Ladies Mantle, of Senacle, of each one handfull, one Columbine-root, shred the Woods above written, and put them together with the herbs into three gal∣lons of running water, boyl them therin till one gallon be con∣sumed, then strain out the woods and herbs with a skimmer, and put to the aforesaid water one other gallon of water, and boyl it till half be consumed, then strain this said drink through a strainer, putting therin a pottle of White-wine, and a pint and a half of honey, boyling it a little again, and skim it ve∣ry clean, then take it off the fire, putting therin two ounces of Sene, and three quarters of on ounce of Rueberb, and let it stand in it, then drink of it.
The second Dyet-drink to cure the Fistula, and divers other Imperfections. TAke of Sarsaparilla, and Saxifrage root of each four ounces, Cheny roots, Madder roots, Tormentile roots, and Sene, of each two ounces, three quarters of an ounce of Rueberb, halfe an ounce of Cynamon, one ounce of Hearts-horn finely scra∣ped, large Mace three quarters of an ounce, shred these very small, take of Bettony three handfuls, of Sabious, of Coltsfoot, Egremony, Ribwort, Mousehair, Ladies Mantle, green Mercu∣ry, and Marsh mallow leaves, of each one handfull, of sweet Marjoram and Peniroyal of each half a handfull, put these herbs in a bagg, and dry them in an Oven after the bread is drawn, and when they are very well dryed, mingle them together with the Woods above written, then divide them into three e∣qual parts, putting one third part into three gallons of Ale in a little bag, and make it sink a little below the yeast, and let it not sink to the bottom, and when the same has stood so one day, then may you drink therof, when, and at what time you please. Probatum. A white water to cure the Fistula, and many other Soars. TAke 3. pints of the distilled water of Elder, put it in an ounce of Mercury, stop it close up into a bottle, letting it stand half a year before you use it, the older it is the better. Another to cure the Fistula, Tetter, Pegus, and Scald. TAke of Mercurie dicipium, and boyl it in a pint of running water, till half be consumed, or put it into the distilled wa∣ter of Elder, but boyl it not then, and wash the soars therwith, and after take Brimstone and Alome, add Sallet oyle, and min∣gle it together very well, and then annoint the soars therwith.
To make Pills approved good for the Chollick. TAke of Aloes the weight of seven shillings, of Agarick the weight of two shillings eight pence, of Mastick the weight of two shillings six pence, you must grate the Agarick and searce it, and then take the weight above written, the other you may beat fine in a stone Morter, and use them without searcing. The making of Oximel to make up the Pills. TAke twelve sponfuls of fair water, four spoonfuls of good Wine-vinegar, boyl it well together, then put in a spoonful of English Honey, of the purest you can get, then let it boyl throughly wel, for the better you boyl it the longer it will keep, then take as much of this liquor as wil work up the pouder be∣fore written, in a Morter like unto past, then roul it up in a lump, and so keep it, you may take two geat Pills at a time so big as you may wel swallow in the pap of an apple, or without it if you can; if you take them a quarter of an hour before supper, they wil work most on the head, if you can take them late at night; or by three of four of the clock in the morning, it wil work most on the stomach. How to make the Pills aforesaid to work upon every humour as need shall require. IF you will have them to work most upon Choller, then add thirteen penyweight of the powder of Rueberbe, and abate fourteen pennyweight of Alloes: If you will have them purge Flegm most, then take fourteen pennyweight of Turbet in pow∣der, and leave out the Rueberb: If you will have them purge Melancholy most, then take sixteen pennyweight of the powder of Cene, and leave out the Rueberbe, and Turbet; If you wil have them to work effectually on the head, you must make up your Pills with the syrrop of Sticados, and leave out your Oxi∣mel, if to work on the Matrix, then make them up with the syr∣rop of Mugwort: If you wil have them work away wind, add to any of those afore witen, three or four drops of the oyle of An∣niseeds when you make up your Pills. I have proved all those waies, and find them very good.
Syrrup of Bysons good for all stoppings and stitches com∣ing of Feavers, and for the yellow Jaundice, and for Feavers coming of Choller and Flegm. TAke the juice of Endive and Smallage, of each one quart, the juice of Burrage, Landbofe, and wild Hops of each one pint, let them be wel clarified, then take the leaves of red Ro∣ses two ounces and a half, one of good Licorace, Spiknard the weight of eight pence, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, and Smal∣ledge seed, of each the weight of twelve pence, then boyl them together to the third part upon a soft fire, and let it run through a bag at aforesaid, till it be clear, then take two quarts of the same liquor, and put therto two pound and a half of fine Su∣gar, and so let it boyl to a syrrop as is aforesaid. Syrrup of Roses to allay thirst in a burning Ague, to com∣fort the stomach, and to let corruptions from ingendring. TAke three pints of Damask Rosewater, two pound of Sugar, and let them boyl together on a soft fire til it be come to a syrrup, and keep it as aforesaid. Syrrup of Violets good for the Diseases aforesaid, as also for the dry Cough, and Rheume in the throat, the stich in the side, and comforteth the Liver and Heart. TAke three quarts of water of Violet flowers, and two pound of fine Sugar, and boyl them together as you do the syrrop of Roses as aforesaid. A Syrrup to comfort the stomach. TAke Wormwood, Mints, and Motherwort, seeth them in fair water, and make a syrrup of the water, and take half a spoonful every day To make syrrup of red Roses. TAke two pound of red Roses, and put them in an earthen pot anneiled within, with a narrow mouth, put to it five pints of Conduit water being made hot, stop the pot very close, and so leave it the space of 8. hours, then strain the water from the Ro∣ses, and take other two pound of Roses, and put them in the same pot, and put the water that was strained from the Roses to
them being made hot as the first, and close the pot well, and when it hath remained so other eight hours, strain the liquor again from the Roses into a fair Skillet, and put three pounds of pure Sugar unto it, and when you have clarified it with the White of an Egg, set it on a soft fire of Charcoal, till it com∣eth to the thickness of a syrrup, then put it in a glass wel cover∣ed, that it take no aire. A Pill to expell the Chollick, and to preserve the Li∣ver. by Mrs: Napper. TAke of the powder of Rueberb the weight of a French Crown and a half, of the powder of red Rose-leaves half so much, of Mastick the like, of Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger, of each six grains, make these up into a mass for Pils with the syr∣rup of Sticados, or Violets. An excellent Medicine for the Stone by William Hamp∣ton. TAke the Roes of red Herrings, and Prick-holly leaves, and dry them in an Oven, beat them severally into dry pow∣der, searce them, and put them together of like quantity, put therto the powder of Grummel-seeds, and Broom-seeds of like quantity, but half so much as of the powder aforesaid, mix them together, and use therof aily a spoonful in a draught of Beer, Ale, or Wine, White, or Renish, evening and morning, you may use it in your broath, the oftner the better, have al∣waies a good deal of this powder in store, and keep it dry in a Pipkin by the fire-side. Another for the same by Dr. Nicholas. TAke of the Gum of the Cherry-tree, Damson tree, or Peach-tree but the Cherry-tree is best, put the same Gumm into a cup of White-wine, or Claret-wine, and so let it lye all night, and drink it in the morning, and in like case steep that in the morning that you mean to drink at night, and so use it three or four daies together, and it will break the Stone, and keep you long without pain of the same disease.
To make the Syrrup de quinque Radicibus. TAke Parsley roots, Sparagus roots, Bruskus roots, alias Knee∣holme, Saxifrage roots, Fennel roots, of each a like quantity, boyl the roots in fair water till they be tender, then let the wa∣ter run through a clean strainer from the roots, and let it stand a pretty while, and settle, pour out the clearest of the water into a clean vessell which is very sweet: If you have a quart of wa∣ter put to it two pound of Sugar, and boyl it upon a soft fire, til it come to a syrrop, then take it off the fire, and let it stand and settle, and when the grownds are settled, then pour it in a smal vessel to be kept: This syrrup is good to open the Liver; you may also put to it Germander roots, or the leaves: This syrrup is to be taken with the Decoction of Barley: A Syrrup to cool Choller. TAke Fennell roots, Parsley roots and Burrage roots, wash them clean and take out the piths, boyl them in fair water till they be tender, then strain the water from the roots, and let it settle a while, then take the clearest of it, and put therto a good quantity of Vine∣gar, if your water be a quart, put to it half a pint of Vinegar, and so moderate your Sugar as you may make a syrrup of it, this syrrup will open and cool. To avoid Choller and Flegm. TAke a quarter of a pound of Licorace sliced, two ounces of Anni∣seeds, and steep them in three pints of running water four and twenty hours, and drink therof when you are disposed. For the yellow Jaundice. TAke all the water of the Patient after the first-sleep, and make a Cake of it of Rye-meal, make a good fire of wood, and put the Cake into the fire, and let it be consumed before the fire be stirred, this to be done before ight a clock in the morning.
A syrrup for the Lungs. TAke Scabious Egrimony, Lungwort, Maiden-hair, Cham∣pits, Hysop, Burrage, Bugloss, Harts▪tongue, Endive, Succo∣ry, a pece of Parsley, and Fennel-roots, three crops of Tyme, twenty Raysons of the Sun stoned, a stick of the best Licorace sliced smal, one spoonful of Anniseeds, one spoonful of Barley clean washed, flowers of the whitest Genedis, three soft Figs, and boyl all these in three pints of pure water, till a third part of it be consumed, then straine it, and put thereto, the best syrrup of Roses, and the best syrrup of Violets, of each half an ounce, white Sugar-candy three ounces, boyl all toge∣ther so long as any skim ariseth, then strain it through a strai∣ner and keep it, then take five or six spoonfuls of it in the mor∣ning luke-warm, as need shall require. For the weakness in the back by William Hamp∣ton. TAke one ounce of very good Bole-armoniack, one ounce of Terra sigillaat which is red, two ounces of Nutmegs, one spoonful of Anniseeds, beat all these very small, then mingle them together, and take an Egg and lay it before the fire, til the yolk be throughly warm, then lay the yolk upon a Tren∣cher, and take away the White from it, then take one spoon∣ful of the aforesaid pouder, and a spoonful of white Sugar can∣dy, and mingle them well with the yolk of the Egg, and so eat of it in the morning, fasting after it two hours. To cool an extream heat in the Liver. TAke Violet flowers and the leaves, and boyl them in clarified Ale, then take two or three new-laid Eggs, break them, and lay them in water, then take the yolks of them, and make a Caudle of the said Ale, the herbs and flowers being strained out, and so season it with a litlte Sugar.
A Syrrup for the Liver. TAke halfe a pint of faire water, as much good Vinegar, and a pretty quantity of the powder of Rubarb, seeth them in Sugar, and make a sirrup of it. For the stopping of the Liver. TAke the broth of a Chicken, of Mercury, and Succory, of each halfe a handfull, a few great Raisons stoned, boile them all together, then take a few bitter Almonds, blanch them, and beat them, and with the same liquor make Almond milk, use to drink thereof every morning first. A cold water for the Liver. TAke Endive, Liverwort, Pettimorell, Fumitory, Scabious Sorrell, Burrage, Violets, and Sanders of each one hand∣full, put thereto a quarter of red Vinegar, still them together, and you shall receive a Soveraign water to cool the Liver. For heat of the Liver. TAke a penniworth of Succory roots, seeth them in a quart of new milk till they be soft, then strain out the roots, and eat them with Vinegar, and put a spoonfull or two of Vinegar in the said Milk to make it have a Curd, and straine the whay, and drink it: For the biting of a Madd-Dogg, by Dr. Nicholas, and Dr. Wood. TAke a quantity of Veruine, as much Rew, as much Plantane with some Treackle, stamp all these together with good wine or strong Ale, and give it to them that be bitten to drink, also take the aforesaid Herbs with Treackle, and Bay salt, and stamp them well together, and bind it fast to the place bitten and it will draw out the venome; This drink must be taken twice or thrice, and the Medicine in like case as often applied, Probatum est.
A Medicine for the Plurisie when one is in extremity, by the Lady Fortescue. TAke the Dung of a Horse or Gelding that standeth in the house at hard meat, and put a good quantity of it, when it is new made in Beer or Ale, bruise the dung well therein, then strain it through a clean cloth, and take as much of it, as will make a good draught, and put to it the quantity of a Nut∣meg in Treacle, and stir it till the Treacle be dissolved in it, then warme it, and drink it in the morning fasting, and at night when you go to Bed, so it be two hours after your meat, and let your Medicine be made fresh every day if you can; If not you may make at it one time to serve two dayes, so you make it strong enough, and put Treacle to every draught as much as is aforesaid, and keep it in a Glass vessell. By that time you have taken this drink four or five timas, you shall find ease, Al∣so for th stich, that cometh with the Plurisie, you must take dung, and fry it in fresh butter, and if your stich be on the right side under your small ribbs lay this Medicne at the side of your back directly against it, so it be not directly against the heart, for the Medicine will remove the stich to the place where it is laid. Therefore it must not be laid neer the heart, for drawing it to that place but any where else you may lay it, I have pro∣ved it this hath done great good for the Plurisie, as also for an inward cold, when other Medicines would not heale it. The drinkis also good for any stith or wind that will not easily be broken or dissolued. I have given this to a young Child when the red gumm hath been driven in, and the child ready to dye, and yet it hath recovered. Probatum est. To know when one feeleth a stitch whether it be wind or  Plurisie, Dr. July. TAke Wormewood, and lay it on a Tyle-stone before the fire, and cast a good deale of Bran on it, and when it is very hot sprinkle it with Malmsey, and put it in a linnen cloth, and ay it where you feel your stitch, If it be a wind, it will ease you in two hours, If it be a Plurisie it will augment the paine, and then you must use some other remedie. As letting blood
fomentations, and oyntments, use not Oile of Dill at the first for it is too hot. A Receipt for the Plurisie. TAke a good handfull of brook lime, as much of Violet leaves a pint of Flax-seed, and so seeth them together in a reaso∣nable quantity of faire running water, untill they be fit for a Poultice, then thicken it with Bran, and in two baggs the one after the other apply them as warm as may be endured for the space of an houre and half: Probatum est. An excellent Medicine for the Plurisy. TAke a sweet Apple, and cut it asunder in the midst, and cut out the Coar on both sides of the Apple, and stop both the sides full with good Frankincense, and close them together a∣gaine, Then inclose them with a little paste, and wrap it with paper, and rost it tender, and so eat it. A Pouder to preserve from, and to cure the Plague. TAke an Egge, and make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and yolk of it, fill the shell with the weight of two French Crowns in Saffron, roast the said Egg under the Em∣bers untill it shall begin to wax yellow, then take it from the fire, and beat the shell, and Saffron in a Morter together, with half a spoonfull of Mustard seed: Take of the pouder a French Crown weight, and as soon as you suspect your selfe to be infe∣cted dissolve it into ten spoonfulls of Posset Ale, and drink it Lukewarme, then to go bed and provoke sweating: For those that be well. TAke a Tost every morning, butter it on the one side, and put Vinegar on the other side, and put sme of the afore∣said pouder on it:
For a Child. TAke new milk from a Cow as hot as you can, and put in Saf∣fron and give it the child presently, and so let it lye down and sweat. An approved Medicine to preserve from the Plague. TAke the finest cleare Aloes you can buy, in colour like to Liver, and therefore called Hepatica, & of Cynamon Miche of each weight of three French Crowns, of Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloes, Bole-orientall, Mastick, of each halfe an ounce, mingle them together, and beat them into a very fine pouder, of which take every morning fasting the weight of foure pence in white wine alaied with water, and by the grace of God you shall be safe from the Plague. The simples are to be had at the Apo∣thecaries, except Bole orientall, which is used instead of Bole-Armoniack. A generall Medicine for all sorts of people taken with the Plague, to be had without cost. TAke of the root of Butter Burr, otherwise called pestilent work one ounce, of the root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrell one handful, boile all these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it, and put thereto two spoonfulls of Vinegar, two ounces of good Sugar, boile all these together till they be well mingled. Let the infected drink of this so hot as he may suffer it a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up agine, let him take the same quantity by, and by, and provoke himselfe to sweat and he shall find great help. If a Soare do appeare. THen make a poultice with two handfulls of wheaten bread, two ounces of sweet Butter, of the herb called the devils bitt, halfe a handfull, with sufficient water, after it is made, put to the poultice six or eight▪ Onions rosted under the Embers, and mingle them, and lay this ho to the place, and shift it twice or thrice a day. Also it is good to take the weight of eight pence of Mithridate in the morning in warme drink.
To preserve some, and to expell the Plague. TAke of Saffron ten grains, of Wall-ut Kirnells, and Figgs two ounces, one dram of Mithridate, and a few Sage leaves stamp these together, and the water of Pimpernell, make it up together, and take ten grains thereof in the morning, it will preserve, and out of those that be infected it will expell, Probatum est: To make of a Pill to purge grosse flegme, and to bring down the redds. TAke Allos, Agarick, Mastick, Epithium, Mirrh gum Amo∣niack, and a little Saffron, and make them with sirrup of Mug∣wort. Pills to purge the head and Stomach. TAke of Mastick four drams of Agarick, and Turbith of each three drams, of Cynamon, Cloves, and Anniseeds of each one dram, of Saffron two scruples, of the best Aloes one ounce, make the Masse with the sirrup of Sticados, or juice of Worme∣wood. To procure a stomach. TAke Violet and Straw-berry leaves, Burrage, Sorrel, wild-Mallows, and Currants, and put them all in a quart of white wine, and a quart of water, and boile them to one quart, and drink thereof morning and evening. To comfort the weakness of the Stomach, and also the Head. TAke of Bittony water, and Plantane water, of each one quart, a good Nutmeg bruised, a branch of Rosemary, three budds of the Pomgranate flower, which is not blown out, Sugar Candie two ounces, boile all these from two quarts to three pints, very leasurely boyling it. Then keep it in a clean ves∣sell, and take of the clearest of it, morning and evening being
made bloud-warm six fpoonfulls three dayes together. For the wind in the Stomach. TAke of prepared Anniseeds three ounces, Fennel-seeds one ounce and a halfe, of Coriander seed prepared one ounce, of Comine, and Caroway seeds, of each one dram, of Sesly-seeds steeped in white wine one dram, of Cytron pil, Cynamon one dram, four scruples of fine Sugar, a double quantity to all these, of this powder take halfe a spoonfull after meals, and drink not after it, and it may be used oftner, or seldomer, as there is occasion, and if need be at other times. A very good Plaister for the Stomach. TAke of Muskadel, and Sack of each halfe a pint, and ra∣ther more of the Muskadel, Tenn Dates, and stone them, and boile these together till they be very soft, then stamp them in a Morter, and put to them Sallad Oile, and Butter, and put them into the Poset with their liquor again, then take the pou∣der of Mastick, and Cloves, and a little Barly flower, and let all these boile together till it be thick like a plaister, and laying the same on a cloth. Apply it to the stomach as hot as you can suffer it. Probatum est. For a hot Stomach. EAte green Purslain to moisten a hot stomach, and to asswage the swelling of the mouth rising from the stomach. From an Ach in the Stomack. TAke a peece of Pine Apple with the juice of▪Purslain to as∣swage the gnawing of the mouth of the stomach, and to strengthen the weaknesse of the body, and to hold down the corruption of humors. For the same. TAk Nutts of a Pine Tree, being cleansed, eaten, or drunk in the decoction Raisons, or with the seeds os Cowcumbers.
It provoketh Urine helpeth the sharpnesse of the Kidnies, and Bladder, and the gnawing of the stomach. For weak abhorring stomacks. MIx the pouder of red and white Sanders with oile of Ro∣ses, and apply it to the stomach. For the same. TAke the pouder of Rewbeb in white wine, it is good against the windines, wambling, and weakness of the stomach, and all paines thereof, it is good against all Cramps, grief of the liver, and Milt, It ceaseth the griping, and gnawing of the belly, the Kidnies, and Bladder. It mitigates the Ach in the breast, and of the Mother, and Scyatica, it helpeth spitting of blood, and Cureth the bloudy flux, and Lask, one dram of it being taken with hydromel for the same purpose with Sirrupus actolus a∣gainst the Liver. A Plaister for the Splene by Doctor Hill. TAke gum Armoniack, and Delium, of each one ounce, roots of Irres Galbanum, Bay-berries, and Storax of each halfe an ounce, Frankincense two drams, Pepper one dram, Turpentine three ounces, white wine as much as is sufficient to dissolve the gummes in, and make a Plaister to apply to the splene. The gummes must be dissolved in white wine over a soft fire: Then add the Frankincense and Turpentine, and last of all the other things beaten to pouder. This Plaister is good against the hardness of the Splene comming of a cold cause, or if there be any windinesse therein,
To know the Characters whereby the Physitians Note and set down in their Receipts the quantity and measure of Hearbs, &c. as followeth. lb Signifieth A Pound lb Containeth xii. ℥ ounces ℥ an Ounce ℥ viii. ʒ drams ʒ a Dram ʒ iii℈ scruples ℈ a Scruple ℈ xx G. grains G a Grain       gr. a Quarter       ss Halfe       M. a Handful       ana. of Each       P. a lit. handf.       Measure your Hearbs by the handful marked thus with M. And measure your flowers by the handfull marked thus with P: That is to say the first must be a good hand∣full, and the latter a little handfull. Your Roots and Seeds must be taken by weight, except it be in decoctions, and then they must be nnmbred. Liquors and pouders must be measured by weight of the seeds, fruits are used in number. A Note. A French Crown weigheth vii. d. which is a dram. Halfe an Angel weigheth v d.
Chymicall Extractions. TAke L seven times rectified, and put it in a pelican, and let it Circulate forty dayes, and this is his burning water or quintessence or Heaven, and hath a smell so odoriferous that it being open in any Roome, all that passe by will be forced to come in, if this smell be wanting when you open it, put it in a bolts head well stopped with wax, and bury it in Horse dung with the bottom upwards, some part being bare to the Ayre, and having stood so many dayes, take it out, and with a small warm wyer bore a hole in the wax, and let out all the feces, but when the spirit quintessence comes, stop it suddenly with your finger, and urne it up. The quintessence of all manner of Herbs, flowers, roots, flesh, blood, or Eggs is thus done, take any of these things, and bray them in a Morter, or on a grinding stone, with fifteen times as much common salt, then put them being stopped in horse dung (which must be renewed once a week) for the space of fortie dayes, by which time they will be pu∣trified, and become water, then put it in a glass Still, and draw off as much as will come, then put that which came o∣ver and the feces together again, and bruise them on astone, distill, and grind it often, then take the water and Circu∣late it in a Pellican, as before. To seperate all the foure Elements out of any of these things, put the putrified wa∣ter into a Glass Still, and in Baln. M. draw of as much as will come which is the element of water poure back that water, and set all together againe in Baln. M. to Circulate the space of eight dayes, then set your Vessell in ashes or sand fornace with a head, and recever well luted, in a stronger fire then before, and a yeallow water will rise which is water, and ayre, put those again in Baln. M. and
the water only will rise, so you have them seperated, then to every pound of matter remaining in the bottom of the Glass put four pound of water, and set it as before to digest in Bal. Ma. eight daies, then set them in a sand fornace, and give a strong fire, and there will ascend a red water which is fire, and water, separate them as before the water and ayre so you have all the foure Elements asunder, Calcine the earth, and rectifie the other Elements as you did for the quintessence. Aurum Potabile. MAk an Amalgama of Sol and Mercury, vapour away the Mercury, then take that Sol being in fine pouder, and heat it upon a Plate of Iron till it be red hot, and quench it in L but be sure to stop the Vessel suddenly, that too much of the L burne not away do this fiftie times till the L be tincted yellow. Another way. TAke your Aurum in powder as before, cast the pouder in∣to distilled Vineger or Vrine, set it in the hot Sun, and you shall see it rise in a thin Filme or Skin, take that off with a feather, and put it in a Glass where water is, do this as often as any will rise, vapour away the water and the oile will remaine. The quintessence of Quick-silver. TAke sublimate, and disolve it in Aqua sortis, distill of the water, and then the quintessence of Quick-silver will follow, rising white as Snow, put back the Corasive water upon the feces left behind, untill all be come over. The quintessence of Brimstone. TAke pouder of Brimston, and put it in old Urine, set it upon a soft Fire, till the Vrine be coloured, then poure of that, and
put on fresh Vrine, till you have all the tincture, vapour away the Vrine, then put your tincture in a broad vessell with distild Vinegar upon a soft Fire, and skim of the fatness of the Brimston if any rise. A burning peircing Water. TAke Quicksilver sublimate with vitrioll, and comon salt then take Sal Armoniack often times sublimated equall parts grind them well together, and set them to resolve in a Cellar this wa∣ter will peirce through a mans hand, or a Plate of Iron or Cop∣per, and hath strange vertues if it could be repaired. The quintessence of Antimony. TAke Antimony in fine pouder, and put it in vinegar distilled till it be red, pour of that distilled Vinegar and put on more, till it will receive no more colour, put all your coloured distil∣led Vinegar in a Glass Still, and give fire under it, and when the fleame is come, you shall have a red Oyle ascend in threds which you must save to your use. The white water or Maids milk of Mercury or Quick-silver. TAke sublimate or the quintessence of it, and put it in a large Glasse well sealed, and set eight daies in an Athanoure then take it out, and grind it very small, then hang it in Baln, M. let it vapour till the matter be resolved, then put it in a Still, and Maids milk will rise. To make a diphoretick of Antimony and Sol that work∣eth in dose, foure, five, six, or seven graines. TAke Antimony and Mercury sublimate equall parts, and draw them in a Retort as you know, and rectifie the oile that you get five times as you know, then make the Aqua sortis, and make it Aqua Regis in a large Glass, into which put in your re∣ctified oile, and then let them stand in a gentle Balneo untill it be dissolved perfectly, then dissolve sixty grains of pure Sol in
another part of your Aqua Regis, and being dissolvd perfectly, pour you dissolved Sol upon your dissolved Oyle of Antimony, drop after drop soft and fair, for fear you spill all, and all being put therin, lute theron a head and Receiver very close, and put it into ashes for two daies, with so easie a fire as you can keep, then remove it into sand and draw off your Menster by degrees, untill at the last the bottom of the glass be as red as you can make it, then cease the fire and let it cool, and then cut away that part of it in the bottom which is not sublimed, and gather it clean, and put it into a Crusible, and give it fire until the cru∣sible and matter therin be as red as any coal, then take it out of the fire, and keep it safe, for it is ready for your use. To a dram six grains of Diagredium, To make the Diaphorettick of Antimony, Mercury, Sr. Walter Rawleighs way. TAke ♁ Cruda, and grind it very smal, two pound Anti∣moni sublimitate, grind it well and fine, and then mix them wel together, and grind them well together, and then put them into the flattest bottom Bason you can get, and put it in a cold Cellar, where they must stand until they come in the form of very Liquid pap, then take it and put it into smal bottles not a quarter ful, and put a head theron, and receiver therto wel luted, and draw of the moisture so long as any com∣eth, in sand, and then increae the fire so long, untll that the Antimony be all sublimed, and in the like sort you must do until you have gathered all your Antimony from the ♁ then recti∣fie all the waters you have gathered therfrom, and keep the last part therof by it self, for to put upon your Antimony to work it up, the which must be very often reiterated upon the Anti∣mony, and drawn off again, and at the last sublime up all your Antimony from the bottom which gather, and grind very smal, and mix with it so much of that Antimony that hath been four or five times sublimed and quickned at the least, and sublime them together, and then in two or three times subliming, you shall separate the Crude Antimony therfrom, and then sublime it by it self, so long til it leave no feces in the bottom, alwayes putting away the upper part of the sublimation, for in that work it wil not serve the turn, and then have you finished a very great labour, but you have gotten a good Medicine, and
before you begin, though the words be few, yet it is a very toil∣som labour. To make the Purge of Tartar, what quantity you will, two pound or more. TAke the best white Tartar, and pound it very smal, and put it into a well glased Pipkin, and boyl it strongly, and skim it continually until there ariseth no skim, then have a good many of broad, and flat milk pans, into which you must pour your boyled Tartar, being clean skimmed as aforesaid, and let them cool, and in the cooling there wil arise a cream upon the top, which take off with a Lanthorn-horn, and within half an hour after you may skim it again, and again, as oft as any cream ariseth, if the water consume put in more cold water, and then put it on upon the fire, and boyl it again, and pour it again in∣to the milk-pans, and skim it as before as oft as any cream ari∣eth, and so boyl it, and skim it in like manner so long as a∣ny cream ariseth, then wash it if you will have it pure, with two or three waters, or else dry it and grind it smal.
Chymicall Characters. 24 Grains one penny waight. 20 Grains a Scruple. 3 Scruples a Dram. 60 Grains a Dram. 8 Drams an Ounce. ♄ Saturn, Lead. ♀ Venus, Copper. ☿ Mercury, quicksilv. {antimony} Antimony. {arsenic} Arcenick. {alum} Allum. {vinegar} Vinegar. {vinegar distilled} Vinegar distilld. {aqua fortis} Aqua fortis. {aqua regis} Aqua Regis. {wax} Wax. {potash} Pot-ashes. {oil} Oyle. {purify} To purifie. {nitre} Salt Peter. {salt} Salt. {sal armoniac} Salarmoniake. {tartar} Tartar. {blood} Blood. {fire} Fyre. {air} Ayre. {water} Water. {earth} Earth. {day} Day. {night} Night.
Luting. TAke pouder of Bricks searsed, of Smiths sinders, of sand, of each eight ounces, pouder of Glass searsed one pound and a halfe, of Potters earth four pound, of Flocks four ounces, beat all these well on a board with an Iron wand, and arme your Vessell. To draw Chymicall Oyles by the Lymbeck. ALL vegetables which are Aromatick in scent, and hot in Tast, yield Chymicall Oiles, and no other, whether they be leaves, flowers, fruits, hearbs, bark, seeds, rinds, or roots. Seeds, flowers, and leaves, need no bruising. Barks, fruits, and roots must be grosse bruised, not fine least they sticke to the bottom, and burn in the Stil. To every pound weight of any vegetable put foure pound of com∣mon water, the heavier the water the better. Let the water, and the vegetable be distilled assoon as you can with∣out macetation. Let your fire be as great as may be so it run not over, nor come out whole. The quantity that your Stil contains is four pound of any spice, seed, &c. and of hearbs, as many as it will hold. When a a third part of the water is distilled, the most part of the Oile is come, then take off that Receiver, and put into the body of the Still as much water as you drew out, and distill it into another Re∣ceiver: Every thing must be distilled untill the water that cometh forth have no sent, nor tast of the said vegetable. Seperate all Oiles that swim, presently assoon as you take the recei∣ver away, but let those that sink stand in some cool place two or three daies as Cynamon, Mace, Cloves, Sassafras. The water which is the vehiculum of the Oile yeildeth not forth his Oile, till it be exuberate with Oyle, therefore keep every water by it selfe to serve the next time for then it will yeild a greater quantity of Oile.
For a Cancer, a Tettar, a Wart, or a great bunch on the face. TAke a pint of the best white wine-vinegar, the roots of Salen∣dine, a Manuple, of red Sage leaves a pugil, of burnt Alome a spoonful, of blew Vitriol a spoonful and half, boyl all being stopped together til half be consumed, strain and squeeze them hard through a linnen cloath, save it for your use in a glass stopped while it is hot, into which put half a spoonful of the flow∣er of Brimstone in a little lawn bagg, so as it may hang in the middle of the glass, about which the Vitreol wil shoot, and hang when you use it warm it, and drop a little upon the soar, and rub not the soar though it smart a little. For a Fistula. THe root of our Ladies Candle, the old lead of a window cut from the soder, Hogs grease, beat all in a Morter til it be perfectly incorporate, make a tent for the soar of one of the roots, and annoint it with this Oyntment, and put it into it, and lay a Plaister of the same Oyntment upon it. For a Burn. TAke Semper vive, Plantane leaves, and the green ryne of Elder, of each a like quantity, and boyl them in Sallet Oyle, so much as will draw out all that Tetter by boyling, then strain the Oyle well out, and put it on the fire again, and put to it a smal quantity of {vinegar distilled} of Wine, and so much yellow wax as will bring it to the consistence of a Lineament. To sweeten Amber. PUt it in a Sand Stil in a low body with a great head wel luted, and stil it gently of, and the stinking part, which wil be one half wil come off first▪, which you must set by, and unlute the head, letting it drop into a unluted Receiver, and so as you find it sweeten change the Receiver, letting it continue so til the Balmson within be hard enough to make a Plaister, which
you may try by lifting of the head, and taking some of it ou with a long spoon, and cooling it in the aire. A Laudanum. TAke Opium Thebaise, cut it in thin slices, and dry it gently in an Oven upon glass Plates, til you may crumble it be∣tween your fingers: Take the Tr▪ of this with L of {vinegar distilled} filter it and vapour it to the consistence of honey, to an ounce of which Tr. take as much of he Tr. of Saffron, of the Tr. of Species of Amber one dram, Magisterial of Pearl, and Corral, of each one scruple, the Tr. of Gold one drm, mix them, and vapour them in Bolarmoniack to the consistence of a Pill, the doss is from one grain to four. TAke a part of ☉ and a dram of ☽ unto which add 12: parts of Mercury mixing them well together secundum artem, then put them in a bolts head, and give it a reasonable strong heat in a Fornace, so it will rise up like shrubs of trees, then break the glass, and take out those things, adding the fourth part of that weight of more Mercury mixing it wel together, and put it in∣to a bolts-head, and giving it fire as before: And when it is come up, it will fall all down unto powder by little and little, and it will fix into a colour between red and brown, and the more it is fixed the higher colour it wil take. Take three grains of this in bread, keep your bed with your armes on your sto∣mach, in four hours you may rise. A Purge of Antimony that works without Vomit, by Dr. Jordain. TAke an ounce of yellow Stibium poudered, melt it in a Cru∣sible, then put upon it while it is in infusion a spoonful of wel refined Salt petre, and burn it off, do so four times, then grind it upon a stone and it wil be a white pouder, to which you must put as much oyle, an ounce of Vitriol, or Sulphur as wil cover it, and vapour it away in a Sand Fornace, til the pouder be perfectly dry, the dose is from four to seven grains; if you use oyle of Sulphur or Vitriol to it, I hold it best to wash it af∣terwards once or twice.
A Recept to make Vinegar. Mr. Sawer. FIrst take a quantity of the best sweet wort, that may be had so much or as little as you will, according to the proportion you mind to make, let it cool, then work it in a guyld▪ fat as you work your Ale, then tun it into your vessell, and let it spourg when it hath spourged, then put in a quantity of Bay Berries beaten in pouder after the rate of one ounce to a firkin, and stir it well together, then it will spurge again, when it leaves spur∣ging, than draw it out at the Tap, every three or four dayes, the space of a Moneth, then put into your Vessell of Helder flow∣ers a good quantity, you may put in of Red Rosc leaves of Vio∣lets or of Barberies. But I take it the best waye is to let it stand till it be fyned, and then draw it into Bottles of Glass, and put into it, either redd Rose leaves or Violets, and so make Rose or Violet Vinegar as you please, so you may have it white, and if you like to have it redd, you may put in Barberies Hel∣derberies, Senaper knopps turnfall or such like: Also if you will you may determine at the first, how much you will have Violet o Rose Vinegar, white or red as you like, and put it in severall vessells. A Receipt to make Raison Wine. TAke twelve pound of Maligo Raisons, pick the stalks of them, put them into a Vessell that hath a spiggot neare the bottom, and let them stand at the least eight and fortie hours, (being often stirred) having at least three Gallons of good wa∣ter put in with them, then draw it off into a Rundlet or other Vessell, that you mean to work it in and set it in some corner, where you may keep a constant heat to it, and let it continue till it will work no more, which will be at least two daies, then draw it out into Bottles, and fill them to the neck, and be sure to stop them close, and set into a cool Cellar, you may when you fill the Bottles, put in three or six more or lesse of Cloves, or a Bag of Tiffene or Sarne filled with Coriander seeds which will give it a very good tast, also when you have drawn of your first Liquor from your Raisons, put on halfe so much water as at the first, and use it as the former.
To draw Oyle of Tartar and Turpentine. TAke a pound of Calcined Tartar and a pound of ordinary Turpentine put them into a Retort and lute the Retort to the receivor, then set it in a pan of Ashes upon a furnace and keep it some eight hours with a small fire that it may digest, then make a strong fire some eight houres longer, in which time it will be all drawne. Certaine Secrets of Hearbs not Com∣monly to be found in any common HERBALL. Tutsan, or Parke Leaves. THis Herb is called of some Agnus castus, although in the best Herballs it appears that Agnus castus is clean another thing. But thus is written of it, The use of Tutsan maketh man chast, and dryeth up the seed of moist men, this Hearb sodden with Fennell-seed and Eisell is good to destroy the could Dropsie. Also f this Hearb be sodden in Smallage, salt water, and Sage, and laid to the hinder part of a mans head, and if he be washed therewith it helpeth and unbindeth an evil that men call Lethargie, also this hearb cureth the foule sinne of Lechery if it be dronk or laid about. This Hearb is good against the stopping of the Liver and Milt, a Plaister made hereof is good against head ach, that is engendred of evill humors. Wormwood. Wormewood comforteth the heart, tempered with hony, it easeth the swelling in a mans mouth, it doth away the
blackness of a mans eye, and cleareth the sight. Also if this Hearb be powdred with the Gall of a Bull and afterward put into a mans eyes it shall clear the sight without faile. Mugwort. MUgwort compounded with Tallow and laid too healeth the aking and soreness of a mans feet comming by travell, the same tempered with running water healeth the aking of a mans gutts. Sothernwood. THis Hearb dronk with water healeth them that be bitten with venomous beasts, it destroyeth wormes in a mans womb. The pouder of this Hearb mingled with Barly meale, unbindeth and breaketh hard impostumes. Allelnia. Subwort. THis Herb rosted in the embers in red Dock-leaves, or red Wort leaves, takes away the dead flesh of a wound. Egrimony. EGrimony the root and Herb eaten together, helpeth the aking of the wombe, this Hearb tempered with  good to heale a wound, that is hurt with Iron, it is good ∣aking of the milt, and for Salves. Caroway. THis Hearb destroyeth ill windes and the cough, it is od for the Frensie and for byting of venomous beasts mixed with Vinegar, it is good for stabbs and tetters, it doth also re∣store haire▪ Coleworts. COleworts is good to clense fresh wounds of the Canker, to nourish the sinews, and to heale sore eyes that have almost
lost their sight: It inreaseth womans milk, it comforteth the stomach: Also the Juice of this hearb tempered with Alome and Vinegar asswageth the Leprie: Woodbind. THis is good to heale Cankars, Wounds, Blisters, aking of the Teeth and soreness in a mans tongue, also it is good for swellings in a mans body that is wounded: Onyons. THe juice tempered with womans mill is good to heale the aking of a mans ears: The juice dronk with any kind of Liquor is good for a man that hath lost his speech: Columbine. THis is good for them that have the Quinsey, this Hear should be gathered in August. Cardiaca. IT is good for the falling Evill. Wolfe Thistle or wilde Thistle. IF you take this Thistle while the sign is in Capricornus, and the Moon being new, there shall no thing mischiefe the bearer thereof. Comfrye. IF a man be bruised or broken within take the roots of this Hearb, and rost them well in hot ashes, and eat thereof three dayes, and he shall be whole. It will also knit broken bones.
A Note for the removing and making of slips and planting of Artichokes, Gooseberries, Roses, Privet, White∣thornes, and all manner of flowers. My Lady of Surrey, FRom our Ladie day in August, till our Lady in September, it is good time to remove, to set slipps of all kind of flowers. From September to March, is good o set all quick setts. In September is good to graft of the body, the Moon being at waine. For setting of Treesit is good in November, December, January February, and March. In the latter end of February, it is good to set all manner of flowers, and Artichoks, and also March and Aprill. To graft Peers, Apples, Plummes and Cherries, it is good in the moneth of March in the new Moon. To graft of the budd in the latter end of June the Moon be∣ing at wain. To prune trees, and open the earth about the roots, and to lance and open the bark of trees, it is good in December, Janu∣ary and February, the Moon being at new, &c. To cut Damask and red Roses, it is sufficient to cut them once in a yeare, to have them beare plenty, and whn you cut the Roses, you must cut them in October, the Moon being at the waine, for if you cut them twice as they use to do, they sprought too many leaves and too few blossoms. For opening of the earth about thirty foot compass, you must first take away the earth till you come to the root if it be an old tree, and to let them stand open December, January, and at the la tter end of Februarie to fetch Cart loads of the myre that commeth out of the streets, and to laye a Load of it, to every tree is good to bring down the moss, but it would be done but once in four years. It is very good to cut Vines in the latter end of January, February, and March the Moon being in the waine. For killing of a Canker in any trees it is good to take a Ches∣sell and a Mallett and to cut of the Cankar till they come to the very quick then take a quantity of Swines dung and fill up that place, then put clay upon it and Mosse on that, then
binde it all in with a cloth and so let it remaine till it fall of it selfe and so the bark renueth: A Note of the best times of sowing these Hearbs and seeds insuing. CAbbage coales both white and redd, to be sown in Ianuary, February, March, and August, in the waine and replanted in the same. Lettice, Cabbage to be sown in all Monthes of the yeare, the Moon being in the waine: White Raddish and black Raddish to be sown in March, April, May, June, July, and August in the wain: Parsenepps to be sown in December, Januar, February, March, and Aprill in the wain. Carrots yeallow, white and red, in February, March, Aprill, and May in the waine. Onyons red and white, to be sown in January, February, March Aprill, and August in the waine. Leeks, great and small, in the wayn in February, March, April, and May. Succorie, Endive, Sorrel, Burnet, Landebefe, Buglosse, Sommer Savory to be sown in the wain in February, March, and Aprill, May, June, July: Marrom, Basill, Parsely, Bucks horne, flower-gentle, Stock∣gill flowers, double Marigolds, Roche, Taragon, Tyme and Isop, to be sowne in the wain in Aprill and May. Alisanders, Skirretes, Parsley, Beans, hastie pease to be sown in the waine, in January, February March, and Aprill. Winter Savory, sweet Fennell, Rampions to be sown in the waine in Aprill, May June. Cowcombers, Myllions, Pompions, Gourds, to be sown in the new of the Moon in Aprill, and May. Spinage round and square to be sown in the waine, in March, Aprill, May, August, and September. White Poppie, double and single, Rosecampions, French Mari∣golds, Spannish Marry-golds, French-brome, to be sown in March, Aprill, and May, in the waine. Rew, Carduus benedictus, Artechoaks, Carduus, to be sown in the wayne, in January, February, March, Aprill. Holyokes, Walflowers, red Rubes, Stichados, Cassidonia, Pances, Queen gilliflowers, to be sown in the wain in March, Aprill, and May.
Snape, Dragon, French Mallowes, white and red, and Car∣nation pinks, and pink Gilliflowers to be sowne in March, A∣prill, May and June. Asparagus, Bayberries to be sowne in the waine, in January, February, March. Coolworts, Annise, Tornepps to be sown in the waine, in Aprill, May, Ju ne, Iuly and August, &c. Nicosiana p etum male, and Female in the waine in Aprill and May. Larke-foot blew, and white, Colyflowers to be sown in the waine in March, Aprill and May. Thus endeth the Notes, of setting and sowing of Hearbs and Seeds, &c. collected by the right honourable and vertuous Lady Anne Countesse of Surrey. Another Note to sow Seeds in due season, which I had of John Sinkley. February Parsley. Beetes. Coolworts. Landebeefe. Lettice to Cabige Onyons Leeks. Parsenips. Beanes. To be sown in the waine of the Moon in Fe∣bruary and all Pot-Herbs. Cabige coles to be sown in the waine in February and removed in May.
March. Carrets. Tyme. Isop. Winter Savorie. Sommer Savorie. Costmarie. Mawdlyne. Double Marigolds. Stock gilly flowers. Rose campions. Columbynes. These to be sowen in the waine of the Moon in March and all flowers. Taragon the Plants to be set in March in the waine of the Moon. Aprill. Marjerome. Basile. Flower gentle. Raddishes. These to be sowne in the waine in Aprill. Cowcumbers. Myllions. Cyttrons. Pompiones. These to be pric∣ked, or set in the waine of Aprill. Coleflowers to be sown in the waine of Aprill, and to be re∣moved as you would remove Cabages. Sparagus must be sown in Aprill as afore in a dunged corner, whereas it may not be removed in two years, and as the Sun may come thereto, and it will be the second yeare, or ever you may use it in Sallads, But the first yeare you may gather the Seed, and the next yeare you shall have Sallads thereof, that when you cut it over night, you shall have as much the next day, to serve your turne and it groweth up like a Reed.
White Endive to be sown in the waine of the Moon a fort∣night before Midsummer, and when the Endive is great, you must take it up in a drye day, and make a hundreth holes some∣what wide, and put to every hole a root, good and deep into the ground, and put them close together every root, so as no earth be between the leaves, and set one hundred one week, and as many the next, and so more if you will that may be ready as you shall spend them, and then about Bartholomew tide, or a little before sow more Endive for winter, and use it as be∣fore. It is good to sow Raddishes before or after Midsommer when you sow Endive, and they will be good in winter. To sow Cabage coles at Bartholomew tyde, and to take them up in the latter end of February and set them againe, and they will be Cabages at Midsomer. To set the Plants of Artechokes in the waine of the Moon in March, and you shall have apples of the Plants at Midsomer. Also to set the seeds of Artechokes as aforesaid, but you must remove them, when they come up, at the least twice, that is to say, in June and after Midsummer, in the waine of the Moon, and water your Artechokes when you remove them and three dayes after. And your Cabages also. To sow Spinnage after Midsommer, and all Pot hearbs that runneth to seed, and they will serve in winter. Rules for the setting of Hearbs and sowing of seeds. The setting of Hearbs. At Michalmas. SEt Onions for Skallions. In February. Set Artichokes in compasse. In March. Set Isop, Tyme, and all such hearbs, Winter Savory, Alcha∣kengi, Gillistowers of all kinds, Walflowers, Skirrets, and Plantane, and cut off their tops by the body:
In June. Set Leeks▪ In August. Set, cut, and remove, all manner of Roses, except Musk Roses which nee to be set at Candlemas. And in August lay Endive in the ground to make it white. The sowing of Seeds. In February. SOw Onyons, Leeks, Parsley and Nigella Romana. In March. Sow Lettice, Carrets, Cabbage-Worts, Nigella Romana, Succorie, Endive, Skirrets, Rocket, Rampions, Parsley and Walflowers. In Aprill. Sow Marjerome, Flower-gentill, and all kind of fine seeds, with Isop and Tyme: In May in the end. Sow Torneps, Naves, and Venus Lettice: After Pentecost. In the latter end of the Moon, set Raddish seeds one inch and a halfe deep, and leave the holes open. In August. In the first of August, sow Turneps, and Naves for winter, and Parsley that shall not beare seeds in two yeare. Those Hearbs which you Will have flower and seed, set and sow, (if the weather serve) in the first quarter of the Moon, and that which you would have neither flower nor seed, set and sow about the last quarter.
Setting of Hearbs and sowing of Seeds. February. Onions, Parsley, Endive, Sorrell, Spinage, Raddish, Beets, Cresses, Rackats, Lettice, Tyme, Borage, Buglosse, Leeks, Fennel, Marigolds, Langdebefe. March. Puselane, Marierome gentle, basill, Carrets. Aprill. Cowcumbers, Millons, Gourds, Savery, Cabages, Coleworts, Artechokes. May. Rampiones, Succorie. Remove Artechokes in February or March, Onions in May, Endive in August, or before Michaelmas, And to have feed of Endive or Succory, sow them in February or March. Sow all other seeds as before. Remove the Lettice that is sown in the end of August at Hallomas. And sow Lettice in the end of October, and remove at Candlemas, and it shall be ready to succeed that which is sown in August. Lettice may be sown in the end of every Moneth, except No∣vember, December, or January: Ali Herbs prove best that are sowen in the deepest of every moneth, except Raddishes which require the full Moon. Sow Lettice every Moneth in the waine of the Moon. To make them Cabbage when the sign is in Aquarius or Pisces, for a moist ground. And for a drie ground, sow when the signe is n Aries: The Vertues of divers Waters, as followeth. Hysop-water: IS good for all manner of evills in the Stomach and in the Heart and Lungs for the breast and Marrow.
Water of Bettonie. Is good for all Head-ach to wash the Temples therewith, and for filth about the Heart. Water of Dragons. Is good for any infection or corruption in the Eare, that goeth into a man, and for the pestilence. Water of Elder. Is good for a man or woman to drink against all manner of Jaundice. Water of Endive. Is good for to drink for all manner of Feavers and hott evils, for the Dropsie, the Liver and Stomach. Water of red Fennell. Is good for all manner of evills in the Eyes and good for a prick. Water of Wormewood. Is good for wormes in the Belly, and for girding in the womb and windinesse of the Collick, for the Liver, for the Splene, for Drunkenesse, for the eye sight, and for evill yre of Plagues and pestilence. Water of Dytanie. Is good for venome and pestilence. Water of Centorie. Is good for the Liver, for the Milt, for Wormes in the wombe, and for the Sauce-fleame. VVater of Fumitory. Is good for the Morphew for Scab or Scale, for the Dropsie, for the Liver, for the Martow. VVater of Manebyne. Is good for the Gout, for the Longs, Breast, and for the Col∣lick.
VVater of Balme. Is good for the Lyver, for the Spleen, for the Marrow of the back: And also it cleanseth and driveth away the Mother. VVater of Plantane. Is good for the Flux, and for the hot Dropsie. VVater of Violets. Is good good for a man within and for the Reins of the back, and for the Lyver: VVater of VVoodbinds. Is good for all manner of heats, and also scaldings in the mouth, which break out of the Stomach, and for a Canker. To Distill Waters truely. Out of Mrs. Dauson hir Book. Prymeroses. Pryme-roses must be distilled leaves and Flowers. Fennell. Fennell must be distilled both Hearb and root. Isop. Isop must be distilled Hearb and Flowers: Camomile. Camomile must be distilled Hearb and Flowers. VValwort. Walwort the Hearb and the root stamp them. Strawburies. Straburies the fruit stamped, with Vinegar and so distil them. VVormewood. Wormwood must be gathered in May, then stamp it and lay it in strong Vinegar, to step and to distill it. Selendine. Selendine must be distilled, both Hearb, Flowers and roots. To distill Damask water. Take a peck of Rose-leaves and three handfull of dry Lavan∣der two handful of Marjerome, one penyworth of Yreos & Orice pouder, and Damask pouder two ounces, one penyworth of Cloves. Put all these things together into two pottles of Con∣duit water, and let it stand in steep seven dayes, and then still them.
To make sweet water with a small cost. TAke three gallons of water, and put therto half a pound of Callamus, two ounces of Cloves, a quarter of a pound of Orris, a peck of Roses, two handfuls of Basil, one handful of Marjoram, a little handful of Bay-leaves, two handfuls of La∣vander-spike, a few tops of Rosemary, a little Maudlyn, let all these lye in steep day and a night, and then stil it, and a week before you occupy it, hang within your glass two grains of Muk unto a pottle of water. Sweet Waters which I had out of Mrs. Dawson her Book. KNead the flower of Wheat meal with Mares milk, then bake the bread therof gently in an Oven, and draw it out before it be much baken, Take the crum of this bread cut it in smal peeces, and put it into new Goats milk, and let it stand so six hours, mix it with the water of twelve Whits of Hens Eggs made with a spong, lyme made of egg-shels, one ounce of Camphire, white Sugar and Alome, with white Corral of each two drams, when all these things are welbeaten to powder, let them be mixt with the moist things, and distilled in a Lymbeck of glass. My Lady Cromwell. TAke of Garden Snails three handfuls, Oyle of bitter Almonds one pound, Daysie-roots one handfull, Mares milk, or Goats milk a quart, distill all these together iu a Limbeck of Glass, in the month of May, and wash therwith when you will. My Lady Paget. TAke fair white Sugar, and dissolve it in Rosewater, and add ther∣to whatsoever you will as Violets, Roses, Alessander buds, and such like.
To make Damask water in Winter. TAke a pottle of good Ale new cleansed, and let it stand in an ear∣then pot all night, in the morning take it out, and put therto a quart of running water, and a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, and as much of Oris, two handfuls of dryed Lavander, four handfuls of dryed Roses, forty Bay-leaves, and a handfull of Rosemary tops, put all these in a Stillitory with a little Camphire, and distill them. How to make another Damask water proved, by her that stilleth the Kings sweet Waters at Hampton-Court. TAke of the best red Roses new gathered a good quantity, and straw them light in the bottom of your Stil, then take Lavender speck, fine Marjoram and Basill, the leaves of each mingled together, of these four being mingled take one handful and strew them light upon the Roses, then take a little Damask pouder and strew it lightly upon your green flowers, then take a handfull of your Rose leaves, and strew thom upon your pouder and green flowers. Then take a quantity f Damask pouder, and strew it upon your uppermost Roses: These things above written being done, take six or seven Rose-leaves, and lay on every leaf the quantity of half a grain of Cyvet, and lay them upper∣most of all with the Cyvet upward, then take and cover your Stilli∣tory very close that no aire get out, and distill them altogether with a soft fire: And you shall make fine Damask water. To make Rosewater for Damask-water. TAke red Roses and pick them from the buds, then take Lauender speck, Marjoram, and Basill, the leaves of each two handfuls, then take five or seven leaves of your Roses, and lay on them a little quantitie of Cyvet, then take Damask powder and straw be∣tween every range, then distill them in your Stillitory with a soft fire i any wise. To make Damask water at all times. TAke a quart of fair water and make it hot, and then put it into your Ewer, and then minglethrwith six drops of pure oyle of spick and three drams of Camphire.
To make water Aromatick. TAke Nutmegs, Cloves, and Galingale, and a quantity of Camphire and Musk, make these in pouder, and put into it Rosewater a day and a night, then cleanse it and reserve it in a glass. To make a peircing water: TAke Wine and put to it Salt-petre, Salt-gem, and Sulphur, and stil it in a Stillitory, and this wil peirce stone, Iron, and all things that come neer it. A sharp water to cleanse Metall: TAke white Argoil, Sal armoniack, Alom de plume, and com∣mon Salt, of each a quantity, and make them in powder, and put the powder in strong Vinegar, or else into a Childs U∣rine, and boyl the Mettal therin.
Baits for Fishes. For the Pike. A Roach layed in a dry linnen cloath that no scales go off it. A Frog layd in a pot with honey five daies, then taken out and washed in Oleum Benedictum the space of an hour: this is a soveraign bait for a Pike all the year long. For the Pearch. The red Worm without a knot. The writhen Worm that lyes in the Clay, on a round heap▪ The Worm that lyes in an old Tree, having a white body and a red head. For the Trout. The Hasel Worm that lyes under the hasel root. The Dock-worm that lyes under the Dock-roots, a Canker. For the Roach. The straw Worm that lyes in the Ryne. The Cod-worm, Maggots, &c. April. For the Roach. TAke the Worm that lyes among the ashes on a dunghill, he is red with a green tail. The straw Worm he is green: The Maggot of new Cheese. The Fly with a long tail.
May. THe baits for al fresh water Fishes be in manner the same that be before, for May, Iune, Iuly, and August. September. For the Roach: THe Warbub put in the pouder of Assa fetida one night and one day, then taken out and put in Oleum Benedictum, and so put next your dubbing. The Butter▪flye that hath four colours, that is to say, the body yellow, the wings red, black, and green. For the Pearch. Take the writhen Worm, put him in Oleum Benedictum. October. For the Roach: THe Worm that is amongst Skinners shavings, he is white and shorr. The Worm that is among Barkers shavings, he is red. The green Fly. November. For the Roach and Pearch. TThe green Cod-worm which hath yellow wings, he is com∣monly found sitting upon Oke-leaves. The green Fly, the Maggot. Take Asurbis and slime of Caper honey, and Saffron, mingle all these together with a pint of stale Ale, then take a penny∣weight of Assa fetida, put all these in a glass, and let it stand nine daies and nine nights. Also take the Cassell Worm, or the Bryer Canker, or the green Fly that sits on the Ivy berry. Begin to fish on St. Valentines day if the weather be cleer.
How to take Fish. SEeth Neats Oyle, skum it, make a ring of a Rush, lay it up∣on the water, put of the Oyle into the Ring, and you shall see the Fish that is in the Pool. Annoint your hands with juice of Nettles and Sengreen, put them in the Pond, and the Fish will come to your hand. Take Assa fetida, He nbane seed. Quick-silver, and Vinegar, fry it together in a pot▪sherd, put it in a linnen bag, tye it with a line to a Pole; Dip it it in the water, the savour wil make all the Fish to be above the water, that you may take them, as long as the bagg is in the water. Take honey, soft Cheese, C. oculus Indiae, crums of white bread▪ make all in past like Maggots, the Fish eating therof wil swim above the water that you may take them. Take C. oculus Indiae twelve berries, Henbane seed a spoonful, hard Cheese, Sheeps-tallow, of each as much as a Walnut, a quantity of Wheat-flower, a little honey, beat all in a Morter, make Bals therof and cast it into the water. Take honey one ounce, Cheese two ounces, C. oculux Indiae 24, berries, Comfits two ounces, make it in past, and cast where the Fish is. Burn Hors-leaches called Blood▪suckers, make fine powder of them, annoint the back of your hand with Oyle of Osprey, strow the powder upon it, put your hand into the water, the Fish will come to it. Take the Glow-worm that shineth by night, put her in a Vi∣all of glass close stopped, hang it in a bow Net or Stalker. Make Fagots of new Pease-straw, bind them in three places, bind stones in them to make them sink. To take a Pike. FLey an Eel to the Navel, fill the skin with Tar &c.
Baits for Fish at all times. TAke VVheat-flour, new killed Sheeps-tallow, the white of an Egg, a little honey, make a past therof and put upon your hook. Take the juice of Valerian, Vervine, and Rueberb, ana put in a Box, put red worms to it three hours before you use them, bait your hooks with them. For Birds, and Fowls. TAke seeds of Henbane, Poppy, Lettice, Hemlock beaten in fine powder, boyl all in dregs of strong Wine, then boyl whole Wheat in it, strow the wheat where the Fowl do haunt, and if they eat of it they will be drunk and cannot flye. Likewise for Conies with Oats An order for the encrease and keeping of Carps. 1. THe Female must be eight or nine years old ere ever she wil multiply. 2. For the Female you must put in twelve or more Males of three or four years old. 3. The Female must be kept from year to year, though it be forty years, or more. 4. Put in two Females least one dye. 5. The Pond must be drawn about Holland-tide, and the Fish put into a less Pond til March, and then put forth some of three years, some of two years, and some of one year, so many as the Pond wil feed wel; this must be done every year, and kil all that are four years old except the Female aforesaid. 6. A Pond of an acre wil feed every year two hundred of three years old, and three hundred of two years old, and four hun∣dred of one year old. 7. And to feed them fat and make them encrease in great∣ness, you must put them in Pits and Puddles, in Pastures. And from stealing in Winter you may have them home, and put 500. in a Pond of the breadth of a Parlour, for a Carp ne∣ver feedeth but in Sommer.
To Dye divers kinds of Colours. To dye yellow. TAke of running water and as much Tap wort, then take Alome and seeth them together til the Alome be molten, then put in the Yarn and let it seeth til it be somwhat yellow, then wash it clean out of the water, then take Clay wa∣ter, or Chalky water, then take Wheld and seeth it in the said water, then take weights of Lead or Stone to keep down the Weeld, and then let it seeth til it flour above, then put in the Yarn, and so let it seeth a little. To dy red. FIrst Alome your Yarn as you do the yellow, then take Brasil, and lay it in water a night, then seeth it, and put more water to it as you think good, and then let it seeth til it flour above, and then put in your Yarn and let it seeth til the water look Oreng-tawny, then take a handful of bay Salt and cast upon it, then let it seeth til it be molten. To dye Carnation. TAke running water four gallons, and take two pound of Pot ashes and lay in the said water two daies and two nights, then divide the water, the one half into one pot, and the other half into another pot, and let the one pot stand in the hot Embers up to the brim, and the other stand warm by the fire, to fil the other as it seeths away: Then take an earthen pot and put in the said water, then take two pound of red Flocks Brisco, and let it seeth til it be thick, then take a little Gum arabeck and Alome, of both as much as a Walnut, then let it stand til it be but warm, and then put in the Yarn, and let it lye a night and a day.
To dye Popingay Green. Take penny-hew, and put to it Chamberlye or good Boock∣ley, and seeth it and put in the yeallow Yarne, and let it seeth, the longer it seetheth the deeper the colour will be. To dye dark Green. TAke your Yarne, and let it be wett in blewfant, and then put it in the yeallow fat, and let it seeth, and it will be a darke green. To dye Purple. TAke Orchall and mingle it with halfe Chamber-ley, and let it seeth till it be a dark colour, and then put in your Yarne white. To dye Russet. TAke green Coperas and Nugalls, and beat them to pou∣der, put them in water and set it on the fire till it be hot, and then put in your Yarne. To dye Tawny. TAke sowt that is over an Oven and Buck ley and Cork and seeth it together, and then put in your yeallow yarne, and it will be a Tawny. Take a handfull of Bay salt, and cast upon it. To make steyning or dying waters. To make a deep Green. TAke two peniworth or three penniworth of Vertgrece, grind it on a stone, take blades of worts the greenest and the say∣rest, stamp them and wring the juice thereof through a cloth, take halfe a pint of this Juice, and put thereto three pence∣worth of Vertgrece, temper it together.
Another Green. LAy first a blew, and when it is drie lay thereon a yeallow, the better will the green be. A light Green. TAke Florey a shell full, and put thereto into some vessell the eighth part of a gallon of wort, stir them together and put it on a cloth, then take yeallow water, and with a pensell do it upon the other till it wax green, the more yeallow you lay on the better green: A blew water. TAke cleane water of the well and a shell full of Florey, of the said water one pint, mix them and and lay it on thinne. Another: TAke a portion of Florey blew, a portion of Alome, mix them in water. Another fine Blew. TAke a portion of Florage, a portion of Ley or Lime water put into a pan, let it not plaw, put thereto a portion of Al∣lome, stir it well, take it off the fire, and cast thereinto wood∣ashes, this is a fine blew:
To make Network called the Broad Arrow, and the Diamond. THe first course at the beginnig of the work is to to make nine plain stitches, and the tenth to winde twice about your pinne, and so to work throughout at every ninth stich to wind the tenth. The second row is to make eight plaine stitches, and your long stitches, that is to make the Diamond; And so to work your second course through out. The third row is to make but seven plaine stiches, and then to make two long stit∣ches and one little stitch between the two long stitches, and then to make your course throughout. The fourth course is to make six plaine stitches, and then go down to make your Dia∣mond with a long stitch, and then to make two short stiches, and then to make your other long stich, and so to make your course throughout, and then halfe your Diamond is made. Now to make the other halfe of your Diamond is, if you have at the beginning of your course ever a Diamond then to make the stiches that containes to mace. And then to make that which you call the broad Arrow; that is to make three winding stiches twice about your pinn. And to knit three of them winding stitch∣es together in a knot. And so to make three winding stiches more, and to knit them on a knot, so there must be two of them broad Arrowes together between every Diamond, and so to make that course throughout. The second course of the lower part of the Diamond, is to make them six long stiches in full length. Then to go up with a long stitch to your Diamond, then to make two little plain stit∣ches, and then to make down your winding stitches, that is to make the broad Arrow foot, and thus to make your course throughout. The third row is to make seven plaine stitches, then to go up your long stitch And then to make but one plaine, stih, then to make your long stitch down, and so to work as
you did before, and thus to work your course throughout. Then to begin your work new againe. The fourth course, that is, to make an end of your Diamond, is to make ten win∣ding stitches twice about your pinn, and so to work your course throughout. Then to begin your work new againe, is to make nine stitches, working every other stitch, and the tenth to wind twice about your pinn, and thus to work your course throughout. And then to begin your work new againe, as I have above written. To make Net-work of the Skallop-shell. FIrst make a plaine course, the second course, take the third stitch, and work it plaine down to your pinn, then loup over the next stitch to that to your handward, and then loup the next stitch to that to your handward, and so work all that course. Provided alwayes if your work go true, you have two short stitches between one long, that lyeth something course: The third course; If you have a short stitch at the beginning of your work, slip it upward, and then pull out your pinn, and work, and wok the next short stitch to it as short as you can, then pull out your pin and put it into your first stitch, and work your long stitch that lyeth overthwart, down to your pinne, as long as it will go, and so do all that course. Provided alwayes if your work go true, you have one short stitch between two long stitches. The fourth course. If you have a short stitch at the begin∣ning of your work, slip it upward and then work your two long stitches down to your pinne, and then slip up, and the next short stitch that is between two long stitches, slip it upward, and so do all that course. Provided alwayes if your work go true, you have three long stitches of an even length. And so your work is made an end, for there is but three courses in al the work besides the plain course. You must take heed at the beginning of your work, that you set one Skallop sel right against another, a Dyamond right against another, and so you may make the work of the double Dyamond as you do this in every point, saving at the beginning of your work you must set your Diamond▪over▪thwart your work, cater corner, if it be wrought with a great pinne it is the better.
The Knotwork like Dice. FIrst make a plaine course. The second course wind about your pinne, and work down the third stitch to your pin, and the next stitch backward to your handward, bring it over and work it dovvn to your pinne, plaine as it lyeth, and the next stitch, and the next stitch to that, work it dovvn to your pinne, turned as it lyeth, and so do all that course. Provided alwayes, if your work go true, you have two short stitches betvveen every long. The third course, If you have two short stitches, you must slip the first upvvard that lyeth nethermost, and the other pull out your pinne, and work it short, then pull out your pin and work your long stitch down to your pin, as long as it will go, then the next short stitch work it dovvn to your pin and slip it upvvard, then pull out your pinne and vvork the next short stitch as short as it may be, then pull out your pin and vvork the next long stitch, as long as it vvil be, and so do all that course. Provided alwayes, if your vvork go true, that you have a Dia∣mond that is two stitches of an even length together and a short stitch betvveen. The fourth course, at the beginning of your vvork if you have short stitch slip it upward, then the next tvvo long stitches, vvork them dovvn to your pinne, and slip the next short stitch, and so vvork all that course. Provided alvvayes if your vvork go true, you have three stitch∣es of an even length, and a gap betvveen, and then to begin your vvork again, you must vvind your thread about your pinne and vvork dovvn the third stitches as you did before. To make Network like seven Eyes. THe first course, wind your thread about your pinne at every stitch, and the second course take two long stitches upon your needle and turne the second stitch into the first long stitch inward to your hand and pull it through your first stitch, and the thread of your first stitch, turn it inward through the second stitch down to your pinne like a loop or a Nouse, so that the thread of the loop must lye upon the nouse upper∣most, then work your nouse dwn to your pin, and the next stitch or
thread that lyeth upon your nouse work down to your pinne, and make a stich. Provided alwayes if your work go true you have two knots toge∣ther, and a wide bout between, and the next third course begin your work again and round your thread about your pinne at every itch, as you did before at the beginning of your work. The Net-worke of the small Diamonds. THe first course must be wrought plaine, work the second stitches plain and the first stitches loup it over the second, and work it downe to your pin. Provided alwayes at the beginning of your second course, if you chance to have an odd stitch that is not against your Diamond, work it plain, and then work the third stitch and loup over the second as be∣fore, and so your third course you must work it a plaine course as you, did at the beginning of your work. Provided alwayes if your work go true, you have two knots together and one stitch ligger then another, and you must work it with a very great pinne, or else it will be too thick. To make the great Loosings. YOu must knit eleven stiches and then wind about your pynne, And if you will make a lesse loosing you must work eight stitches and wind the ninth about your pinne, and at the second course if you have any short stitches work them short and pull out your needle and work your Loop as long as it will go, and the next shortest stitch slip it upward, and so do all that course. Provided alwayes you must have seven short stitches, if your work be true, and the third course if you have any short stich∣es at the beginning of your work, work them short, then put up your thrid through your long stitch and turn your two long stitches inward, and then work them down upon your pinne, and put your thrid into your long stitch againe, and work one of your short stitches, and slip it upward, and then pull out your pinne, and work all your short stitches short. Provided alwayes, that you must have six short stitches be∣tween your three long stitches.
The fourth course, At beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then work one of your three twisted stitches a little longer then your other long stitches, then pull out your pinne, and work your other two very short, then put in your long stitch and work one of your short stitches and make it an other long, and then pull out your pinne, and work two short stitches, winding your thread about your pinne, and that will make a short mask, then work your other two short stitches down to your pinne, and so work all that course as be∣fore. Provided alwayes, if your work go true, you have two short stitches between your longer stitches. The fifth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thrid into your longest and work it down unto your pinne, then put your thread into your long stitch, and work on of your short stitches under your pinne, and slip it upward then pul out your pinne, and work one short stitch very short, then pull out your pinne againe, and put your thread in∣to your long Mask, and work your long mask down to your pinne aslong it will go, and put your thrid into your long maske and work one of your short stitches under your pinne and slip it upward, and the next short stitch work it upward, and so work all that course. Provided alwayes, if your work go true, you have but one short stitch between your long stitches. The sixth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, and then put your thrid into your long stitch, and vvork dovvn to the pinne, then put your thrid into your great hole, and vvork your short stitch under your pinne sloping upvvard, then put your thrid into a hole like a Glasse-vvindovv, and turne both those stitches invvard, and vvork them to your pinn, not too long as your other Masks, then put your third into that hole like a Glass-vvindovv, and vvork your short stitch under your pinne, and slip it upvvard, and so do all that course. Provided alvvayes, if your vvork go true, you must have three tvvisted stiches together, and a gap betvveen the three tvvisted stitches that be against the Glasse-vvindovv must be shorter then the other three tvvisted stitches.
The seventh course if you have any short stitches, work them short, and if your three twisted stitches be against the hole of the glass-window, you must make a long mask of one of them, then pul out your pin, and work the other two short masks, then put your pn into the longer mask, and work down your twist∣ed stitches that are divided into two parts, and so do all that course. Provided alwaies, that if your work go true, you must have two short stitches between every seven stitches. The eighth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thred into your long mask, and work it down to your pin, and so work up all your stitches of an even length, which wil be eight, then put your thred into your long mask, which is the last stitch of your eight stitches, and work your other short stitch under your pin, and slip it upward, and then pul your pin and work your other short stitch very short, then pul out your pin and put your thred into your long mask, and work down your other eight stitches down to your pin, and so work all that course. Provided alwaies, that if your work go true, you must have seven stitches of an even length, and a short stitch between. The nineth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thred into your great hole, and work down all your seven stitches down to your pin, then put your thred into your great hole again and work your short stitch under your pin, and slip it upward, and so do all that course throughout. Provided alwaies, if your work go true, you shall have nine stitches of an even length, and a gap between. Loosings of eight stitches. THe first course make a loosing of eight stitches, and wind a∣bout the nineth stitch, so you must have eight stitches between every wind. The second course, at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then pull out your pin, and work your long stitch down to your pin as long as it will go, and the next short stitch work it about your pin and slip it upward.
Provided alwaies, if your work go true, you must have seven short stitches and two long stitches. The third course, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thred into the hole that is like a glass∣window, and turn your two long stitches inward, and work them down to your pin, then put your thred into the same hole again, and work one of your short stitches under your pin, and slip it upward, and so work all that course. Provided alwaies, if your work go true, you have six short stitches between two twisted stitches. The fourth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then pull out your pin and work your three twisted stitches down to your pin, then put your thred about your pin, and work it close down to your pin, and it will make you have four stitches in all, wherof two short and two long, then pull out your pin and work your short stitches short, and so work all that course. Provided alwaies, that if your work go true, you have four long stitches and five short. The fifth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then pull out your pin, and put your thred into your long stitch, and work it down to your pin, and so do all your long stitches which are four, then put your thred into your long mask, and work one of your short stitches under your pin and slip it upward, then pull out your pin, and work your short stitches short, and so do all that course. Provided alwaies if your work go true, you have four short stitches and five long. The sixth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thred into your great hole, and work down your five long stitches close to your pin, then put your thred into your long mask, and work one of your shott stitches under your pin and slip it upward, and then pull out your pin and work your short stitches, and so do all that course. Provided alwaies if your work go true, you have six long stitches and three short. The seventh course at the beginning of your vvork, if you have any short stitches vvork them short, then pull out your pin, and work your six long stitches down to your pin, then work one of your short stitches to your pin, which will make
seven long stitches in all. Then pull out your pinne, and work your short stitches, and so work all that course, provided al∣wayes, that if your work go true, you have seven long stitches and two short between your long. The eighth course, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put your thread into your long Mask and work it down to your pinne, and all the rest the seven stitches, then put your thred into your long Mask, and work one of your short stitches under your pinne, and slp it upward, then pull out your pin, and work your next short stitch very short, and so do all that course: Provided alwayes, if you your work go true you have eight long stitches, and one short between. The ninth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, then pull out your pinne, and put your thread into your great hole, and work all your eight stitches down to your pinne en put your thread into your great hole againe, and work your short stitch under your pinne and slip it upward, And so do all that course. Provided alwayes, if your work be true, you have nine stitches together, and a twisted gap between, and so is your halfe los∣sing done, and then must you work eight plaine stitches, and wind about your pinne as you did the first course. To knit Net-work like Glass-windows: THe first course, you must wind your thred about your Pin at every second stitch, and so work the other stitch plain to the end of your work, and the next course you shall work it plain, drawing one of the knots shorter then the other, provided alwaies, that course that you wind your thred about your Pin, you must wind that stitch that the knot of the glass∣window is lowest to our pin. If you will have a double Glass window, you must wind your thread about your Pin every third stitch, and so work it as be∣fore, and at every third course wind about your Pin, and if you wil make your Glass-window of four stitches, you must wind at everv fourth stitch, and so likewise if you wil make it of 5. of 6. of 7: or of 8. you must do likewise as before, or as big as you wil. If you wil have your Glass-window very wide, you must wind your thread about your Pin twice together.
How to knit Net-work of the Harts. THe work of the Harts you must knit first three stitches, then pluck out your Pin, and work it backward and forward a∣gain, then you must make one long stitch, the knot must be half the way, and so work three plain stitches more, plucking out your Pin, and work them backward and forward as you did before, of this fashion you must work all the breadth of your work, and the last; and the last three stitches at the begin∣ning and at the ending you must work it six Masks of length, for the beginning of your long stitches at the next course. The Knotted work of the Flese. THe first course you must wind your thred about your Pin at every second stitch, and leave a stitch between, and bring that stitch over the other stitch, and that course work it so, and at the second course you must work it plain with knot-drawing of one stitch shorter then the other, provided alwaies if you have a short stitch at the beginning of that course of your work, that one knot is shorter then the other, you must wind your thread about the Pin, and make that stitch a long one, and provided alwaies the first stitch of your second course, if you find a Diamond at the beginning, then wind about your Pin and work the second stitch, and bring the first over to it, and if you chance to find an odd stitch at the beginning of your work, then wind your thred about your in, and work that stitch by it self, and so begin your work as before, for there is but two courses, A K not-work like Honey-combs. THe first course wind your thread about your Pin every other stitch, the second course you must put your thred into your long stitch and bring it over your Pin and work a stitch, then put your Needle into the same long stitch and bring it down to the inside of your Pin, and put in your Needle into your short stitch, and make that a short stitch of the inside of your Pin to your hand-ward, provided alwaies you must have two stitches against every Honey-comb.
The Knot-work of Lossinges: THe first course, at every fourth stitch wind your thred about your Pin, and so work all that course through, winding your thred about your pin at every fourth stitch, provided al∣waies, that if your work go true, you must have three short stit∣ches between your long stitch, & the second course at the begin∣ning of your work, if you have any short stitches one or two work them short, and pull out your Pin, and put your thred through your long stitch, and then work a stitch upon your Pin, and then put your thred about your Pin, and put it through your long stitch, and work one of your short stitches under your Pin, and knit it upvvard long, and then pul out your pin, and work two short stitches, and so do all that course through: Provided alwaies that all your course must go with two short stitches, and two long; the third course at the be∣ginning, work two short stitches, short, and pul out your Needle, and work your two twisted stitches as long as the loops wil go, and the next short stitch to it, knit it up high that it may be as long as the other two, then pul out your pin, and work your short stitch very short, and then pul out your pin and work your long stitch as before, and so work all your long course; provided alwaies that you must have three long stitches oge∣ther, and one short stitch between. The fourth course if you have any short stiches at the beginning of your work, work them short, then pul out your pin and work your long stitch upon your pin, then put your thred into your long stitch, and vvork your short stitch under your pin, if it be your short stitch at the end of your Lossenge, draw it upvvard and vvork it at length, then the next long stitch that is next to your Lossing, you must put the thred into it, and then vvork a stitch, a∣bout pin, and the next short stitch that is betvveen your tvvo long stitches, that stitch vvil begin a nevv Lossing, you must work it close to your pin, and so work all your course through; provided alwaies, that if your work go true, you have four stitches of an even length together on your pin, and a twisted gap between, then begin your work again as before at the beginning, that is to say, to wind about your pin at e∣very fourth stitch▪ two and twenty score stitches and seventeen wil serve for the widness of a Gorget, if the thred be fine.
The order how to knit a Hose. FIrst in the top it must be six score and twelve stitches wide, so work downward, and take in at every four purles hard at the seam of the right hand Needle one stitch, and of the left hand Needle, leave a stitch between the seam, and then take in, and so work down til you have made four purles, and then begin the ham, and work up streight, neither wi∣den nor streighten til you have made fourteen knots, and then widen out of both sides of your seam as you did before at every four purles, til you have wided seven stitches at a side, then work up plain, neither widen nor streighten til you have made fourteen knots then take in at every fifth mask a stitch of each side as you did before, til you have left but four and forty of every Needle, which amounteth to fix score and twelve, and if it chance in the working of your smal that your ham rise som∣what round, you must take in somwhat faster then is appointed here, that your smal be not too big, and from your calf to the beginning of your clock amounteth unto seventy knots, and so then divide your Needles into three equal parts, allow∣ing upon your two heel Needles three stitches of each, more then upon your instep Needle, and then at the beginning of the right hand Needle of the heel make two turned stitches, and so work plain til you come at the latter end of the left hand Needle to the instep ward, and there make two turned stitches again, and then knit plain round til you come again to your heel-needle, then make one purl at the beginning of your heel-needle, then take up a stitch between the two purls and work it plain, then the next stitch make a purl, and the next stitch work plain, then shrink two stitches into, and work til you come to your left-hand Needle, then you must leave four stitches of your Needle, and so shrink two together, then cast up your thred and make a knot, then widen a stitch and work it plain, and make a knot again, and so then work your instep-needle, and so work plain one course round about, til you come to your right hand heel Needle, then make at the first stitch one pul, and kni a plain stitch again, and then take up a stitch and work that plain, next that cast up your thred and make a knotted stitch, and thn work a plain stitch again, and take in two plain stitches into one, and so knit a¦bout
til you come to the left-hand Needle within five stitches, then take two into one then make a purl, then work a plain stitch, and take up a stitch and work it plain, and then work a purl, and so then work your instep-needle, and then a plain course round about of all three Needles, then make your purl again when you come to your right hand Needle, and then two plain stitches, and then one purl, and so work til you come to your left hand Needle, within four stitches, then make a purl stitch, two plain stitches and one purl, and so work your instep-needle, and then a plain course about til you come to your right-hand Needle again, then make a turned stitch, then one plain stitch, then take up a stitch and make that a purl, then a plain stitch, then a purl, then a plain stitch, then take in two, nd work about til you come to your left hand-Needle, til you have left but six then shrink in two, then make a purl stitch, then knit plain again one stitch, then take up a stitch and makes that a purl, then work a plain stitch▪ then make another purl, and so to your instep Needle, and knit a plain course round about, then when you come at your right Needle, make a purl, then a plain stitch, then a purl again, then a plain stitch again, then knit a plain again til you come at your left hand Needle, til you have left five stitches, then you must make a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch again, and so to your instep Needle, and then knit a plain course about til you come to your right hand Needle, then a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then take up a stitch, and make that a purl, and then two purls together then knit a plain stitch and make a purl again, then a plain stitch, then knit two to∣gether, and so knit til you come to your left hand Needle, til you have but seven, then tak two into one, then a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then take up a stitch and make that a purl, and so shall you have two purls toge∣ther, then a plain stitch, then a purl again, then knit out your instep Needle, then a course about plain, then to your right side Needle, ad at the first stich make a purl, then a plain stitch, then two purles together, then a plain stitch, then a purl again; And so to your l ft hand Needle til you come to six stitches, then make a purl, then a plain stitch, then two purls together, then a plain stitch, then a purl again, and so to your instep Needle, and so a plain course til you come to your right hand needle, then make a purl, then a plain stitch, then
a purl, then take up a plaln stitch, then make a purl again, then a plain stitch, then a p, then a plain stitch, then a purl, and knit two together, then knit to your left hand Needle, til you have but eight stitches, then take in two together, then make a purl, then a plain stitch, then a purl again, then take up one and make it a plain stitch, then knit a purl again, then a plain stitch again, then a purl, and so to your instep Needle, and so knit round about, neither widen nor streiten til there be ten purls on the side Needles, and take off your two side Nee∣dles, three stitches of each, and put them upon our instep nee∣dle, and then upon your two side Needles, knit up your heel til you have 54. purls, taking in at every four purls a stitch from the purl of the right side, and leave a stitch between the purl of the left side, and so take it in till you have but 28. stitches of each side, then upon your right hand you must work of 12 stitches with the purls and all▪ then take two stitches, and loop one over another inward to the seam of your Hose, and so work plain til you come within two stitches of your seam, and work them both into one stitch plain as they lye, and then knit your seam stitch, and your other two stitches next your seam stitch, must be looped outward from the seam, then work till you have but 18 stitches of a needle, and knit two toge∣ther, and so must you take in and bind at every other course till your binding stitches do meet, if you chance to have any odd stitches of one needle more then of thother, bind on those stitches and not of thother, then work till you come at your seame stitch, and so put both the right sides of your Hose togea∣ther of both your Needles, and take a third needle, and work both those needles together on the wrong side, looping one stitch over another, as you do end a hose, then take two Needles, and take up all the knots on the wrong side next to the ede stitch, and so knit one course plaine round about your Hose, and at the second upon your side needles▪, you must at every fourth stitch take up a stitch, and so must you do of both sides of your side needles, till you have seventy six, and so take three at the point of your clock, at every course of stitch, of both sides till you have done 10 purles, and these take in at every second course a stitch of each side till you have done twenty purles and so at every third course till you have other twenty.
Here beginneth the making of Laces. IN the manner of making Laces, you shall understand at the beginning that the second finger shall be called A. the third B. the fourth C. and the fifth D. and mark wel when thou ta∣kest a bow through another, somtime you shall take through the bow aright, and somtime the reverse. To take right is to put your finger through a bow, and take that that is before him, as the common manner is to take▪ and in that manner shall you do alwaies, but when the bow asketh the reverse. For to take reverse is to take a bow throughout another, and that behind that bow, as thou dost when thou shalt change a bow vvith thy fellow, and for that, that when it is taken through another that is somtimes taken reversed, and somtimes not reversed. Also under, and then the bow is taken reversed, when it is taken in such manner that was before the taking, the taking a∣bove is after the taking beneath. Somtime reversed, is when it is taken in such manner that that was before the taking above, is after the taking above: And somtime is the bow reversed, and somtime turned. Reversed are, when the party that was afore reversed above, is now beneath. Tnrned are when the bows are twice reversed, and that par∣ty that vvas afore above, is now above, and if it so be that the Lace be wrought of two of the fellows, shall ever let him on thy right hand, and when you shall change your bows uppermost of your hands next you shall reverse through the overest of thy hands next, your fellows uppermost bow not reversed of his hand next to thee. And he shall take thine also not reversed, and that is called the changing above: And vvhen you shall change your overmost bows of your farther hand, your fellow shall take you the reverse throughout his overmost bow of his further hand, from thee thy overmost bow unreversed of thy fellows further hand from him, and thou shalt take his unrever∣sed, and that shall be under all the bows, and that is called, the changing beneath.
And somtime shou shall hayn your bows, and somtime lowen them: hayn them is to set the bow B upon A. and the bow C: upon B. and the bovv D upon C. Lowen them is to set the bow C. upon D. and the bow D. upon C. and the bow A. upon B. A broad Lace of V. bows. 1. IF you will make a broad Lace of V. bows, take two bows upon B. C. of thy right hand, and three bows upon A. B. C. of thy left hand, and then take A. of the right hand through the bovv B. upon the self hand, and the bovv C. reversed of the left hand, and then low thy bovvs of thy left hand, and then shall A. of thy left hand take through the bow B. of the self hand, the bow C. reversed of thy right hand, and then lovv the bows of thy right hand and begin again. A Lace round of V. bow. 2. IF thou vvilt make a Lace round of V. bows, look that the bows be set upon thine hands as is aforesaid, and then shall A. take of the right hand through B. C. of the self hand, the bow C. reversed of the left hand, and then low thy bovvs of the left hand, and then shall A. of the left hand take through B. C. of the self hand, the bovv C. reversed of the right hand, and then lovv the bovvs of the right hand, and then begin again. An open Lace of V. bows. 3: JF you vvill make an open Lace, viz. tvvo together of five bovvs, set upon thy hands, as is said in the round, and then shall you work as in the round, save in the round the bovv is taken reversed, and in this it it alwaies taken unreversed, and then begin again. The same Lace of divers colours. 4. ANd if thou wilt make two Laces together, the one of one colour, the other of another, of V▪ bows, of the which the half end shall be of one colour, that other of another, and
be thone colour above, the other beneath and sinthes work i the same manner as is afore said in the open place. A Lace bastuve of five Bows. WHen thou wilt make a round Lace that is called bastuve of five bowes, be the halvendle of every bow of one co∣lour and the other of an other, and set thy bowes upon thy hands, as in the round, now the colour that is above on that one hand shall be beneath on the other hand, and then work as in the round afore. A broad Lace for Purses of ten bowes. IF thou wilt make a broad Lace for Purses of ten bowes with a fellow either of you take five bowes as is aforesaid of the broad lace of five bowes, and be they set on the selfe manner on your fingers, and then worke in the same manner as in the broad lace aforesaid, and when you have done once with the right hand, and once with the left hand, and thy fellow al∣so then shall you change your over bowes of your next hands, and then begin againe. A Lace bordered. TAke thou and thy fellow ten bowes of the which the halfe of every bow be of one colour, and the other of an other colour and be the bowes set upon your hands in the same man∣ner as was said in the broad lace afore, but all that one coloure shall be above upon the next hand, and the other beneath on the further hands, and then work both with the right hand, and with the left hand, in manner as is aforesaid of the round lace of five bowes, and then shall you change the overbowes of the hands next and begin againe. A Lace covert of ten bowes. TAke ten bowes in the selfe manner set on thy hands and on thy fellows, as is said of the lace bordred, save in this lace that one colour of all these bowes shall be above, and thother be∣neath, and then either of you work once with the right hand, and once with the left hand, in the manner, as is aforesaid of the
open lace, and then shall you change the over bowes of your hands next, and the over bowes of your further hands, and then beginning againe as you did afore till you have all done, and then shall you have a lace within and other without, and that one of one colour, that other of another, and that one shall now be drawn out of that other and therefore it is called a lace covert. A Lace double covert. TAke ten bowes of the self manner departed, and in the selfe manner set upon their hands as it is said of the lace covert, and be one lace of the greatnesse of the halfe of thy bowes bound at the one end betwixt thee and thy fellow, and thother end be bound with thy bowes, and then work of the same manner as it is said of the lace covert, save when e shall change the o∣ver bowes of your hands next, ye shall change above the lace, bound betwixt thee and thy fellow, and when you shall change the over bowes of your further hands, you shall change from beneath the lace bound betwixt thee and thy fellow, then shall you have double covert three laces each within other. A Lace cowpen covert. MAke it of twelve bowes be the halfe of one colour, the o∣ther of another colour, and be three bowes upon B. C. D. of both thy hands, and of thy fellows also, and be all thone co∣lour above of both your hands, then take with a right thorow all thy bowes of the selfe hand, the bowe d: left, and also doe with thy left hand, and thy fellow do also and work in the same manner, as in the double covert of ten bowes till thou hast all done. An other Lace of coupen covert depiole. TAke twelve bowes in selfe manner set on thine hands and thy fellows, as is said of the coupen covert of twelve bowes, save that in this lace the colour shall be beneath of the further hands and the selfe colour above on the next hands, and then work on the selfe manner, as in the Coupen covert of twelve bowes, save that the bowes of this lace shall never be reversed.
A Launce daunce broad of twelve bowes. LEt the bowes be all set, and the colours departed on your hands and on your fellows as is said of the coupen covert of twelve bowes and then wok in the selfe manner save in this lace d. shall be taken ever reversed and after the change above and beneath, then begin as afore alwayes. The same round. TAke eight bowes of the which four bowes shall be of one colour, and four of another, and set the four of one colour upon A. B. of both thy hands, and thother four upon D. C. of both thy hands and then shall A. right take through his bowes, and the bwes B. C. D of the selfe hand, the bow D. reversed of the left hand, and then shall A. of the left hand take horow B. C. D, of the selfe hand the bowe D. reversed of the right hand, aad then low your bowes of the right hand and begin againe as before, but the bow that was afore without upon A shall come through the other, and shall dwell upon A. and that that was afore within shall be upon B. A Lace piole. TAke eight bowes, foure of one colour and four of another colour, ad ut the one colour be of the one hand, and the other of tho∣ther hand, and then work in the same manner as in the daunce of eight howes. A Lace covert cheveron. TAke twelve bowes of the which the halfe of every bowe be green & thother half of six bowes be white, and the half of four bows pur∣ple, and the half of two bows yellow, and be three bowes white above uon B. C. D. of thy right hand, and two purpure upon B. D. and one yeallow upon C. of the lft hand, and be the right hand of thy fel∣low according to thy left hand, and his lest hand according to thy right hand, then shall you take both with your next hands thorrow, B. C. D. of the selfe hand, and thorow D. C. the further hand, the w B. unrevesed on the same hand, then change your bowes above
and beneath also, and then shall D. take of the further hand the bow D. unreversed of the next hand, and shall the bowes be lowed of the next hands and begin againe. A lace depowne. DOe this lace depown in the selfe manner as is aforesaid▪ and when thou hast done a portion as much as thee liketh, reverse then all thy bowes, and work in the selfe manner, and then shall that one hand another coupen of tuell, and so at e∣very cowpens end reverse all thy bowes, and then shall all thy lace be cowpen. A lace of covert Viceray. TAke twelve bowes in the selfe manner set on thy hands and departed, and on thy fellows, as in the covert Cheveron, then shall D. of the right hand take thorow his bowe, and chang not the bow D. unreversed of thy left hand, and then A. of thy right hand, shall thorough B. C. of the self hand, take the bowe D. unreversed of the self hand, and then low thy bowes of the same hand, and then shall A. take off the right hand thorough the bowe D. of the left hand the bowes, C. B. of the selfe hand unreversed, and then heyne the bowes of thy selfe hand upon B. and the bowe that is more without upon A. of thy right hand set upon C of the left hand, and that that was more within set upon D. of the left hand, and in selfe manner do thy fellows, with his right hand as thou dost with thy left hand, and then change your bowes above and beneath. The same lace compounds. DOe in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou hast a cowpen long inough reverse, all thy bowes and do in the selfe manner as is aforesaid, and so at the end of every cowpen reverse all thy bowes, and so shall thou have all the lace com∣pound.
A Lace Demi-cheveron. TAke twelve bowes in the selfe manner departed, and in self manner set upon thine hands, and upon thy fellows, as in covert Cheveron, save the white party of the next hand shall be beneath, and then shall A. of thy right hand take thorough B. C. D. of thy left hand, the bowe D. reversed of thy left hand, and A. of thy left hand shall take thorough B. C. of the left hand the bow D. reversed of thy right hand, and then the selfe manner shall thy fellow do, and then shall you change your bowes above and beneath, and begin againe. The same Compound. DOe in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou hast a portion as much as thee liketh, reverse then all thy bowes and do as is said afore and so at the end of every cowpen reverse all thy bows, and begin againe. A Lace covert de bastuve. TAke twelve bowes in the selfe manner departed, and in the selfe manner set on thy hands and on thy fellows, as in the cowpen covert of twelve bowes, save in this the colour that is above on your right hands shall be beneath on your left hands, and in the same manner shall you work as in the cowpen covert of twelve bowes save the bowes shall never be reversed. A Lace covert de bastuve de-miray. TAke twelve bovves in the selfe manner departed and set on your hands as in the covert cheveron, and be tvvo above purpure upon B. D. and on yellovv above upon C. of thy hand and three vvhite above, upon B. C. D. of thy fellovvs left hand, and three bovves of Tuells above upon B. C. D. of your both righthands, and then vvork in the selfe manner, as in the covv∣pen covert of tvvelve bovves, save the bovves shall never be here reversed, and so shalt thou have tvvaine bastuves covert, and tvvo bastuves rayed of one yellovv betvvixt tvvo purpures vvith the champ vvhite.
A Lace Bastuve techell. TAke tvvelve bovves in the selfe manner departed and set upon your hands; as in the lace covert de cheveron, save thy fellovvs right hand shall accord to thy right hand and his left hand to thy left hand, and then shall you vvork in the selfe manner as in the covvpen covert of tvvelve bovves save that the bovves shall never be reversed. A broad lace for Pnrses of seven bowes. WIthout a fellovv make them, and be tvvo bowes upon B. C. of thy right hand, and two sundry bowes upon A. of thy left hand and other tvvo sundry, upon B. of thy left hand and one upon C. of the same hand, and then shall you take vvith A. of thy right hand thorough B. C. of the selfe hand, the bovv that is uttermost upon B. left unreversed, and B. right shall take the bovve utterest upon B. left unreversed, and thorough the left bovve A. right shall take the bovve C. left unreversed. And take good care that the bovves that are on any singer meng them not, and then lovve thy bovves of thy lest hand, and then shalt thou take vvith A. of thy left hand thorough B. C. of the selfe hand, the Bovv that is uttermost upon B. right reversed, and B left, shall take the bovve that is utter∣most upon A. right unreversed, and thorough that selfe bovve A. left shall take the bovve C. unreversed of the right hand, and lovv thy bowes, and then begin againe. The same Lace open. DOe in selfe manner as is aforesaid save that never a bovve shall be taken reversed, and if the bowes be departed that one shall be of one colour and thother of an other. A Lace partie round. LFt all thy bowes be departed and set upon thy hands as is aforesaid, and then work in the selfe manner, and what time thou hast but two bowes upon thy one hand thou shalt turne the over bow of the selfe hand, so that the selfe colour that was afore the turning above is after the turning beneath.
The same Compound. DOe in the selfe manner as is aforesaid, and when tho hast a good cowpen reverse all thy bowes and begin againe. A lace partie broad. DOe in the said manner as in the round lace party, save that in the round lace partie, thou turnest the over bowes of both thy hands, and in thy nether not but the over bow of that one hand. The same lace ray. TAke seven bowes of one colour and thy fellow seven of an∣other colour, and be the bowes set upon your hands as in the lace of seven bowes, save that he shall have but two bowes of the left hand, and then work both as in the lace of seven bowes, and when there be but two bowes on thy further hand from thy fellow thou shalt turne thy over bow of the selfe hand and thy fellow shall not turne, and when there be but two bowes on thy hands, next then shalt thou change thine ovvn bovves, so that after the changing you have againe thy seven bovves, and thy fellovv his seven. A lace called pale. SEt fourteen bovves departed upon your hands as in the lace ray, and be all that one colour above up on thine hands, and the selfe colour beneath upon thy fellovvs hands, and then vvork in the selfe manner as in the raylace. A lace quarter and quar▪tell. TAke fourteen bovves in the self manner set upon your hands as in the lace ray, and then vvorke in the same manner as in the lace ray, and over that vvhen there be but tvvo bovves up∣on your farther hands thy fellovv shall turne the bovve upon the selfe hand as vvell as thy left hand, and vvhen the lace is made do another vvith in, and then shall it be both quarte and quartel.
The same compound. DOe in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou hast a good cowpen reverse all thy bowes and begin againe. A lace corduve of eight bowes. TAke eight bowes, four of one colour and foure of another, and be all that one colour upon that one hand, and thother colour upon thother hand, and then shall A. right change with D. left, and B. right with C. left, and C. right with B: left, and D. right with A. left and begin againe. A lace Maskell. TAke eight bowes of one colour set upon A. B. C. D. of both thine hands and then A. right thorough his bowe shall change with A. left reversed, and in the selfe manner B. right with B. left, and C. right with C. left, and D. right with D. left, and do so thrice, and then shall A. right change with B. left and B. right with A. left and C right with D. left, and D. right with C. left, and then shall A. change with A. B. and A. B. with B C: and B. C: with C. D. and C. D. with B. other thrice, and then shall B. right change with C. left and C. right with B. left, and then beginne againe. A lace called the fret. DOe in selfe manner as is aforesaid in the maskell, and when B: right hath changed with C. left, and C. right with B. left, then shall the bowe B. left, be set upon B. right, and C. left upon C. right, and then A. right shall change with D. left, and D. right with A. left, and then B: C. of the selfe hand shall take againe her bowes, and then shall you begin as afore till the lace is made, and then do another within that lace, that is of a∣nother colour, and then shall it be fre. A lace called Cow-de-rate. TAke seven bowes of Duve colour, and be four bowes upon A B. C. D. left, and three bowes upon B-C. D. right, and then
shall A. right take to reverse thorow the bowe B. of the selfe hand, and under all thother bowe the bowes A. reversed of the left hand, and then hye the left bowes, and then shall D. of the left hand take the bow of the right hand not reversed, and then low the bowes of the right hand and begin againe as afore, and this same lace may be made of six bowes, but then shall no bowe be upon D. left. The same Lace. IF you like to make this lace the one to turne of one colour thother of another be all the bowes departed, and that one colour of all the bowes be above and then work in the self man∣ner as is aforesaid. The same Lace compound. WHen thou wilt make this lace coupen. Take seven bows as afore with six departed, and in selfe manner set as in the cowlace, and work in the same manner, save that the bow A. left shall be taken unreversed, and when you have a good portion reverse your bowes and begin againe. The same Lace of sixteen bowes. SEt four bowes of one colour upon A B. C. D. left and all thother upon A. B. C. D: right, and in the selfe manner up∣on thy fellows hands and then shall you both work with your left hands till that the four bows of one colour be come upon A. B. C. D. right of thy fellow, but you must afore every re∣versing change your over-bowes of your next hands, and then shall you work both with the right hands as you did before with the left hands till the foure bowes of one colour be come againe upon A B. C. D. left and hen begin againe. A Lace bend. TAke eight bowes, foure bowes of one colour upon thone hand and four of another colour upon the other hand, and then shall A. right take thorough his bowes B. C: D. and D. C. B. left, the bow A unreversed of the left hand, and then hye thy bowes of the left hand, and then shall D. left take the bowe D. right, and then low thy bowes right, so that the bowe that was taken thorough that other dwell upon A. and that that was upon A. be upon B. and then reverse all thy bowes, and beginne a∣gain.
The same Lace of sixteen bowes. BE thy right hand according to thy fellows right hand and thy left hand to his left hand, and then shall you work both as in the lace bend of eight bowes, and a afore the rever∣sing of your bowes you shall change your over bowes of your hands next, and then reverse your bowes and begin againe. A Lace cheveron broad. TAke sixteen bowes, eight bowes of one colour, and eight of another colour, and be four of one colour set upon A. B. of thy right hand, and C. D. of thy left hand and four of another colour, upon C. D. of thy right hand, and A. B. of thy left hand, and be the right hand of thy fellows according to thy left hand, and his left hand to thy right hand, and then shall you take both with A. of your hands next thorough. A Lace cheveron round. TAke sixteen bowes set upon thy hands, and on thy fellows as is aforesaid, and then work in the selfe manner as in that o∣ther lace, and when you have changed your over bowes of your next hands, you shall change your over bowes of your further hands, and then reverse all your bowes and begin a∣gaine. A Lace penne de pound. TAke sixteen bowes of the which foure be green, foure redd, foure white, and foure black, and be the foure green upon A. B. of your next hands and foure red upon D. C. of the left hands, and four white upon D. C. of your further hands, and four black upon A. B. of the self hands, and then shall you work in the selfe manner as in the cheveron broad, till that the green be upon A. B. of your further hands, and then work in the selfe manner with A. of the further hands as ye did with A. of your next hands and then begin again as before. A Lace en leved of sixteen bowes. DOe in the selfe manner as in the lace penne de pound, but when ye have changed your over bowes of your next hands ye shall change your over bowes of your further hands, and then reverse all thy bowes and begin againe.
A lace cheveron broad of eight bowes. TAke foure bowes of one colour and four of another, and be all that one colour upon A. B. of both thy hands and thother colour upon C. D. of both thy hands, and then shall you take with A. of the right hand thorough D. C. B. of t hand, the bow A. unreversed of the selfe hand and then hie thy bows left, and the left bowe so taken set upon D: left and after shalt thou take with A. left thorow D. C. B. right the bow A. right un∣reversed, and then hye thy right bowes and set the selfe bow up∣on D. right, and then shall D. right change his bowe with D. left and then reverse all thy bowes and begin againe. A lace Cheveron round. TAke eight bowes, and do in the selfe manner, as afo re in the boad of eight bowes but when D. right hath changed with D left, then shall A: right change with A. left, and that under all the other bowes and begin againe. A lace ownd of sixteen bowes. TAke sixteen bowes of which eight be of one colour, and eight of another, and be all that one colour upon A: B. of both thy hands, and on both the hands of thy fellows, and that other colour upon C D. of both your hands, and then shall you chang your over bowes of your hinder hands, and then work in the selfe manner, as in the Cheveron broad of eight bowes and begin againe. A lace ownd round. SEt your bovves upon your hands as in the ovvnd broad, and vvork also in the selfe manner, save ye shall change here your over bovves of your further hands, and begin againe.
A lace sawter of eight bowes. TAke foure bowes of one colour, and four of another, and be that one colour upon A. B. of both thine hands, and that o∣ther colour upon C. D. of both thine hands, and then shall A. right take thorow B. D. of the left hand, the bow A of the selfe hand unreversed, and then hie thy bowes of the left hand, and then set the selfe bowe taken upon D. left, and then shall A. left take thorough D C. of the right hand the bowe A. right un∣reversed, and then hye the bowes right, and then set the selfe bowe taken upon D. right, and then D. right shall change his bowe with D. left and then reverse all thy bowes, and begin againe as afore, till when the selfe colour be come againe upon A. B. of both thy hands, and that shall be when thou hast done foure sithes as is said afore, and then shall A. right take tho∣row his bowe, and B. C: of the self hand, and then low thy bowes right by▪ so that the bowe taken dwell upon A. and that was up∣on A. be set upon B. and then shall A. left take thorough his bowe and B. C. of the left hand the bowe D. unreversed of the selfe hand, and then low thy left bowes so be that the bowe taken dwell upon A. and that that vvas upon A: be set upon B. and then shall D. right change his bovve vvith D. left, and then re∣verse all thy bovves, and begin againe, till that the selfe colour be come againe as afore upon A. B: of both thy hands, and that shall be vvhen thou hast done other foure sythes nethervvard, and other foure sythes overvvard, changing among like as is a∣foresaid. A Lace Croisle. TAke eight bows of the vvhich two be of one colour, and six of another, and be the sixth of one colour upon A. B. C. of both thy hands, and the other two upon D. of either hand, and then work in the self manner as in the Sawter, but when D. right hath changed his bow with D. left, then shall A. right change his bow with A. left, and that under all the other bows.
A Lace Croise Ʋliet. TAke eight bowes, six of one colour and two of another, and in the self manner set upon thy hands as in the croi∣sle, work then in the self manner as in the Sawter, save that in the Sawter thou takest but four sythes thine over bows down∣ward, and four sythes upward, and in this Lace thou shalt take thine over bows eight sythes downward, and thy lower bows eight sythes upward. A Lace double losenge. TAke sixteen bows; eight of one colour and eight of another, and be all the bows set upon thine hands, and thy fellows as in the Lace Ownd, and then work both in the self manner as in the Sawter, save that when D. right hath changed with D left his bow, then shall you change your over bows of your hinder hands and further hands, then reverse all your bows and begin again as afore: A Lace double croisle. TAke sixteen bows of the which eight be of one colour, and eight of another, and be they set upon your hands as in the Lace Ound, and then shall you work both as in the double Losenge, save that you shall not change the over bows of your further hands. A Lace uliet boss. TAke sixteen bows, of the which be eight black, four white, and four yellow, and be four black upon A B. of the right hand, and C. D. of thy left hand, and two white upon A. B. of thy left hand, and two yellow upon C. D. of thy right hand and be thy right hand according to thy fellows left hand, and his left hand to thy tight hand, and then work both in the self manner as in the Lace enlewed, you shall work six sythes with your hinder hands, and other six sythes with your further hands, and in this Lace you shall not work but four sythes with both your hands.
A Lace uliet vine. TAke sixteen bows of such colour as in the Lace boss, and in the self manner set upon your hands, and then work in the self manner as in the Lace boss, save you shall change your over bows of your further hands: A Lace Ʋliet boss. OF two colours bene two bows set in the stead of yellow, and then work in the self manner as in the Lace Uliet Vinee, and then shall you make uliet boss of two colours. A Lace Sawter Ʋliet. TAke sixteen bows, eight white, four purpure, and four red, and be the two upon A. B. of thy right hand, and two red up∣on D. C. of thy left hand, and four white upon A, B: left, and C. D. right, and the right hand of thy fellow be according to thy left hand, and his left hand according to thy right hand, and then work both in the self manner as is aforesaid, in the Croise Uliet, and when D. right hath changed with D. left, then shall you change your over bows of your next hands, and then reverse all your bows and begin again. The same Lace round▪ DO in the self manner as afore, and when you have chan∣ged your overbows of your hinder hands, you shall change your over bows of your further hands, and begin again as be∣fore. A Lace fret Ʋliet round. TAke sixteen bows of all such colours, and the self manner set on your hands as in the Lace Ound, and then work both as in the Sawter, save in that you take your over bows four sythes downward, and four sythes upward, and in this you
shall take but twice downward, and twice upward, and after that the right D. hath changed his bow vvith A. left, then shall you change your over bowes of your next hands and of your further hands also, and then shall you reverse all your bows and begin again. The same Lace fret and broad. DO in the selfe manner as afore, save that you shall not change your over bows of your further hands. A Lace cressant. TAke sixteen bows of all such colours as in the Ownd Lace, and in the self manner set on your hands as in the Ownd Lace, and then shall you work both as in the fret uliet broad, save in the fret one colour is alwaies taken, and in this that one colour shall always be taken, till vvhen you have changed your over bows of your hinder hands eight sythes and then shall that other colour be taken till that you have changed your over bows of your further hands other eight sythes, and then begin again. A Lace indented. TAke eight bows, four white, two red, and two black, and be the four vvhite set upon A. B. C. D right, and the two red upon A. B. left and the tvvo black upon C. D. left, and then shalt thou take D. right unreversed thorovv A. B. C. D. left, and set it upon A. left, and then reverse all thy bovves, and then shalt thou take C. right unreversed thorovv. A. B. C. D. left and D. right and set it upon A. left and reverse all thy bovves, and then shalt thou take B. right unreversed thorovv, A. B. C. D. left and D. C. right and set it upon A left, and then reverse all thy bovves and then shalt thou take A right thorovv, A. B. C. D. left and D. C. B. right, and then reverse all thy bovves, and then shalt thou vvork vvith thy right as thou didst vvith thy left hand, and so shall you doe all the bovves at every bovv, taking of both thine hands, and on this manner shall you take first of the left hand and then of the right hand the bovve D. thorough A. B. C. D. and then vvith the selfe hand the bovve C. thorough A.
B. C. D. and D. right, and then B. thorow, A. B. C. D. and D. C. right, and then A. thorough, A. B. C. D. and D. C. B. right, and so take thy bowes till thou hast so done. A Lace green de orgee. TAke four bows of one colourset upon B. C. right and B. C. left, and a bow, of another colour upon D. right, and a bow black upon A. left, and take with A. right thorough B. C. right the bowe C. left reversed, and then low thy bowes B. left, and then with B. left with C. left take the bowe C. right reversed, and then A. left shall change with D. right. The same double with twelve bowes. TAke either of you six bowes of divers colours, and set upon your hands as aforesaid in the lace give and then do both as is aforesaid once, and then shall you set your overmost bowes of your next hands upon your further hands, and then shall ye change the bowes that then are overmost upon the hands next, and then shall you take again your bowes that you set upon your further hands, and then begin againe. A Lace vice of three colours. TAke six bowes white, and four black, and two bowes departed, that one side black, and the other yellow, then set three white upon B. C. D. right and two black upon B. D. left and one bow departed upon▪ C. left, and also do thy fellow, save that thy left hand shall be like to his right hand, and his left hand to thy right hand, and then reverse thy bowes right and take with A. right thorough B. C. D. right the bowe D. left and also doe thy fellow and afterward low both your bowes left and take then with B. left his bow A. right, and he shall take with B. left thy bowe A. right, and look that it be under all the bowes, and then begin againe, and this lace shall be a vice when you have made a coupen this manner work, then with your left hand, as you did with your right, till when you have another coupen and then shall you have a faire vice.
A Lace that is called Vinee. TAke eight bowes tow bowes of one colour that be set upon A. B. of the left hand, and six of another colour of the which two be set upon D. C. left and foure upon A. B. C. D. right, and then shall you take thorow A. B. C. D. left, and D. C. B. right, the bow A. right unreversed, and then hye thy bowes of thy right hand, and then shall D. of thy right hand take the bowe D. left unreversed, and then low thy bowes left, so that the bowe that that was taken thorough thother dwell upon A. and that that that was before upon A. be upon B. of of the left hand and then reverse all thy bowes and begin again till that two bowes of one colour be upon A. B. right, and then work in the selfe manner with thy right as is aforesaid, till that two bowes of one colour be come againe on thy left hand, and then begin a∣gaine: A Lace cheveron broad of sixteen bowes. TAke eight bowes halfe of one colour, and eight halfe of a∣nother colour that be departed, and eight halfe of another third colour, set then the eight bowes of one colour upon A. B. right and left of thee and of thy fellow, and the eighth of that other colour upon C. D. right and left of thee and thy fellow, and be your hinder hands of the selfe colour beneath, take then with a right thorow all the bowes of the selfe hands the bowe D left, and then bowe thy bowes left. Take then with A. left thorough all the bowes of the selfe hand, the bow D. right and then lowe thy right bowes by, so the bowe A. that is more with∣out be set upon B. and that other shall dwell upon A. and also do thy fellow, and then shall ye change your bowes A. of the next hands, and then begin againe, and in this manner do ye till it be full wrought, but look alway that D. in the taking be re∣versed and this lace shall be a cheveron with a border on both halfe and also rayed. The same Lace Compound. WHen you have made one good cowpen, reverse all your bowes and work as afore, till you have made another cowpen, and then reverse againe all your bowes, and begin againe: Explicit Da. Eliz. Screne.
An Order how to breed Horses. The choice of your Stallion and Studd Mares. FIrst and principally you must force, that your Stallion and Studde Mares be both of good and lively nature, and not subject to any naturall diseases. For as heavy horses and Mares will breed Colts of roilish and heavy nature, so if they be in∣fected with any naturall disease, their Colts for the most part shall be troubled with the same disease. Wild Mares be not best to keep for the Race. IT shall be well done that you handle all your Studd Mares and make them tame, and easie, whereby besides the comm∣ditie you may have of their work which cannot hurt their tame∣ing if they be soberly handled, you may be sure at all times to remove them from one Pasture to another, to bring them to be covered, and to take their Colts from them without great trouble, whereas wilde Mares be not only combersome to keep but also often times do destroy the Coults in their bellies with their rashnesse when you should handle them or any of their fellows. At what age your Mare is first to be handled and covered. THe best age to take up your Mare to make her tame, and to break her, is, when shee shall be two years old, and the van∣tage, and so you may the yeare following, when she shall be ful∣ly three years old, and upward put her to your horse to be cove∣red, which in my opinion is the best age to put her first to the Horse. Although some Writers be of opinion, that it is best that shee be first covered at two yeare old.
How to inforce your Mares to come to be strained. YOu may most conveniently bring her to be covered of your Stallion, if four or five dayes before you will bring her to your great Horse, you cause to be put to her in some close Pa∣sture kept and fensed for that purpose, some small stoned Nagg to woe he that she may abide your great horse, foreseeing that he be in no wise unfettered longer then some diligent man doth look on, for if the Nag be at liberty at any time after she is dis∣posed to take the horse, she will be sure to be covered of him, though he be lower then she by a cubite. The Order of covering. VVHen you do perceive that your Mare will abide the Nagg, and doth show other tokens that she is desirous to be covered, you must cause your great horse that shall cover her to be provendred, and not to drink much the night before he shall cover her. Then in the morning following at the Sun rising, you may bring him to your Mare, or her to him in some such place, as neither of them can leap out of, where when he hath covered her twice or thrice, let him remaine feeding on Grass with her Colt kept by her without water, but let your horse be taken up, well rubbed and well provendred to the next evening. And then put him to your Mare againe where you left her, and let him cover her as often as he will that night ex∣cept you see your horse chafe so much that he will marre him∣selfe. How to use your Mare whic his covered. ANd so must you of force be driven to take him from her the second time till the morning following, at which time, (except your Mare be satisfied with that which was done before) you must put to your horse the third time, and when he hath covered her as often as he will, between foure of the clock in morning and eight of the clock before noon, take up your horse, and let your Mare be led into some water, to the mydd∣side at the least, where she may drink water, but not too much, and then let her be led and turned to the hole studd, where no other horses must come f a whole Month at the least to bea her.
How to make that no Mare shall go barren. ANd when you have thus severally caused to be covered all your Mares, you must about Lammas in the month of July, or beginning of August, get a Mare or two which have not beene covered that yeare before, and inforcing them to be horsed by such means as before appointed when they shall be readie to be covered, you must turne them with some other stallion, whom you esteem not as your best horse amongst your studd of Mares, and so he covering that Mare or Mares, you turned in with him unto the studd, shall cause the rest (if any of them have not conceived at their first covering) to come to that horse againe, whereby you shall be sure to keep no Mare barren all the yeare, but to have of every Mare a Colt, though not by your best horse, you may suffer that horse to runne amongst your Mares, three weeks or a moneth. But if you turne him into your studd putting no Mare in with him ready to be covered, he will at his first entry beat all your Mares, and so happily hurt all your Mares which had conceived before, and so do more hurt then good. What time of the yeare is best for your Mares to be covered. THe best time of the yeare to have your Mare covered, is, from the end of May to the end of July, and then shall your Mare, which alwayes goes with foale one year lacking a moneth Foale in such time of the yeare as she shall find plenty of grass to nourish her self and her Colte withall. Whereas if you suf∣fer her to be covered in February, March or Aprill, she will foal so rathe in the yeare, that often times being bare and not co∣vered of the Winter past, she doth hunger both her selfe and marr her Colt for lack of feeding. To Dyet your Stand for the time he shall cover. HEre is to be noted that although your stalland standing t hard meat will not miss to get a Colt on your Mare going to Grass (if she be ordered and inforced as before) yet the best dyer for him for the whole time he shall cover is to feed on grass
when he hath tasted of the grass with them, he will like his Hay the worse, and also there is more danger in breaking of his wind in feeding rather on Hay then Grass. How your breeding Mare is to be used when she shall Foale. YOur breeding Mare that hath a Colt in her belly must four∣teen or fifteen dayes before she Foal be taken from the stud, and with some other gentle Mare or gelding be put in some o∣ther rank pasture well fensed for that purpose, which will not only make her Lusty, and soon ready to be covered, and able to Foale without danger, but also give plenty of Milk to her Colt when he is first Foaled. How many years a horse will serve to cover your Mares. YOur Stallion used as is before wil serve fot six or seven years to cover every yeare seven or eight Mares, and do you service the rest of the yeare besides, whereas turned a∣broad to your Mares, he can do you no other service, neither will he last above three years. The best age for horse or Mares to get or beare Colts, and how many years they will continue good. THe best age for Horse or Mare to get or bear Colts, is for the Mare from three years old till ten. And for the horse, from four or five years ill twelve, and after that age the Colts of them wax heavy, weak and slothfull: What time of the yeare is best to wean the Colts from their Dams. THe best time of the year to wean your Colts is at Candlemas or shrove-tide, after the time as your Colt is Foaled where∣in you must use much diligence, for if your Colt be not well weaned, well Summered, and wel Wintred, the three first years, and namely the first yeare when he moaneth for his dame, he shall seldome or never come to a good horse. And therefore when you weane your Colt, you must bring them to some
house ordained for the same purpose, clean out of the hearing of their Dams, wherein they must be pinned and not to come abroad the first fourteen dayes out of the hearing of their dams whereunto you must have pasture adjoyning wherein they may play, and feed every faire day after the fourteen dayes past from the time ye begin to wean them till grass be fully sprung in May, and put them into some such pasture, as commonly your Milch-kine be fed in, where they may neither feeding in high and rank grass hurt their Reyns, or grow thick-necked, nor for lack of feeding hinder their growth, but feed in a short sweet grass may prove well till they have forgotten their dams. What feeding is best for Colts, from two years old upward. THis is a generall ground, that we lying and lack of fee∣ding in the winter, and old rank feeding in sommer from two years old forwards doth mar the more part of our whole breed in England, which in my opinion well ordered would breed the best horses for all kind of service, of the whole earth, for as wet lying and lack of good feeding in the winter, doth breed a hartless ill shapen horse subject to all cold and water diseases both in his body and limbs, so over rank feeding in the Summer chiefly from two years old upward doth breed an evill rayned, and a slothfull horse, ever ready (being over laden with fat flesh to be more▪found and to catch the glanders and cough upon every cold. And therefore your best feeding of your horse Colts, from two years old upward, for the summer feeding is where he may have a large walk, and hungry short feeding, and not yet so bare but that he may, (travelling for it) feed him selfe full once in a day, and that he hinder not himselfe of his growing, but in any wise keep your horse colts for knowing any Mare till they be five years old. Why Englishhorses be taken up so young, are not good. THe cause why our English horse be taken up so young as I have heard of sundry of our chief hors-masters say, is for that our horse being great and well fedd, if they should runne, till they should come to their full strength, would be so sturdy and mischeivous to break, that they would rather mischeive themselves, and their breaker then to to be made tame, which in m fancy is but a vaine opinion. For there was never so sturdy, nor so wilfull a horse, which would not be tame, and easie to handle with watch and hunger, within one moneth at the furthest, if his Keeper will use diligence.
The way to handle a sturdy Horse. ANd that may most conveniently be brought to passe if at the first comming into the house before he will suffer his Keeper to handle him, and to take up his feet, he do put no meat before him, but let him take all his feeding at his Keepers hands, and so shall you make him gentle and tame without stripes or striving, and the order before appointed in his break∣ing being the Colt of a tame Mare, and feed some part of eve∣ry winter at hand in the house wil acquaint him with the man, and make him almost tame before he be taken up, which Colt shall seldome prove a fearefull o a blenching horse. The using of horse after they be handled. ANd for Conclusion whosoever doth use to keep his horse bridled after riding till he e in good temper, and almost cold, and doth not give him water nor meat, being hot, neither doth ide him fast upon a full stomach shall seldome or never have his horse lame or sick if he breed him as is aforesaid, before he take him up. What feeding is best in Winter for Mares, Weanlings, and two years old. AND for the winter feeding you must use one order for your Mares, and weanlings two years old in several places, which is a hovel or house made for them adjoyning to your winter pa∣sture, wherein you must somtime in the evil weather, in a rack made for that purpose, give them some fodder, and be sure that they be brought into that house every night that is like to prove wet, but in the frosty days and nights, it is best to pin them abroad, You must in any wise keep one pasture nigh to the house that you feed your mare Colts in the winter time, which pasture may not be fed in before Shrovetyde, because that time and the mid∣dle of May, (before which grasle is not sufficiently sprung in most places for horses to feed on) is the most time of danger to hunger bane of all the yeare, in which time, if your colts grow∣ing all the summer following, will make your colt mares so bare that they shall not be able to foale, nor give their colts suffi∣ientl suck.
At what age Colts may best be handled. WHen your Horse-colt hath been bred as is afore appoint∣ed, the best age in my opinion to take him up to break, is when he shall be full four years old and the vantage, or if you may spare him and have good close ground to keep him in, rather at five years old and the vantage, for then will his joynts and sinews be strong, and wel knit, his hoof ever tough, and not brittle, his eye-sight good, his chin strong, so that you can∣not hurt him, neither in breaking nor in reasonable riding, besides he will last a good Horse till he be 24: or 25. year old, wheras if you will take him up at two or three years old, as we commonly do, you shall find him afterward▪ many times blind, brittle hoofed, weak backd, full of windgales and splints, and shew himself to be an old stiff Horse, before he come to be ten years old, as the most part of their Spanish Horse do, because they are taken up so young; which is, because that in Spain they have no good close ground to let their Colts run longer in, and not for any other Commodity.
To make a Lenton Gelly. TAke the skin of a well grown Tench when it is boyled, take the Fish and Scales as cleer from it as you can, then take a pint of White wine, half a pint of fair water, boyl them toge∣ther to the half, put in half a pound of Sugar, one quarter of an ounce of Cynamon▪ a rase of Ginger sliced, one quar∣ter of a pint of Rosewater, let it boyl on a soft fire altogether, but not too long, least it be red. To make a Lenton Custard. TAke the spawn of a Tench and wash it in many waters, and lay it all night in some quantity of Rosewater, then take one pound of Almonds, and beat them a little before you put the spawn to it, and then grind it very fine, then take a pint and a half of fair water, with some whole Mace, boyl them in it and so strain them. For your colouring take a little Saffron, season them with Rosewater and Sugar as your self please. It may be baked in an Oven, or on a pot of water, whether you will. Mr. Birch. To dry Damsons, or any other Plumms. FIrst pare your Damsons or Plums very thin, and as you pare them put them into cold water, then when you have pa∣red them make new water scalding hot, and put your Plumms into the water and so let them scald without boyling until they be tender, and whilst they be scalding turn in the water with a silver spoon, or with a clean wooden Ladle, then take them forth and put them in fair cold water again, in the mean time make ready your syrup with clarified Sugar and Rosewater, ac∣cording to the quantity of your Plumms, put your Plumms into that syrrup, and so let them boyl to a good height as if you would preserve them, then put them into some clean Vessell, and let them stand so four and twenty hours, the next day make
some new syrrup with clarified Sugar and Rosewater, and dry them again to a full height, to dry or candy, take them forth and lay them on a clean board, and cast some fine Sugar through a fine Lawn upon them, and so put them in a Stove to dry. Your Peach and Apricot must thus be done, but one syrrup will suffice and not boyled for fear of breaking. Mr. Birch. To preserve red Roses whole after Mrs. Goodrouse manner which hee calleth Conserve of red Roses whole. TAke red Rose leaves or buds with the white part being cut off, one pound, boil them in a quart of Conduit water until they be somwhat tender, which will be by that time all the wa∣ter is almost consumed, then take them off the fire and set them by, until you have made your syrrup; Then for every pound of Roses you must take three pound of Sugar, beat it into pouder and dissolve it with a little Conduit water, and when it is well dissolved and beginneth to boil, put into it your Rose leaves, together with the water wherin they were boiled, if there remain any, which must be very little, and then let them boil in their syrrup until that all the syrrup be almost wasted, and that it be∣cometh like a Conserve, then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, add to it the juice of two or three Lemonds, which will make it have a most orient colour, surpassing all that ever you saw, then put it in a gally pot or glass. Your Roses must be but half beaten, then have your syrrup made and boyled to a full height, and then mix them together and put them up in your pots. Mr. Birch. To preserve the Walnut in syrrup. TAke and gather your Nuts in the month of July, in the be∣ginning of the month, pare them very thin, and bore them with a bodkin of wood, quite through every way, that is, through the midst and through each end, so done, throw them into fair water, and so let them lye the space of seven or eight daies, shifting the water every day once, this done, take them forth and let them be boiled in fair water till they be tender, then
take them forth of the water, and lay them on a searce to drip and to dry for two hours, then take Cynamon cut it in small peeces and Cloves, and stick them into the holes which before you made, so done, make your syrrup to the height of a thin syrrup, and put your Nuts into the same syrrup, and let them boyl one quarter of an hour, then skim them and take them from the fire, and let them stand till they be almost cold, and then put them up, and let them stand two or three weeks, then boil them again to the full height of a syrrup, and so keep them to use Lettice roots, first pare them, then boil them untill they be tender, then put them in Sugar as you know, let them lye in their syrrup untill they candy, after dry them. Mr. Birch. To candy Eringus. TAke of your roots new gathered, and clean washed from the sand, four pound, then set on your water in a clean Vessell so as you will cover your roots, and when the water is boiling put in the root and colour the same, let them boil untill your root be ender, then take out the pith and pill them, lay them upon a hairing searce until the water be drained away, and the root dry, then take six pound of fine Sugar, beat it in a mor∣ter and put it in your pan, with two pints of fair Rosewater, and stir it throughly with a rod of dryed birch, or such like, then have in readiness the Whites of four Eggs well beaten, and mixt with Rosewater, still well wrought with the rod, and when the Sugar is dissolved, then put in your Whites, then labour it again with the rod upon a soft fire, let it boil until it be clean, strain it through a wooden strainer, and then boil it, in the boi∣ling put in your roots, and take them off and skum them, set it on again to boil, and oft in the boiling take them off, to the end they may take in the syrrup the better, when they be boiled e∣nough take them off and set them by, being clean scummed un∣till they be almost cold, then put them in your pots, and after a while take them out and dry them, if they stand in some warm place, it is the better three daies together, if they be candyed, dissolve them, setting the pot in warm water, and lay them on clean boards, and dry them in a Stove without smoak. Mr. Birch.
To preserve the Pippin, Pear, or Warden dry, as fol∣loweth. FIrst take the clearest Pippins you can get, pare them and coar them very clean, either in halves or whole, then take so much fair water as will suffice to make them, and set it on the fire, untill they be ready to boyl, so done, put in your fruit, and let it boil a little space, then take them off from the fire, and let them stand close covered till they be very soft, then when you feel them soft, take them out of the hot liquor and put them in cold, and then let them lye for half an hour, then take them out, and let them lye two or three hours upon a searce to dry, so done, take for the weight of your fruit so much Sugar or more, and with a quantity of Rosewater dissolve your Sugar to one pound, half a pint of Rosewater, with a lit∣tle fair water, and with the White of an Egg clarifie your Su∣gar and strain it, so done, set it over the fire again, and let it boil until it be come to a perfect height, which is, when it wil a little cleave between your fingers & thumb, then presently put in your fruit, and let it boyl a little space, then take it off and let it stand half a quarter of an hour, then set it on the fire a∣gain, and let them boyl till such time as you find your syrrup so thick that it will roap betwixt your fingers, then take them from the fire, and let them stand as long as before, then take them sorth, and lay them one by one upon a searce to drip the space of two hours, setting a thing under it to receive the syr∣rup, so lay them on boards to dry. Mr. Birch. To preserve Quinces. FIrst when you gather your Quinces, you must gather such as be yellow all over, and the smooth and flat Quince in the crown is the best. First, coar your Quince and then pare it. To preserve six pound of Quinces, take six pounds of Sugar, wherof one pound of Musk-sugar, two pints of Damask Rosewater, put your Sugar into the water, and put in your Quinces, the water being cold, set it on the fire and let it seeth til you may skum it, and make them boil as fast as you can, remember to skum it as often as any skum ariseth, and take heed as neer as yon can
that the Quinces lye either the top or stalk downward, and not to lye on the side, and be alwaies pouring your syrrup upon them, and take them off a little before they be sodden, and look that they be well and clean skummed, you shall know when they be well sodden, in taking of the syrrup and let it drop upon a Sawcer, and it will jelly if they be sodden enough, and then put them in gally pots. In this like manner you may preserve all kind of stone fruit, provided to put to three pound of Sugar, but half a pint of wa∣ter, because they be moister. Mrs. Clere. To make Syrrup of Mallows. TAke a gallon of water, and put into it the roots of Marsh-mallows, to the quantity of two ounces, of Sych Pease two ounces, of the roots of Asparagus two ounces, of green and cleer Licorace two ounces, of Raisons of the Sun and of Scabious half a handfull of each, the stones being taken out, the tops and flowers of Marsh-mallows half a handfull, Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernell, Adianthum of both kinds, and a Grass which you must buy at the Apothecaries, of either of them half a hand∣full, of Anniseed half an ounce, of Fennel-roots two ounces, the pith being taken out, the four great cold seeds, the four less cold seeds, of either of these half an ounce, and boil all these to the one half, and strain it through a thick strainer, and take the clearest of it and put it in pan, and put to it foure pound of Sugar, and boil it to the height of a syrrup, and then put it up in a gally pot, and use it at your pleasure, The four great cold seeds be these, Cytrons. Milions. Cowcumbers. Gourds. The four less cold seeds be these. Suckory. Endive. Lettice. Purslane.
The making of the Syrrup of the five opening Roots. TAke the roots of Apium, otherwise called Smallage, Fenell, Parsley, Ruscus, Asparagus, of each of them four ounces, Setwell, Galingale, Pyony roots, of each one ounce, Fennell, Anniseeds, of each one ounce and a half, broken Cynamon two ounces, Mace one ounce, red Sanders six drams, running wa∣ter about six pints, Sugar three pound, and so seeth them to a syrrup, you may make as much and as little as you please. Provided that you must strain them through a thick cloath before you put in your Sugar. Dr. Martin. Dr. Walker. Dr. Atteslow. To make Syrrup of Apples after the Prescription of the foresaid Doctors. TAke the juice of sweet Apples one pint, and of egar and somwhat sharp, and séeth Apples one pint, the juice of Fumi∣tory half a pint, and seeth all these together, and clarifie it with the White of an Egg, then strain it and take the clearest, and put to it three pound of Sugar, and seeth it untill it come to the height of a syrrup, and so put it up in your gally pot, and when you will use it, take two ounces of the syrrup of the opening roots, and one ounce of the syrrup of the apples, and drink it in a morning with a thin Broath, or Rennish-wine, three mornings together fasting upon it. Use this when you feel your self oppressed with the melan∣choly of the Spleen. The Receipt of the Broath for the Stone, by Do ctor Matthias. TAke a young Cock, a knuckle of Veal, boil them in a good quantity of fair water, putting thereto of French-barley a good handfull, the roots of Parsley, Fennel, Succory, Sorrel, and Bruscus called Kneeholm, of either of them one ounce, of the four cold seeds two ounces, boil all these a good while toge∣ther, then being half boiled put in these hearbs, Mallows, Vio∣let
leaves, Sorrel, and Lettice of either one handfull, boil all these together untill it be well boiled, then strain it. Take of this Broath six ounces, the juice of one Lemon, and four spoonfuls of the syrrup of Marsh-mallows, written in the next page before. Mr. Birch. To make Orange Cakes. TAke your Oranges and pill them very thin, and take out all the meat, and lay the pils in water two daies and one night, shifting them three times in a day, & in the mean time take the meat of the Oranges, all the Kernels being clean picked out, and the white skins, and boil it high with Sugar until it be ready to candy, and then put it up till you shall occupy it: And then take the pills that be in the water, and put them in faire water, and then boil them untill they be tender, shifting of them with warm water till the bitterness be gon, then take them out of the water, and let them drain all the water out of them, then take a few Almonds and beat them with a little Sugar very small, and so beat the Oranges with them, and they must not tast too much of the Almonds, then take them out and work it with searced Sugar like past, and so print it with your Moulds, and lay some of the meat of your Oranges between two of your Cakes, and so let them be dryed in a Stove, or in an Oven with a soft fire. To make Bisket bread. TAke a pound of flour, and a pound of Sugar beaten, and mingle them together with the Yolks of six Eggs, and the Whites of three Eggs, and Anniseed, Corianderseed, and Car∣rawaies, of all these half an ounce, and a little Rosewater, to the quantity of half a quarter of half a pint, you must labour all these together with a wooden Ladle, till it be mingled like thick water, and the more you labour it the whiter it will be, and annoint your Coffins or plates with a little melted butter, and so fill it no to full for running over, and so set them into the Oven, and your Oven must be no hotter then to bake a Tart, and they must have as much soaking as Manchet, and then take them out, and cut them thin with a knife in slices and lay them on a sheet of paper, and then put them into the
oven to dry till they be hard like Bisket bread. To make Almond Butter. TAke two pound of Almonds and blanch them, and grinde them in a stone Morter very fine with cleer water, and strain them through a thick cloth with a good deal of water, and set them upon the fire, and let it seeth till it begin to gather some∣what thick, you must have some of the thinnest thereof in a chafer by it self, which must be boyled with white violets, one handfull wel picked, and ten maces beaten, with half a Nutmeg, and a rase of ginger grated, when this is boyled well that it have good tast of the spice and flowers, then strain it into the other, and so let them both boyle together till it begin to grow some∣what thick, then put to it the juyce of a Lemon, or two Oranges or one good mease of verjuice to make it quaile, then when it is fully quailed, ast it as thin as you can upon a fair cubbard cloth, and as softly as you can that the water may draigne a∣way, and so shift it into a dry cloth, and let it hang all night, and when it is stiffe which wil be the next day, season it up with Sugar, Rosewater, and a little Saffron, and so dish it to the board. To bake beefe like red Deer to be eaten cold. TAke a buttock of beef, cut it long vvise vvith the grain, beat it vvell vvith a rolling pin, and then broil it upon the coales a little, and after it is cold, dravv it through vvith Lard, then lay it in souse, in White vvine Vinegar, Pepper, Salt, Cloves and Mace, Bay leaves, let it lye three or four dayes, then bake it in thick Rye past, and vvhen tis cold fill it up vvith butter, after a fortnight it vvill be fit to eat. To marinate Fish. TAke the fish you vvould marinate, viz. Mullet, Basse, Turbet Sole, Bream; &c. draw it and dry it, that it may be fit to fry, vvhich is to be done in Oyle either of Zant or Florence, which must be excellent good, and svveet, put your oyl in a clean fry∣ing pan, and after it boyles in the pan a little, put in the fish, and fry it so as it vvill come from the bone, then take it out, lay it so as the Oyle may run from it, then make your
pickle, which must be of White-wine Vinegar, Pepper, cut no beaten, Mace, Salt, Bay-leaves, and Saffron, these being boild and cold, and the fried Fish likewise cold,, place your Fish in a little Runlet or Tonikin, strowing to every layer some of the spice, and Bay leaves with some slit Lemon, close up the head, and make it tight, and pour the pickle in at the bunge, in three weeks or a month, it will be fit to eat. Boil the heads of the Fish (which are not fit to keep) in your pickle and it will be the stronger. Angell water. A quart of Rain-water, a pint of White-wine, two wet or dry cods of the Musk Cat, of the best Benjamin and Storax two ounces, a peece of Amber-greese, of four. five, or six grains, boil all together in an earthen pipkin softly, till a third part be wasted, and better. A little Gum-dragon, Benjamin, and Storax beaten together, make up Pastils with the bottom of the Angel water to burn in Chambers. One dozen of the little Cloathes. TAke half an ounce of Sperma-cete, half an ounce of Oyle of Benus, half an ounce of Oyle of Almonds, a spoonfull of Rosewater, two spoonfuls of flower of Rice curiously finely bea∣ten first in a silver Porrenger by some, and some, melt alike quantity of all the three Oyles on a Chaffin-dish of Coals, a like quantity of the powder of Rice, as of the Spermacete a little Rosewater, the cloathes very fine washed, even and smooth, lay them on a fine little board in your lap, and with a bone-knife spred of these Ingredients, work them very hard with a great deal of labour, what is superfluous, take of the Cloath put it back to the Porrenger to new melt. A Custard. TAke a quart of good Cream, the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, the crum of a Manchet, shred Dates, Currants washt and pickt, a little Muskadell and Rosewater.
To brew Ale. TAke 32 pecks of Malt, take as much River-water as will mash this Malt being first boiled, and let it stand three hours in a wooden Vessell, then take up the Penstaff, and let it run into a Vessell, then remove it into a large Vessel, and put in a quarter of a pound of Hops, then put in more water boyled out of the Furnace, as you may gather thirty or forty gallons as you please to have it smaller or stronger, then take this and put it into the Furnace, and let it boyl a full hour, then take it up and strain it, and put it into Coolers, when tis almost cold put in some yeast, and let it work four and twenty hours, then put it up into Vessels, at a fornight old you may drink it, if the Vessell be small it may be drunk the sooner. To make Mustard. TAke good quick Mustard-seed, and dry it by the fire, pick it clean, and beat it in a Morter, but not too fine, sift out the husk put it into a Bason, and beat it with strong stale beer▪ and three spoonfuls of Wine-vinegar, let it be beaten an hour, put a little Salt and some Sugar into it, put it into a pot, and stop it close, at a week old, you may use it, it will last a Month if it be well stopt. A Receipt to prepare the Suet. TAke strong sweet Sack, and warm a little of it over the fire, and with a soft rag dip therin, pat and bath your face all over therwith for a quarter of an hour, not rubbing your face but only patting and bathing it, and then let it dry of it self on the face. Then take of the prepared Suet scraped or sliced off the lump, with a bony Knife, and work it well with the Knife in the palm of your hand, untill it be soft and well tempered, and lay it on your face all over with a soft linnen rag, not touching your face with your hand or fingers in the doing therof.
TAke a Cawl of Mutton as it comes hot out of the Sheep, cast it into water, and wash it in divers waters, take away all the bloody veins, and so let it lye four daies, shifting it twice a day, then lay it in new milk warm from the Cow three or four daies, shifting it as before, then wring out the milk ve∣ry dry, and lay it in Damask Rosewater for four hours, then beat it out of this water in a cloath again, and pull it in little peeces; take half a peck of Marsh-mallow roots, pill off the brown skin, and take the white from the pith, and take a white Lilly root, and wash it very clean, and pill of the skin, shred this root with the others, and mingle them with your Su∣et, put them into a stone Pitcher, tyed up very close, set it in a pot of water, which you must keep boiling for foure houres, then strain it out, the next day melt it again, and keep it for your use. Then put a chin▪stay of soft fine Leather on your chin, as also a frontlet of the same Leather on your forehead, lying so all night, keeping your face warm, in the morning take off the Frontlet, and wipe the Suet of gently with a fine cloath, alwaies being carefull not to touch your face as before, and all the day after be sure to keep your face as hot as you can, by continually wearing your Mask, or as often as you may, and at no time suffer your face long in the cold or open aire. To make an Olave Pye. SLice part of a leg of Veal thin, as for Scots Collips, bark it, and spread it in a dish, mince some Beef-suet very small, three or sour yolks of hard Eggs minced small, some sweet hearbs shred very small, Currants, season these with Salt, Nutmeg, and the pill of an Orange finely minced, work it altogether with the yolks of three or four new-layd Eggs, and a little Sugar, then make it up in balls as big as Eggs, laping in the midst of the balls, two or three Raisons of the Sun, then put them into a Pye, and cover it over with plates of sweet butter, when it is half baked, take half a pint of Verjuice and a little Sugar, boyl it over the fire, and put it hot into the Pye, then put it into the Oven again, and let it stand the other half houre and somwhat more will bake it.
To make a French Pye. TAke the fleshy part of a leg of Veal, parboyl it, and mince it very▪small, and as much Beef-Suet almost as the Veal, to be like wise minced exceeding fine, as many Currants as half the proportion of the Suet, and make it up as you do a minced Pye, the yolks of six eggs boyled hard, and minced small, mix all these together, and season it with Salt, Nutmeg, and Ginger, then work it up with the yolks of six raw Eggs, wich some Verjuice and Sugar and on the top put the yolks of three hard Eggs whole, some Marrow, and a little Lemon sliced, the Pye must be round. To make Puffs. TAke a pint of Cheese Curds, drain them dry, bruise them smal with your hand, and put in two handfuls of flour, a little Sugar, three or four yolks of Eggs, a little Nutmeg, and Salt, min∣gle those together, and make them in little lumps like Eggs, fry them in fresh butter, serve them up with a little fresh butter and Sugar: To beautifie and adorn the Face. AT night when you go to bed annoint the Face with this ensuing Oyntment. Take the fat of a Lon of Veal, put it into a Pipkin, or gal'y pot, with a few Cloves, and Rosemary to give it a good scent, put the Pipkin into a Skillet or Caldron of boyling water, and let it con∣tinue therin over the fire untill it all be dissolved, then strain it through a cloath, and beat it with Plantane water, and red Rose water and it will look very white. Mrs. Hagger.
Adidem. In the morning following wash your face with this wa∣ter. TAke bitter Almonds and blanch them, then pound them, then strain it, and after that beat with it Plantane water, and Rose water, and the white of an Egg, and the juice of a Lemon or two must be beaten into it, and so reserve it for your use as aforesaid. Mrs. Hagger. TAke a quart of distilled Vinegar, or spirit of Vinegar, infuse in it sorde Pearl, or ragged Pearl, or instead of Pearl, the pearly part of the Oyster-shell, so much as the Vinegar will consume, and so let it stand untill it hath consumed what quantity you will use, then pour it gently off, and put in some filtred water, and shake it up and down, and set it down again and let it settle, and then set it upon gentle Embers, and let it vapour away, and keep the pouder, and when you use it, put a little sack to it, and with your finger lay it on with a fine little cloath put filtered water as you see cause, pour it not off too neer. A Perfume. FIrst wash your Leather in cold water three or four times, then steep it in Rosewater a while, and after crush out the water, and hang it up till it be almost dry, but still rub it, or stretch it to keep it from growing hard, then hang it over a Chaffin-dish of coals, with a Cover-lid over it to keep in the smoak, putting in sweet past eight or nine times under, then wrap it up in fome peece of Silk close to keep it from the aire, where it must lye one whole day and a night, and then when you have rubbed and smoothed them, they are ready for the perfume.
TAke Gumdragon, and lay it in steep one night in Rose∣water, then put your Musk into a Morter, and having beaten it a little, take so much Gum and Rosewater as wil make it like a syrrup, or of half an onnce of Musk make almost a pint, then empty the Morter and heat it hot, and then put in your Amber, and beat it till it be melted, then put in a spoonful of oyle of Jasemine, then put in your Civet, and stir it well together with the juice of half a Lemon, and two little peeces of the Pill, then put in the Musk a∣gain, and set it on the fire still stirring it, and when tis ho work it into the Leather. Another Perfume: FIrst wet your Leather in cold water three or foure times, then steep it in Damask Rosewater a while, then crush out that water, and hang it up till it be almost dry, but not in the Sun▪ for it will extract the scent of the water from the Leather, and still rub it, or stretch it to keep it from growing hard, then hang it over a Chaffin-dish of Coals, with a dryed skin over it to keep in the smoak, putting in sweet past eight or nine times under, then wrap it up in some peece of Silk close to keep it from the aire, where it must lye one whole day and night, and then when you have rubbed and smoothed them, they will re∣ceive the perfume strongly. Another. Take Rosewater, and infuse a quantity of Gum-dragon with Musk, a little stamped in a Morter, till they be incorporate like to a Syrrup, you may make half a pint, with half an ounce of Musk, when it is hot, put in beaten Amber, and let it melt, then put in of the Oyle of Jasemine one spoonfull, and mixe your Civet with it, and the juice of half a Lemon, and a little of the Pill of it let your Musk be good, set it on the fire, and stir it about when it is hot, let it be worked into the Leather. Probatum.
Certain very good Perfumes. King HENRY'S Perfume. TAke a quarter of an ounce of Fussis, and two penny weight of good Cloves, and let them be a little bruised, then take the weight of a penny of the rynd of a Lemond in powder, and six spoonfuls of good Damask Rosewater and old, and four spoonfuls of fair clean water, and let all these boil toge∣ther in a perfume Pan, with the quantity of a Hasell Nut of Sugar. King Edward's Perfume. TAke eight spoonfuls of perfect old red Rosewater, three graines of Civet, foure grains of Amber-greese, put all these in a little Viall together, and shake them in the Glasse, and put it into a perfume Pan, and let it distill softly in hot Embers. The French Queens Perfume. TO take away the grosse Aires, first, take Chips of good Ci∣press, and burne them in the house, the Doors and Win∣dows being shut, then take six spoonfuls of perfect Rosewater, and put it into your Perfume Pan, take as much white Su∣gar-candy as weigheth a penny, and let it boile softly on hot Embers.
Another fine perfume. TAke of Benjamin, of Storax Calimint ana three drams poudered together, and dissolved in Rosewater, beat them with thefourth part of Lignum aloes, and half an ounce of white Sanders, and being dry, incorporate them altogether with Gum dragagantum dissolved in Rosewater, and occupy this paste for perfume. Another other Perfume. DIssolve Gum dragagant in Rosewater, then make these things n powder, Labdanum one dram, Storax, Calami∣t one dram, Benjamine one dram, Lignum aloes a quarter of an ounce, Coals of Willow or of the Vine two ounces, beat them all to powder, and knead it with the same Gum, and therof make balls or cakes, and dry them in the Sun. Another Perfume. FIll you pan half full, or a little more, with pure Rosewater, and put therin half an ounce of Cloves bruised, and two or three Bay-leaves cut in small peeces, and then fill it up with good Vinegar Roset, and let it boil▪ and ever as it wasteth fill it up with common water. A Perfume called Amber paste. TAke Storax calamint two ounces, Yreos of Florence an ounce and a halfe, two Nutmegs with a little musk pouder. Then incorporate them all with gume Dragagante, dissolv'd in Rose water and make little cakes of them. Perfume for a Chamber. TAke Benjamin an ounce, Tyme halfe a quarter of an ounce▪ Storax calamitae halfe an ounce, and a little lignum
Aloes, a little Sanders cyterne, and six red Roses with gum Dragagante, and so mix them all together on a stone make them in little Cakes as ye will, and so lay them in hot ashes. All manner of Herbs good for Perfumes. SWeet Basill dryed in Summer, cut small and kept in baggs with Violets, the green being cut of. Then take the budds of Red-Roses the white being cut of, these three being mingled together with white Sugar and Rose-Water do make an ex∣cellent perfume. Bay-leaves green, are good tempered with Rose water and Vinegar for the head, and the leaves of Wall∣nuts being young with Rose-water. And young red mynts are very good dryed. A sweet perfume to burne. TAke Storax, Calaminte and Beniamin of each halfe an ounce Labdanum one ounce, Musk two grains, and put them to∣gether in a faire brass morter, which you must first warme so hot in the Fire, that with the heat thereof, and beating with a litte pestell it may work like wax, which being throughly wrought you may make it in little cakes or balls, and so lay it up.
Perfumes for Gloves. To perfume Gloves. TAke Damask water two or three peniworth and put it in a pewter dish, and lay the Gloves in it one night, and one day, with a little turning now and then that they may be throughly wet. Then take them out and put in your bosome two or three dayes till the be drye, then take an ounce and a halfe of Cloves beaten in fine pouder, and put it into the same water, stir them together, and lay it upon the Gloves, and wet the Gloves therewith, and dry them as before. The take Sto∣rax liquida a great weight, and halfe a pound of Almondes or more, and an ounce and a halfe of Beniamyn in fyne pouder, and mingle them together in a Morter, and anoynt thy gloves therewith. Then take Muske foure or five graines, and mix it with a drop or two of good Damaske water. And grind it small, and lay it with your finger upon the turning down of the Gloves, and so dry them alwayes in your bosome▪ To perfume Gloves very well. TAke oyle of sweet Almonds, and put them into a Glasse with this pouder, a quantity of Musk, Storax, calamint, Ro∣ses of Flambes all poudred together, put it into a Glasse and so let them stand together in the Sunne eight dayes, and stirr them every day with a little stick, then take Rose-water musked and your Gloves, and moyst them well with the same water up∣on a Trencher, and then dry them, do this three or foure times, and the last time anoint them with the said Oile, and with the same Oyle you may anoint your hands, and it will smooth them, and make them brighter, and the good smell of your hands will make your Gloves continue the better in their smell.
Another perfume for Gloves. TAke Oile of Cloves two ounces, Storax Calamint one ounce Beniamin halfe an ounce, Cloves and Cynamon halfe an ounce, Musk twentie grains, and Amber ten grains, Tyme twenty grains, Lavander water three ounces, mix these things and grind them on a stone. Another Perfume for Gloves. WAsh your Leather first in raine water, untill the Alome and the Eggs be clean out, and lay them in Rose water and let them ly therein till they be thick, and so let the water dry into them, and then take this following. TAke a dozen Oranges, and pill of all the rynd of them, so that all the white of the Oranges be away. Then take a pinte and a halfe of Lye made of wood ashes, and put in a cleane earthen pot with a cover, then put in the Oranges and pill a little Brasill and a little Sanders Citren, and a little Allom, and let them seeth till the third part be wasted in, then take and strain it through a cleane cloath & streak your Gloves within with a spunge when it is cold. And colour them two or three times, till they be well coloured. Then dry them and turne them, and then keep them close, then take Lymian pouder, and beat it in a Morter, with a little Rose-water, and colour them againe▪ and so let them drye, and then make them cleane with  brush. The Receipt for the former Perfume. TAke a quarter of Musk, and halfe a quarter of Amber, twelve grains of Civet, and mix them all together with gum Dra∣gagante dissolved in Rose-water two dayes and two nights, till the gum be dissolved into the Rose-water, and then grind them all together upon a stone till it be very fine, and then lay it on your Gloves with a fine brush as thick as you think good.
Another Receipt for the same. TAke as much Musk as Amber, and twelve graines of Civet, and grind them on a stone with Oile Beniamyn that is good and then with that perfume your Gloves. To make an excellent Pomander. TAke Labdanum one ounce, Storax Calamint, Roses, Cloves, Maces of each a dram & an half, and make them in pouder Amber and Musk of either a dram and a halfe, and make them into pouder. Then take a sponfell of Oile de Bay, Virgin wax an ounce, dissolve them together and mix them well. Cynamon, Cloves, Fossis, Storax, Calamint, of each a dram and an halfe, white Franckinsence, Myrre, yellow Saunders, Bole Armonyack, Calamus aromaticus of each two drams, Camphier two drams, Labdanum six ounces, Wax two ounces, and put them in a Morter with a little Malmesey, and as much Musk and Civet, as please you. Take Gum Dragagante halfe a pound, infuse it in Rose water twenty foure hours, then take Storax Calamint nine ounces, Balsomum four drams, Cloves, Fussis, Cynamon of each one ounce, Nutmeggs four ounces, Labdanum three ounces, beat all these into fine pouder, then take the Labdanum, and put it into a Morter, and pu to it a little oile of Spick, Storax liquida an ounce, and among all this stuffe beat a pouder of black Sal∣low coale. To make a costly Pomander or counterfeit Amber. TAke a quarter and a halfe of Amber, and a quarter of Musk, and bean them in a Morter with gum Dragagante dissolved in Rose-water but you must make it thick, then take it in the balm of your hand, your hand being anoynted first with oile of Ben∣iamyn, or some other sweet oile cleaving to your hands, and so Oile it round like balls, and put them on a string, and let then dry betwixt two papers and then wrap them up close.
To make a good Pomander. LAbdanum halfe an ounce, Storax Calamint two ounces, Beniamyn one ounce, Cloves one ounce and a halfe, Mar∣jerom one ounce, Basill three ounces, Cipres, Calamus, ana▪ halfan ounce, Storax liquida one ounce, Musk six grains dissolved in Rose-water. Amber twelve grains. Civet three grains, tem∣per all these together and make up this Pomander at your pleasure. This Pomander will cost thirteen shillings foure pence. To make a Pomander of light cost. ORas one scruple, Cloves halfe a scruple, Calamus Ciprus ana six graines, Labdanum spick ana three graines, Basile one ounce, Cynamon, six grains Storax calamint, Ben∣iamine, Labdanum ana. five graines, white Sanders ten graines, Marjerom halfe an ounce Storax liquida two grains, Campher one graine, Gum Dragagante, Gum Arabeck, ana. one halfe ounce resolved in Rose-water, temper all these toge∣ther in a Morter and make it at your pleasure. A sweet pouder to be sown in silk bagges. TAke Roses, yeallow Sanders, Belzonum, Spick, Cypres of each a like, beat them in a Morter. Another. TAke Belzonum, Storax, Calamint, Cloves of each two oun∣ces fine Yreos six ounces, yeallow Sanders three ounces, fine Musk twenty graines. Another. TAke Roles, Orras spick, sweet Marjerom dryed, Fossis Cy∣pres, Belzonum of each a like quantity.
Take a handfull of Damask Rose leaves cut of the whites, and put them in a Glass, and put to them seven grains of Musk▪ three of Amber, and five of Cyvet, stop the Glass very close, and set it in the Sun, untill the leaves be through drye. A Pouder to make sweet bags. Oras, Cloves, Storax, Calamint, Calamus, Beniamyn, Cy∣pres, white Sanders, Lavender, Bassill, Marjerome, beate all these in pouders and mingle them together: I can appoint you no portion for I make a pound together, if there be too much of the strongest, qualifie it with the other pouders, mingle these with dryed Rose leaves, and put them into your baggs▪ For to make sweet Baggs: ORras, foure ounces. Fussis two ounces White Sanders two ounces Sprignall two ounces. Cipres two ounces. Beniamyn two ounces. Labdanum two ounces and a halfe. Calamus aromat two ounces. Roses in pouder foure ounces and a halfe. Musk one dram. Marjerom foure ounces. Civet or amber greace. one dram. To make a sweet Bagge. ORras Gallia Muscata Calamus Aromaticus. Cipres roots. Fussis.
Storax, Calamint. Beniamin. Fine Marjorme gently dryed. Eares of Lavender dryed. Five or six grains of Musk, Civet or Amber. Put in your eares of Lavender, and Marjerom whole: To make sweet Pouders. To make white Damask pouder. TAke white Ivory ground, Oras pouder the whitest that you can get, Civet and fine Musk, and mingle every thing ac∣cordingly, to the quantity that you are minded to make. And so ye may keep it a great while, and the longer the better a great deale. A Receipt of a fine Damask pouder. ORras pouder two ounces. Calamus Aromaticus two ounces. Cipres pouder two ounces. Fussis pouder two ounces Beniamin pouder one ounce and a halfe. Storax Calamint one ounce and a halfe Red Roses in pouder two ounce and a halfe Nigella Romana one ounce. Lavender in pouder two ounces. Marjerom in pouder two ounces. Musk one dram. Labdanum two ounces. White Sanders   Spygnoll  
To make a Damask pouder, with the charges thereof. CLoves two ounces   8 d. Cipres one ounce   two pence Ireos foure ounces   3 d. Calamus halfe an ounce   1 d. Lab danum one ounce   2 d. Beniamyn one ounce   8 d. Storax calamint halfe an ounce   4 d. Civet three drams   6 d. Musk eight grains   1 s. 4 d.   Summa 4 s.   A sweet pouder to still sweet Water. TAke six ounces of Ireos, foure ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Storax Calamint one ounce of Labdanum two ounces of yellow Sanders, and beat all these into pouder by them selves, then mingle them together, and ye list to put to it a little Musk it will be the better. To sow Wheat in less quantity and more increase. TAke Wheat, and put it into water, and salt, a day and a night then before you sow it throw it into new slaked Lime, and so sow it, as you do other Wheat, and the increase God willing, will be much more, and the less seed may be sowed.
An Exact ALPHABETICAL INDEX Of all the PHYSICAL RECEIPTS In this BOOK. A FOR an Ach in the back 1 For an ach ibid▪ Aches 3. 5▪ 10. 17. 34. 91. 168. 182. 192. 233 Adder biting 24 Almond milk 42 Aqua Composita 56 Agues 78 98 107 110 143 144 170 210 218 291 All manner of Aches 95 105 110 112 144 Aches incurable 117 Ague out of Sore 118 Aqua Mirabilis 119 Aqua Vitae ibid. An Ancomb—130 144 An Angnail 133 Aqua Realis, for Ʋlcers 164 Armes sweld 190 After throes in Child-bed. 197 200 And thers for the same ibid. Aqua Pendente, his Pills 236 Abortion prevented—245 Aloes Pills rightly made 245 Autumne Pills 263. Ale in Diet Drink 296 Ague Tertian cured 350 351 Cymical Extractions and Receipts. Aurum Potabile how made 376. Another way ibid Antimony the Quintesence 377 Amber sweetned 382
B For the Back a Plaister 1 10 11 Another for the Back 30 31 144 228 Bruises 3 4 6 81 91 112 136 Bleeding—7 183 184 Burnings 14 78 120 Brest 20 21 22 137 145 182 Back weak 40 309 337 Back hot—48 Belly Wormes 55 Biles 79. Another 80 144 157 168 Blisters 80 Breath stinking 139 183 Bones broken 83 113 120 156 Balm for a Wound 94 162 Blood stanched 99 104 138 262 266 Bloody Flux cured 99 105 118 190 216 227 243 Brest aches 105 Brest sore 110 145 214 268 Bruise from a horse 114 Balm-water the best 115 Balm to heal a wound—116 Biting of a mad Dog 116 215 Stone in the Bladder 127 Blood cleansed 131 Bullets drawn out 134 260 331 353 Bruised Blood drawn out—137 Back cooled 144 Brest broken 145 Burne with an harlot 183 Bursten 183 340 Bowels swelled—186 Break wind 193 Balls to wash 202 Bones and shivers 211 353 359 Busby's Oyl 213 269 Breath short—221 Basilicon made 239 Balsom excellent 262 348 Bloud letting dangerous 265. Others ibid. Blood letting good ibid. Blood letting naught 269
Broken shin a Plaister 285 Brest sore 290 Back pain—341 Bite, or flesh-rent 354 Burning Ague helped 363 Back weaknesse 366 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. A burning piercing-water 382 C Cuts 5 81 82 Canker 14 19 20 71 91 98 104 146 213 270 Cornes 14 74 Chollick 30 105 202 302 Cods swelled 31 138 269 Clearing blood 40 China broth 41 256. Another ibid. 267 338 Chollick water 49 Coughs 53 102 145 222 226 242 341 Chollick windy 60 230 Cooling drinks 65 Childs cough 68 Concoction 69 Consumptions 76 232 233 236 237 261 348 Cold aches 86 Conserve of Rhadishes 90 Of Cherries ibid. Of Oranges ibid. Cure of wounds—121 Cold Stomack 124 138 Cerecloth for the heart 126 To make a Cerecloth 129 Cinamon water ibid. Childrens wormes—133 Claret water made ibid. Child dead delivered 138 Cerot of Gallen 141 Ceratum Santallinum 142 Carbuncle healed—163 174 Cerecloth to cure a wound 168 Cramps 169 179 210 250 Convulsion Fits 180 229 Confections 184
Comphrey the Nature 184 Coldness of stomack 200 Conception—201 Cold, a Syrrup. 109 210 A Caustick 220 Choler helped 214 363 Cold—218 368 Cere-cloath for Limbs 219 Cowes bag hard 286 Cere-cloath for the Palsie 319 Corn to recover colour—349 Corn kept clean 350 Collick helped 364 Chymical Extractions. 375 Characters Chymical to know Graines, Scruples, Drams, Ounces, &c. useful and profitable to be learned 380 Chymical Luting 381 Chymical Oyles by Limbeck 381 For a Canker or face Tetter.—382 D Dropsies 27 55 69 146 173 244 271 Dead flesh 33 170 Diacitony 40 Damask Water—75 58 59 185 Diet for Wounds 62 63 Drink for Bones broke 86 Digestion helped—87 Distilled Waters 88 89 Deafnesse 91 140 185 261 347 Dirge for the Lungs 108 Drink for a Bruise 120 Deliverance of a Child 191. Though dead 196 Distilled Roses 224 Dropsies any of the three kinds 227 Diapompholigos 239 Diet Drink for Morbus Gallicus—249 Diapalma Plaister ibid. Diet for the Liver 253
Difficulty of Urine 253 Drink for most Diseases 295 Others ibid Diet Drink for Spring and Fall 296 Diet Drink to purge 299 Decoction for the Liver—300 Distilled water for the Palsie 321 Diet Drink for a Fistula. 360 361 Chymical Extractions. A Diaphoretick of Antimony and Sol, that worketh, in doze, four, five, six or seven Grains 377 A Diaphoretick of Antimony and Mercury 378 E Eyes 28 29 45 46 147 178 241 Eyes sore 44 45 60 70 73 172 03 209 290 Eye-water 44 47 55 59 100 101 212 Bleard Eyes 47 51 137 Eyes bruised 64 290 Eyes hot—103 130 Eares swelled 113 Eyes made clear 130 136 137 Pin and Web in the Eyes 146 164 201 Eyes red—146 Earwigs destroyed ibid. Emrods 146 149 170 343 Eyes defluxion—147 186 205 Eyes with a stiany 147 Elder-flower Oyle 182 Ears sounding—186 332 Eares stopped 186 Ears deaf 192 208 Eyes blood-shotten 208 Eyes, a Medicine—210 Electuaries 234 252 301 Electuary for the Brest 308 Electuary for the Stone 312 Electuarium Indivium 316 Electuary Soveraign against the Plague 317 Evula fallen 322
Electuary for the Plague 324 Eyes with the Pearle 354 F Rednesse in the Face 10 18 21 22 49 229 260 Felon 11 34 87 143 144 147 167 212 Face swelling 29 Dead-flesh 37 Fundament fallen 43 147 148 Face hot—47 347 Feaver thirst 52 Feavers 55 173 218 241 283 Flux and hot Dropsie 56 Falling cknesse 69 70 74 106 148 248 253 267 297 Fair face 71 148 157 160 203 232 Flegme sawey in the fae 89 Flesh recovered 91 Frenzy 95 290 Flux stayed 108 169 252 295 Fame for the head—109 Fall of a man 118 Fistula water 136 148 Flo sodered up 136 Flux of Blood 140 147 228 Flegme purged and cut 1 48 157 Another 365 Fistula cured 167 176 237 270 340 359 361 Festring wounds 168 Flowers stopped 193 194 195 196 Fish taken 206 Foot swelled 226 Fluxing ils for Ulcers Flegme cold, and pain in the back—242 French Pock 248 Flegme in the stomack 310 311 Flegm purged—312 Flos Unguentorum 332 Chymical Extractions, &c. For a Fistula 382
G Gouts, 2 3 5 20 35 55 77 112 168 172 222 225 334 Gargarismes 41 Galled horse 70 Green wound 79 242 Gout salve—95 Gargarismes for the throat ibid. Glister common 99 242 292 293 Gun-powder burns 120 Good Glister 138 216 292 Others ibid. Giddinesse 149 Gravel and Stone 165 224 314 Gloves perfumed 204 Good colour 205 Galled with riding 210 Green sicknesse 217 293. Others ibid. 294 Gonorraea 224 226 228 263 Gums inflamed 254 Gun-shot cured 268 Glister for the Palsie 318 Gargarism for the Palsie 321 Gargarism for the Squinancy—323 Grief at Stomack 351 Gums cleansed 354 Grosse flegm purged 371 Gnawing of the belly—373 H Head-ache 10 54 175 193 212 228 Head sick 23 27 337 Haire to grow 31 203 Healing Salves—38 Head Scald 39 87 200 229 Humors 39 262 334 349 Heat of Stomack 43 Heat of hands and feet 46 Heart ill 54 149 Head-Purgation 65 69 224 264 336 Healing Intret for Wounds 90 91 132
Heart-fainting 106 Hard swellings 109 150 Heart burning 114 Hard bruisings—138 Hand Canker 146 Heat in an Ague 182 Hardnesse of Milk in women 198 Holding of Urine 199. Another for the same ibid. Hemorrhoides 228 230 Others ibid. 231 Hectick Feaver sweating 228 Hearing recovered 229 Hands trembling 285 Heal a Burn 295 Another ibid Hyppocras for the Palsie 318 Harts orn Jelly 330 334 Heal a Fistula 359 Head and Stomack purged 371 I Itch—16 126 166 Issues, or old sores 33 Jaundies 40 54 Itch-water 50 52 Joint in pain 69 165 227 Jaundies yellow 72 150 174 188 221 225 365 Inflammations 73 113 215 28 286 Jaundies black 94 150 184 188 189 Imposthume in the head—105 120 173 Infection of Sheep 117 Iron drawn out 126 To make Irish Aqua vitae—129 Imposthume 150 Inward bleeding—169 Julip of Roses 188 Of Violets—ibid. Imposthume broken ibid. Imposthume an the brest 214 215 Inward Bruise 298 Juice of Licorice—311 Itch in a wound 329 Injecton of the Plague 335 339 Jelly of a Cck 345
K Kings Evil 18 52 Kill a Canker—135 Knees swelled 143 181 Knobs arising in the hands 208 Knots and Knobs in the Brest 215 Kidneyes helped 220 373 Stone in the Kidneyes—223 Kernels about the Neck 246 Kings Evil and bunches 246 267 L Leg sore 18 19 31 33 Leprosie 18 163 Liver 26 55 56 114 131 214 220 253 300 314 366 367 Licorice juice 42 Lunatick 48 Leg swelling—ibid Leg dead flesh 50 Lungs evil 54 288 304 308 309 Loosenesse stopped 73 107 150 165 225 Leg sore, Medicine 79 Leg broken—140 Lice killed 149 Lungs cough 161 328 366 Lute made 161 223 Lucatella's Balsome—177 Legs hard softned 189 Liver grown ibid. Live or dye to know 189 201 267 Lust for a man—201 Limbs lame 226 Liver rotten ibid. Labour in Child-bed 233 365 Liver cold—237 364 Linimentum Alcei 239 Leanness procured 255 Lozenges, to make them ibid. 316 Liver Oyntment—301 Limbs comforted 303 Lozenges for Palsie 322
Liniment for Quinsey 323 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. A Laudanum 383 M Mother 17 107 150 225 233 270 Marmole 23 52 Mad dog 24 259 339 347 352 367 Megrim 28 173 214 Mouth-Canker 44 146 Mouth sore 46 107 150 168 170 174 234 288 Medicine for the eyes 50 Morphew 55 107 108 150 164 268 333 Mouth hot 56 Medicine for Wounds 62 Marmelades 90 Medicine for a strain—106 Melancholy cured 108 131 297 301 Medicine for a Plague sore 121 Meazles, pocks 122 Medicine for the Stone 127 352 Members that swell—136 Milk dried up in the Brest 183 199 Menstrues provoked 187 193 Making water 198 Milk kept from curdling 215 Menstrues superfluous—227 Morbus Gallicus cured 236 248 Mel Rosatum 280 Mint water 285 Madnesse in the head 290 Others ibid. Medicine for the Gout, the best 334 Medicine for the Stone 364 Medicine for the Plurisie 369 Medicine for the Plague approved 370 Medicine in general for all sorts of people taken with the Plague 370 Melt cured 373 N Nail pricked 87 Nose bleeding 108 117 230 258 Others approved ibid. 266 344
Nose Fume 109 Noli me Tangere 114 163 Nails swelling 127 Noise in th head—148 252 Nailes stubbing 151 Needle pricking 15 16 Nail drawn forth 151 Neck swoln 174 Nature restored—246 No children, who is in fault 267 Navel Balsom, precious 286 287 Nose red, and face 289 Nerves restored 303 Nostril powder for the Palsie 322 Navel unguent—332 Nose bleeding, three Receipts 351 Notes and Physical Characters, set down in their Receipts for quantity of several Ingredients useful to be known 374 O Oyntment green 39 83 Oyl of Exeter 112 Oyntment of Swallowes 113 Oyntment to draw and heal—135 Oyle of Bayes Of Balm 141 339 Oyntment for the Stomack 143 Oximel Compound 153 Oyntment for the Sinewes—ibid. Oyl of Mastick 154 Oyle of Roses 154 155 Of Camomile 154 Of Almonds ibid Of Eggs—ibid. Oyl of Wheat 155 Oyl of Anniseeds ibid. Of Tartar 155 162 Oleum Magistrale 157 Old Wounds—168 Oyntment for Back aches 175 Oyle for a Rupture 180
Open sores cured 192 Oyl of Wormwood for stomack 203 Oyle of Wormes for Sinews 204 Oyntment for the Spleen—220 Oyle excellent 234 Oyntment green 250 Old Sores 284 296 Outward Bruise—298 Oyntment, Countesses 305 Oyntment for the Spleen 307 Oyntment for the Reins 313 Others ibid Oyntment for the Stone 316 Oyntment for the Palsie 318 Oyntment for the head 320 Oyntment 344 Oleum Hipericon—355 Oyl of Violets ibid. Oyle of Swallowes 356 Oleum Benedictum ibid. Oyle of Earth-wormes 357 Oyl of Dill, its vertues ibid. Oyl of Rue, its vertues—ibid. Oyle of Elder flowers, its vertue ibid. Oyl of Camomile, its vertue ibid. Oyle of sweet Mints 358 Oyl of Roses, its vertue ibid. Oyl of Lilly-flowers, its vertue ibid. Oximel for the Chollick. 362 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. To draw Oyl of Tartar and Turpentine 30 P For the Plurisie 1 14 75 104 122 173 Pricking 6 Piles 7 8 19 190 216 230 233 Three Receipts for the Piles 255 298 Pimples face 19 329 Paps sore 22 Pin and Web 28 30 231 Palsies 33 53 118 156 162 229 263 319 Pestilence 54 80 ibid.
Poison 55 71 207 Peerle, and Pin, and Web 59 71 204 Pocks small in the throat Pocks pitting the sace 61 165 Perfumes excellent 64 Purgation 75 76 101 123 152 161 217 218 234 247 260 Palsie dead 77 Pissing blood 99 183 192 Ptisick of Lungs 104 Plague 108 115 122 156 251 252 Potion to stop blood 121 166 Plague sore broke 121 Plague sore drawne 122 Purge for Stone—125 Powder for the stomack 126 Powder for the Stone 128 308 Pocks small to come forth—130 207 Powder for Wormes 130 Powder for a Rupture 178 Paps cankered 184 Purge for Menstrues 187 Plaister to dry—189 Powder to eat for the Spleen 221 Plums preserved 235 Preparation of the Magistral Sev 235 Plaister excellent 242 Purge for the Dropsie—244 An excellent Poultisse 262 Pills for the Spring 263 Purge excellent 261 291 296 302 312 347 348 Pills to purge 264 320 Plague a Balsome precious 286 287 Paracelsus Plaister 296 Purges precious three 298 Powder for the stone—302 Pessaries 306 Powder called Lipton-tripon 312 Pomander for Palsie 321 Poultis for the Quinsey—323 Palates of the mouth 337 Populion 339 Poultisse—341 349
Pills for the Chollick 362 Pills to work upon every humor 362 Plurisie a Medicine 368 Plurisie discovered and cured ibid. Powder to preserve from the Plague 369 Preservative for a child from the Plague 370 Plague sore approaching ibid. Plague expelled 371 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. Purge of Tartar, what quantity you will, two pound or more 379 Purge of Antimony, that works without vomit 383 Q Quinsie in the throat 123 166 Quick deliverance 196 Though child dead 196 205 Quinsie, aliàs Squinancy 267 Quartan Ague 283 294 295 Quinsie 323 Quotidian Agues helped 350 351 Quartan Feavers 356 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. Quintessence of Quick-silver. 376 Quintessence of Brimstone ibid. Quintessence of Antimony Quintessence of all manner of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Flesh, Blood or Eggs, how made 375 R▪ Ringworm 13 29 123 149 170 329 334 Ringworm water 50 Rising sores 53 Reins of the Back 56 75 144 164 226 Rose-water made 58 Rheume in the head 65 124 Running Reins—70 134 148 233 271 Ribs broken 84 Rheums 94 Rosa solis Water 119 Rosemary water 129
Rankling Wounds 132 Rupture 143 177 ibid. 180 Rheume 156 163 8 For Rats and Mice—178 Rose-water its properties 205 Rickets cured 212 232 Roses conserved 223 Rhubarb expressed 234 Roots five opening 314 Rawness of stomack—315 372 Receipt for the Plurisie 369 Reds in women procured 371 Receipt of the Black Salve 343 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. Receipts to make the best Vineger 384 Receipt to make Raisons wine 384 S Shrinking of Sinewes 295 99 124 130 190 Sores old 3 6 7 32 36 76 81 90 110 126 169 209 Splinters 6 19 Scalding 13 15 20 116 119 137 227 Stitches 14 26 27 74 94 124 166 13 4 Stanch blood 16 65 66 67 103 Scurfs 17 Swellings 18 22 34 35 103 116 Sauce Flegme 23 Stinging of Wasps or Bees 24 125 Spleen 25 55 56 179 214 220 225 261 283 301 307 309 347 Stomack 25 26 27 53 56 70 102 124 142 207 327 Sleep 27 29 100 107 125 166 204 Stone 31 48 49 52 66 74 76 77 78 115 117 207 224 232 241 Salve healing 37 157 177 Salves 38 83 113 167 171 Spirits vital 53 Sinewes pricked 64 Strangury 64 342 Splent in a horse—65 Soveraign Pestilence water 72 Sciatica 111 118 148 170 171 208 217 Spots of the Small Pocks 123
Stomack windy 124 Strain 125 cut, joyned 134 Scurvey 135 179 271 Speech restored 156 Spots out of the face 160 Side sore—173 Syrrup of tart Pomgranats 190 Swoundings ibid. Skin cleared 203 Spitting of blood 206 Strains—213 222 Syrrup of Gilliflowers. 223 Stomack watrish 231 Syrrup of Quinces for the stomack 251 Stone 259 271 303 308 312 315 324 325 331 334 342 364 Stomack Pills 264 Simples when to be gathered 268 Signs of a dying man 269 Sores old 280 Surfeit 284 335 Syrrups for Palsie—320 Strangury 325 326 Stitch 328 Scald or burning 333 Sciatica 333 346 Sores to ripen—354 353 Powder 359 Sinews cut 355 Syrrup of Bisons for all Feavers 363 Stitches and stopping ibid. Stomack comforted 363. Others ibid. Syrrup de quinque radicibus 365 Syrrup for Choler ibid. Syrrup for the Lungs 366 Syrrup for the Liver 367 Stomack procured—371 Stomack Plaister 372 Spleen Plaister approved 373 T Thorns 24 87 116 176
Tettar and Ringworm 59 98 174 206 217 39 Tooth-ache 68 73 77 128 165 198 205 8 Trembling of heart 70 9 Tooth rotten Thornes drawn out 111 127 221 Throat sore 1272 88 331 Teeth fastned and cleansed 127 128 Tooth pulled out 128 Tobacco Salve—151 152 212 Tobacco Balm 152 Tooth to fall out 167 206 Termes white 197 Termes swelling 198 Tumor on the Brest—229 Tongue inflamed 254 Throat inflamed ibid. Tobacco water ibid. Toes cured of Cornes 268 Teeth yellow and foule—270 Tickling Cough 311 Throat swelled 326 327 Tissick 358 U Unguentum Mundificatum 9 Veins knit 16 Ulcers 21 92 176 236 238 Urine difficult 30 335 Ulcers old 61 91 280 Viper wine 75 Veins cut 82 116 Venemous stings—94 Vomit for stopping 105 Vomiting stayed 106 128 330 Urine not held 123 Voice cleared 131 Vineger made—ibid. Unguentum album Camphoratum 135 Unguentum de Althaea 139 Aureum ibid. Aegyptiacum 140
Vitriol Oyle 161 Veins swelled 175 Vm out of a wound ibid Veins broken—206 Urine provoked 233 Urine sharp 238 254 Unguentum defec. Rubrum 240 Unguentum nut. or Diapharniacon 257 Ulce on the top of the Penis 218 A good Vomit 315 330 Ʋrine stopped 325 341 W Wounds 4 6 19 32 62 68 82 132 355 162 168 175 177 191 192 Wrench 12 Wens 16 191 Wormes 22 71 91 95 126 131 181 169 238 292 355 Wind 28 Wound-water 48 49 51 86 Wound Oyle 72 98 Wind in the stomack 74 327 372 Wound Syrrup 82 Wound bleeding stopt 86 Web and Pin—95 Wind in the head 105 Wound green 112 Water for any Disease 115 Wormwood-water—120 Wambling of the stomack 126 Warts removed 133 358 Wine sowre, made sweet 134 VVound-balm—162 163 VVater against the Stone 167 VVoman with child 180 VVind in the stomack 207 225 302 315 VVeaknesse 234 VVounds healed in twenty four hours 240 VVound drink 260 331 353 VVormwood-water 284 VVater of Balm 297
VVheazing of the pipes 30 308 VVind Chollick 327 VVound corrupted 329 VVounds old 31 VVomens Brests ibid. Water Cordial—336 VVater of Cinamon ibid. VVhitlaw cured 343 VVater to cure any Ulcer 344 VVater for the Stone 345 VVhite water for the Fistula ibid. VVater for the Liver—367 VVeaknesse of head and stomack 371 VVind in the stomack 372 Chymical Extractions and Receipts. VVhite water, or Maids milk of Mercury or Quick-silver 377 VVonderously Piercing Chymical water 399 VVater Chymical to pierce Metal ibid. Y Yard pained and swelled 175 Yard burned 198
Rare Secrets of Herbs, not to be found in any common HERBAL, with their Vertues and Natures. TUtsan, or Park leaves, with its vertue 385 Wormwood, and its vertue 385 386 Mugwort▪ and its vertue 386 Southernwood, and its vertue ibid Subwort, and its vertue ibid. Egrimony—ibid. Caroway ibid. Cole-wort ibid Woodbind, and its vertue 387 Onyons, and their vertue ibid Columbine—ibid. Cardiaca ibid. Wolf Thistle, or wild Thistle ibid. Comphrey ibid. To remove and make slips, and planting of Artichokes, Goosberries, Ro∣ses, Privet, White-thornes, and all manner of flowers 388 A note of the best and properest times to sow these Herbs and Seeds 389 Another special Note to sow Seeds very profitable for all that love Gar∣dening 390 392 Other special Rules for setting and sowing of Herbs and Seeds 392 393 The Vertues of divers Waters. Hysop water &c. 394 395 396
Excellent wayes to distil Waters from Flow∣ers, Herbs, Roots, &c. Primroses 396 Fennel ibid. Hysop ibid. Camomile ibid. Walwort—ibid. Strawberryes ibid. Wormwood ibid. Celendine ibid. Damask water ibi. To make sweet water with small cost and charges 397 Other sweet waters ibid. Waters to wash fair ibid. To make Damask Water in Winter 398 Another rare Damask water ibid To make Rose water for Damask water ibid. To make Damask water at all times ibid. Water Aromatick 399
A TABLE of sundry Rare Inven∣tions contained in this Book. For the several Baits for Fish. FOR the Pike 400 For the Pearch ibid. For the Trout ibid. In April For the Roach—ibid. May For the Roach 40 September For the Roach ibid. For the Pearch—ibid▪ October For the Roach ibid. November For the Pearch and Roach ibid, How to take fish 402 To take a Pike ibid. Baits for fish at all times 403 A way to increase, and to keep Carps ibid. For Birds and▪ Fowles—ibid.
To Dye divers kinds of Colours To dye Yellow. 404 To dye Red Colour ibid To dye Carnation ibid. To dye Popinjay Green 405 To dye a dark green ibid. To dye Purple ibid. To dye Russet ibid. To dye Tawny—ibid. To make staining Waters ibid. To make a deep Green ibid. To make another Green 406 To make a Light Green ibid To make Blue Water ibid. Another ibid. Another for the same ibid. To make Net-Work. To make the broad Arrow and Diamond 407 To make the Scallop shell 408 To make Knot-work like Dice 409 The Net-work of small Diamonds 410 To make the great Losings ibid. 411 412 413 414 To knit Net-work like Glass-windowes 414 To knit Net-work of the Harts 415 The knotted Work of the Flese ibid. A Knot-work like Honey-combs ibid. The Knot-work of Losings 416 The order how to knit an hose 417 418 419
For making Laces. The description of the Art p. 420 A broad lace of five bowes 421 A Lace round of five bowes ibid An open Lace of five bowes—ibid The same lace of divers colours ibid A Lace Basture of five bowes—422 A broad Lace for purses of ten bowes ibid A Lace bordered ibid A Lace covert of ten bowes ibid A Lace double Covert—423 A lace Coupen Covert ibid A lace of Coupen Covert, De Piole ibid A lace daunce of twelve bowes 424 The same round—ibid A lace Piole ibid A lace Covert Cheveron ibid A lace de powne 425 A lace of Covert Vice-Ray ibid The same lace compound—ibid A Lace Demi-Cheveron 426 The same compound ibid A lace Covert de Basture ibid A lace covert de Basture Demi-ray ibid A lace Basture Techel 427 A broad lace for purses of seven bowes ibid The same lace open ibid A lace party round—ibid The same Compound 428 A lace party broad ibid The same lace Ray—ibid
A Lace called Pale. ibid A Lace quarter and quartell ibid The same Compound 429 A Lace of Corduve of four bowes ibid A Lace Maskell—ibid A Lace called the Fret ibid A Lace called Cow-de-Rate ibid The same Lace—430 The same Lace Compound ibid The same Lace of sixteen bowes ibid A Lace bend—ibid The same Lace of sixteen Bowes 431 A Lace Cheveron broad ibid A Lace Cheveron round ibid A Lace pene de pound—ibid A Lace enleved of sixteen bowes ibid A Lace Cheveron broad, of eight bowes 432 A Lace Cheveron round ibid A Lace Ownd of sixteen bowes ibid A Lace Ownd round—ibid A Lace Sawter of eight bowes 433 A Lace Croyslee ibid A Lace Cross Ʋliet—434 A Lace double Losenge ibid A Lace Ʋliet Bosse ibid A Lace Ʋliet Vine 435 A Lace Ʋliet Bosse—ibid A Lace Sawter Ʋliet ibid A Lace for Ʋliet round ibid The same Lace fret and broad 436 A Lace Cressant—ibid A Lace indented ibid A Lace green de-Orgee—437 The same double with twelve bowes ibid
A Lace vice of three Colours ibid A Lace Cheveron broad, of sixteen bowes 4 The same Lace Compound ibid Here ends Lace making. An order how to breed Horses. The choice of the Stallion and stud Mare pag. 439 Wild Mares not best to keep for the race ibid At what age the Mare is first to be handled and co∣vered ibid How to inforce the Mares to come to be strained 440 The order of covering ibid How to use your Mare which is covered ibid How to make that no Mare shall goe barren 441 To diet the Stallion for the time he shall cover. ibid What time of the year is best for the Mare to be covered. ibid How the breeding Mare is to bee used when she shall fole. 442 How many yeares a Horse wil serve to cover the Mares. ibid The best age for Horse or Mares, to get or bear Colts, and how long they will continue good. ibid What time of the yeare is best to weane the Colts from their dammes. ibid What feeding is best for Colts from two yeers. 443 The cause why English Horse are taken up so young, which is not good. ibid The way to handle a sturdy horse. 444 The using of horse after they be handled. ibid What feeding is best in Winter for Mares, Weanlings,
and two years old. 444 what age Colts may be best handled 445 Here ends breeding horses, and then followes these. To make a Leuton Jelly 446 To make a Leuton Custard—ibid To dry Damsons or any other plums ibid To preserve red Roses 447 To preserve the walnut in syrup—ibid To candy Eringus 448 To preserve Pippin, Pear or Warden dry 449 To preserve Quinces ibid To make the Syrup of the five opening roots 450 To make Syrup of Apples ibid A Receipt for the broth for the Stone by Dr. Matthias. ibid To make Syrup of Mallows 451 To make Orange Cakes—452 To make Bisket bread ibid To bake Beefe like red Deere to bee eaten cold. 453 To make Almond butter. ibid To Marivate fish ibid Angel water—454 A dozen of the little cloaths ibid A Custard ibid To brew Ale—455 To make Mustard ibid An excellent receit with a Caule of Mutton 456 The way to prepare the suet ibid To make an Olave Pie ibid To make a French Pie—457 To make Puffs ibid
To beautifie and adorn the face. 45 A Water to wash the face 45 Perfumes for Leather ibid Another perfume 459 Another perfume—ibid A sweet perfume to burne 460 Perfumes for Gloves ibid A perfume called Amber-paste. ibid Perfumes for a chamber—ibid Herbs good for perfumes 461 King Henries perfume. ibid King Edwards perfume—ibid The French Queens perfume ibid Another fine perfume ibid Another excellent perfume ibid Another perfume—462 A sweet perfume 463 A special perfume for Gloves 464 Another perfume for Gloves ibid Another perfume for Gloves—ibid Another perfume for Gloves ibid The Receipt for the former perfume—465 Another receipt for the same ibid To make an excellent Pomander. ibid To make a costly Pomander 466 Another way to make a Pomander ibid To make a Pomander with little cost ibid A sweet powder to be sowed in silk bags ibid Another way ibid Another way to make sweet powder 467 A powder to put into bags ibid To make sweet bags ibid
Another way ibid To make white Damask powder 468 Receipt for a Damask powder ibid To make Damaske Powder with the charges of it ibid A sweet Powder to still sweet Water 469 To sow wheat, lesse in quantity and more increase, 469 FINIS.
