P3022 E1498_3 99867570 119886
A Voice from Heaven: OR, A TESTIMONY AGAINST The remainders of Antichrist Yet in ENGLAND: And in particular, the Court of Tryers For Approbation of MINISTERS. Born by GUALTER POSTLETHWAIT, Pa∣stor to a Church of Christ in Lewes in Sussex. LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-alley. 1655.
To the Saints and faithful brethren that are in England, Scotland, and Ireland; especially to that little flock of God over which the holy Ghost hath made him over∣seer; Gualter Postlethwaite wisheth grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Brethren and beloved, SOme thoughts have of late (more then formerly, and more sadly (visited my heart, that I wish may prevaile more upon your hearts. First, the thought of the greatness, the soveraignty and sove∣raigne
perfection of God: the foo∣lishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men. He is the onely Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and that in the most undoubted right, that has made all things of nothing, by the word of his mouth, for himself. Vaine man would be wise, al∣though he be borne like the wild asses colt; he will provoke God to anger, transgresse his Laws, change his ordinances, and breake the everlasting Co∣venant. But who is this that darkens counsel by words with∣out knowledge? shall he that contendeth with the Almigh∣ty instruct him? He that repro∣veth God, let him answer it. Do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger then he? Adde not unto his words, lest he re∣prove thee, and thou be found a
lyar. The world, yea, the hight of the people do languish, because the earth is defilled by deniati∣ons from the laws, ordinances, and Covenants of God: 'Tis mans deformitie, to walke ac∣cording to his own invention in any thing, & will prove his own destruction. Can God endure to be prescribed by creatures? Shall Man coin Laws for Rules of acceptable walking with God in Spiritual, Civil, or Ec∣clesiastical things? It would be and is horrible impudence for any to do it. All the sin and misery in the world, brake in at this door, viz. by hearkning to Reason▪ against Institution. 'Twas Israel's sin, to do that was right in their own eyes, in Civils, Judg. 17. 6. much more in Ecclesiasticals. The Apostle held a war with reasonings and thoughts of men, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
These are no competent judges of the doctrine of God in Christ, but must be overthrown. Secondly, the thought of the fatal miscarriages of man mana∣ging any thing by his own wisdom and strength. Eve became the mother of mischief to all living, by trusting to carnal Sense and Reason in judging of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The sons of God brought the Deluge on the old world, by taking such wives as they chose. Israel provoked God to anger with their own Inventions, not onely in point of Worship, but in the matters of their Com∣monwealth, when they follow∣ed their own fancies, and the Customs of men; but in deter∣mining what kinde of Govern∣ment to set up in the Nation; and were convinced of their mistake by a signe from heaven,
God thundering his displeasure against them from heaven, and raining tokens of his wrath up∣on them: and the tyranny that followed was as teaching of the same, God giving them such re∣compence of their error as was meet. Gedeon would have a new way of remembering the victory by a costly Ephod, and Israel went a whoring after it; which thing became a snare to Gedeon, and to his house. Alas! 't is but a shew of wisdom, that is in Will-worship, Col. 2. 23. and by this means men are be∣guiled of their reward, vers. 18. and righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prov. 14. 34. We think by our own inventions to get us glory among the Nations, whilst we conform our selves to the worldly glory of their govern∣ment: but our way were to keep
to Gods statutes and judgments, without adding or diminishing; then the Nations would say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people: Deut. 4. 6. Thirdly, the thought of the per∣fection of the Scriptures: They are able to make us wise unto salva∣tion, 2 Tim. 3: 15. to teach us how to behave our selves in the Church, 1 Tim. 3. 15. how to behave our selves in the Com∣monwealth: David teaches the Church to pray, Give the King thy judgements, and thy righteous∣ness unto the Kings Son, Psal. 72. 1. The Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect, throughly furnished to all good works, 2 Tim. 3. 16. Therefore, my beloved bre∣thren, accept no Law-giver but Jesus Christ, neither in Church nor Commonwealth. Let this be your profession: The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Law-giver, he is our King. And though o∣ther Lords besides him rule over us, let us b him onely make men∣tion of his Name, that will in due time save us from devilish government in the Church, when he shall give the body of the Beast to the burning flame, and cast the Beast and false Pro∣phet into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone; and from all worldly government in Commonweals, when the Stone cut out of the mountain shall smite on the toes of the Image: Then not onely the Clay, but the Iron, and the Brass, and the Silver, & the Gold-government shall be broken to pieces, and be carried away like dust by the wind, and no more place shall be found for them; no, not for the goodliest Government that e∣ver was invented by the wit of
man. And till that time, change of Governments will be the disease of the world, whilst Crowns and Diadems are trans∣posed from one Man, and from one People to another. I must say it, although I delight in it (considered in it self) as little as others that complain of the great cry of Overturnings, wherewith the world is now Alarm'd. There will be over∣turnings, till he come whose right it is. Oh the stupidity of men! that apprehend not Gods displeasure against the Govern∣ments of this world, by the often changes that are made: 'Tis to be feared that this is Ju∣diciary, that God may leave Europe, and the wise Nations thereof, unto themselves, to walk in their own counsels, be∣cause they trust in, and leave no∣thing of their own doings, nor
of their stubborn way, whilst, he passes over to America, and thence to the East-Indies, to set up the government of Jesus Christ amongst the Barbarous Nations. The Lords word, brethren, is to me, to you, Love the Truth, and Peace: Let us not, of a fond affection to Peace and Ease, lose Truth; yet in our striving for Truth, let us strive lawfully, or else we shall not be crowned: Wherein I would have every one be wary, not with a carnal, but spiritual wa∣riness; walk in your Warfare by a divine Rule, act from a di∣vine Spirit, keep to a divine Frame of Spirit, and stand eve∣ry one in his place, striving for Truth. I hope, in what I have done in this following Treatise, I have not exceeded. As one of
the Lords Watchmen, I must warn men. I hope I have spo∣ken from the Spirit of God; I am sure 't is after many prayers and tears; and so long I have delayed, till Conscience made me speak, and the guilt of my delay began to stare in my face; and I think I speak not beside the cause: that was the Disci∣ples fault, that they spake beside the cause; and from this, Christ argues the carnalness of their spirit, that would have fire come down from heaven on the Sa∣maritanes, Luke 9. 54, 55, 56. Is it not the time of Antichrists war, whilst Christ is consuming him with the breath of his mouth? If any, judging of my frame of spirit by my phrase, think me too bitter, let them but take this along with them, That I speak not of persons, but things, that can't be too ill spo∣ken
of, when vicious, and con∣trary to the Word of God. And for the text I have for what I say, if I abused it, I shall be glad the righteous should smite me for it. Read, and judge; and as you see cause, correct my mistakes. My time cuts my E∣pistle to you, shorter then I in∣tended. I beg this, That as the three thoughts before mention∣ed led me into this Treatise: so prepare to read it by the medi∣tation of them; and I shall pray to the Lord to make both profi∣table to you, who am Devoted to the service of your faith and holiness, Gualter Postlethwaite.
A Voice from Heaven. Rev. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from hea∣ven, saying, Come out of her, my people; that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. THe Chapter begins with a most stately Proclama∣tion, of the certain sud∣den, and utter ruine of Babylon the Great; to∣gether with the Causes of it, vers. 1, 2, 3. But I shall not here insist.
There follows an Admonition to God's people, to come out of her▪ and this in our text. In this there is observable, 1. The means whereby this War∣ning is given; and that is, a voice from heaven, to note God to be the author of it, Matth. 21. 25. Here are not the like stately circumstances accompanying this Voice, as accompanied the foregoing Voice. It seems this Voice will not be so remarkable for any thing, as the Di∣vine Author of it; the impress of whose divine excellencie stamped on it, shall be the onely thing observable, challenging our attention to it. As if God meant to sound forth this Voice, not by silver trumpets, but rams horns; not employ∣ing the choicest parts and gifts, nor men of greatest power and repute among men, in this work. 2. The Admonition it self; where∣in we may observe, 1. A duty required, viz. to come out of her. 2. The argument moving hereunto, drawn from the consideration of a dou∣ble danger, viz.
1. Of fellowship with her sins. 2. Of sharing with her in her plagues. There remains one thing to be enqui∣red into, and that is, who is here meant by the relative Pronoun [her.] The antecedent to this relative, must needs be Babylon the great, vers. 2. and she is the same with that great Where in the foregoing Chapter, as appears by the name written in her forehead, vers. 5. and this is no other, but Rome Anti∣christian, as appears plainly from the Beast that she rides on: neither is this at all controverted among Protestants. But the great Question will be about the extent of the signification of Baby∣lon, or Rome here. Surely we are to extend it to signifie not onely what lies within the walls of Rome, but what∣soever is comprehended within the Par. in loc. territories of the Romane jurisdi∣ction. And my reason is, because the same that are called to come out of her, in the text, are by the same voice called upon to execute vengeance upon her, vers. 6. and this work is laid out for the
ten horns, or Kings over which she reigns. Chap. 17. 16. And besides, we know there was the like extent of signi∣fication in the Prophets words, from whence the text is taken, Jer. 51. 45. My people, go ye out of the midst of her; that is out of all places within the Babylonian Jurisdiction. But still there remains as great a Question, viz. How we are to con∣ceive of the Romish Jurisdiction, and under what notion to consider the Ter∣ritories of it. To which I answer, that we are to look upon them in their Ecclefiastical considerations, as they are formed into Antichristian Churches. Certainly, An∣tichristian Societies are here meant, be∣cause they are distinguished from their sins; it being made a consquent of abi∣ding in them, to be partakers of their sis. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins. Now 't is not like that Civil Societies should be meant: for Babylon here, is the same with the great Whore, Chap. 17. 1. that is out of doubt Rome con∣sidered
Ecclesiastically. For if we take the Beast for the Secular State, on which she is said to ride then apparently she is distinguished from the Secular State, as the Beast she rides on, vers. 3. And if (with Mr. Cotton on Chap. 13.) we take that Beast to be the Catholike visi∣ble Church of Rome, we must needs take Rome Ecclesiastically: for Rome Civil does not ride on Rome Ecclesiastical; but Rome Ecclesiastical rides the Universal Church of Rome, as the reference of her Universality to Rome makes plain; and by vertue of this reference, Come out of Rome is as much as to say Come out of all the several territories of her jurisdiction. Having thus made way unto it, I come to the thing that I intend viz. Whosoever would avoid fellowship Doct. with the sins of Antichristian Chur∣ches, must see to it that they depart from the fellowship of such Churches, and cease to walk in Antichristian order. There be many examples in Scripture, that shew how the people of God have degenerated, through unwarrantable Ci∣vil
cohabitation and association with wicked men and false worshippers: how much more dangerous is Ecclesiastical communion, in the times of the Gospel, unwarrantable to be held with wicked men, 1 Cor. 5. Heb. 12. 15. especially in ways strange to the Word of God? The sons of God lost their Religion, by marrying the daughters of men, Gen. 6. Israel was defiled with the idolatry of the Egyptians in Egypt, Ezek. 23. They were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, and served their idols, Psal. 106. 35, 36. And in their Captivity, this comes into their minde: We will be as the heathen, and as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone, Ezek. 20. 32. But if Civil communion be so dan∣gerous, how much more dangerous is Ecclesiastical communion? The daugh∣ters of Moab called the Israelites to their sacrifices, and the people did eat, and bowed down unto their gods. Numb. 25. 2. yea, Israel joyned him∣self unto Baal-peor, vers. 3. Take one place for all: Deut. 12. 30, 31. the Lord warns the people that
they should not imitate the Heathen in their worship; not onely that they did not worship their gods, but that they did not worship their God in that way. And here note, that though the means of Worship be onely changed, yet 't is a going to another God. Take heed (says God) that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these na∣tions serve their gods? And that the means of Worship is onely minded, is plainly apparent from what follows: Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God. To worship God with a strange worship, is, to worship a strange god: neither will God accept of any other in∣terpretation of false worship, or wor∣shipping in a false way, but that a new God is devised for the object of it, that Ames. Me∣dul. l. 2. c. 13. S. 42. is delighted with such worship. So long therefore as we worship God in the Antichristian way, we do interpretatively worship the gods of the Antichristians. Steven the Proto-Martyr lost his life in defence of the Gospel-way of wor∣shipping God, in opposition to the Legal worship, earnestly contended for by the Jews, his antagonists; amongst the rest,
for preaching against the Temple, and so consequently against their National Church, the bond of which was their meeting together at the Temple in one individual worship, Acts 6. 13. For Cal. in loc. although the witnesses are said to be false witnesses; yet, as Calvin says, this reproach was not objected to him for nothing; for he taught the abrogation of the Law. But in this they were false witnesses, and suborned to lye, be∣cause they wittingly depraved that which was well and piously spoken. I shall now explain what I mean by Explic. Antichristian Churches. And first, I mean Parish-Churches. To prove which to be Antichristian, I shall first shew what I finde storied of their original. Potter, in his interpretation of the number 666. p. 131. quoting Onuphri∣us Panvinius de praecipuis urbis Romae Basilicis, cut of him writes thus: Whereas originally there was a small uncertain number of Presbyters at Rome▪ they were brought to a certain number and order, by Cletus and E∣varistus
Popes of Rome. First, Cle∣tus reduced the Presbyters of Rome to the number of 25: afterwards, Evaristus, about the yeer of Christ 100 appointed and prescribed a seve∣ral Parish to every one of these Pres∣byters; which Parishes were after∣wards enlarged, and had their bounds and limits more perfectly, and more exactly prescribed unto them, by Pope Dionysius, about the yeer of Christ 260. After which time, Marcellus about the yeer of Christ 305. limited the number of those Titles, which an∣ciently were first given to the Presby∣ters by Evaristus, and did by Decree constitute that there should be in Rome 25, as it were so many Dio∣ceses, for the more convenient bapti∣zing of such Gentiles as were daily converted to Christian Religion. Thus he. Selden, in his History of Tythes, Chap. 6. S. 3. writes thus: For Pa∣rish-Churches, it is plain, that as Me∣tropolitane Sees, Patriarchates, (Ex∣archates in the Eastern Church) and Bishopricks, these greater dignities,
were most usually at first ordained and limited according to the distinction of Seats of Government, and inferiour Cities that had been assigned to the Substitutes, or Vicarii, of the Prae∣fecti-Praetorio, or Vice-Roys of the East and West Empire: so were Pa∣rishes appointed and divided to several Ministers within the Ecclesiastical Rule of these Dignities, according to the conveniencies of Country-towns and villages; one, or more or less (of such as being but small territories might not by the Canons be Bishopricks) to a Parish; the word Parish at first de∣noting a whole Bishoprick, (which is but as a great Parish) and signifying no otherwise then Diocese; but after∣ward being confined to what our com∣mon language restrains it. The Cu∣rates of these Parishes were such as the Bishop appointed under him, to have care of souls in them, and were called Presbyteri-Parochiani, i. e. Parish-Presbyters. These Parishes arose from the limita∣tion of the Ministers function. After∣ward there arose another kinde of Pa∣rishes,
from the limitation of the Mini∣sters maintenance; of which Selden in his History above-said, Chap. 9. S. 4. thus: Afterward, when devotion grew firmer, and most Lay-men, of fair estates, desired the Country-residence for some Chaplains that might be al∣ways ready for Christian instruction among them, and their families, and adjoyning tenants: Oratories, and Churches, began to be built by them also; and being hallowed by the Bi∣shops, were endowed with peculiar maintenance from the Founders, for Incumbents that should there onely re∣side: which maintenance, with all o∣ther Ecclesiastical profits, that came to the hands of every such Incumbent, (in regard the Lay-founder had, ac∣cording to the territories of his De∣mesnes, tenancies or neighboring posses∣sions, made and assigned both the li∣mits within the which the holy Fun∣ction was to be exercised, and appoin∣ted those that should repair to the Church and offer there; as also pro∣vided a special Salary for the perform∣ance) was afterward also restrained
from the common Treasury of the Diocese, &c. And thus you see the Pedigree of Pa∣rishes; set aside some few that have been made by the special Orders of Popes or Princes in the dividing or uniting of Pa∣rishes for conveniencies sake; of which, Selden, p. 276. Out of what has been said, 't is evi∣dent, that Parish-Churches are not plants of our heavenly Fathers planting; and so shall be plucked up. Mat. 15. 13. They are of mans making, and have sprung out of his pride, ambition, and usurpation. They have been bred in the womb of the Apostacie of these lat∣ter times, and brought forth by the working of the mystery of iniquity. The best that can be said of the mother of these daughters, is, to call her Igno∣rant devotion. They are therefore things that may be shaken, and that God hath promised to remove, Heb. 12. 26, 27. and therefore it behoves all to flee out of them before they fall on their heads. But lest what hath been said be useless to the more heedless, consider,
First, that Scripture speaks nothing of Parish-Churches, if we cut out the scantling of them by what hath been al∣leadged. We have nothing of such Pa∣rish-Churches in Scripture, as we have spoken of. There is nothing of limita∣tion of Churches by the Ministers Fun∣ction, or maintenance by the Edicts of Popes, Bishops, or Princes of this world: and it is enough against a thing belonging to the Worship of God, that there is no institution for it, that the Scri∣pture says nothing of it. Heb. 7. 14. Secondly, that these Parish-Churches derive their Pedigree from Rome; There was the copie set, after which all the world wrote, wondering after the Beast: neither does it help that they de∣rive their Pedigree from times so neer the Apostles; for the mystery of iniquity did work even in Paul's time, 2 Thess. 2. 7. Thirdly, consider what Babels of confusion and superstition they be. Here you shall see Christ and Belial confounded Saints and Sinners jumbled together, without any kindly separation of the precious from the vile. Civils
and Ecclesiasticks confounded, whilst the Civil power of a Magistrate bounds a Church, or the priviledge of a Patron by Civil Precincts. Here you may ob∣serve great care that all should be conse∣crated, the walls within which they meet, yea the ground that they tread upon, ex∣cept the worshippers; as if God were pleased with an holy house, and holy ground, without an holy people: which kinde of superstition Steven rebukes in the Jews, Acts 7. 48, 49, 50. Fourthly, When the pretended rea∣sons of these constitutions of men are, the convenient baptizing of converted Gentiles, and taking care of souls in the Country: There lies poison hid un∣der these herbs. For the necessity of Cu∣rates arose from the exorbitant pride and ambition of the Bishop, affecting a spiritual Dominion, parallel to the Civil Dominion of the Civil Governour. And again, the Curates are the Bishops crea∣tures, for the managing of their mon∣strous Ecclesiastical Dominion; and so appointed, as not to infringe the Domi∣nion of the Bishop, nor detract from the dignity of the Bishoprick; and that
not onely before, but since Lay-founders and Patrons, the Bishop still reserving to himself, Ordination of Ministers, Con∣secration of Churches, and Excommu∣nication of Delinquents: and so as the devotion that made men desire a Chap∣lain to reside with them in the Country, was ignorant and superstitious, like the then-Popish times; so was it satisfied with as superstitious a mean; which therefore layeth no good foundation to the Churchdom of a Parish. Fifthly, these Parish-Churches have continued unto our times, wit∣ness the presentation of Patrons, insti∣tution and induction by the Bishops; who also consecrated the Church, as often as any new one was built. And here we may minde the known distin∣ction of the Common-Prayer-Book, viz. of Ministers into Bishops and Cu∣rates; whereby it plainly appeareth, that our Parish Ministers were reckoned still to stand but as Curates to the Bishop. Now though there hath been some change made by the fall of the Hierar∣chy; yet there hath not been a kindly Reformation. For the most standing
to their old Principles, though their pra∣ctice be lamed by the fall of the Hierar∣chy, wait with hope that the deadly wound that that Image of the Beast hath received, may be cured, and he live again; and therefore while the Head labours of the deadly wound, they do what they can to defend the extreme parts. Others, though they would have some reformation, yet delight in some broken pieces of the shattered Image of the Antichristian structure, setting up their threshold by Gods, and their posts by his posts; Ezek. 43. 8. Sixthly, if we would make a kindly reformation, we must not build on An∣tichrist's foundation; but laying aside all thet is of men, return immediately to Gods institution, and primitive practice, Matth. 19. 8. As for instance: when the National Church of the Jews was to cease, and the floor of Christ to be purged; this was the Apostolical pra∣ctice, viz. to preach faith and repen∣tance unto their audients; and especial∣ly, that they save themselves from the un∣toward generation they lived amongst, that not onely were unbelieving and im∣penitent
in general; but resisted the Re∣formation that Christ had set afoot, and with tooth and nail defended their Tem∣ple, Law, and Customs, Acts 6. 13, 14. This done, those that gladly recei∣ved their word, walked in the fellow∣ship of the Church, Acts 2. And when Antichrist hath raked the Natio∣nal Church out of her grave, and set up Parish-Churches, her daughters, or ra∣ther, divided her into Curacies, as so many members of her, who cannot de∣rive their Pedigree from Apostolical in∣stitution; I know no reason but that in our Reformation we should imitate the Apostolical practice. And concerning the Antichristian Church-state, 'tis plain that is spoken, Rev. 11. 2. The court that is without, cast out, and measure it not. That is, says Bullinger, God will not edifie, but destroy it: and those that God acknowledges for Churches during the time of Antichrist, under the notion of the two Candlesticks, vers. 4. which in the language of the Revelati∣ons are Churches, Chap. 1. 20. these are witnesses against, and separatists from
the Antichristian Church-state, as we see by the context precedent, vers. 1, 2, 3. Christs Church-state is set down in the first verse, Antichrists in the second; the witnesses against it are impowered, vers. 3. and specified to be the two Olive∣trees, (noting Magistracie and Ministery) and the two Candlesticks (noting Chur∣ches) that arise against the Antichristian Church-state; at least, at the later end of his Raign, shall the testimony be ma∣naged, by separating Congregations: I say, separating: for 't were absurd to conclude that they witness in word a∣gainst, and comply in practice with the Antichristian Church-state, that is to be utterly slighted and demolished, like a Castle that is to the damage, not the defence of the Commonweal. And how the holy Ghost could speak plainer, for separation, not onely from the corrupti∣ons of the Antichristian Church, but from the Antichristian Church-state it self, (which is also a corruption) then in the text, I cannot tell: Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins.
Thus far for the rise, and original nature of Parish-Churches: We come now to consider them in their pre∣sent state. Does not the character of the Anti∣christian Church-state agree very fitly unto them, as you have it, Rev. 11. 2? Are they not given unto the Gentiles? Do not men of uncircumcised hearts and ears, stand seized of the power of the Keys in those Churches; the major part by far (everywhere, for ought I can observe) being such? Finally, does not this present party of Gentiles in all Pa∣rish-Churches, tread the holy City under foot, and trample upon the sacred Politie of Jesus Christ? Will they endure the reformation of their Christian Gentilism? or the breaking of the Image of the first Beast, where-ever their Churchdom is acknowledged, and an answerable inte∣rest in the managing of their Church∣affairs allowed them? Look on the condition of those Pa∣rishes, where the Minister pleaseth his Parishioners, and ye will finde that ve∣rified that is written, Lam. 1. 11. Zions adversaries there spread out their hands
on all her pleasant things. Cast them out therefore, and measure them not. The Samaritanes pretend the same Religion with the Jews, and therefore desire to be admitted to re-build the House of the Lord with them. But the Jews reject their motion, saying, You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God: but we our selves together, will build an house unto the Lord God of Israel, Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. Let our answer be the same to all those Christned Gentiles, that would, on pretence of being of the same Reli∣gion. yea Church with us, being of the same Parish: to them that would, I say, upon this pretence, equally with us, in∣teress themselves in the re-building of our Gospel-Temple; let our answer be the same: They are adversaries; they have for these many hundred yeers trod∣den under foot the holy Citie; and to this their Genius leads them: and there∣fore there is no probability that they should further the work but hinder and mar it; especially if we continue our fel∣lowship with them in the Parish-Chur∣ches, where they are the greatest part by far.
Saints of late, and heretofore, have expressed their sense of what I have said. Mr. Caryl, Mr. Oxenbridge, and Mr. Sidenham, in the Epistle Dedicatory to Mr. Lockyer's Little Stone, thus: The first part of his work, that pleads for the holiness of Church-members, (say they) may put you up∣on enquiry whether you (viz. those of Scotland) have dealt kindly with Christ, to obtrude as imperious and selfish Guardians or Tutors, such a Spouse upon him, as is not ac∣cording to his choice, minde, or liking. The experience of the true and discerning Shepherds here, (who are as dear to their brethren, as sheep to the wolves) doth tell them, that al∣most nine parts of ten, of their flock, are not sheep, nor fit (say they) of Ci∣vil, much less (say we) of Spiritual priviledges; and then they are rather a Herd or Drove, then a Flock: for few (as the Shepherds themselvs think, now their driving power ceaseth) will be willing to be kept by them; nay, many (as they already know) do turn again, and would gladly rend them.
And afterwards, thus: If Saints will not (say they) but in the company of this multitude walk with God or his people what Gospel-communion can there be expected? As for the purging of this body, we suspect it to be (as the body) supposed, and a diversion from a real duty: for besides what we apprehend how impossible it is, for the far lesser in number (retaining their present constitution) that they should regularly cast out the greater part therefrom; we are informed by our experience, that the worse and greater part, is more able and willing to a for∣mal ejection of the better, then on the contrary: And therefore this ten yeers talk of the lips (about purging) hath tended onely to penury, and the last yeers are farther from that work then the former. Thus they. I adde a notable Prophecie of John Hus that you may read in Foxes Mar∣tyrologie, Vol. 1. pag. 830. More∣over (says he) hereupon note, and mark by the way, that the Church of God cannot be reduced to her former digni∣ty, or be reformed, before all things
first be made new. The truth where∣of is plain by the Temple of Solomon. Like as the Clergie and Priests, so also the people and Laity: or else unless all such as be now addict unto avarice, from the least to the most, be first re∣claimed, as well the People, as the Clergie and Priests. Albeit, as my minde now giveth me, I believe rather the first, that then shall arise, a new people, formed after the new man, which is created after God; of the which people, new Clerks and Priests shall come and be taken, that shall hate covetousness, and the glory of this life, hastning to an heavenly conversa∣tion: notwithstanding, all these things shall come to pass, and be brought by little and little, in order of times, dis∣pensed of God for the same purpose. And this God does, and will do, for his own goodness, and the riches of his great longanimity and patience, giving time and space of repentance, to them that have long lien in their sins, to amend and flee from the face of the Lords fury; whilst that in like man∣ner, the carnal people and carnal
Priests, successively and in time shall fall away, and be consumed as with the moth. Thus far John Hus. Neither let it seem harsh to any that admire the antiquity of Churches in England, which they conceive began to be planted by Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes; that I press the casting out of the Parish-Churches, the deemed successors of them. It was a saying of William Rufus of the Popes of Rome, the pretended successor of Peter; Quod Petri non inhaerent vestigiis, praemlis inhiantes, non ejus potestatem reti∣nent, cujus sanctitatem probantur non imitari. The like may I say of Parish-Churches, that 't is conceived were plan∣ted by either of those Worthies above mentioned: They retain not their privi∣ledge, whose neither constitution nor conversation they can be found to imi∣tate. And we know that the holy Ghost teaches us to say of as few as may be, to give a valid testimony against the Antichristians, of two witnessing Chur∣ches, witnessing against, and separated from the Church-state, and corruptions of th holy-City-trampling Gentiles: of
these, I say, the holy Ghost teaches us to say, These are the two Candlesticks (i. e. Churches) standing before the God of the earth, Rev. 11. 4. whereby the Churchdom of these witnessing se∣parated Churches, is not onely establish∣ed and approved, but the much-claimed Churchdom of others rejected, whiles 't is appropriated unto those two witnes∣sing separated Churches, that they stand before God; whereby is plainly impli∣ed, that others stand not before God: but such a God as must be conceived to delight to be worshipped in such an or∣der. Thus much for Parish-Churches: We come now, in the second place, to in∣terpret Antichristian Churches by E∣piscopal Churches, that are the greater territories formed into Diocesan, Pro∣vincial, and Oecumenical Churches, un∣der the several Orders of Bishops; of which Amefius thus: Superstitio se∣cundi Med. lib. 2. c. 13. S. 44. generis est in humanis Ecclesiae formis, &c. That is, A superstition of the second kinde, is in the humane forms of Churches; of which sort are Chur∣ches visibly, integrally, and organically
Oecumenical, Provincial, and Diocesan, brought in by men, as also in the Hierar∣chy agreeable thereunto. For Jesus Christ has instituted no other visible, in∣tegral, organical Church, or Church with Officers, for the practise of his vi∣sible, publike, and solemn Worship, but one particular Congregation, that may meet together ordinarily in the same place, to worship in all the Ordinances of Gods house. Such was the Church at Hierusalem: There were added to the Church about three thousand souls, Acts 2. 41. The number of the men was about five thousand, Chap. 4. 4. Yet they were all with one accord in Solomons porch, Chap. 5. 12. Mul∣titudes of men and women were ad∣ded, Chap. 5. 14. yet the Apostles call them together unto them, Chap. 6. 2, 5. And Chap. 15. 4. Paul and Barnabas were received of the Church: by which (says Calvin) he understandeth Plebem ipsam & totum corpus, the whole body of the people, in distinction from the Apostles and Elders, as appears from the immediately following mention of them: and in vers. 12. All the mul∣titude
of the Church (that it seems were present at the disputation of the Apostles and Elders, vers. 6, 7. and it is very plain they were, by their concurrence with them, immediately upon the conclusion of James his Speech, in chusing bre∣thren, and subscribing Letters to the bre∣thren of the Gentiles, according to the declared sentence of James) gave au∣dience to Paul and Barnabas, decla∣ring what miracles God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. And whereas the Apostle speaks of myriads of Jews that believe, Chap. 21. 20. it is not to be restrained to Jews dwelling at Hierusalem, since it was the time of Pentecost, (Chap. 20. 16.) when Jews and Proselytes came to Hierusalem out of all nations: and we have express mention of the Jews that were of Asia, vers. 27. Neither is it impossible for Myriades (in the language of Luke, at least) to come together, and to hear at once the same Preacher. To shew which, Mr. Norton urges Luke 12. 1. However it be, it seems that the Church of Hierusalem did at this time ordina∣rily come together in one place, as occa∣sion
required; for vers. 22. tis said, The multitude must needs come together. This cannot be meant of the Officers; for besides that they are the Speakers, it would be incongruous, to call them the multitude: neither can it be meant of o∣thers besides believers; for this speech of the Elders, is to be speake some condes∣cension in Paul, to some Legal rites, thereby to take off the offence of these, that believing, were yet Zealots of the Law, as is plain; and so such an under∣standing would not agree to the scope of the Elders. Neither doth it seeme congruous, that it should be said of any other but the Church of Hierusalem. What other multitude should the Apo∣stles and Elders expect, that they should come together (unto them, as is impli∣ed) much less determine their coming together, (as some understand the speech) about the Apostles being come to town? To this agree Calvin, Beza, and Dio∣date, on the place. We may adde to this instance, that of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 23. and Antioch, Acts 15. 30. But I finde no contrary instances.
And this I say, not onely against the Episcopal; but also Classical Churches, which are put in the room of those Epis∣copal Churches, by the effectual work∣ing of the mystery of iniquity. These are combinations of many Con∣gregations united by subjection to one and the same Court of Elders, chosen out of the whole to govern them. These are pressed so far, (at least by some) as to take away power of Government, and exercise of Ecclesiastick Discipline from the Congregations, and not onely infringing of it; so leaving them but as the Curacies under the Bishops, and their Ministers, to have no more power then the Parish-Ministers had, under the Bi∣shops, at least considered as the Mini∣sters of such Congregations. See Mr. Wood, in his answer to Mr. Lockyer's Little Stone, Part 2. Sect. 1. S. 4. I will not (says he) question the an sit, or being of the subject of this as∣sertion, whether there be de jure and of divine institution, an Eldership or Presbytery within a particular Con∣gregation; that is, a Colledge of El∣ders, belonging to one single Congre∣gation,
by it self, having power of Government, and exercising Ecclesia∣stick Discipline: although I know, men learned, and much exercised in the study of the Questions about Ec∣clesiastick Government, are of the judgement, that there is not such an Eldership or Presbytery. And I con∣fess, it is right hard to finde in Scri∣pture either precept or example for it. Let us consider the judgement of these Learned men, to which Mr. Wood seem∣eth to incline; and more too, as appears in his foresaid Treatise, p. 369. where expresly he gives his judgement. The fixing (says he) of single Congrega∣tions under appropriated Officers, is not necessary by any divine institution, &c. Observe, first, that they appropriate the power of Government, and exer∣cise of Ecclesiastick Discipline unto the Eldership, That is implied in what has been quoted, and we need not search their Writings, that are of that Way much, to finde it expresly denied, that Popular concurrence in acts of Govern∣ment, is to be proved by the Scriptures.
Vide Mr. Wood, Part 2 of his aforesaid Treatise. This how well it agrees with the in∣stitution, Matth. 18. 18. let it be consi∣dered. When Christ says, Whatsoever [ye] binde on earth, &c. does not he include the offended brother, to whom he directs his speech, from vers. 15, and of whom, and whose act to the offen∣der, he had last spoken? Especially considering that this verse contains the confirmation of the last clause of the fore-going verse, mentioning the said act of the offended brother, to the incorrigible offender, that amounts to the casting him out of the Congregation of Christs Church, and making an Hea∣then of him: which that we may con∣ceive that it was done, though by him, yet not by him alone, but with the Church; Christ, adding the confirma∣tion of this act, speaks in the plural num∣ber, and says, not, Whatsoever [thou,] but [ye] shall binde, &c. yet withal keeping the second person, that the of∣fended brother be not excluded: not saying, Whatsoever [he] or [they] but [ye] shall binde on earth, shall be bound
in heaven. And when Christ promi∣ses the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven unto Peter, his whole discourse lookes on Peter as a lively confessour of Jesus Christ; his confession being the occasion of all that Christ speakes unto him, and nothing coming in between the beginning and end of his Speech, that may make us thinke, that Christ considering Peter as a confessour of him at the first, did afterward change his Notion, and look on him otherwise. Read Matth. 16. 16. &c. Secondly, they exclude the single Con∣gregations considered severally, each one by it self, from having an Elder∣ship having power to exercise Eccle∣siastick discipline; and so consequent∣ly the several single Congregations are excluded from having power of Government, which they say resides wholly in the Elderships. How likely this is, let it be judged. Is it likely that Go tell the Church, Matth. 18. 17. should mean, Go tell the Elders of the combination? Is it likely that our Sa∣viour, so tender of the offenders credit, and wary of offending him, by making
his fault publique, that he must be told of it first alone, then onely before so ma∣nay as may be sufficient to give a Satis∣factory Testimony according to the Law: Is it likely, I say, that he should appoint no mean, between the two or three wit∣nesses, and a court of Elders of many combined congregations? But not to stay here; it has been proved already, that the Church of Hierusalem and Corinth were single congregations, that met together ordinarily in one place: And that the Church of Hierusalem had her appointed officers, and that the Church of Corinth exercised Ecclesia∣stick discipline who, can deny? But how unwarrantably soever, hard they press their Classical way against the congre∣gational; even as hath been said, to the utter taking away of power of Govern∣ment from the several single congregati∣ons; neither do they stay here, but translate the power of Government to their Elderships subordinate one to an∣other till they come to an Occumenical assembly, to the officres of the whole Catholick visible Church of Christ, as united in lesser & greater combinations,
even to an occumenical assembly. As Mr. Wood in the aforesaid Treatise, pag. 371. This is altogether strange to Scripture: for if we grant that single congregations with their Eldership be excluded from the power of Government, and exercis∣ing Ecclesiastick discipline; yet will it not appear from Scripture that there are any higher Elderships, or larger com∣binations of Churches then those of the first form and of the first step from the single congregation; yea the contrary apears, in that the Churches of Asia, grant them collective, Churches, (Rev. 2. and 3 chapters) do severally receive of Christ the praise of their good, and blame of their evil carriage, each single Church for her self, without any reflecti∣on on superior combinations; notwith∣standing some of them lay situate with∣in eight or ten miles of each other; and those that were farthest distant, not a∣bove 200 miles each from other (as some have computed the Journeys be∣tween them.) This is strange, if there were superior Combinaions: and if there should have been, 'tis much that
Christ should not blame them, after so long continuance of Christianity, for not setting up his ordinances; especially considering the defection of divers of the Churches, to whose charge it might well have been laid, as a thing wherein they were accessary to their own Apo∣stacy, that they had not set all up Gods meanes to preserve them. If it be objected that we read of an higher Eldership, exercising acts of rule over a Proportional combination of Churches, viz, a Synodical assembly, Act. 15. To this I answer, We read not of a∣ny combination, of any such combina∣tion of the Churches there mentioned, viz. of Hierusalem, Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, whereby they should be∣come Subject unto the rule of one superi∣or Eldership, in matters conceived to belong, firstly to their cognizance, or that may be referred unto them, or in which there may be appeales made unto them; nor when, and how the said combina∣tion was made and established. Secondly, here was no Synod, by which our adversaries understand, an
assembly of Officers, resulting out of many inferiour Presbyteries: I say here was no Synod, in this sense. For we read of no forreigners that came to this Sy∣nod, (if we must call it so) but these that came from Antioch, of whom we finde nothing that may import their con∣currence in the decrees of it, but these proceeded from the Apostles, Elders, and whole Church, that must needs mean the Church at Hierusalem; and when 'tis said, With the whole Church, there is a reflection in the expression, on the Apo∣stles and Elders, as related at least in their present residence and action, (which is all can be said of the Apostles, being general officers,) unto that Church onely. So that upon the whole, the result is, that the decrees here made, were of the Church at Jerusalem, and the officers of it onely. Thirdly, here was no appeale from the censure of the Church at Antioch. For we read not of any Ecclesiasticall censure, that the Church at Antioch had passed, either concerning the persons dis∣puting, or the things disputed: but one∣ly of dissention, and disputation had be∣twixt
Paul and Barnabas and those that came from Judea. Neither were there any refers made from Antioch un∣to Hierusalem, as though the matter were too high for their Cognizance, or beyond their abilitie to determine. For the Churches of Antioch and Hieru∣salem were alike, congregational, I say, more then Classical (in that strict sense wherein the next to Congregational is meant) our adversaries cannot say:) and furnished both with extraordinary Offi∣cers; to which appeals, and refers, in the sense before recited, cannot agree. But the reason of sending from Anti∣och unto Hierusalem, seemes to me, most probably, to be this, viz. to take off the scandal that came to the Church of Antioch, and at least might come to those of Syria and Cilicia also by these false teachers: by whose comming out of Judea, it may be also, bragging of the Apostles and Elders at Hierusalem, that they taught the same doctrine to the brethren there, yea moreover, and it may be urging them to go and see if it Vid. Bez. in. oc. were not so; by these meanes, I say, the Church of Antioch had (as it is pro∣bable)
at least twice taken some offence, and been staggered in their faith, as though Paul and Barnabas had taught otherwise then the Apostles and Elders at Hierusalem. And so the errand of these Messengers, from Antioch to Hi∣erusalem, was primarily to get satis∣faction that there was the same doctrine taught at Hierusalem that was at An∣tioch, for the establishing of such as might be staggered, and preventing of farther danger, by the pretences of these false teachers. And this seemes to shine forth clearly, in the returne of those at Hierusalem, in the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. verses. Because some had gone out from them, that had offended the brethren of Antioch, &c. therefore they send chosen men of their own company, that might take off the offence, by assuring them of the contrary judgement of the Apo∣stles, to what those false teachers taught. Fourthly, here was no rule exercised over the Churches, to which they of Hierusalem wrote the result of their conference occasioned by the Messengers from Antioch; wherein they throughly weighed the controverted point, to give
a sound resolve for the establishing of the staggering brethren. There was no rule exercised, I say; for Paul is so em∣barqued with the Church of Antioch by his residence there, and deepe hand in carrying on the controversie with the false teachers, that I cannot see how with∣out diminution of his Apostolical autho∣rity, that the decrees of the Apostles should be more then materially binding, viz. because Gods word onely. How Paul, that in the defence of this same point, causes whomsoever should preach otherwise then he with the rest of his per∣swasion Gal. 1. 8, 9. had preached: how he, I say, should submit unto any Judicature on earth Authoritatively determining of his doctrine whether sound or not so as their decrees should be formally binding, viz. as the decrees of such a court, this I cannot conceive. And again, 'tis a joynt act, to make these Decees, a joynt act of the Apo∣stles, Elders, and brethren; the whole Church concurs to the making and sen∣ding of them▪ and that under the same Notion, vers. 22, 23. 25 28. It pleas∣ed the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church. It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord: It seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us: which us must be interpreted by Apostles, Elders, and brethren, men∣tioned in the inscription of the letter. Now it will not be granted that the brethren did joyne with the Apostles in an act of rule over another Church or Churches. Neither will it helpe to say, that the concurrence of the Apostles and Elders, and of the brethren, was of a different nature. For the text is so full as to the involving them together in the same act under the same expressions, even the highest, with so much punctualness, in signifying their joynt concurrence, that it will not admit such a plea. Dif∣ference in the order of their concurrence we shall grant, viz. that the Apostles and Elders did lead the Church in these acts: but difference in nature we cannot grant. If it be said, that by the whole Church is meant onely the Synodical Church: the reason that is given for this, falls to the ground. For 'tis grounded on the Impossibility of the meeting of the
Church of Hierusalem together in one place, that hath been refuted from cleare texts of Scripture. But be it that we shut out the bre∣thren from a concurrence of the same nature with the Apostles and Elders, to the making of these decrees, and let our adversaries make the most of vers. 6. of this chapter, and vers. 4. of the follow∣ing chapter: will they say these decrees were Authoritative and formally binding the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cili∣cia? I trow not, when they have better considered of the matter, according to what has been said. Will they say that the Elders of a Classicall Presbytery at Ierusalem (for they assert no more of the Presbytery there: see Mr. Wood in the aforesaid tractate, pag. 371. and the Messengers of Antioch are excluded from the decision of the controversie and Decrees here made, by the text it self, ch. 16. 4.) did exercise rule over all these Churches, so far distant, that could not therefore be of their combination? Neither is it to be conceived but (if classes were then in fashion) they had their classical combinations, and Pres∣byteries
too; and shall Presbyteries of the same order rule over one another? It may be it will be said that the pre∣sence of the Apostles, being Extraordi∣nary Officers, constituted this a Synod. I answer, 'tis sooner said then proved: The text rather represents the Apostles condescending to act with the Church, then elevating the Church to act with them, vers. 22, 25. If against what has beene said against exercise of authority by this meeting o∣ver the Churches, that (vers. 28) of lay∣ing a burden of necessary things upon them, be objected; Let it be consider∣ed whether there be not as much said of the Assertion of the Pharisees vers. 5. whether therebe not as much said of their Assertion, vers. 10. And thus you see how hard it will be to grant any more with Scripture-warrant▪ if we should grant classical El∣derships, and combinations: but we shall not grant these for want of instance in Scripture, or any other sound ground for them. For the most Numerous of Churches that we read of, we have al∣ready shewed at large, that it was Con∣gregational,
viz. the Church at Hie∣rusalem, And I conceive that the Nu∣merousness of the Churches we read of in Scripture called severally (even the most Numerous, but) by the name of Church in the singular Number, with∣out the mention of any more then one company of Elders; I conceive that hath occasioned the conceit of classical Chur∣ches, and Elderships; but without war∣rant from Scripture, as may appeare, I say, from that the Holy Ghost hath been so punctual in shewing that the most numerous Churches have still met toge∣ther in one place. To the Church of Hie∣rusalem, we may adde that of Corinth. 'Tis plaine that the Apostle writes to the body of the congregation, by the epi∣ther he gives them in the inscriptions of both Epistles: These he hints their ordinary coming together to joyne in the same individual acts when he en∣joynes them the casting out of the ince∣stuous person: When ye are gathered to∣gether, to deliver such a one to Satan, 1 Ep. chap. 5. vers. 4 5. A like hint we have in the same Epistle. chap. 14. vers. 23. And here we may take notice, not
onely that this Numerous Church of Corinth (how Numerous soever pre∣tended to be) was congregational: but that this Church had and exercised the power of the Keys, for neglect of exerci∣sing which she is blamed, 1 Cor. 5. 2. although Paul had not before this writ∣ten to manifest his determination: and that the exercise of this great piece of the Power of the Keys, viz. Power of ex∣communication; I say, the exercise of this Power is put upon the body of the congregation by Paul, without any di∣stinct application of his speech to the Presbyterie. And in the same manner that the Power of binding is put upon them, in the same manner is the Power of loosing put on them, 2 Cor. 2. 6. &c. without any mention of their Elder∣ship in particular, but wrapping up El∣ders and People together, as which were both to concur, in this exercise of Ec∣clesiastick discipline, and that with a concurrence of like nature as to the sub∣stance of the matter, leaving to each their due place in the body, the one going be∣fore, the other following in the Lord. But to return, if these most numerous
congregations, were congregational, not Classical; I cannot think there were any Classical Churches, except there be a Scri∣pture produced, as plain for their Clas∣sicalness, as these are that I have quoted, to the congregrationalness of these that I have instanced in. For reason will car∣ry any man to thinke, if the most Nu∣merous Churches were congregationall, that the less Numerous were so too: and nothing but a plaine Scripture can stop the course of such a reasoning. And thus the whole fabrick of the Classical way falls to the ground, in my Judgement. Their appropriating all au∣thority, and power of exercising Ecclesi∣astick discipline to the Presbyterie; the secluding the Presbytery of a parti∣cular congregation from such authority; together with the whole course of sub∣ordinations of combinations of Chur∣ches, and Elders, from the Classical (that is, the lowest) to Oecumenical (that is, the highest) combination: they can none of them shew their genealogie, nor derive their Pedigree from Scripture. And what difference betwixt the Episcopal, and Presbyterial Govern∣ment?
wherein does their constitution dif∣fer, except in the exorbitant power of a Chair-man that the Presbyterians cut by the height of the rest of the Presby∣ters, in the several combinations? And what difference betwixt the Ʋniver∣sal Church of the Papists and that of of the Presbyterians? is it more then Circumstantial? The Papists refer the Roote and head of the Universality to Rome; the Presbyterians do not: the Pa∣pists subject it unto the Pope, the Pres∣byterians do not, but unto a general Councel; and some Papists plead for no more, save in the interim of the general Councel. Vide Ellis Vind. Ca∣thol. Pag. 16. Let it be seriously considered, that the Bishop of Rome is not reckoned the An∣tichrist from what time he got the peace∣able possession of his Universal Bishop∣rick, with all the exorbitant Power thereunto belonging; but from what Vide Cot. in Rev. 13. Pag. 36. time he aipired to, and carryed it am∣bitiously, and had it yeelded usually un∣to him, to sway Bishops, and Churches at his pleasure: and from this time, at least before he proceeded farther, he is
reckoned Antichrist, and the seventh head of the Monstrous Beast, Rev. 13. 1. &c. That is no other then the Ca∣tholick Visible Roman Church, as Mr. Cotton has learnedly demonstrated in an exposition of his on that 13 of the Revelations, lately published. And this reckoning of the beginning of Antichrist, is suitable to that description of him that is given 1 Thes. 2. 4. That he op∣poseth and exalteth himself. Accord∣ingly we may easily gather, that the am∣bition of a Chair-man, with the fond de∣votion of some Elders and people, may soone turn Presbyterie into Episcopacy. There needs not an act of State for setling such power on a Chairman, and putting Elders & people in subjection unto him, to constitute either Papacy or Episcopa∣cy. Thus you see there is little differ∣ence betwixt Presbytery and Episco∣pacy and an easie transition from Pres∣bytery to Episcopacy, yea Papacy: and Vide Perk. Probl. Pag. 235. they agree much also in nature, being an usurpation of Authority over the particular Congregations, the visible Churches of Christs institution; and therefore I have put them together, as also
Mr. Bain's Diocesan tryal, qu. 1. pag. 21. Those who subject themselves to a Presbytery, sayes he, as being under it by subordination, may in effect as well be subject to an Episcopal (and by con∣sequence, I say) to a Papal consistory. Let it be seriously weighed, that the Apostle gives us this Character of the Spirit of Antichrist, that such a Spirit confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, John 4. 3. We must not un∣derstand this of a confession of words onely, but it is sufficient if practice speak it: For Antichrist acknowledges that Christ is come in the flesh in words, but he denyes it in practise, whiles he brings in Judaism, or any other way of worship that Christ hath not instituted, into the Churches, according to that uncontrol∣led expectation of the Woman of Sama∣ria, John 4. 25, 26. When the Messias comes, he shall tell us all things, viz. about worship, that was the matter in discourse; for that Practise contradicts Christs being come in the flesh, when men do not look onely to Christs institu∣tion in matter of worship. And this is the expectation of the Jewes even at this
day, that Christ will at his coming give in a sutable platform of his worship, sutable to his being come into the world, to whō therefore the practice of Judaism must needs be a stumbling-block. Though men may thinke they differ from Rome, they are of the same spirit, if they walk not according to the Gospel-institution of Christ. Before I come to the reasons of the  point, I shall answer some Objections. And first, 'twill be said, This way of se∣paration that you press to be made from the Parochial and Episcopal, yea classical Churches nulls all (at least the most part of) the reformed Churches in the world. I answer: This tends not to null or  make void the faith of the true believers, that shall be found in the aforesaid ways of Church-order: I deny not their faith, whereby they are of the mystical Church of Christ, and accordingly destroy not their mystical Churchdom, which is ac∣knowledged, by a voice from heaven in the text, when such as are in Babylon mixt with the Gentiles in the outer Court unmeasured, and nourished hitherto in the wilderness of abominable confusion,
where the great whore sits President: when, I say, such as these are called out of the Babylonish corruption and con∣fusion by the name of Gods people, they are plainly acknowledged to be of the mystical Church: And yet they are im∣plicitely denyed to be of a right order, when they are called and warned to come out of Babylon, that must needs mean order, since their faith is approved; for that being done, there remaines no∣thing to be disapproved but order: for under these two, the Apostle sums up all to be approved or disapproved in the Church, Colos. 2. 5. I deny accordingly that the Churches before mentioned, are such visible Churches as Christ hath in∣stituted, and their politie such as he hath appointed; and assert, Though their faith be Christian, yet their order is Antichri∣stian▪ I deny them not to be the Woman nourished in the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6, 14. But I deny them to be the Candle∣sticks that stand before the God of the earth, chap. 11. 4. And this need not be grievous, since the Holy Ghost hath fore∣told us of such a distinction of Christians. Some are content to walk with the na∣tions
in the outer court, with so much as will keepe life and soule together, and to bite hard in the Wilderness, and straggle there, from one greene path to another, so they can but get a living. Others God gives power to be his witnesses against the Gentiles, and to set up Christs owne order in the face, and to the teeth of the Beast that ascends out of the Bottomless pit, though they be slaine for it, and will not be content to serve God as Pharaoh will give them leave. Such was the Con∣gregation in Queen Mary's time which Mr. Fox mentions Gods preservation of, in his 3 Vol. pag. 921. and those of which Mr. Cotton makes mention in the way of Congregational Churches clear∣ed, pag. 4. These were in Queen Eliza∣beths dayes, and were remembered by some amongst us, but lately dead; they were about an hundred, and they refused the common Lyturgie and Congregati∣ons attending thereunto, and used prayer, and preaching, and Sacraments among themselves, and suffered imprisonment for it, and pleaded for their separation before the Lord Mayor, Bishop Sandes, and other Commissioners, Jul. 20. 1576.
and in this they behaved themselves as faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ. 'Tis one thing for Churches, to be looked upon as Churches in point of sal∣vation, and another thing for them to be looked upon as Churches in respect of outward constitution, and visible order: In the former account, we cannot but give the right hand of Fellowship to all that looke to no other way of salvation but by the blood of the Lambe: in the latter account, we can give the right hand of fellowship onely to those that are after the heavenly patterne, laid down in the Word: we must not for re∣spect to a right faith, swallow a wrong order. Hath not the letting go the right order, let in a wrong faith? Does not the great beast, Rev. 13, Blaspheme God and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven? meaning the Catholick Church of Rome, as Mr. Cotton on the place shews at large. Secondly, 'twill be said, this laies a ground to question all the ordinances  that have beene administred in any other way then that you press for, whether they are to be accounted null and void.
To this I answer, there is a double de∣gree  of corruption that ordinances have met withal. Some have beene corrupted in the essentials of them; as for instance, the Lords supper in the Popish Churches was essentially corrupted; The signs were turned into the thing signified, one Ele∣ment denied to the people, &c. When ordinances are thus essentially corrupted, they become no ordinances, & are of no efficacy to do good unto the souls of men. Other ordinances are circumstantially corrupted onely, as Baptisme; although much were added unto it, as anointing, crossing, &c. yet the essentials were re∣tained, whil'st it always was administred by washing, sprinkling or dipping in water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now when ordinances are but circumstantially corrupted, we have cause to be humbled that we have not sought God in due order, as David for bringing up the Ark▪ in a Cart, that should have beene borne on the Priests shoulders: but we cannot reject the ordinance, no more then the Israelites could reject the Ark, because it was car∣ried in the cart of the Philistims mak∣ing.
When 'tis promised that the woman shall be nourished in the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6. it must needs imply that there shall be some ordinances preserved from cor∣ruptions in their essentials, and that Gods, people shall be accepted in the use of them, and have benefit by them: yet that is no ar∣gument against coming out of the wilder∣ness (expressing (as is plain) the condition of the Christian world, during the reigne of Antichrist) when they have light and might todo it; neither can it be more an argument against separation from the Images of the Beast or reliques of them, then it was against separation from the beast. Will any say, that because Baptism was valid that was received in the Catho∣lick Church of Rome, that therefore they should not have separated from her that are called the reformed Churches? Why then should any say, that because Bap∣tisme is valid, and other ordinances that have retained their essentials, in the Epis∣copal Churches, and classical Churches the Images of it, and in the Parochiall Vide M. Cotton in 13 Rev. Churches, that are but reliques of the Image of the beast, that therefore we are not to separate from them?
But to speak no longer in general, let us come to that which is mainly drived at in this last objection, viz, whether this separation do not require rebaptiza∣tion. I am for the negative, as appears by what hath been said; and shall adde these arguments against rebaptization. First, the Scripture speakes nothin of it; Jesus Christ hath left us no institu∣tion for it, who yet was expected to tell us all things, and this expectation own∣ed without the least exception, by our Saviour, John 4. 25, 26. That of the 19 of the Acts of the Apostles, is all the instance that I know, hath at any time been given to prove rebaptization; and this Scripture has been quoted to this purpose in the fourth age after Christ by the Donatists: but in my Judgement Cent. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 5. pag. 377. so long abused. When, say they, Paul found certain at Ephesus, that said they were baptized with the baptisme of John, he commanded them to be bap∣tized in Christ. After the same manner do our Anabaptists interpret this Scri∣pture through mistake, applying vers. 5. to Luke, as his relation of what Paul did; whereas indeed it is to be looked
on as the relation of Paul of what John did. And so is to be joyned unto the for∣mer verse, as one intire Speech of Paul to the Ephesine disciples. To prove which, Beza argues thus: For, says he, Beza in loc. the particle , which in all Greeke co∣pies is read with greatest concent, and necessarily answers to the particle , does by no meanes, by no meanes, I say, suffer that we should breake the series of this speech asunder, as though the first part were to be attributed to Paul, and the latter part to Luke the writer. And besides, if there were here a rebaptization of the Disciples that had been baptized with the Baptisme of John, it will be implyed, that Christs Baptisme that he was baptized with, (being baptized of John) and the Baptisme of all his mem∣bers, is not the same: that sounds very harsh. These considerations perswade me to thinke that here was no rebaptizati∣on; and upon this account there was none, because Paul upon deliberation findes the essentials of a Gospel-Baptism in John's Baptisme. And let it be pro∣ved that any thing else was deliberated of by Paul, as to the solving of the Que∣stion,
whether he should baptize them or no, before he laid his hands on them, after that their Ignorance of the gifts of the Holy Ghost brought their Baptisme into question; and whether the text will afford any thing to say upon good ground for the former Baptisme of these, but that they had the essentials. Secondly, We must either owne our Baptisme received in the Catholick visible Church of Rome the mother, or in the Diocesan or National Chur∣ches the harlot-daughters and Images of that strumpet; or else we must con∣clude that the Churches that shall be, and be owned of God, during the 42 months of Antichrist, of which see Rev. 11. 4. shall want utterly the initiatory seal of the New Testament: and of this we finde no president in Scripture, that a Church should utterly want the initiato∣ry seal of the Covenant of God; neither do I finde any hint that these Churches should want it, & be in this case unparal∣lel'd, or know of any that pretend to any such thing, that there should be a Church utterly without the initiatory Seal: or else there must be an extraordinary way of
reviving the lost ordinance of Baptisme in these Churches; and of this I know neither promise that we should expect a second Baptist, nor experience for these hundreds of years, since there have been such Churches, that any such have been raised up; yet this must be received, or the former, that these Churches must want Baptisme, if that be null that we have had in the Catholick visible Church of Rome, or the Images of it: for if re∣ceiving it in those false Churches null it, every one I think will readily grant that there was not a Baptized person left in the world when the Wilderness first be∣gan to set up particular visible Churches. For from the Churches rest till those Waldenses and Albigenses, 'tis very rare to finde a man that would acknowledge any other Churches then the beast, or his Images, that would acknowledge a particular visible Church, as Mr. Cotton observes in his exposition of the Revela∣tion, Cent. 4. cap. 5. de Heresi. chap. 13. pag. 123, & we are indeed minded of an act of Constantine, by his Imperial Edict reducing all to the Ca∣tholick Church, to walk in communion with her Holiness (as his language is)
by the Centuriatores Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4. pag. 315. by which Church that he meanes the Catholick visible, is plain by the meanes he uses, viz. the de∣livering up the meeting-houses or orato∣ries to the Catholick Church; as they that please may read in the place above cited. Thirdly, 'twill be said, But many Obj. 3. godly men have worshipped God Zeal∣ously in this way, and do still; and God has, and is still no Question found of them. In answer to this, let me propound Answ. this to be weighed by every serious soule, that this must be looked on as an in∣dulgence of God unto sincerity, own∣ing what is of himself, mingled with much of man. After that God had de∣clared his mind, about the place where he would put his name, and David had preached it, 1 Chron. 22. 1. yet Solomon and the Children of Israel neglected to build the house, the foundation of which was not laid untill the fourth yeare, 1 Kings 6. 1. and 37 verses: and per∣haps this came to pass through Solo∣mons too much intensness on the build∣ing of his own house: because this is nam∣ed
before the Lords house, chap. 3. 1. immediately before the people are blam∣ed for sacrificing in the high places, that is done, vers. 2. neither can I tell how to make the connexion betwixt these two verses, but that Solomon was so intent on his great match, and providing a Suitable Palace, that in the meane while the building of the Temple was delayed, not being carried on with that speed, that it might have been; and this prolonged the peoples sacrificing in the high places, that turned unto sin unto them, and Solomon too; and is made an exception in the religion of them both, 1 Kings 3. 2, 3. And yet Solomon's Zeale of God is approved too, and God is found of him, vers. 4, 5. &c. but for all that, 't is not 1000 burnt-offerings that can make God winke at the neglect of Gods institution. Men thinke because they love God, and are abundant in du∣ties, that God will not take notice whe∣ther they come to Jerusalem, or go to the high places, what Churches they worship in: but believe it, they are de∣ceived; and they are as much deceived that think 'tis enough to say for a way,
that they have found God in it, or rather in something of his that is practised in it. But there may be good done this  way and has been good done in it, errors suppressed, &c. and those reject it now, made use of it once. I answer, The good that God brings  out of evil, is not to be construed into a divine approbation of it, that its name should be changed, and evil called good. Neither is the use that has been made by good men of a false way of Churches, to be drawn into an argument to con∣tinue in it. See Peter Martyr in his Pet. Mart com. loc. Clas. 4. cap. 6. ss. 42. common places, pag. 570. I transcribe not the Latine (as also neither in other quotations) for haste. Godly men, says he, so long as they were compelled to be in the Papacy, neither could have their meetings otherwhere, if they thought they should any way profit in amend∣ing maners, or any way procuring the glory of God or the Salvation of others, were to shew what was necessary to the Bishops and pastors for that time given, if they could not do it amongst their owne. But when it pleased God to raise up Heroick persons, such
as Luther, and Zuinglius, which have planted innumerable Churches: leav∣ing the graves, and ashes, and small Relictis Bustis. footsteps of the Church; it was meet they should betake themselves thither where they might both live and do ac∣cording to the word of God, and by this meanes continue among them∣selves by succession the Apostolique faith and life, by joyning themselves to their predecessours▪ which lived rightly, and sincerely in the primitive Church. But shall we do it without the Au∣thority  of the Magistrate? I answer, that which is pressed is but  the doing of your own duty in separa∣tion from unwarrantable Societies, that the text layes on every particular Christi∣an, upon peril of incurring the wrath of God. Jer. 51. 45. is a parallel place: Go ye out of the midst of her, and de∣liver ye every one his own soule from the fierce anger of the Lord burning against false worshippers. If the Magistrate will further refor∣mation, 'tis a mercy, so that he keepe to his own power, and do not infringe the
power of the Church, for these two powers must not be confounded; which yet few of the objectors attend unto: but the text hath no such provisoe, as, If the magistrate bid, or give you leave, then come out of Babylon. And therefore we are to resolve with Pet. Martyr, We must Com. loc. Class. 4. cap. 14. S. 29. worship God holily, and piously, though all the Magistrates in the world gain∣say it. I may adde to this what Wolle∣bius Wol. lib. 2. cap. 5. Can. 11. saith: If the magistrate be an ene∣my of the Church, the reformation of religion cannot be obtained of him; then reformation of religion lyes upon those as their duty, whom God hath furnished with necessary gifts for it; neither is the consent of Bishops to be expected. And because of this last clause, I shall adde what Peter Martyr, (a little above the place above quoted in the margine) saith: There are some which may say, saith  he, Before we depart from the obedi∣ence of the Magistrate in point of re∣ligion, the consent of the Church is to be expected. They which say these things, let them  consider that Christ hath never so com∣manded,
every one is for himselfe firmly bound to the law of God, whether o∣thers assent or dissent. If a Master have many Servants that he commands to worke in the field, and some of them in the Masters absence will be idle, ought therefore the rest to be idle too, because the others do not at all consent to the common worke? for this he quotes Gal. 1. 15. and adds, So ought we also to do; after God hath made known his truth, we must not delay. Consent in∣deed is to be expected, if the matter be dubious and obscure (viz. to him to whom it is revealed, as the course of his speech makes manifest.) Let those there∣fore whose hearts God hath raised up, go up and build his house, Ezra 1. 5. and be as the he-goats before the flock, Jer. 50. 8. get we our bre∣thren, if we can, along with us, but let us not delay our own work and duty, but with David make haste, and not delay to keepe Gods righteous Judgements. And so much for explication. The reasons of the point are, first,
because Antichrist Churches are sin, The great beast, Rev. 13. 1, 2. represented in so monstrous a shape, to shew h ugly he is, in the fight of God, is the Universal visible Church of Rome: For it cannot be meant of the Roman Pagan Empire, be∣cause of the crowned hornes, Rev. 13. 1. and being in the wilderness, Rev. 17. 3. Nor the Roman Christian Empire; for the Devil gave not the Seat to the Christian Emperours, neither were they admired of all the world, after the healing of the wound, by Charles the Great; neither is it a note of perdition to yeeld subjection to them; which things are said of this beast, Rev. 13. 2, 3, 8. Nor Antichrist, which is the other beast, vers. 11. he is indeed one of the heads but not the beast it self; differing in number, original, shape, and exercise of power: Vide Cott. in 13 Revel. p. 4. &c. what then can this beast be, as he concludes, but the Catholike vi∣sible Roman Church? and this beast an∣swers to, and is most fitly thought to suc∣ceed in the place of the Roman Empire. 'Tis reckoned also amongst the detest∣able sins of Antichrist, that he causes an Image to be made to the first beast. Rev.
13. 14. that is to set a Church in every Nation, &c. that may have the likeness of the Roman Church, viz. Metropoli∣tan, National, Diocesan, Cathedral, and Provincial Churches, as Mr. Cotton shews, pag. 233. And indeed, if the first beast be the Catholick visible Church of Rome, these are the living Characters of her, and so may well be thought to be the Image; they are as like as mo∣thers and daughters, and the Parishes are but reliques of them. Now these be∣ing sins of Antichrist, the Doctrine can∣not be doubted of; and those that will meddle with this sin, it will draw in more sin upon them, even as the needle drawes in the thred, Rev. 18. 5. Her sins have reached unto heaven; the holy Ghost gives this a reason of our text. Take Beza's criticisme, on the word rendred by reaching. He uses, saies he, the word , whereby is signified sins mutu∣ally following one another, and spring∣ing one from another, at last to grow un∣to such an heape, that they have reached even to heaven. And how naturally Antichrists blasphemy of the Taber∣nacle of God, Rev. 13. 6. (that in
the language of the Revelations best sig∣nifies the Church) followes on the con∣tinuance in his Churches, Let all men judge; and whether that be not the reason why the Congregations of Christ are so evil spoken of. Secondly, because they are harlots, and will entice, as the harlot, to draw us away to their leud courses, Rev. 17. 5. She holds forth her abominations, and filthiness of her fornication, in a golden cup. Babylon hath golden pretences for her abominable idolatries: The preven∣tion of Schisms and Heresies, for a Ca∣tholike Church visible; Reverence to the womb that bare us, and the paps that gave us suck, for Metropolitane, Na∣tional, or Diocesan Churches, and Pa∣rish-Churches: Decencie, for the Sur∣plice, &c. She hath the alluring smell of a Leopard, to draw people after her. 'T is dangerous to come neer her, lest they be ensnared, being besotted with her Cott. in Rev. 13. vers. 18. sweet smell to the carnal sense. She con∣trives all things should be very sightly, a comely proportion in the number of the Beast is contrived; 't is pleasing to the fancie, and easie to remember; 't is 666.
She is Mystery Babylon, subtil of heart; her ways are such, that thou canst not know them. Therefore hearken not to her. A void her, pass by her, turne from her, and pass away, Pro. 4. 15. And she is stubborne; if you will re∣turn to to her, well: but she will not re∣turn to you. Gods people would have cured her, but she is not cured, as 'twas said of old Babylon, Jer. 15. 9. I never knew any that would have a through Reformation, that durst take along their whole parish with them to the worke: but have been forced to lay aside the most of them, as the Jews the Samaritanes, Ezra 4. 1. &c. when they would prepare for distinguishing Ordinances (as their phrase is) know∣ing right well, that there were dogs e∣nough (if indifferently all were admitted to the management of that matter,) to snatch the bread out of the childrens hands, and drive them from the Table. Why should they be washed in the same Laver, (at least their children that must be washed in their right) that may not eat at the same Table? Let us take the Prophets counsel; forsake we Babylon,
and go every one to his own country: let us wash our hands of her, and ex∣pect what God hath determined of her, Myst. iniq. pag. 660. as Du Plessis once said of the Roman Church. So much for the reason of the point. A word or two of application. Let all according to their places far∣ther  and facilitate Gods peoples going out of the Antichristian Churches, ac∣cording to the exhortation, Isa. 62. 20, Be wise, Oh ye kings be instructed, ye judges, of the earth serve the Lord in this worke; cast ye up, cast ye up an high way for the people of God, and take away the stumbling-block, and gather out the stones out of the way of Gods people. First, take away Parishes by an act of State, viz. the Ecclesiasticalness of them, and all that may represent them to be of Ecclesiastical consideration: leave not so much as a broken piece of the Image of the beast, such are the parish, and its Ecclesiastical appurtenances, as Hozekiah made the brazen serpent Nehushtan a piece of brass, and brake it to pieces; because the Children of Israel unto those dayes did burn intense
unto it, 2 Kings 18. 4. So do ye, make them common civil things, and leave no shape of the fomer Ecclesiasti∣cal state in them. Take Josiah's ex∣ample in demolishing the Altar of Be∣thel, and the high place there; he brake down and stamped to powder the high place. Parishes are our high places, in this apostacy of the latter times; temples of mans invention. Away with all those consecrated places for worship, those holds of Mahuzzim, Daemons, or Saint-Gods, as Mede expounds them opening the 39 verse of the 11 of Apost. pag. 104. Daniel, as a part of the description of Antichrist. He renders the text thus: He shall make the holds of the Ma∣huzzims, with all, or joyntly, to the forreigne God. He paraphrases thus: And though the Christian God, whom he shall profess to acknowledge, and worship, can indure no compeeres, yet he shall consecrate his temples (Ec∣clesiastical holds) joyntly to the Chri∣stian God, and his Mahuzzims, Deo & Sanctis, i. e. to God and the Saints. This may seeme a nicety to most, that I should inveigh so against these. But
is not God as Jealous as ever? And should not Saints be as zealous? May monuments of Idolatry be better indu∣red then heretofore? Sure I am, the ar∣gument for the demolition of these, is perpetual; and why the precept should not, I know not. Daniel 7. 5, 6. and also verses 25. 26. The true reason why these are suffered, is hinted by Mr. Cotton, when he says, Vial the 7. pag. 14. When the zeale of God lifts up the hearts of people, Saith he, then they will not endure a consecrated place, in all the world where they come. And when this vial is poured out, then the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God, and then all the chappels o ease, and Churches of State, and temples of glory, wherewith the world hath been deluded, shall be thrown down; they will not leave them a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down. 'Tis to our shame, that we have no more knowledge of God, then to suffer such plain monuments of Idolatry. I confess, were it not to cry out against the Altar of Bethel, and gain an advantage
of speaking to them, that otherwise I cannot have, after the example of the Churches meeting in Solomons Porch, after the temple was abolished, Act. 5. 12. I would never more preach or perform any holy duty in them. A way with Patrons, or lay-foun∣ders, those most abominable usurpers: They usurpe the prerogative of Christ, they will found Churches; not onely build a Synagogue, but appoint the Church and the minister; and herein they usurpe over the Church too. Is it not wisdomes priviledge to build the house, and hew out the 7 Pillars thereof, Pro. 9. 1.? is not Christ Jesus the builder of the house? and is not this his preroga∣tive founded in his Godhead? Heb. 3. 3, 4. Durst Paul and Barnabas ex∣ercise such tyranny as to impose a mini∣ster on the people, as these do with the helpe of the Bishop formerly, of the Commissioners for tryal of ministers now? See Act. 14. 23. Mr. Calvin on the place, having rendred the text thus: When by suffrages they had made them Elders in every Church; He comments thus: The word  is
to decree somthing by up-lifted hands; by which form of speech, is best of all expressed the right way of making Pa∣stours. Paul and Barnabas are said to to Chuse Elders: Did they do this alone by their own office? but rather, they put it to the suffrages of all, &c. Away therefore, I say with, these abo∣minable usurpers. And although this usurpation appeare not so clearely in the continuance as in the beginning of pa∣trons, and though it lie under more re∣straint now then formerly, this will not salve the matter: For the Patrons now a dayes hold their right to present, by vertue of the first usurpations of their Ancestours, which yet they also imitate and uphold; and so now all the wick∣edness of them: and withall, Scripture will not beare a mincing reformation, Lopping and plashing of bad plants: Neither will the blood of Christ beare it, and the power of his Spirit. When the fountain is opened for sin and un∣cleanness, the names of the Idols shall be cut off, and be no more remembered, Zach. 12. 1, 3. 'Twas evil to sacrifice and burne incense on the high places,
though it were unto the Lord onely: God will be served onely in his own way, and wisdome will send forth her maidens, Pro. 9. 3. which she cannot be said to do, when men will minister to her in a strange way in the doing of it. And mark, these maidens are such as go abroad to them that are without, that are simple, without understanding, and walke with the foolish, vers. 4. 6. let the world, as well as the Church, be supplied with ministers according to Christs in∣stitution. That which is stuck at much, is the rights and properties of Patrons; the taking away these, is looked on as a piece of injustice. Remember Pharaoh King of Aegypt, and Sihon King of Heshbon, how their hearts were har∣dered by abuse of righteous principles, urging them against Gods commands and his Churches good. Do you ever finde when Images are broken and burnt, groves cut down and burnt, and high places destroyed, that there is any regard had unto the right that any had to the materials? The great Proprietarie of all the world calls in these rights; who shall with-hold them?
I am sorry for men in these dayes, See the Nar∣rative of the Parlaments dissolution on Dec. 12. 1653. with the Ordin. for impow∣ering the Commissio∣ners for tri∣al of publik preachers, p. 1. that make it a ground to breake up Par∣liaments, and make Ordinances, to pre∣serve the rights and properties of Pa∣trons: God calls for them, and they may yeeld them without any dammage; except that they shall want a way to ob∣lige Ministers to daube them with un∣tempered mortar, and sow pillowes un∣der their elbows, that they may lie easi∣ly in their sins, and go in ease to their everlasting paines. A way with Tythes, that old-Testa∣ment-maintenance, that seemes to me plainly distinguished from the new-Testa∣ment-maintenance, in that argument of the Apostle for the maintenance of the ministers of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. 'tis plain he argues a simili, from the like; and like is not the same. And to this suffrages judicious Mr. Hooker, in his Survey of Church-discipline: Part 2. ch. 1 pag. 31. This way of raising maintenance, saies he, appointed in the Gospel, is far dif∣fering from that way of the tything in the Law, &c. Mr. Mede hath this passage touching difference of the Law∣maintenance of ministers, and the Gos∣pel
maintenance. That which was one∣ly required for acknowledgment of the divine dominion under the bondage of the Law, is now turned into the nature of an , or gift for good tidings, but this does not fully teach the differ∣ence, betwixt law, and Gospel-mainten∣ance of ministers, which differs not one∣ly in the motive and end, but in the very kind. For one is a legal Ceremony, and the other is a Gospel-institution; the one is Jewish, the other is Christian; the one reformed, the other popish, accord∣ing to the epithers I find put on the way of tything by Mr. Hooker, calling it the popish Jewish way of Tything. Survey, part 1. chap. 1. p. 29. Concerning the popery of it, I shall one∣ly adde what Mr. Cotton speakes, open∣ing the number of the beast. The foun∣dation, sayes he, is six, that he opens by the six books of Decretals: now, says he, if you would know why this six comes to be multiplied by ten; If you ob∣serve it, all the Government and main∣tenance of the Roman State is by tenths, by tythes; all the people must give the tenth to the Priest, and the Priest to the Bishop, for the maintenance of the Ca∣tholique
Church, and so the whole Go∣vernment comes to be multiplied, main∣tained, and established. All the Roman Catholiques are built upon popish Laws and decrees, all which require subjecti∣on to the popish Church, and submis∣sion to that Church, and to the Pope as the head of that Church; receiving do∣ctrine, and worship, and discipline from that Church; and that was found∣ed in six, in the six books of their decrees, and it is multiplied (viz. by tenths) ac∣cording to the same bookes to maintaine all the Clergy, from the Pope to the lowest Parish-priest. But my argu∣ment that I would follow, is, that Tythes are Jewish; that is much to be suspect∣ed, because they are Popish: the Papists being so much addicted to be the Jews Apes; and the rather, because they have seemed to make much of the Jewish Church-Government, in composing theirs; and so their Maintenance was most sutable to uphold it. But, which is more, the maintenance by Tythes had reference to the Temple: They that mi∣nister in holy things, do live of the things of the Temple, 1 Cor. 9. 13.
that is a shrewd hint to their Jewishness: for they have reference to, and so imply a Temple, Priest, Sacrifices; which have been revived by the Papists, with this maintenance. But yet farther, either Tythes are paid by the light of Nature, or Moral command, or else by a Cere∣monial precept. For as for the Judicial Law, it contains but appendices, explica∣tions, and functions of the Moral and Ceremonial Law; and so I need not mention that in this dis-junction. And also I know none that flie to another mean, to prove that Tythes were not Ceremonial, that may hurt this my Ar∣gument, besides this of Natural light or Moral command. I assume therefore, Tythes are not paid by Natural light, or Moral command. Those instances of Abraham and Jacob paying Tythes before the Law of Moses, are not suffi∣cient to evidence so much. Circumci∣sion was not of Moses, but of the fa∣thers, Joh. 7. 22. yet was it so incorpo∣rated into Moses Law, that it did oblige a man to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. Sacrifices also are as old as Cain and Abel, Gen. 4. yet part of the Ceremo∣nial
Law, and abolished by Christ, Heb. 10. 8, 9. 10. But the Assumption is ma∣nifest, because no Law appointed in the Gospel, is inconsistent with any Natural or Moral Law of God. But the institu∣tion of our Saviour, Luke 10. 7. urged by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 14. and ex∣plained, Gal. 6. 6. will not stand with Tythes: These are out of the seed of the land, the fruit of the trees, or of the herd of the flock, Lev. 27. 30, 31, 32. Deut. 14. 22, 23. The Gospel-maintenance is raised out of all good things that the person taught hath. Tythes were paid, the first Tenth to the Levites, and they paid the tenth of the tenth to the Priest, Neh. 10. 38. And those Levites that taught in the particu∣lar Synagogues, paid to the Priests who administred in Jerusalem; the Gospel-maintenance is to be paid by all that are taught. I conclude therefore, that Vide Hook. Survey, part 2. ch. . Tythes belong to the Ceremonial Law; which to practise, is to dig Christ out of his grave, and a character of Antichrist, 1 Joh. 4. 3. Neither will it avail for any to say that they take them not as Tythes: for the Corinthians could not be so ex∣cused,
as to their eating things sacrificed unto Idols, neither in the Idols temple, nor otherwhere, having taken it from the shambles; if they eat with the offence of their brother. And if they eat in the I∣dols temple, it was not onely evil, for the offence its sake, but for it self, as in which they committed idolatry, and had fel∣lowship with devils, 1 Cor. 10. 14 &c. notwithstanding they made no consci∣ence of the Idol, or the things offered to Idols, but went to eat, as to the civil feast of their friend, vers. 19. compared with chap. 8. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. When we joyn in the same action with others, our different opinion will not save us from the guilt of it, as the Apostle hints, vers. 20. These Tythes were sacrificed to Idols, either directly, whilst in honour of the Saint the Patron with them en∣dowed the Temple that was consecrated unto him, or her; or interpretatively, by worshipping God with other wor∣ship, and setting up other things (yea contrary things) then what he hath ap∣pointed in his Church; worshipping God in a Messiah to come, and exchang∣ing institution, Gal. 6. 6. for Tythes.
And these are still fixed to the Temples of the Saints, to whom Temples were built in every Parish: and though they be not now looked upon so much, as Temples of the Saints, yet as Temples of God they are looked upon generally, and the Service thought to be the better, because performed there; and this comes to the same pass, since to worship God in a false maner, is to worship a false Observant Saints see it to their grief, and talk to one another of it. god; for God hath now no material Temple. Neither hath there been any thing done, by way of publike Act, of the Nation, against this Superstition, re∣ceived by tradition from our Fathers. Upon which I could not meet with the Parish, were it not that I come as a Pro∣phet from Judah to Bethel to them, to cry out against the altar there; or upon the account of the Churches meeting, not theirs primarily. There is a thing like that eating things sacrificed to idols, that the Church of Thyatira stands, as Rev. 2. a bush in a myy hole, to warn us lest we fall into it. And they that oppose it, shall it may be fare the worse for it with the Nations; but Christ will give them power over the Nations at last. Let us
not deceive our selves, God will not be mocked; All the Churches shall know that he searches the reins and the heart, and will give to every one, not according to his pretences, but his workes. Let us esteem our knowledge by humiliation, and the love of God, 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3. whereby we submit unto him, and are zealous of his glory, and afraid of of∣fending him; not by the enticing words of mans wisdome: God will acknow∣ledge him that loves him, and submits unto him, though his brethren may hate him, and cast him out for trembling at Isa. 66. 5. his word, through which he becomes in their eyes more nice then wise: but he shall appear to his joy and they shall be ashamed. Away, I say, with all appurtenances of a Parish-Church. Let us not desire the Silver and Gold of the Idol, lest we besnared,, and become an abomination like it, and accursed like it. Deut. 7. 25, 26. Let us not be confident of our own strength: how easie is it for us, or at least our Children, to be reduced to the former Popish Church-way, when we have Cathedral and Parish-Chur∣ches,
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Church-wardens, &c. still continued? people are apt, upon such occasions, to be taken with such things, and to ask kow their Fathers, or the Nation hath worshipped; and this is a step to idolatry, and forbid∣den of God, Deut. 12. 30. that there∣fore would not have any of the reliques of the Canaanites idolatry survive them. Oh that God would turn England into a Bochim, weepers, (as 't is in the mar∣gin) that we might become weepers for this, That we have not yet abolished the memory of our Fathers superstition, lest the Lord leave us to our enemies, to be thorns in our sides; and to their gods, to be snares to our souls. See that sad sto∣ry, Judg. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. meditate on it sadly: we have been parallel to Israel in deliverances, answerable to them in neglect of duties; why should not we expect to be like them in the judgments that came on them? If to this I should say, Take away Episcopal Churches, you would say it were needless: but what then means the Cathedral Temples? other things may
be found, 't is like, if you search as God will, viz. with candles, every dark hole. But give me leave to say, Take heed, take heed, that you set not up Episcopacie a∣gain. Saints are afraid what the Com∣missioners for trial of Ministers will come to at last. Some spake out their fears at first sight, and wished it came not to an∣other Episcopacy. Let it be seriously en∣quired into. I confess that at first I was pretty well satisfied with the Ordinance for their sitting, save that 'tis grounded, in part, on the defence of Patrons rights and properties: but since, my scruples increase. That which most satisfied me at first and made me think favourably of these Com∣missioners, (I mean, as such Commissi∣oners) was, that their Commission gives them not power to invest into Office: but that will not answer all my scruples now. For though they are not to invest into Office, yet they are to take the begin∣nings of their proceedings from the pre∣sentation of the Patron, that presents to Benefice with care of souls originally; and I know no qualification that is put on his presentation, but onely care
taken to preserve his rights and proper∣ties; and so when they do confirm this presentation, they do in effect invest into Office, and supply the place of the Bishop, to give the Complement to the Parish-Priest. And again, is there not the same-kinde of Tyranny exercised over the elections of the people that was formerly? even as whom the Patron and Bishop could a∣gree in, he was the man for the place, let the people be never so much grieved: e∣ven so now, if the Patron and Commissi∣oners agree, that brings in a Minister into a Parish in spight of their hearts. But 'twill be said, that they are not looked on as Churches. But I answer, There can∣not be denied, but in many of them there are some reliques of a Church, some poor Saints that are nourished in this Wilder∣ness, that should not be imposed on. Let it be considered what Temple of God that is, that Antichrist is described by u∣surping over it, 2 Thes. 2. 4. was it not the woman in the wilderness? Rev. 12. 6. with 17, 3. Antichrist raigns over the u∣niversal visible Church, during the wil∣derness-state of the Church, that is hid in
the confusions of Antichristian order, and lurks among the crowd of Gentiles in the outward Court, that God owns not as a Church, Rev. 11. 2. and therefore his Remnant is this Temple, during the confusion of Antichrist, lurking secretly among the Gentiles in their corrupt or∣der. Lastly, does not the Ordinance for em∣powring these Commissioners provide for the propagation and continuance of our Parish-priests? for though the Commissi∣oners are not to make them so, yet they approve them that are so, without any al∣teration Apost. pag. 104. of their standing. Aaron would have excused his making the golden Calf if he could, when he said, There came out this Calf: but Aaron should not have cast the metal into the fire over such a mould, and then the Gold would not have come forth in such a shape: so the aforesaid Ordinance should not cast Ministers in the fire of examination over the Parish-mould, that is not taken a∣way, and then when any come out of this fire, they shall fall into that mould, they become Parish-Ministers, or are conti∣nued to be so.
Let things be seriously weighed; I make not cavils, but speak out of conscience, and the fear of the Lord. The fear of his Majesty makes me stand upon such things as these, whose Name should be sanctifi∣ed, his Kingdome be submitted to, and his will be done in earth as it is in hea∣ven. The Lord make his people of quick understanding in his fear, not judging by the sight of the eyes, and the hearing of the ear. Things may have fair faces, and be well spoken, that are very foul, filthi∣ness, of the fornications of Mystery Ba∣bylon, whose abominations are in a gol∣den cup. I cannot but look upon what Mr. Goodwin once said, speaking of the Vid. a late tract of the world to come. pag. 28. World to come, in opening Eph. 1. 21. viz. That Christ will not cease till he has thrown down every rag, all that dross and defilement that Antichrist and Popery brought into the World. I cannot but look on this, as compre∣hending as much in brief as I have said, Jesus Christ will never rest (sayes he) till he hath thrown out all the dross of this world, both of doctrine and wor∣ship, that conformity to the World hath brought in.
I know the great Objection against what has been said is, that Ministers will want their certainty: but for all this, they that trust in the Lord will say, Cast up, take away the stumbling-block, and that with a great deal of fervour, because of the promise, They that trust in the Lord shall possess the land, and inherit my holy mountain, Isa. 57. 13, 14. God hath kept me, I bless him, from many a snare, by enabling me to take the promise for my maintenance; and when I first en∣tered into the Ministery, that Psa. 37. 3. was set on my heart; When I was in doubt whether to serve the Lord with a little means, or go to seek more; yea, rather accept more, for I was offered it in more places then one. And I have been tried whether I would stick to i: God hath kept me to it, though with much experience of my frailty: & through this comfort of the promise, I have refused livings when I might have had them, and laid thē down when God call'd for them, in the witness of the Truth. That I say in the strength of God, is, Vincat veritas, ruat coelum. Let us gain Truth with the greatest damage; for he that is the
fountain of truth, is the fountain of good, that hath riches of glory to supplie all our wants. I proceed now unto a Use of exhorta∣tion  to all Gods people to come out of Babylon, according to such Scriptures as these, viz. Isa. 52. 11. it is an ex∣hortation, Diodate on the place. sayes Diodate, to the people to come out of earths Babylon, and not to be allured and enticed by the unclean and profane benefits thereof; And to all the Church, redeemed by Christ, to se∣perate it self from the communion and affection of the world, and the corrup∣tions and Idolatries thereof, 2 Cor. 6. 11. If any say, We are in a captive state, yet heare what Calvin saith on Cal. in loc. the place; he admonishes them, says he, that although they be captives, yet that they do nothing for the sake of their lords, that their condition may be the better, that they suffer not themselves to be drawn away from the pure wor∣ship of God, that they be not polluted with their rites; that they seeme not to worship their idolls, &c. assent to their religion: The Prophet doth not, sayeth he, exhort the Jews, to be clean,
when they shall be free, but whiles they shall be held captive, and undergo the peril of their lives. Add Jer. 50. 8. and 51. 6. and 51. 45, 46. Strive to be for∣most in reformation, as the hee-goates delight to go before the flock. Deliver every one his own soule; stay not for o∣thers so as to lose your selves. These are not commands onely, but have the force of a promise, that the people of God shall come out of Babylon. And 'tis as much as to say, Ye shall come out, if it be not your own fault. And this is a Cordial not to be neglected, as in the Type, so neither in the Antitype, that the Lord gives his people. But what hopes of Deliverance? one rumour comes one yeare, and another yeare comes an∣other rumour, and in the land is violence, ruler upon ruler, (as some render this last clause.) The Lord endeavours to defend our heart against such discouragements as these, Jer. 5. 46. before quoted. Take Calvin in loc. Calvins note on it. I doubt not, says he, but the Prophet here bids the Jews be of good and cheereful heart; al∣though the earth do often change the Lords thereof: because that mutation
althought it be manifold, cannot at all detract from Gods rule, viz. swaying all things to the accomplishing of his promise, to his peoples good in their Season. My deare brethren, whom I long to see upon mount Zion, and meet in the Rendezvous of the 144000, there fol∣lowing the Lambe, and singing the new song: I beseech you suffer the word of exhortation, in these following par∣ticulars. First, reform not onely substance, but circumstance; hate the garment spotted by the flesh. Under the Law a man might not onely be defiled by a leprous man, but by his clothes. Jude allude∣ing to this type, exhorts us to hate the garment spotted by the flesh, vers. 23. Calv. in loc. Jude is so far from suffering evil to be cherished by indulgence, that he com∣mands to cut off all preparations, and all accessaries (as they call them) that they avoid whatsoever is of any affinity or neere to vice. Willet on the place Willet on the place. gives us this exhortation. We that profess, saies he, the glorious Gospel of Christ, are taught that we should not, neither in o∣pinion,
or in any external usages, rites or customs, which may breed offence, con∣form our selves to the carnal and spotted profession of poperie, but to decline in all things the very shaddow, shew, or least suspition thereof. Secondly, take away, not onely Ido∣latrous Notions, but the things. The Lord commands, that the graven Images of the heathen Gods, be burnt with fire, Deut. 7. 25. But it might be ob∣jected, The Silver and the Gold is never the worse we will therefore save that, and call it silver and gold; we may put it to a good use, so we looke upon it as of no holiness, but common silver and gold: Therefore the Lord adds, Thou shalt not desire them, nor take them unto thee, lest thou be snared. Dod and Cleaver on the Commandments, give this com∣ment on the place: God, say these re∣verend lights, labours with the people of Israel, that when in the land of Canaan they met with Idols covered with gold and silver, they should not covet or touch one parcel of the plate, or med∣dle with it: for if they did, it would en∣snare them, and make them remember
the Idol; and from remembring, fall to likeing, and at last to worship it. There∣fore it is an abomination to God; and he that will keep a piece of gold of the Image, it is the next way to make him a worshipper of the idol. This is that which the Apostle means, when he bids us purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. We must not onely purge our selves of evil intentions, as the Corinthians that eat things sacrificed to Idols in the Idols Temples, that said they went to the civil Feast of their Friend, and acknowledged but one God, and one Lord: but as the Apostle teaches them, they must not eat the things sacrificed to Idols, nor sit at meat in their temples; even so we must lay aside all superstitious things and acti∣ons, and have no fellowship with wicked men in them. Thirdly, return not onely to the true object of worship; but to the right means that are instituted in the word of God. Enquire not how others have worshipped their Gods, Deut. 12. 30. we should in reformation take no notice how idolatrous superstitious people have
done before us, but what thing God com∣mands, observe to do that, ver. 32. This is that spoils reformation, that mens eyes do not look right on, and their eye-lids look straight before them, Prov. 4. 25. and so as the Serpent beguiled Eve, by drawing her eyes from institu∣tion to carnal considerations; so are men beguiled from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. Lastly, Beware of Antichrist's brokers, and buy nothing of him at second-hand. The Prophet reproved the Hypocrites of his time▪ who though they would not eat of polluted and unclean flesh, yet the broath was found in their vessels. It Will et on Jude 23. hath been the old stratagem of the Dra∣gon, and his vicar Antichrist, to deceive men by an image; and men that will not abide Papacy, are yet well a paid with E∣piscopacy; and those those that cannot bear with Episcopacy, fall in Presbytery; which how neer of kin to it, ye have seen before. As there is the strength and juice of the swines flesh in the broath, though not the outward form; so is there the force, and strength, and nature of Episco∣pacy in Presbytery, although it in shape
shape be somewhat different. Therefore Epist.  vind. C Mr. Ellis. once Popery, sayes he, rective or in point of Government, I shewed was very probable (for the substance though not the formality of it) to follow upon the Presby∣tery, on the ground that its now endeavoured upon. I do not scornfully upbraid any, ('tis far from my heart) but I faithfully warn men of the devils method, whereby he goes a∣bout to deceive. I shall conclude all with that noble Speech of the noble Lord Du Plessis, May we not Myst. iniq▪ p. 660, 661. lawfully say with the Prophet, We would have cured Babel, but she would not be cu∣red. Forsake her, and let us go every one to his own Country, let us now wash our hands of her, and expect what God has de∣termined of her, especially since her judge∣ment is come unto heaven; on the contrary, the Lord hath set forth our righteousness. And what then do we wait for from the same counsel, the same prophesie, and therefore from the same certainty; but that those Kings and the same States who have worship∣ped her, finish the work of God, who will put into their hearts to fulfil his will and his pleasure, to execute his sentence? and let not the present state of things astonish us in one
day, in one hour, in a moment are his works performed, and this work must without doubt be performed. And long ago, as of a thing al∣ready done, near at hand, and most certain, the Angel cried out▪ & redoubled it, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon. But God forbid we should forget that other cry that follows, Go out of her, my people, ye to whom God hath given power to know her, ye which know her but too well, take heed it be not your damnation. Can any man now pretend an excuse? that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; lest being defiled by the contagion of her Idolatry and Enchantments, ye be made par∣takers of the sentence long ago pronounced against her, of eternal fire that remaines for her. But because we are for the most part incredulous and stupid; let us pray unto God of his mercy to draw us as a Lot out of this spiritual Sodom, as St. John calleth it, to pull us to himself by the hand of his Angels, to grant unto us, that we look not back again, and that we may, before he pour down his judgements on Babylon, get to that holy Mountain, to that little Segar Zoar. his Church, how small and con∣temptible soever it be in the eyes of the world. Is it not a little one, (saith Lot) and my soul shall live? Now to him, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the bot∣tomless depths of his Judgements, and of his Graces, be Praise and Glory World without end, Amen.
