P918 E102_12 99860728 112853
PEACE and PLENTY comming unto us, If we be willing to entertain them and will bid them welcome: Manifested in some Observations upon the Motion lately made by certain persons sitting usually at Salters-Hll in Bread-street London, and there imployed about raising of new Regiments of HORSE and FOOT: Viz. That all well-affected Families and Persons would forbear one Meal in a Week, and give the value thereof, for, and toward the Raising and Main∣taining of the said Regiments. Written by one, who hath heard and seen somewhat said and done, for and against the same Motion, And desireth that it may be more fully understood and fur∣thered, tending (as he conceiveth) so much unto the Publique good. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwll, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the Sun in Pauls Church yard. May 19. MDCXLIII.
Peace and Plenty coming unto us, if we be willing to entertain them, and will bid them welcome. 1. NOw Ireland, (from whence we formerly received much food) is so wasted, that it must be supplyed from England, or else be pined; and now so many parts of England are also already, and the rest very likely without Gods great mercy, before it belong to be in no better condition: this Motion like the I epers news, 2 King. 7. bringeth the glad tiings of peace and plenty. If we as the unbeleeving Lord thre, will not reject it as impossible; but as the Samaritans there make triall of it. Of peace; for as the Syrians there fled at the noyse of Chariots and Horses, so happily may our enemies shortly hearing of these forces added unto the former, sent out against them, or else by the righteous judgement of God fall in battle before them, Of plenty: For if London begin, and England (except where the enemies Armies hinder) follow her example, and abstain thus betime (as we may hope England, for so great a good will easily b perswaded to so small a thing) then will plenty also follow, if the Lord please. 2. If this Motion (in this particular designe) succeed well, it may perhaps shew this to be the best way to furnish all the necessities of the State, and move the Parliament, allowing only a part of the Monies raised hereby unto these new Regiments (who may levy the same in and within miles of London) to extend this way of raising money and the Kingdom over; and if they finde it to yeeld a sufficient supply, ease themselves, and the people thereby, of, and from all other payments And this (unto some that have seriously considered there∣of) seemeth not improbable. For if but the willing party would say unto the Parliament; We will cheerfully abstain from one meal in a week, and give you the value thereof, (yea from two if there be cause)
so by an ordinance you will compell the Malignants to do the like: who can doubt but that the Parliament would readily answer; We will give power, if the Malignants refuse to pay their part, to distrain them for three times as much as they shall be assessed at, and also free you from all other payments, if we finde these to be sufficient, as in truth they will readily appear to be; if, what one meals meat in all England cometh unto, be but reckoned and cast up, at a very easie and under rate. 3 By this astinence the rich men once in a week, may have the poor mans pleasant appetite: which alas they lose or lessen by their continuall plenteous feeding, as Salomon sheweth, prove. 27. 7. The full soul loath them honey-comb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is weet. The rich, what sauces are they sain to sharpen their apptites with? when by this astinence they may finde a delight∣full taste of every dish, yea, and withall have the favour of God, and the love of their Countries. The poor (the poorer they are, even down to the Almesman) in some respects have more reason to ab∣stain, and cast in their mites; for, poor souls, they are not able many other wayes (as the rich are) to expresse their love unto their Coun∣trie: but this way they may, yea and highly please God thereby (as the widow of Zarephath did, by making Elijah a little cake first, of that handfull of meal which was all that she had left, 1. Kings 17.) and withall, either provoke the rich to follow their examples, or shame them before God and men, if they will not. Again, famine first illeth the poor and the poorest first of all: and according to the degree of their poverty is plenty the greatest blessing unto them; therefore they have most reason to strive most to avoid famine, and to procure plenty: wherefore let them (for example sake) give even the fouteenth farthing given to buy them food, if for the present they can give it, and live; therein shall they do wisely for themselves, for none of those that are more able (seeing them that are so poor, to do this) will be so shmelesse to refuse to do their parts, to avoid fa∣mine and to procure plenty. Yea God will move others to enlarge themselves, in relieving suh poor, as they see (even of their nothing) yet to give something to support the Comman-wealth. 4 If this be done universally, victuall must needs be the four∣teenth penie cheaper, and thereby one penn ewill be gained in eve∣ry fourteen laid out for victuall, so that what one of Jacobs sons said, Gen. 42. 28. My money to restored, and so, it us even in my sack: every
one may as truly affirm of what he thus spareth and giveth, that it is restored, for he shall pay so much the lesse for another weeks provi∣sion, and the longer he giveth it, still so much the lesse, for it will be so much the more plentifull, and by consequence the cheaper; which may move the covetous to contribute it, because it will be gainfull unto him: and much more if it shall (as if it be observed generally it will) exempt him also from all other impositions. The money thus raised is better unto England, then if Holland or any forraign State gave it: for it is not onely gained, but bringeth as (as it were in) all the victuall which we save thereby. 5 If two men in every Parish went with two Books, the one vvith a vvhite book, and the other vvith a black book: and record∣ed in the vvhite book the names of all that by this beneficence be∣came bene factors unto their Countrey, and in the black book theirs that refused, to the perpetuall honour of the one, and infamy of the other and their posterities (as a wittie Florentine in time of famine adviseth to do) surely very few would be set down in the black book: for the greatest Malignants beside the avoiding of such shame) would also fear left the Parliament might impose more upon them, if they refused this, and thereby shewed the height of their ma∣lignancy, which moved them even vvith their own damage, to en∣deavour the undoing of the Common-wealth: and that all their neighbors would ready to leavie vvhat they vvere assessed at with zeal enough. 6 In besieged Cities (for saving of victuall) it hath been usuall to put out innocent old men, women and children; yea, though they were exposed thereby unto the pleasure of the enemy: how much more do such as refuse this abstinence and contribution deserve to be thrust out, from eating up that which is brought in to sustain this City? yea to be thrust not onely out of the City but out of the king∣dom also, toward both which (doubtlesse) they can bear no good affection, who shall refuse to do so litle for their preservation and happinesse. 7 All that are religious and lovers of their Country, with all rea∣dinesse and alacrity will abstain from, and give the value of the best ordinary meal in their families once every week, and not inconside∣rately object that their children and servants will ea% as much either before or after such abstinence, as they spare by forbearing that meale. For if in a besieged City, the victuall can be, and usually is
proportioned, so as it may hold out happily untill the siege be raised; how much easier may this be done by a man in his family, if he be Master in his own house; and if in a siege, seven small meals in a week, would be as so many feasts, and men and women be so well contented to feed more sparingly many dayes, that they might rejoyee with their friends upon a feast day: will they not now abstain from one meal in a week, to avoid warre and famine, and to procure peace, plenty, and many joyfull feasts? If any (unterrified by the judge∣ments which fell upon Ananias and Saphirah) shall keep back a part of the price, by estimating the families meal at too low a value (be∣side their present basenesse, manifested thereby unto all the Parish) the Parliament if they please to exercise their power therein, can easily appoint some of their neighbours, to give them a just and true reckoning what a meals meat for so many mouths, as they have in their familes cometh unto (which would make but little for their credits) and if they refused to pay it, authorise some to levy the same (as in the like cases they have done) by distresse, and sale of such Recusants goods and chattels. 8. If any be grieved, that for the cooking of dinners on the Lords dayes, some of their family cannot be at Gods publike worship in the morning; or that in the afternoon in the like duties, they are too drousie and sleepy. Behold hereby a remedy for both, They may take (instead of a dinner) only so much as will keep them from fainting; and at supper (which though but ordinary, will seem a feast) they may rejoyce that more have been at Gods worship, and all become fit∣ter by this abstinence to worship him; and that no work (as some per∣haps, if this abstinence were on a working day would conceive) were hindered thereby. And for doing of this, no man can doubt that his God will be offended, unlesse his God be his belly, as the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. sheweth some mens are. 9. If we will do thus much for our selves, we shall also hereby shew unto our Brethren of Scotland, how without their own cost or ours, they also (if need require) may do the like, and thereby raise and maintain their forces, and come and help us: as we (reciprocally) shall be ready to do for them, whensoever our assistance may do them good. 10. Joseph an accused stranger, and prisoners advice being heark∣ned unto (when no danger appeared, but by a dream) what good thereby was done for Pharaoh, and all Egypt, the story sheweth. Now
War hath already wasted so far, that Famine is also come within eve∣ry mans conjecture: Let England be perswaded to remove both these evills, and to procure Peace and Plenty at a cheaper rate then Egypt did; for the Egyptians lives were saved indeed, but that cost them all that they had, except their Idolatry, their Goods, Lands, and Li∣berties. But this abstinence, beside the saving of our Lives (with the lords blessing) will also preserve unto us our Goods, Lands, Laws, Liberties, and true Religion. Arguments enough, if any be suffici∣ent to perswade people, with so much ease and accomodation to at∣tain these four excellent aims or ends: 1. The compleating of these so necessary new Regiments of Horse and Foot for our own safety. 2. The maintaining of the War (the onely way to a good and godly Peace.) 3. The prevention of Famine (which otherwise semth unavoidable.) 4. And lastly, the easing all men from their Contribu∣tions, which otherwise must continue, yea, become more grievous, if this course be not taken. 11. The Spirituall and Temporall Watch-men, Magistrates and Ministers, mentioned Ezek. 33. (except such as be contented God should require the soul, and body blood of the unwarned people at their hands) will doubtlesse give the people warning, and do what they can to move them to apply the remeies. And Neb. 5. 7. pre∣senteth them a prevalent president; when he could not otherwise get the Usurers to remit their interest, he set a great Assembly against them, to cry shame of them: though the belly (as the Proverb speak∣eth) hath no ears, yet if almost a whole Parish cry out of one so bru∣tish obedient unto his belly, that would not thus abstain and give, doubtlsse he would either hearken unto them, and come in, or else flie upon such a hue and cry. 12. All good men now are as busie as Bees at this time of the yeer, exampling and provoking one another unto good works, especially such as tend to the advancement of Christs Kingdom and his Churches deliverance, and now (as in Isaiahs time, Ch. 37.) children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth: will women (o ready to assist one another in child bearing) do nothing for Christ? (Hath he shewed no love uto them, or done nothing for them;) ys, to do them no wrong by silence, they have (above what men have done) fasted and prayed, an to do still; and in this City, how did many a Dorcus send lately, Shirts, Stockins, and other necessaries; yea, and meat and drink unto Christs poor Souldiers that fight against
Antichrists, and shall hear him at the last day say unto them, In as much as ye have done it unto the least of these my Brethren, yea have done it unto me? Let them not be weary in well doing, for Gal. 6. 9. i due season they shall reap, if they faint not. The wise woman of Abel, 2 Sam. 20. was able to perswade the whole City for its own safety: if women will study (as they do to obtain their own desires in things concerning themselves) and make use of these and the like Argu∣ments, which of them is there not, but with prayer, endeavour, and the Lords blessing, may prevail with all in their Families, to yeeld un∣to this abstinence and contribution? And if any wife to obtain thus much, bestowed upon an unwiling husband, some of those tears (if she had no more) which she useth to wash Christs feet withall, in the dayes of her humiliation: without all question, the Lord Jesus would like it as well, as if she bestowed them more immediately upon him∣self. Have not women generally the disposing of meats and drinks in Families? Let them undertake (if they thus dispence) that God will so lsse the food of that Family (though it were but pulse and water, and so much lesse of it) that all in the house (like Daniel and his fellows) shall look fairer and fatter in flesh, then any other that do eat daily of any Kings dainties. This work seemeth to be most proper for women, especially, now when men have so many other imployments. And a few of the wisest of them here in London, (joyning but together unanimously, and appointing some of their sx, fittest and most active in every Parish) might both ease the men of this labour, and carry this good work thorow the City first, and Kingdom after ward, and be honoured for it both by God and men, in all Countries, and in all ages, and give the Parliament cause (as in the like case once the Dames of Rome did that Senate) to give them pike thanks for their love and care of the Common-wealth. FINIS.
