R1353 E459_3 99863425 162111
Colonel Rich's LETTER TO The House of COMMONS, Of a great VICTORY Obtained against Eight hundred of the Princes Forces, Lately landed in Kent by Sandown Castle. Where were One hundred and eighty kill'd in the place, One hundred Pri∣soners taken, Three hundred Arms, and all their chief Commanders, as by A LIST herewith appeareth. VVHich Letter was Read in the House of Commons, and by the Honorable William Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the said House, appointed to be printed and published. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, August 16. 1648.
To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, UPon several reiterated Intelli∣gences of some hundreds of men for the land-service, which the Prince had come from Holland, and lay ready in the Ships here to be put on shore and attempt us, I drew what Horse we had here together, and after five nights expectance of them, began to conceive their intentions of landing here altered, though the Ships continued; this I was confirmed in by Captain Battin's going two days since with some five or six Sail and many Boats, towards Sandgate-Castle, whi∣ther I sent a Troop to prevent incon∣veniences, and accordingly came thi∣ther
very seasonably, which together with some of a Troop (as yet not quite raised) belonging to Dover-Castle, forced the Seamen to betake them∣selves to their Boats, and so came into the Downs again; in the like maner another of my Troops went to possess Rye, and a third towards Portsmouth; so that having but three here, this morning came from Sandown-Castle in good order and equipage about 800 men, very confidently towards upper Deal (which were landed in the night unknown to us) and waving our Fort towards the Sea, intended to come up∣on the back of our Leaguer at Deal-Castle, which so soon as in view, we drew what Horse and Foot of a sudden we could get together, which were not above 300. Foot, and 100. Horse (the
rest being ordered to reinforce the Guards in and near our Trenches be∣fore Deal-Castle, expecting a Sally at the same juncture) and charged them; after some time of dispute with Mus∣quet shot, the Bodies closed nearer, the horse pickering up and down in their flanks aswel as they could over the ditches, together with the foot who gave on freely, forc'd them to run, ours pursuing them up to the very Castle bridge, killing in all about One hun∣dred and forty at least upon the place, as is the opinion of all else besides my self in the action, and have taken about One hundred prisoners, and about three hundred Arms; in this action I have lost the quarter-master to my own troop, that was slain upon the place, and no other officer; the Lieu∣tenant
to my Majors troop shot in the Knee, about three Horsemen killed, and three or four Foot Soldiers, ten or twelve Horses shot, whereof my Majors was one, who through the whole Action performed his duty with much diligence and boldness; neither did Col: Hewsons Lieut: Col: neglect any advantage either in the Field or Trenches: A perfect List of the pri∣soners is not yet come, though many of quality are taken, as Major General Gibson who commanded the whole party, as appears by the Princes Or∣der taken in his pocket to command all; Sir John Boyce, Sir John Knotsford, Col: Linsey, Lieut: Col: Bale, Lieut: Col: Walker, Lieut: Col: Gamlin, Ma∣jor Den, &c. many Captains and Lieutenants, one more notable then
the rest, Lieut: Lendal, Lieutenant to the present Admiral, Boatswains mate to Col: Rainsborow, the chief Agent to manage the Revolt of the Sea-men, who commanded now the party of the Sea-men, which as the prisoners in∣form, were most for action before they came on shore, but in time of Service failed their Leaders. Colonel Hewson going up to soli∣cite the necessary supply of his Regi∣ment and guns, and many other things which we want here, requisite to these Castles reducement, after a moneths expectation of them, will bring a List of the Prisoners names that are of qua∣lity, and the exact number of Soldiers: This is all at present from Your most faithful and humble Servant, NATH: RICH. Deal, August 14. 1648.
The List of the Prisoners Names. MAjor General Gibson. Sir John Boys. Sir John Knottesford. Col: Lindsey. Lieut: Col: Bale. Lieut: Col: Gamlin. Major Burridge. Major Den. Capt. Hull. Capt. Wright. Capt. Bowman. Capt. Coary. Capt. Pool. Lieut: Lindol, Lieutenant to the Admiral, formerly Boat∣swains Mate that betrayed the Ships. Lieut: Nock. Sir John May his Son, Ser∣vant to the Prince. Mr. Blithe. Mr. Corrame. Mr. Howson. Mr. James. Mr. Bennet. Seventy three private Soldiers, One hundred and eighty kill'd upon the place, about Three hundred Arms taken. Most of those that escaped are wounded. No Officers of ours lost, but my own Quartermaster, Ma∣jors Lieutenant wounded, Three Horsemen killed, Four Foot killed, and about Ten Horse shot. FINIS.
