R1475 E932_4 99871571 168503
THE BANNER OF GODS LOVE, AND ENSIGN OF RIGHTEOVSNESS Spread over his people in these later dayes. Wherein the true light shineth, and the mysterie that hath been hid from Ages and Generations, is re∣vealed to the Saints, which is, Christ in us the hope of glory, as our forefathers witnessed, Read Col. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29. ALSO, A Testimony against them who formerly hath tasted of the good Word of God, and of the Power of the world to come, who hath cast the Law of God behind their backs, and hath trodden under foot the blood of the Covenant, and now doth labour with one shoulder to destroy the Man∣child which is now brought forth to rule the Nations with an Iron Rod; and these are most especially, those that are called Anabaptists and Independents. Also, A few Words in warning to the Priests, Professors, and Peo∣ple of the Town and County of Southampton. With a few Quaeries to the Rulers and Magistrates of England, to try their fruits whether they be according to the Christian Magi∣strates recorded in the Scripture of truth, or according to the hea∣thenish Kings and Rulers in former Ages. Set forth most especially for the sake of the honest-hearted, who are not whol∣ly given up to believe lyes, that they may come to know the way of life and peace. Written by me who am called Ambrose Rigge. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the Black spread-Eagle, neer the West end of Pauls, 1657.
To the sober Reader. GReat and admirable is the Love and Mercy of the Lord God unto the sons of men, that he hath not with-held his onely Son, but hath sent him a Light into the world, that all men through him might believe, and be saved: But there is a gene∣ration of men in these our dayes that cannot endure sound Doctrine, and such will not receive him who is the good shepherd, but heaps unto themselves Teachers having itching ears, which hath never pro∣fited them, nor never shall; and the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stands now where it ought not; therefore I desire thee who readeth these ensuing lines, to understand and weigh them in an equal Ballance, and with a single eye look upon them, and thou wilt clearly see that here is no∣thing written but what is just and true to every mans condition, without flattering, or daubing with un∣tempered Morter, as the false Prophets have done these many years, which hath made the abominati∣on so great in our Nation of ENGLAND. And
take heed of judging or censuring any thing hastily, but try all things, (as he hath done who writ this unto thee) and hold fast that which is good; For to this end was this sent forth to publike view, That every one may be knowne by their fruits: From him who is a Friend to all that love the Truth as it is in JESUS called of men Ambrose Rigge.
THE BANNER OF GODS LOVE, AND ENSIGNE OF RIGHTEOVSNESS, &c. FOrasmuch as many dear and precious Isa. 8. 18. Joh. 17. 23. Servants and Children of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whom he hath loved with an everlasting love, and hath opened their eyes and ears to behold him whom they had pierced, and hath armed them with Zach. 12. 10. power from on High, to make war in righteousness against all the pow∣ers Rev. 20. 8, 9. of darkness that stands up against the appearance of the
Lamb of God, who hath now cloathed them with his Armor of Light and Life, and given them for an Helmet, the Hope Rom. i3. 12. Eph. 6. 13, 17. of Salvation, and hath put the Sword of the Spirit (which is the Word of God) into their mouths, that with boldness they may declare abroad the Name of him who is now come a Light into the World, and hath lighted every man that Joh. 12. 46. Joh. 17. 9. cometh into the World, that all men through him might be∣lieve, and come to the knowledge of the truth. And for this end is he now made manifest, To destroy the 1 Joh. 3. 8. Eccles. 12. 3: Ezek. 32. 25, 26: Ezek. 2i. 28. Works that the devil hath wrought in man, even to make the strong man bow before him, and the Keepers of the House to tremble, that the uncircumcised may fall by the stroke of his Sword which is now drawn in his hand, and made ready for a mighty slaughter, even to cut off the wick∣ed from the Land of the living, that their remembrance may Luk. i9: 27: be blotted out from the earth, which wlil not that he shall rule whose right it is: and he hath made his children and ser∣vants living Witnesses of his eternal Truth, to declare his e∣ternal Name among the Gentiles, and hath given them a 1 Joh. 5: 20: Luk. 22: 35: good understanding to know him that is true, and hath sent them forth into the VVorld vvithout Bag, or Scrip, or tvvo Coats, and hath given them his Word of Life and Light to declare to the Spirit in Prison; and these have (as they have been moved of the Lord) run to and fro in the earth, in true and tender love to peoples souls, vvarning all men every Acts 17: 30, 31. Acts 20: 33: vvhere to repent, and seek the Lord vvhile he may be found, vvithout coveting any mans Silver, Gold, or Apparel; and for this have they been stocked, stoned, vvhipped, imprison∣ed, and shamefully intreated, and not counted vvorthy to live upon the earth, not onely by them that professed little or nothing of God, Christ, or the Scriptures, but rather by the Scribes, and Pharisees, and chief Priests, and zealous pro∣fessors Mark 8: 31: as the Jevvs vvas, as may be vvitnessed at this day by hundreds in our Nation of England, vvhose fruits shame their Profession, and vvhose Works shevv to their faces they are of their Father the Devil. And those vvhom the Lord Joh. 8: 44: 1 Cor. 4: 2: hath called and chosen to commit his secrets unto, and to place his eternal Name in, as they have freely received of the
Lord, freely have they ministred unto all, whereby many hath been turned from darknesse unto light, and from the Matth. i0. 8. Acts 26. 18. power of Satan unto God; and God hath greatly blessed their labours within these few years, so that many that was scattered as Sheep without a Shepherd, in the cloudy and dark day, by the Idol dumb Sepherds which had made a prey Ezek. 34: 12. upon them, their feet are now directed into the Way of life and peace, wherein they are now walking up to Zion, with Songs of Deliverance, and are sitting down with Abraham, Isa. 35: 10: Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; and the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, where Matth. 8: 11: is weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever. And now quick and powerful hath the Word of the Lord Heb. 4: 12: been in the mouth of his Messengers and Ministers in this Nation of England, and elsewhere, whereby the strong man in hundreds hath been made to bow, and the Keepers of the House to tremble; and by it hath the Wisdom of the Wise Isa. 29: 14: 1 Cor. 1: 19: 1 Pet. 1: 23, 25: Isa. 40: 8: Acts 19: 20: been confounded, and the understanding of the prudent brought to nought; but the Word of the Lord hath stood, and shall stand and accomplish the VVork for which it was sent, and hath grown and encreased abundantly, so that many by it is quickned, and raised from death to life; and they have not laboured in vain, as the false Prophets have done this many years, but many Vessels are full, and an innume∣rable multitude is drawn out of the Sea of confusion, where Luk. 5: 5, 6: they were overwhelmed, and could never have come to the Son of God, unlesse they had been drawn by the Cords of the Fathers Love, wherein now they walk to the praise and glo∣ry of God for evermore. And those whom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth hath 2 Cor. 1: 22: indued with his Spirit of Life and Light in Christ Jesus his on∣ly Son, and as they have been moved of the Lord, have ta∣ken Luk. 1: 1, 2: in hand to set forth from the very first a Declaration in order of those things which are most surely believed among us, who have been eye-witnesses of him from the beginning, and of all the things that Jesus began to do and to teach, of Psal. 112: 4: the works and mighty wonders which he hath wrought for
the sons of men, who sate in darknesse and in the shadow of death, how he hath caused his everlasting day to dawn upon them, and hath commanded light to shine out of darknesse, Luke 1: 79: 2 Cor: 4: 6: whereby his children comes to have the knowledge or his glory. And this Declaration hath been set forth for the sake of the simple, that they may turn in at the call of Wisdom, who is now uttering her Voice in the Streets, and opening Prov. 1: 20, 22, 23, 24. her Gate wide, so that many hearkens to her Voice, and en∣ters in at her Gate; and by such is Wisdom justified daylie, Matth. 11: 19: Isa. 11: 9: Zech: 4: 9: and Knowledge encreased abundantly, so that the Lord God is known to be one, and his Name one. And he hath confir∣med his Work, not by Word onely but by his mighty Power, and by his Armor of Righteousnesse on the right hand, and on the left, whereby his Enemies is subdned under his feet, 2 Cor: 6, 7: and the Power given unto him to rule whose right it is: And this hath his own Arm accomplished for his own Seed sake which lay in captivity, and was oppressed and burthened, so Ezek: 21: 7: that it could not arise to bring forth fruit unto him, but his Vinyard wholly laid desolate to the Beasts of the field to make a prey upon, and his Heritage was become as a speckled Bird that was wandered into the desolate places of the earth, Je: 2: 9: and not one stone was found to build up the desolation of Zion with, till it was hewed and suted by the Word of God, which is as a Hammer, which was put into the mouths of his chosen ones in the fulnesse of time. Jer: 23: 29: And now I, with the rest of my dear Brethren and Sisters, who have obtained grace and mercy from the Lord; and ha∣ving had perfect knowledge from the very first, of the things that Jesus hath done for me, and the rest, who have believed in his Name, and how it pleased the Father to reveal him in us, that we might preach him among the Gentiles, for the Gal. : 16: salvation of his people Israel, and for the redemption of all the children of Adam, who were made sinners by his diso∣bedience. Now am I moved of the Lord to bear my testimony (with the rest of my Brethen and Sisters, who are in scorn called Quakers) unto Christ Jesus the Light of the World, whom
wee witnesse in us, the hope of Glory and how He did there Col. 1. 27. begin his work, and wrought in us both the will and the deed, as our fore-Fathers witnessed in their declaration in Phil. 2. 13. order; the mistery that was hid from ages and generations was Christ in them the hope of glory, and them that sought Col. 1. 26. a proofe of Christ in them, they exhorted to try themselves, and prove themselves, and told them that Christ was in them 2 Cor. 13. 3. 4. 5. except they were reprobates; and this is the mistery that is now hid from all sorts of profession and professors at this day who are found without the life of Christ, manifested in the mortal flesh, and so are seeking proofs of his speaking 2 Cor. 4. 11. Deut. 18. 15. 18. Acts 3. 22. in his people; and such hath ears but doth not hear him of whom Moses wrote, which the Lord hath now raised to be a Teacher and a Leader to his people, which they now bear in all things according to the word of the Lord by the mouth of his servant Moses: And this doth set all the world in an uproar so that Gog and Magog doth strike hands together, Rev. 20. 8. Rev. 17. 14. Rev. 12. 5. Rev. 19. 15. Matth. 3: 12: Luk. 3. 17 to joyn in Battle against the Lamb who is now arisen to rule the nations with a Rod of Iron, and Fan, and purifie his Sons and Daughters, that he may gather his Wheat into his Gar∣ner according to his promise, and burn up the Ghaff with unquenchable fire. And now shall they clearly be known that serveth the Lord in truth and tighteousnesse, from them who pretend Mal. 3. 18. Titus 1. 16: 2 Tim: 43. in words they know him, but in works deny him, for the time is already come wherein men cannot endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, heaps up unto them∣selves Isa. 56: 10: 11: 12: Ier: 23: Ezetk 34: Matth: 23. Teachers which doth not profit them at all, but are such as the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord did always bear testimony against as all that are not wilfully blind may clearly see. But now hath the Lord furnished us with power from on high, to preach his everlasting Gosple unto every creature, Mark: 16: 1: so that our labour and travel is to see Christ formed in them, who is the expresse image of his fathers person, that hence∣forth Gal: 4: 19: Heb. 1: 3: they might not be tosed to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine, through the sleight of men but that all may Eph: 4 14:
come to the knowledge of him in them, subduing all things under his feet, and leading Captivity Captive, and destroy∣ing 1 Cor: 15:▪ 8: Ephe: 4: 8. Ephe: 5: 27. and defacing the image of the Devil in all his children, that they may be presented without spot unto his Father, and for this end did he sow the good seed of the kingdom a∣mong us, which the good ground hath received in us, and Matth. 13. 8. hath brought forth first the Blade, then the Ear, then the full corn in the Ear, to the everlasting praise and glory of him that sowed it; so that the earth hath brought forth her increase by handfulls, and abundance is gathered into the house of the Lord, and God hath opened the Windows of Heaven and hath sent a blessing upon it, that there is scarce Mall. 3. 10. roome to hold it, and he hath rebuked the devourer in hun∣dreds according to his promise, so that his children doth eat and drink with a discerning of his body, and are become one bread and one body fitly joyned together unto Christ the head, who is made unto them, wisdome, righteous∣nesse, 1 Cor. 1 30: sanctification, and redemption, to the everlasting praise of his everlasting name for ever and ever. And now is the Lord ariseing and arisen out of his holy Habitation, and hath covered himselfe with Zeale as with Isa: 59 7: a Cloake, and for Zions sake hath he uttered his voice as a man of Warr, whereby the tall Oakes hath been brought down, and the Cedars of Lebanon hath been made to bend; Ezek. 37: 10: 11: And he hath breathed upon the slain that they have stood up upon their feet, and are become the whole house of Israel; Isa: 28: 17: and for Zions sake hath he laid Judgement to the line and righteousnesse to the plummet, and is sweeping a way the refuge of lyes, so that there shall be no hideing place found in Heaven or in earth but his own righteousnesse, which whosoever is found out of, in the day of Gods fierce wrath, shall be swept a way with the Beesom of destructi∣on into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever, where there is no redemption. And therefore awake a∣vvake all you carnal minded ones of what Sect or Faction so∣ever you be of: The everlasting day is come, and dawned upon us, which you hate, vvhich hath discovered you to
be out of Gods righteousnesse, in the deeds of darkness, following the Imaginations of your evil hearts, whereby the seed of God is oppressed, as a Cart is pressed with Amos 2: 13: Sheaves, and over you death hath great dominion, and darknesse hath great power, the way of peace you know not, nor never can in that state; therefore open your eyes, Rev: 22. 16 and behold the bright and morning Star, that ariseth out of the East, which is over-shadowing the whole earth, that every mans work is now made manifest of what sort it is; and no longer shall your deeds be hid, for all things are naked and bare before him with whom we have to do; Heb: 4: 13: 1 Cor. 4: 5: and he will suddenly bring to light the hidden things of darknesse, so that every one shall appear as he is in truth and righteousnesse, or in deceit and unrighteousnesse, and all vailes will he rent, and all covers will he rip off, that his own flock only vvho are covered with his spirit of Isa: 30. 1: life and power, may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath, which will come upon all mankind. Awake awake all you who hath long lain upon your beds of ease and carnal security, and hath eaten with the Glut∣tons, Amos 6: 3: 4: 5: Matt: 24. 49. and drunken with the Drunkards, and is now beat∣ing with the Fist of wickednesse, and with a slanderous tongue backbiteing the innocent, behold your Master is come & hath found you asleep, He stands now at the door and knocks, and is desiring of you to awake, and arise Ephe: 5. 14. out of the filthy pollutions of the world that you are over∣whelmed in, that he may give you the light of life to fol∣low him into the Land of the living, where many now doth praise and magnifie his great Name for evermore, who hath done marvellous things for them who are his Matt. 21. 42. flock, who follows him whethersoever he goes, unto whom He is a Priest, a Prophet, a King. Awake awake all you filthy Dreamers, who are in the defilements of the flesh, and who hath made people bru∣tish Ier. 27 9. Iude 8: by your false Dreams, which you have called the word of God, which hath been but a Divination of your own brain, and hath not profited the people at all, but their
hungry souls is yet languishing after the bread of life, you have fed your selves with the fatt, till your flesh is become Ezek. 34. 3. Ezek. 23. 20. as the flesh of Horses, your eyes stand out with fatnesse, your words is as smooth as butter, but in your heart doth the ravening Wolfe lye hid from the eyes of many, as your fruits doth daily manifest, the Lord will now feed Ezek. 34. 16. you with Judgement, and make you drink the dreggs of the Cup of his sury, powred out without mixture, for you have caused many to erre by your lyes and lightness, and none have you brought into the knowledge of the truth, because you have departed from it your selves, you have long ruled in this long night of Apostacy, where∣in the blind have walked which you have led, who have Inter scos reg∣nat strabus. called you ministers of Christ and prophets of God: And of such have you made a grievous prey, and hath taken their money for that which was not bread; but the Lord hath shaked his hand at your dishonest gain, and hath caused Ezek. 22. 13. his everlasting day to spring upon his children, which he hath appointed to gather from your mouths, that they Ezek. 34. 22. 28. shall no longer be made a prey upon by you; therefore be awakened and consider your state and condition in which you now stand, if you be not wholly given up to make Merchandize of peoples souls through covetousnesse which is Idolatry; for God will now no longer be mock∣ed, 2 Peter. 2. 3. such as you sow, such shall you reap; your Vine∣yards are very unclean, Bryers, Thorns, Weeds, and Heb. 6. 8. Thistles grows up abundantly insteed of tender Vines, you are sleepy and sloathful Vine-dressers, you may blush to look into your Vineyards if you were not wholly given up to hardnesse of heart: The day of the Lord will come upon you as a thief in the night, wherein the Lord will 1 Thess. 5. 2. require his sheep at your hands, and then shall the book be opened wherein is written all your covetous practices, Rev. 20. 12. and ungodly deeds, and out of it shall you be judged ac∣cordingly, and then shall you howle for pain of heart, and weep for griefe of spirit when you consider how mise∣rably you have deceived & deluded many poore souls, and
how you have scattered the Lords flock upon the barren Mountaines, which the Lord will surely require at your Ezek. 34. 10. hands; behold now the time is near accomplished that if you will not hear and lay it to heart, to give glory unto the Lord, that he will spread dung over your faces, and Mal. 2. 2. will curse your blessings, yea many of them he hath cursed already, so that henceforth never fruit shall growe on you more, but you shall suddenly wither away like the Fig-tree that bare leaves, but no fruit, because you have Matt. 21. 19. dispised the Law of God, and hath followed after cove∣tous 2 Pet. 2. 14. practices and are become cursed children who have forsaken the right way, and hath run gredily after the errors of Balaam the son of Bosor, whom Gods hand was heavily stretched out against, and the same hand of the Lord is against you now, who are found treading in the same steps. Awake awake all you high notionists of what kind or sort soever who hath gotten the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles to talk of in your ayrie minds, and thinks to have eternal life in them, but hates the son of God in all Iohn 5. 39. his appearances, and will not come unto him that you might have life; the day is dawned, and the sun is risen with his burning heat and hath scorched all your beauty, so Ier. 17 6. that you are become as a parched Heath in the Drought of Summer, all your glory is the Lord bringing into Isa. 23. 9. contempt, and your Wisdome hath he turned into fool∣ishnesse, because neither you nor it did stand in the fear of his name; your preaching and long praying are but as the cutting off of a Doggs neck, or offering Svvines blood; Isa. 66. 3. the Lord hath no regard to it because your hands is pollu∣ted and daily vvorks iniquity: And as a Cage is full of birds, so is your houses and hearts full of deceit, your a∣bominable Idols have you not yet cast to the moles, and Isa. 2. 20. to the Batts, for the fear of the Lord & for the glory of his majesty, vvho is novv arisen to shake terribly the earth, the Lord vvill not be mocked vvith your Hypocritical pro∣fession, Gall. 6. 7. for the day is come vvherein every one of your
works are made manifest, but this you cannot endure to hear of, who loves darknesse rather then light because Iohn 3. 19. your deeds are evil, therefore be awakened, be awakened now when the everlasting day is come and consider your state, and measure your wayes, by the unalterable rule of righteousnesse, which is the light wherewith you are en∣lightned, 2 Cor. 10. 13. 15. and it will let you see that you never yet knew the mistery of the Crosse of Christ, which to the world doth crucifie all that comes to bear it; but in the world and the vanityes therof are you yet wandering as sheep Gal. 6. 14. without a shepheard, and never yet witnessed a true se∣peration to God with the light of his Son: And now are you stumbling at the stumbling stone that is laid in Zion, Isa. 8. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 8. which is become a rock of offence to you who stumble at the word of faith which is nigh in the heart; your high buildings shall be now laid besolate and not one stone left upon another, that shall not be thrown down, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. Awake awake all you covetous cruel oppressors, who grinde the faces of the poore, and by Cuzening, Chea∣ting Isa. 3. 14. 15. and defrauding, hath set your nests on high, and are become great in the earth, so that you joyn house to house and field to field, till there be no place for the poore in the earth, the day is come upon you that you Isa. 5. 7. 8. shall be called to an account before the dreadful God of Heaven and earth, who hath taken notice of all your wayes and actings, and hath heard the cry of the poore and needy which you have greedily made a prey upon, ac∣cording as you could receive power from the beast whose Image you bear: And therefore go to now ye rich men, weepe and howle for the misery that is coming upon you, for the rust of your silver and gold shall be a witnesse a∣gainst Iames 5. 1. 2. 3. you; the Lord is now bringing down the oppres∣sors, and setting the oppressed free, which hath long cry∣ed unto him; your riches shall not deliver you in the day of Gods fierce vvrath: Therefore novv, incline your ears Pro. i1: 4: Ezek: 1: 6. and 18 30. unto the call of Wisdome, and repent repent vvith speed
and return unto the Lord with all your hearts, and seek him while he may be found, and hearken unto him while he calls upon you, Why will ye dye in your iniquities? Now have you all a day and a time, see that you all prize it, least Psal. 52, 5. you be cut off from the Land of the living, and go down to the pit with the uncircumcised. And now blessed be the everlasting Day for ever, who hath visited us who sate in darkness, and in the shadow of Luk. 1. 78, 79. death, & hath broken forth in an acceptable time unto the sons of men after this long night of Apostacy, wherein darkness hath been called light, and the Way of the Lord hath not been known, nor the true Prophet which Moses Act. 3. 22, 23. wrote of, hath not been heard; but people hath been ever learning, but were never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, which many hath desired to know and re∣ceive, 2 Tim 3: but could not in that state, and by reason of dark∣ness and blindness of mind, have followed such Teachers as have been wholly Enemies to Jesus Christ, and in every thing out of his Doctrine, but yet covered themselves o∣ver with the sheeps clothing, and through good words, and fair speeches, deceived the hearts of the simple, and Rom i6. 18. made them believe that they were the only men that were gifted of God to minister a Word in season to the weary, and to direct them that were gone astray, into the Way of Ezek. 38. 16. God: And so great was the Cloud of darkness over the whole earth, and the covering was drawn so close over the ravening Wolf in them, that he did not at all appear unto the children of men, but they gave large sums of money unto them, and thought by that to know the true way to eternal life; and this kept the ravening Wolf from appear∣ing or breaking forth, so that (as they did imagine) all was well, and at peace, and they cryed peace, peace, unto Ezek. 13. 10. them that put into their mouths, and daubed with untem∣pered Morter; so the Lord overturned them by his mighty power, and then did he appear in a measure of the dispen∣sation of his love unto a people that was called Puritans, and he opened their eyes in a little measure, that they saw
the deceit and unrighteousness that both priest and people lived in; they had a zeal for God and his glory, and a ten∣derness of affection arose in their hearts one to another, to exhort one another to love, and to good Works, and the Seed of the Kingdom of God was sown in them; but it falling by the way-side, the Fowles of the air picked it a-away, so that it came not to take root downward, nor Mar. 4 4. bring forth fruit upward to him that sowed it. So these fell back again, and lost their zeal and tenderness which they had, and got the words of truth in the airy mind, but in the life was one with the World after a little time; and then was the Lord grieved that his Heritage was wholly Jer. 12. 8. left desolate for the Fowls of the Air to tread under their feet, and make a prey upon; and it pittyed him to see his own seed so oppressed, and his Vinyard so wholly laid waste to the Beasts of the field. Isa. 3. 14. And then did he arise for his own Name sake, and open∣ed the eyes of many, and appeared in a large measure into a People that was called Anabaptists, and shewed them in a large measure the Witchcraft of the great Whore, who Rev. 17. 1, 2. had made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Forni∣cation; and then did he lead them from the mouths of the Idol dumb shepherds which had made a prey upon them, and had taken their money for that which they saw was not bread, nor had not in the least satisfied their hungry Isa. 55. 2. souls; even then did God raise his living Witness in them, and shed his eternal love abroad in their hearts, and ga∣thered them together in several quarters of the world, and his Name was witnessed among them, and his Power did appear in them, and a great zeal and tenderness for a while was among them, so that they met with part of the rage of the Devil, and indured it for a time with joy; and while they was near unto the Lord, he was known to be near un∣to them, and gave them the necks of their Enemies to tread upon, and a great sight of the good Land they had, and the Seed of the Kingdom of God was abundantly sown a∣mongst them, but it falling upon the stony ground in them Mar. 4. 5.
when the Sun arose vvith his burning heat, it vvas scorch∣ed, and became unfruitful, so that after a time the povver of God ceased, and vvas not seen amongst them, but coldness and barrenness got up, and pride, and exaltation, and self-conceitedness crept in by little and little, and then they begun to build again those things vvhich they had in a measure destroyed; and he that got the most in his brain-knovvledge, vvas set up to be a Teacher and a Ruler, and so gloryed in the gift more then in the Giver; and this Mi∣nistry became one in nature vvith the Priests, and did not profit the people at all, vvhich may be vvitnessed at this day. And novv are they set dovvn at ease in a dead form of that vvhich the Saints vvitnessed the life of; nay, they have so far departed from the povver of God vvhich the Saints did, & doth vvitness to lead & guide them, that they have lost the very form, and are become one in nature vvith the World, and differ nothing but in vvords, and in outward shews and pretences. The true Proverb is fulfilled. upon them, The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again; and the 2 Pet. 2. 22. Prov. 26. 11. Sow that was washed to her wallowing in he Myre; so that the Lord is weary with their sacrifices, and their solemn Assemblies he cannot away with, because they have cast his righteous Law Isa. 11. to 16. Heb. 10. to 29. behind their backs, and hath trodden under foot the blood of the Covenant, and now hath sitten down in a rest which is pol∣luted, and are become enemies to the Crosse of Christ, there∣fore is the same hand of the Lord that vvas turned against his Enemies before, the same is lifted up against them novv, vvhereby they are torn and rent as an old Garment, and as a tottering VVall that is daubed vvith untempered Mor∣ter. And thus have they rendred unto the Lord evil for all his kindness, and hath turned his grace into lasciviousness, vvhich vvould have led them to salvation if they had been taught vvith it, vvhereby the vvorks of the Devil Tit. 2. 11. 12. vvould have been destroyed in them, vvhich they are so strongly pleading for, and concluding all to be deceived and seduced that shall vvithstand or oppose it; and if any vvill not bovv dovvn to their Image vvhich they have set
up from the Scripture Letter, presently he is judged and censured not vvorthy to have communion vvith, though he have the povver of God for his defence, and be led and guided by the Spirit of the living God, and have fellovv∣ship vvith him, and be brought into his Covenant of light and life. And this is that now which they call their Fundamen∣tals, Baptism of Water, and taking of material Bread and Wine, which there is no command for throughout the Scripture; but Judgement, Mercy, and Faith is omitted, Luk. 11. 49. which is the weighty matters of the Law, and so the Wo that was unto their forefathers is to the same generation still. And thus hath the Lord been mocked with a volun∣tary humility, and a Will-Worship after the traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ the Light of the World, who hath lighted every man that cometh into the World: And so now are they Joh. 1. 9. crying up the Ordinances of God, the Ordinances of God, as the Jews did the Temple, but are as ignorant of Christ Jesus the Substance, as the Jews was that stoned him: Though there was a time that he was known in such things, and in the flesh, yet he that came through it, desi∣red to know him so no more; but these deny all that comes to know him ony otherwise, as the Jews did them that te∣stified against the outward Temple, (which was a time commanded of God) when their Bodies was made the Temples of God, and they came to witness the Substance 1 Cor. 6. 19. of the Figure. Now this is the reason of so much confu∣sion now among several sorts of men and forms, That the Life and Substance of all Types, Shadows, and Figures, is denyed, and only the Husk fed upon; and this hath been the ruine and down-fall of these people that are called Anabaptists. Then in another dispensation of the Lords love did he ap∣pear to a People called Independents, & brought many of them to se the emptiness of all sorms of profession, & they thought only to depend upon the Lord was the safest way;
and there was a love begot in them to God and his Way and truth, and tenderness of spirit one towards another, and they were a little brought low in their own eyes, and they separated themselves in the outward from other men in Worship; but it was self that separated them, which was never yet denyed nor separated from by them, as doth ful∣ly appear at this day in their whole course of life; the Seed of the Kingdom was sown among them, but they receiving Mark 4. 7. it into the thornie ground it was choaked ere it grew up, with the cares of the World, and deceitfulness of riches, and abominable pride, envy, and wrath, as Nathaniel Rob∣binson, one of their great Sect-Masters of the Town and County of Southampton, may bear me witness, if his heart be not totally hardneed, and he be given up to work all manner of wickedness with greediness, and his conscience be seared with a hot Iron. Wofully hath these sort of people betrayed their trust, their latter end will be worse by double then was their be∣ginning; highly are they now exalted upon the Mountains of pride, and deeply are they obliged in the bond of i∣niquity; their Sacrifices are now an abomination to the Lord, who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; they have departed from the counsel of the Lord, & have great∣ly erred into the Way of Cain, as will hereafter plainly Jude 11. appear in Nathaniel Robbinson, and many of his Hearers 2 Tim. 3. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. in the Town of Hampton, who are now become brutish, and without natural affection, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, and not onely so, but hath a great thirst after their blood, without any just cause, as hath ma∣nifestly appeared both in words and actions not long since; all this they cover under a cover of profession, and a feign∣ed humility, which is seen with the children of light to be double hypocrisie. And a covering of a most curious co∣lour Matth. 7. 15, 16. have they put on to hide this ravening Wolf, but now it is too narrow, the ravenous Beast breaks forth in great rage and fury, and musters up all his Forces against the Lambs appearance, who is now come to torment him be∣fore
his time. And now doth he cast out floods of railings, revilings, lyes, slanders, false accusations after the Woman in whom the man-child is moving, and this is because his sacrifice is not accepted: But oh Cain! why art thou wrath? and why is thy countenance fallen? Why doth thou so rage and swell, foame and torment thy self, and envy thy Brother? If thou dost well thou shall be accept∣ed; if not, sin lyeth at thy door. Thou hast forgotten that Gen 4. 5, 6. thou should first be reconciled to thy Brother before thou offer thy gift, and this is the main reason why it is not ac∣cepted at thy hand, which makes thee so envious and wrathful, that even nothing will quench thy thirsty sto∣mack but thy Brothers blood, which daylie appears to all that are not wilfully blind, by thy eager pursuance after it, and threatning them that will not to the utmost answer thy cursed desires in persecuting the innocent. Oh how art thou postng on in the Way of Cain the Murtherer, Jude 11. and treading in the steps of thy Father Balaam! Oh thou Nathaniel Robbinson! Oh how is the right Wayes of the Lord evil spoken of and reviled daylie by thee, and by thy seduced followers, who makes lyes your refuge and mis∣chief your dwelling place, which is hatched in your deceit∣ful Breasts! Wil your high talking of God and Christ cover all this? Or are you so given up to believe a lye as to believe it will? There is an eye opened that sees you, which you see not; and a Judge that weighs your actions, which you know not; but when the Book of every one of your consciences shall be opened, then out of that shall you all be judged, without respect of persons, and receive according to your deeds done in the body. In that day shall not your crying Lord, Lord, and preaching in the Name of Christ in your Synagogues rescue you from that dreadful sentence, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not; for I was an hun∣gry, Matt. 7. 23. Matth. 25. 41, 42, 43, 44. By Name VVilliam Pin∣horn. and ye fed me not; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; a stranger, and ye took me not in, but went with abomina∣ble lyes and false reports to the Magistrates to persecute me as a Wanderer and a Deluder; and when they would
not imprison me, you caused them to do it; and when there was no Witness against me, you came in false Eliz. Horsent said it was a matter of con∣science not to visit her Sister in Prison. Witnesses your selves, whereby to seek my ruine and de∣struction; and when I was in prison, some of you said it was a matter of conscience not to visite me, and said it was just upon me: All this and more have you acted and spoken against me, because you neither knew the Father, nor me; for in as much as you have done this to one of the least Matth. 25. 45, 46. Matth. 18. 6. that believe in me, you have done it to me: And therefore now wo unto you, good had it been for you that a Milstone had been hanged about your necks, and you cast into the midst of the Sea, then to have offended one of them that believe in me. Oh Matth. 23. 37, 38. how often would I have gathered you as a Hen gathereth her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not, but hated, per∣secuted and shamefully intreated my servants and messen∣gers that I sent in tend or love unto you, to warn you, while you had a day and time, to turn unto me from all your abominations: But oh! how have you hated reproof, Prov. 1. 21. Isa. 55. 9. and turned your ear from the cry of Wisdom, and hath chosen your own wayes, which is corrupt, before me, and as far from mine as the Heaven is from the earth! Oh how will you answer this, ye stiff-necked and rebel∣lious people, that have eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not; and hearts, and doth not understand! Will the Lord be mocked with your vain oblations which you bring be∣fore Isa. 1. 13. him day by day, when your hands is full of blood, and your hearts is after your Idols? You have set your Nests on Isa. 30. 1. high, and hath covered your selves with a covering, but not with the Spirit of the Lord, as is daylie apparent to all whose eyes the Lord hath opened; highly are you seated upon the Mountains of pride and exaltation; the Scribes and Phari∣sees did far exceed you in zeal, who made clean the outside, which you are far from; but you say pride is in the heart, which is true enough by your garments; you are bad pat∣terns before them you call Heathens, which can see no∣thing but the outside; yea, many of them outstrips you in life and conversation, and would be ashamed of your pra∣ctise:
You have built you a Tower, whose top you think may reach to Heaven, whereby to get you a Name, and exalt your selves in the sight of men; and a name you have gotten of Lambs and Sheep, but the nature of Dogs and Swine is found ruling in you, as is too too evidently your Rev. 3. 1. actions and fruits: I know you wil call this railing, but it is the Words of sound Doctrine unto you, which you can scarce endure, you have been so long daubed with untem∣pered Morter, and flattered in your iniquity; but now will 2 Tim. 4. 3. the Lord rip off all your false covers, and your folly shall be made manifest unto all men, as theirs was who with∣stood 2 Tim. 3. 8, 9, the truth in former ages. I did think to cover your iniquity from the eyes of the World, but now I see the Lord will not have it so, but your shame and confusion must now be laid open unto all, that others may hear, and fear▪ and take warning, and that you may be left without excuse, and your blood be upon your own heads in the day of the Lords fierce indig∣nation, which shall come upon you as a thief in the night, except you with speed repent, and turn to the Lord with all your hearts, and with all your souls, and put on Sackcloth, and sit down in the dust; for the jealousie of the Lord is kindled against you, and all your prayers are an a∣bomination to him; for you regard iniquity, and envy in your hearts, and works it with your hands: Is now the Weapon of your Warfare become a Magistrates Sword? Wil not your Ministry stand without imprisoning and per∣secuting the innocent? Had ever the Churches of Christ such a VVeapon, as you can read of? VVhat will be the end of these things? Consider betime, if you be not wholly given up to a reprobate mind. In true and tender love to your poor souls I speak, & warn you again, as I have often done, who have most unjustly suffer'd by you, both in false words, and unjust actions, as I shal make appear to publike view: You have cast many false and abominable aspersi¦ons upon us who are by you in scorn called Quakers, and most especially upon me, who am onely known to you by
the Name of Ambrose Rigge; yea many things have you laid to my charge, which I never knew nor acted, for which the Lord wil you judge, which thing you never made good, to this day, nor never can. And this have you possest ignorant people with, That we are Witches and Deluders, and doth deny Christ and the Scriptures; and many other filthy things, which is not fit to be named, but to be thrown into the bottomless pit from whence they came: And this have you possessed the minds of many with, for which the Lord will reward you into your own bosoms; but of all your false Accusations are we clear in the presence of the Lord, for Christ and the Scriptures we own and witness, else we should not see your deceit and hypocrisie, which is cover∣ed in you with the Name of Religion; and if we did not own him in us the hope of glory, we needed not suffer by Col. 1. 26, 27. you and all the World so much reviling and slandering, and be hated with a deadly hatred, as we are daylie by you; but at this we marvel not, for we know it was our Masters portion before of the same generation, as we have a cloud of Witnesses recorded in the Scripture of truth, was writ∣ten for our admonition and learning, as our forefathers were moved of the Holy Ghost, took in hand to set forth in order a declaration of the sufferer, & of the persecutor, that we might have a Witnesse for one, and against the o∣ther, which we prize greatly at this day, seeing that both parts is now to be fulfilled, as your eyes have seen, and our ears have heard. And thus hath the third ground appeared worse then both the former, wherein you are found who are called Independents; for you are weighed in the Ballance of the 1 Sam 2. 3. Sanctuary, and are found wanting; therefore wo unto you if ye do not repent, for the Spirit of the Lord will not al∣waies Gen. 6. 3. strive with you, nor his Messengers will not alwaies be sent to warn you to turn unto him; but the time shall suddenly come upon you, that you shall seek the Word of the Lord from Sea, to Sea and shall not find it, if you still Amos 8▪ 11, 12. go on in hard heartedness and rebellion, and despise the day of your visitation.
And now Nathaniel Robbinson, I shall lay open some of thy fruits to publike view, that all who feare God, and keep his commandments, may be ashamed of thee. And this I shall declare for the simple sake, that they may know thee by thy fruits, according to the words of Christ, Matt. Matt. 7. 15, 16. 7. 20. and that all who loves their souls may no longer be de∣ceived by thee, nor hold thee up, lest they partake with thee of thy plagues. Upon the first day of the Week I who am called of the World by the Name of Ambrose Rigge, was moved of the Lord to come into the Idols-Temple where thou was spea∣king a divination of thy own brain, where I stood peacea∣bly till thou had made an end, as many may witnesse; and then I spoke to thee the words of truth in soberness, but thou fled out at a back-door, as the false hirelings ever did; Joh. 10. 13. and then those that was present in hearing thee, fell upon me like so many Wolves and Lyons, that it was the great love and mercy of the Lord that I saved my blood; and they haled me out of thy Synagogue into the Street, where I was speaking the Words of truth with boldnesse, till one of thy Hearers, by name William Pinhorne, and Nathaniel Knight, one of thy members came, and laid violent hands on me, and haled me violently along the Streets to the Ma∣jors House, where they kept me prisoner till the Major came home, and then accused me falsly to the Major, so they sent me to prison, where I did remain till the second daie, and then was brought before the said Major and Ju∣stices of the Town and Countie of Southampton, where did appear none to lay any thing to my charge worthie of bonds: Then came in Nathaniel Robbinson, as a Judge in his own cause, and told the Magistrates he would prove me a Hireling; and when I put him to prove it, he quoted that place of Scripture in Luk. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. where Christ said unto his Disciples when he sent them forth without bag, or scrip, or two Coats, and commanded them to eat and drink such things as was set before them, for the Labourer is worthie of his hire; but when I put him to prove by the
Scripture where ever Christ commanded his Ministers to go into such a City, and there have a set-place, and a Stee∣ple-house to go into, and have fifty pounds by the Year from the State, which is his practice, as many may witness, such a command was not to be found thorowout the Scrip∣tures: Now let any that are guided by the Spirit of the li∣ving God, judge whether of these are according to the command of Christ, or agreeable to the Scriptures of truth and the practise of the holy men of God. Then when the Magistrates could find no just occasion of evil against me, whereby to suffer anyfurther imprisonment, Nathaniel Robbinson came & told them in my hearing, they had best to bind me to my Good-behavior, when no evil-behavior could justlie be laid to my charge: And then they would have proceeded against me for mis-behavior; but I pleaded my freedom according to their own Law, That without the mouth of two or three Witnesses no∣thing is established or proved, nor cannot legallie be pro∣secuted. So upon that they concluded to send me to pri∣son again, which was done accordinglie. Then on the next daie came Nathaniel Robbinson and another Priest to the Prison-door, and asked me if they might have a little dis∣course with me, to which I answered. Yea: So they went awaie, and said they would come again by and by, which they never did, and so proved themselves to be of their Father the Devil, who was a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: Then I was sent for before the Magistrates again, where was five false Witnesses prepared against me, of which Nathaniel Knight was one; but their te∣stimonie did not agree together, as it was with their forefa∣thers recorded in the Scripture of truth, Mar. 14. 56, to 59. Then the Magistrates being more sober then to prosecute from such false Witnesses, they commanded their absence; then they tendered me the Oath of Abjuration, which I did then, and shall for ever bear testimonie against, both over my self in particular, and over the whole Church of God in general: So finding no just occasion against me
of farther Bonds, they set me free, according to Law, though it was much against the Wills of mine adversa∣ries. Then on the third daie of the seventh Month, 1657. El∣lin Embree went to the Steeple-house in Southampton, cal∣led Roods, and there stayed peaceablie until the Priest had ended both his Sermon and Prayer, as he called it; and when he had quite ended, as she did believe, she spake some few words to the people whereupon two of the Justices of the said Town, presently commanded some Officers to lay hands upon her, which they did, and haled her in a rude manner through the Streets to prison, without any Exa∣mination or Mittimus to the Officer or Keeper of the Pri∣son, to shew the cause of her imprisonment, nor had the Keeper any Warrant for her detainment in prison, where she remained until the Sessions, which began the 17th. of that Month; and in the Evening of that day the Recorder Lisle sent one of the Town-Officers to bring her before the Court; and calling for the Indictment laid against her, it was answered, There was none; whereupon the Recor∣der taxed the Justices for having imprisoned her wrong∣fully, and so word was sent presently back, not to bring her to the Court; but the next day there was a false Indictment framed contrary to the late Act, by which she suffered for the words maliciously, wilfully, or of purpose, (according to the Act) was quite left out of the Indictment, and on∣ly the Word disturbance put in, upon which Indictment the Jury proceeded, and brought her in guilty of disturbance; whereupon the Recorder Lisle gave sentence to lay a Fine of five pounds upon her to be paid at a Months time, or to be sent to the House of Correction for six months, to be set to hard labour, & be corrected according as they should think fit; but the Prisoner replying she would never pay any, they had her body there present, they might do with her what they thought good; so she asking whether she was free, they bid her go home if she would, which she did.
Now the Month being up, the Mayor of the Town made out his Warrant to the Constables and Beedles to come to her house to demand the mony, or to take her Body; her Name being mistaken in the VVarrant, there was nothing done, only the payment of the Fine refused: Then two days after; being the 21. of the eighth month, the Constable & five or six Officers with Swords, came with a second VVarrant from the Mayor to fetch her to Bridewell; but she being in an inner Room in her house, did forbear putting her self in their hands, and so remains, expecting what fur∣ther course they will take against her. Anne Horsent upon the 6th. day of the 7th. Month, was moved of the Lord to go to a Steeplehouse in Hampton, called All-Saints, where Nathaniel Robbinsen spoke that day, where she stood peaceably, and spoke not a word un∣til Robbinson was come down his Pulpit, and out of the Mee∣ting-place, and when he was fled, she spoke some few words to the people, and so went home again. But the next day this Robbinson sent to the Church-VVardens, (as they are called) telling them he had been affronted, and if they did not execute their Office, he would complain against them: [Take notice of that, thou that reads, with a single eye] And he also went to the Mayor of the Town with a false Information against her the said Anne, whereupon the Mayor sent his Officers to apprehend her where she was to visit the said Ellin Embree in prison, and there they al∣so detained her in prison until the Sessiont, full 12. dayes, and was likewise imprisoned without Examination, or any Accusers heard, and was proceeded against in the same manner, and upon the said dayes and VVarrant as the said Ellin Embree, although it did not appear by any proofs in the Court, that she the said Anne had disturbed the said Robbinson in the time of his officiating, nor yet in going to it, or returning from it, as many can witnesse; nor can Robbinson say that he heard any one vvord that she said in the Meeting-place, but was got home, or very near, be∣fore
she spake; yet judgement was given against her at the Sessions, either to pay five pounds, or to be sent to the House of Correction, to be set at hard labour, and be cor∣rected as they should think fit, though it could not truly be brought in that she had broke any Law. Note, That the Justices of the Town (when they were in prison) did give order to the Keeper of the Prison, that none should visite them but their near Relations. Therefore I desire all sober people in this Nation that fears the Lord, to weigh and consider these things, whe∣ther ever such a Ministry as this was ever ordained of God yea or nay, that will not stand without imprisoning and persecuting the innocent for saying not a word, but for standing peaceably among the rest, looking upon him; What do you think is in this mans heart if he could but get the Rulers and Scribes to join with him in cruelty? Would not the Jesuit Priests in Queen Mary's dayes been asha∣med to have acted such things against any that came to speak to them? Oh Nathaniel Robbinson! cannot thou e∣ven blush to hear of this? Is thy heart so hardened that thou glories in that which one day will be thy shame? What will be the end of these things? Consider betime, left he that thou so much strives against, break thee to pie∣ces, and thou be cast out into utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.
THere dyed of late one John Behaute, in the Town and County of Southampton, who was another of the Inde∣pendent Teachers, as this Nathaniel Robbinson aforemen∣tioned, who did upon his death-bed declare, that this Rob∣binson was the cause of his death, to Robbinsons face, but did forgive him, and bid him do so no more: Now if they be so envious one to another, as be the cause of one anothers death, what may any judge they would do with us if they had power given them from above? If this be not Cain's way that Robbinson is in, let all who feares the Lord, judge, Gen. 4. 8. Jude 11.
And now a few words in warning to the Priests Professors, and people of the Town, and County of South∣ampton. VVOE Woe unto you the Inhabitants of Southamp∣ton Priests Professors and People, who hate the light wherewith Christ Jesus the light of the world hath Iohn 3. 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 73, 18. Iohn 2. 8, 9. 1 Iohn 1. 5. lighted you withall; your deeds are evil, and your wayes are crooked, and perverse, even the slippery wayes of darknesse, your building must be thrown down, and not one stone left upon another, & your Image must be dashed to peices which you have set up, (unto which you would Dan. 3. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8. have the true seed to bow) with the little stone cut out of the Mountains without hand; at which you stumble, which is become a rock of offence unto you, who at the word of life stumbles, and yet professeth the letter as your fore-fathers did, but as far if not further from owning Rom. 9. 33. the life as they were, even stoping your ears, at the voice of the true Prophet; and cannot endure sound Doctrine; 2 Tim. 1. 3. 4. Isa. 48. 22. but saith unto the Prophets Prophesy smooth things unto us, and speake unto us peace, though the witnesse of God (the true Prophet in your consciences) saith there is no peace to you, for you live in the lust of the eye, and in Ezek. 10. 49. the lust of the flesh, and in the pride of life, eating and drinking and riseing up to play, even like your Sister So∣dom, whom God overthrew: And doth not thy Prophets in the midst of thee hearken to this, and cry peace peace where the Lord hath not spoken peace, and daube with untempred morter, so that none is able to turn from the Ier. 6. 13, 14, 15. evil of their doings, but all your daubing is accounted as Potters clay, for within are you ful of rottennesse and de∣ceit, Ezek. 13, 10, i1, 12, 13, 14, 15. pride, and ambition, envy and hatred, prisoning
and persecuting the Innocent, which are all fruits of that Matt. 23, 27, 28. Matt, 7. 19, 20. Heb. 6. 8. tree which hath no promise but to be hewn down and cast into the fire; long hath the Lord looked for fruits of you, but nothing is brought forth but Bryers, and Thornes, for your profession and Ministry will not stand, without renting and tearing, pulling and hailing out of your Syna∣gogues, persecuting and drawing the Innocent before your Iudgement seates; false accuseing and backbiteing, 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 lyeing and slandering, these are the fruits that is brought forth a mongst you of which I am an eye and eare witnesse, and this was not declared against by thee Nathaniell Robin∣son, who professes thy selfe to be a teacher of others, but thou thy selfe is not yet taught to deny nor to declare a∣gainst such things, but doth cry out and complain it is not severe enough; Now are you like Priest like people, all are Ier. 23. i1. Hosea 4. 9. prophaine; yea your wickednesse is now found out, and your wayes traced with the eternal light of the Son of God which you hate and scof at, now doth your inside appear, the sheeps covering will no longer hide the ravening Wolfe; but he breaks forth in great rage and fury even Matt. 7. 15, 16, 17. ready to devour the Lambs of Christ, which walks Inno∣cently before you, who are inwardly ravening Wolves as your fruits makes you manifest, by which you are known, Ezek. 34. i0. as Christ Jesus the light of the world hath foretold, which is now seen and fulfilled, glory be unto his eternal name for ever that your good words and fair speeches will no longer hide you, but the children of light sees you to be in the same steps of them, the Prophets Christ and the Apostles was sent to cry against, which use your tongues Matt. 23. Ier, 23. 30, 3i, and say thus saith the Lord, when in the mean while you are persecuting his Servants and slaying his Son, though Matt. 7, 21. you make a large profession of him, and call him Lord and Master, but doth not the things which he commands but the things which his soule loathes. And thou Nathaniell Robinson look upon thy congregati∣on, yea them which thou calls church members, which thou hast sowne unto, and see if there be any thing to be
reaped amongst them but corruption, pride, lust, light∣nesse, wantonnesse, envying, strife and debate, the most vaine fashions and customes, of the world, which is to fade as the flower: And is not thy Vineyard full of this, can thou look upon them and not confesse thou art a shamelesse Vinedresser, that can walk in this Vineyard without blushing? thy plants doth send forth an evil smell into the nostrils of the Lord: Is not thy preaching vaine, and their faith vaine, and thy people yet in their sins, and pleading for them for term of life? but if thou had stood Ier. 23. 22. in the councell of the Lord, and caused his people to have heard his word, then they should have been turned from these abominations, which both thou and they are in, and pleading for, and persecuting such who testifies against them, and dare thou say that thou hast brought them to witnesse the first Principle of religion, or thinkest thou Acts 26. 18. 1 Cor. 4 20. the kingdome of Heaven stands in words, or the way to it is the way of uncleannesse, Pride, Envy &c. And whe∣ther thou and the rest be not in such wayes of darknesse Isa. 35. 8, 9, 10, aforementioned yea or nay; if this be the vvay it is very broade, and many may go in thereat, and yet may profess as much of the Saints vvords as you can or doth, vvhile Matt 7 13. Iohn 8. 44. they themselves are of their father the Devil as the Jevvs vvas, vvhose vvorks they did in persecuting his Servants and stoneing him, and are not you doing the same? let the faithful Prophets of the Lord once speak, and lend your Deut. 18. 15. eares a little unto him vvho vvill not flatter nor lye nor daube vvith untempred morter, for novv hath the Lord raised him according to his promise vvho speaks vvith au∣thority, Iohn 1. 45. Iohn 7. 37. 38. and ministers to the spirit in prison, and all that vvill not harken unto him shall be cut off, the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and it shall be accomplished, and Acts 3. 22. unto him shall Kings bovv, and cast dovvn their Crovvnes, Who vvill rule the Nations vvith a rod of Iron, and dash them to peices as a Potters Vessel, and novv vvoe Isa. 28 1. unto the Crovvne of pride, that must be brought dovvn and laid in the dust: And you that bear it the Lord vvill
scatter in your Imaginations in vvhat form or profession Prov. 1. 5. so ever you bee, though you be gathered together and hand joyn in hand, yet the vvicked shall not go unpunish∣ed; Matt. 3 8, 10. novv this is sad nevves to you, that are found vvith∣out the Camp of the Lord, for it is novv fruits that he is now looking for, and righteousnesse that his soule delights in, and the heart that he requires; therefore hear this ye Prov. 23. 16. professors of what sort soever, who are out of the life and power of God, unto which every soule is to be sub∣ject, Rom. 13. 1. unto this power you are not brought, nor a sub∣jection to it you do not know, but are under the power Ephe. 2. 2. of the Prince of the ayre which rules in you whereby some of you are led into pride, others into enmity, others in∣to abominable lyeing and false accuseing the Innocent without a cause, now I know he who hath led you into these things will not let you confesse it, nor own that Ezek. 23. 45. Dan 7. 2. 1. Cor. 6. 2. i: Cor: 2. 16. which condemns you secretly for it, but will bring Scrip∣ture for his own ends (as he did to Christ) and say I should not judge; but I say the righteous loveth judge∣ment, but the wicked cannot stand in it; and the Saints shall judge the world, and the Spiritual man judgeth all things, and he himselfe is udged of no man, and your actions is to be condemned with the light, and troden upon as dirt in the streets, with them who are in the pow∣er of God? Oh how the seed of God is oppressed amongst you, that even the cry thereof hath entered into the ear of the Lord of Sabbaths, vvho is novv risen to avenge his ovvn cause, and to plead vvith you who are in the flesh, and are not only enemies to the seed of God in your selvs, but your rage abundantly apperrs towards any in whom it doth arise, to rule and guide them in the vvay that is call∣ed holy; your abominations are increased, and your transgressions cannot be numbred, the Lord is weary vvith your sacrifices, they are an abomination unto him; for no sooner have you done that you call your sacrifice, Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. Prov. 15. 8. if there be any in whom the seed of God is brought forth, that are sent of him ro declare against your abominations,
before they can be suffered to speak the words of truth in sobernesse, you like doggs, and swine, Wolves, and Lions, Mat. 23. 34, 35 do fall upon the Lambs of Christ, (who wrongeth no man neither can you lay any thing justly to their charge,) and pulls, and hails them out of your Assemblies even ready to Luk. 19. 3. take their bloud as Cain did, and casts into prison such without any cause at all; are these a Company of sheep, or of doggs, and Swine, yea, or nay? And is not this Cains way Gen. 4. 5. that you are found in, and is your sacrifice more accepted of the Lord then his was? why are you so wroth & envious? they that learn of Christ are meek, when they are smitten smites not again, or doe you ever read that any of them haled out of their Assemblies, or persecuted, or imprison∣ned any? What administration do you live under? Answer in plainness, if you say you are Christians, shew where such actions were acted among Christians; if not, confess it openly, and doe not play the Hypocrite; Read and see if your eies be not wholly blinded by the God of the World whom Yee worship and serve, who was an accuser of the brethren from the beginning, and an envious man; Is not all out of order amongst you, your children wild and rude in the evil communication which corrupts the good man∣ners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. brought up out of the fear of God, like wilde Colts, mocking, scoffing, stoneing, deriding, and scorning Ephes. 6. 4. the Servants of the Lord in your Streets, so that those that neither doth, nor speaketh any thing to you that is evil, are daily by you abused both by words and actions as they pass peaceably along the Streets; are not you that are Pa∣rents Titus 2. 2, 3. or Masters to such ashamed of such things (or doe you not delight in such things,) your selves, and incourage your children and servants in it, What doe you think will be the end of these things, doe you not think the Lord scornes the scornfull, or what is it your malice is so much against? And again, is not your young men and maids uncivill, blaspheming the name of the Lord, daily following youth∣ful Titus 2. 4. 5, 6. Psal. 119. 9. pleasures, living wantonly upon the earth, scoffing,
and scorning them that cannot partake with them in their filthy pleasures, which will be bitter in the end, and are they not inventing how to make themselves glorious in the sight of the World, not remembring their Creator in the Eccl. 12. 1. daies of their youth, but following after pride and vanity which corrupts youth, and leads out of the Moderation, which they who fear the Lord are in, and are adorned with a meek and quiet spirit, which is of great price in the sight of God. And doth not your Women array themselves in costly apparell, in gold and pearle, contrary to the Apo∣stles 1 Tim. 2. 9. 10. 1 Pet: 3. 2, 3, 4. command, and doe not they goe in hoods, and vailes, scarfes, and rings, and changable Suits of Apparell, and walking with stretched out necks, and wanton eies, making Isa: 3. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. a mincing as they goe, and a tinkling with their feet; and their broadered hair; that they can scarce tell how to goe they are so proud, and puft up in the lust of the Flesh, even such (if not worse) as the Lord sent his plagues, and judg∣ments upon. Read Isa. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Therefore hear this all you that are found in this path, the Lord will take away your bravery, and instead thereof he will cover you with contempt, and he will bring down the haughtiness of man and woman, and will lay your ho∣nour Isa: 2. 11, 12, 13, 17. Isa: 10. 33. in the dust; and scatter you as chaff is scattered with the Wind, because you have cast his righteous Law behind your backs, and hath walked despightfully against the Spi∣rit of Grace; Who hath been warned like unto you? hath not the Lord sent his Servants earlie and late to forewarn You of the Judgement that he hath intended against You because of Your manie transgressions; whereby You daily provoke him to anger; even to sweep You all awaie with the besome of destruction? And have not You executed Your cruelty upon his mes∣sengers in mocking, scoffing, spitting upon, hailing to pri∣son Math: 23. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. them that have been sent in tender love unto your Souls, to call You to Repentance, and to seek the Lord while he may be found: but You may say, You doe not this
to the servants of Christ, but to Vagabonds and Wander∣ers, Deluders, and Deceivers, and the Ringleaders of the Sect of the Quakers, (as You in scorn calls them) which is every where spoken against, and hailed out of the Syna∣gogues, and persecuted, and cast into prison, but all this while cannot see Your selves as blind as Your Forefathers the Persecutors was, and as ignorant of God, and his works as Cain the Vagabond was, vvho vvas in Envie as you are, though he builded the first Cittie to make bimself an habi∣tation, Gen. . 12. God called him a Vagabond, Gen. 4. 12. but he did not call his Son a Vagabond, vvho had not vvhereon to lay his head, nor his Son did not call them vvhich vvent a∣bout in Sheep skins, and goat skins, and had no certain Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 40. dvvelling place, he did not call such Vagabonds, vvho had a habitation vvhere neither Cain nor any of his stock hath, but you are the Vagabonds rightly named vvho are in envie and vvrath, vvho hath great habitations in the earth as he had, but are driven out from the presence of the Lord into pride and highmindedness, and into the Earth, and its pleasure, and treasure, laying up treasure there, but are ignorant of the true treasure vvhich they have in ear∣then 2 Cor. 4. 7. vessels vvhich vvander up and dovvn, and are made a prey upon by you, vvho are in Cains vvay, and in God hath not an habitation, but are vvandering starres, vvan∣dering Isa: 59. 15. up and dovvn in the Element of your imaginations, out of one fashion and vanitie of the World into another; and here are you scattered upon the mountains of Pride and high mindedness, in the clouds of darkness, and stops your eares at the true Shepheards voice, vvho would gather you off from the barren mountains into the lovv vallies, to feed among his Lambs, and to drink of the fresh foun∣tain of living Water, but this You loath, and vvill not hear of, but loves to vvallovv vvith the Svvine in the filth, and mire, therefore vvill Your condemnation be just, and the Lord vvill be clear of Your blood. Again, is not the harmless and innocent children of the Lord vvhom he hath placed his Name in, and hath set as Phill. 2. i5.
Witnesses against you, as he did Lot in Sodom; whom you have nothing justly to lay to their charge, are not such by 1 Joh 3. . you abused as Lot was, scoffed and scorned at, stoned in the Streets and spitted upon, who cannot goe with you in∣to the same excess of riot, doe you think the Lord doth 1 Pet: 4. 4. not take notice of this? Yea, surely one day ye shall know that it had been better for you that a milstone had been hanged about your necks, and you cast into the midst of John 15. 19. the sea, then to offend one of the least of his, who is the good Shepherd, but because Judgement is not executed up∣on Math: 18. 6. Eccl: 8. 11. you speedily, therefore are your hearts bent in you to doe wickedly; but this know, that there is a Witness in eve∣ry one of your consciences, that takes notice of all your waies and actings; therefore once more I warn you from the Lord to repent and turn unto the Lord, and put off your bravery of your tinkling ornaments, and put on sackcloth, and sit down in the dust, if so be you may be hid in the day of the fierce indignation of the Lord, and cease to doe evil, and learn to doe well, lest the overflowing scourge of the Lord sweep you all away, for his sword is Isa. i. 16, 17. drawn, and his bow bent, and his arrowes are made very sharp, and will fall grievously upon the head of the wicked Amos 5. 14, 15, 16. and how can you escape when he appears, who will plead with you by his Sword, and by Fire, and will render to every man according to his works, without Math. 16. 27. respect of persons, and then shall you all know that you had warning in your life time, by them which you hated and persecuted; scoffed and scorned; so while you have time prize it, and sleight not the day of your Visitation, nor the mercie of the Lord to your Souls, least you be shut out among the Unbe∣lievers into utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, Math. 8. 12. and gnashing of teeth for ever.
I charge you as you will answer it to the Lord, search these Scriptures out, which are quoted, and read them in the fear of God; and try your teachers, and your fruits, whether they be according to them which spoke forth Scriptures, Yea, or Nay, for every tree is known by his fruits, and so are the false prophets from the true, Matth. 7, 20. Written by me whom you greatly hate, because I am sent to bear testi∣mony against your abominations, and by you am I called a Quaker, but tho∣row the tender mercy of the Lord, am I made partaker of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and onely known to the world by the name of Ambrose Rigge.
ANd now Oh ye Rulers of the earth, the word of the Lord is to you; who hath gotten the Seat of Moses the Servant of the Lord; you who are called Judges, Ju∣stices, or Head Officers of what kind or sort soever; And doth pretend that you are Gods Ministers to lay the sword upon the transgressors, and to be a praise unto them that doth well, according as the Lord hath appointed his Mini∣sters to be, now if you profess the Scriptures to be your rule and the Christian Magistrates to be your example, which is recorded in the Scriptures; Let us now reason together in meekness, and trie your fruits whether they be according to the Magistrates in the time of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, Yea or Nay? I speak of them who were Gods Ministers indeed, and did not bear their Sword in vain, but was a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that did well, according as God had ordained them. First Consider, are you such as Moses chused in his daies to be Rulers over the people, even men fearing God and men of truth, hating Covetousness, as you may read, Exod, 18. the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Again, are you such as God commanded his Ministers to be in the daies of Mose, who commanded them to doe no unrighteousness in Judgment, nor to respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty, as you may read, Levi. 19. 15. Again, are you such as Moses charged his to be, who was to judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the Stranger that was with him; and were nor to re∣spect persons in Judgement, but to hear the small as well as the great, as you may see, Deut. 1. 16, 17. Deut. 16. 18, 19. Again, are you such as Jehoshaphat the King set over the
people, who doth not judge for man but for the Lord, and is the fear of God upon you, with whom there is no re∣spect of persons or taking of gifts, as you may read 2 Chro. 19. 4. 5, 6, 7. Prov. 24. 23. 2 Sam 14. 14. Now let but the witness of God in you all speak, and it will plainly tell you whether you, and your Judgment be accor∣ding to them and theirs, yea, or nay. And whatsoever cause came before them between blood and blood, and between Law and Commandement, thus were they to doe in the fear of God faithfully, and with a perfect heart, they were even to warn them not to trespass against the Lord, least wrath came upon them, 2 Chron. 19. 9, 10. Is this so among you oh ye Rulers of England of what degree soever, would not you even cause them to trespass against the Lord that dare not, in persecuting and imprisoning them that dare not break his commands? Again, are you such as doth execute the Judgment of the fa∣therless, and widdows, and loveth the Stranger in giving him food and raiment, as you may read, Deut. 10. 17, 18, 19. or are you not such as daily seeks to ensnare and perse∣cute Strangers under the name of wanderers, and instead of giving of them food and raiment (according to the command of God,) doth cast them into prison, and whip, stock, and stone them, yea, or nay? as you have done many of the servants of the living God within this few years, who by faith hath (according to the command of God,) left their countrie, and fathers house, and are be∣come Strangers and pilgrims in the earth, having in it no certain dwelling place, as it was with the holy men of God in former ages: as you may see, Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. 1 Peter 2. 21. Again, are you such as David was, whom the God of Is∣rael set to rule over the people, being a just man, and ruling in the fear of God 2 Sam. 23. 3.
Again; are you such as God commanded the Princes of Israel to be, who said let it suffice you, O ye Princes of Is∣rael, remove violence, and spoile and execute Judgement, and Justice, and take away your exactions from my people, as you may read, Exek. 45. 9. or are not you such as use violence to them that cannot bend to your pride and lust, and send out your Warrants to spoil the goods of the in∣nocent who cannot for conscience sake uphold that which they know and see the hand of the Lord is turned against? here you are found not to be such as removs violence & spoil, but are the defenders & warrants of such who by violence & spoil, doth daily oppress the poor, fatherless, and widows: And as for taking away your exactions from the people of God, that you are far enough from, for you casts them in∣to prison, and then adds affliction to their bonds, in spoil∣ing their goods; and binds heavie burthens upon them which are grievous to be born, which you your selves will not touch with one of your fingers; now whether this be not as far contrary to them in former ages as light is from darkness let any that fears the Lord judge. Furthermore, are you such as was in the daies of the A∣postles whom he commanded the children of God to be subject unto; who stood in the power of God, and was a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that did well, and did not bear their swords in vain, but was ministers of God to execute wrath upon them that did evil; unto such they was to be subject not onely for wrath, but also for Conscience sake, as you may read, Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Again, search and trie whether you and your ordinances be such as the Apostle Pete commanded the Saints to sub∣mit unto for the Lords sake, whether it was to the King as Supream, or unto Governors as unto them that was sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that doe well, as you may read, 1 Peter 2. 13, 14. (marke) they was to submit to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, which was for the punishment of evil doers, But he did not command them to submit to such ordinances of men as was for the punishment of such as obeyed the command of God; now let the witnesse of God in you all, search you, and see whether you be such Judges, Justices and Rulers as is aforementioned, yea or nay? who was men fearing God, and did not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mightie, and was not to take gifts; Now if you be such, he that is not subject to you resisteth the ordinance of God. But if you be found in the steps of them who were oppressors of Gods people, that when your pride is not bowed unto, doth in your rage and furie persecute, and cast into prison the innocent chil∣dren of the Lord, contrarie both to the law of God, and man; I say they that resists this power, doth not resist the ordinance of God, for such a power was never ordained of God, but set up in the corrupt Wills of men; therefore they that comes to be turned from darknesse to the light, and from the power of Satan unto the power of God, (which is the higher power which every soul is to be subject unto) doth rather chuse to suffer by that power then to be subject unto ill, as you may read Dan. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Dan. 6. 14, 15, 16, Acts 16. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. And now we shall come to search into the actions, and fruites of the Heathenish Kings and Rulers recorded in the Scripture of truth, who were persecuters of the people of God, and weigh their actions with yours, who are called Christian Magistrates in this Nation of England, and see whether doth over-ballance.
So these are left as Queries to be an∣swered by any of you. 1. VVHether Pharoah King of Aegypt, who oppres∣sed the children of God, might not have pleaded, as well as you, That they were to be subject to his command, and bow down to his power, yea or nay? who said, Come let us deal wisely with them, lest they multi∣ply, and grow stronger then we, that when there fall out any war, they become our enemies, and fight against us; and he used cruel rigor unto them, and laid great burthens upon them, as you may read Exod. the first chap. Now whether or no is not this your Wisdom now, To use all your power and strength to oppress the people of God now by cruel bon∣dage and rigor, and when your power is not strong e∣nough, doth join together, and take counsel to make cru∣el Laws against them, whereby to bring them into bon∣dage, and make them serve you as Bond-slaves, which you cannot read that Pharoah did? So whether your cruelty doth not exceed his, yea or nay, let that in all your consci∣ences judge. 2. Whether this power that Pharoah ruled in, was the power of God, yea or nay? If yea, Why did the Lord with an high hand and an outstretched arm, deliver his children from him and his power, and overthrow him, and his Chariots and Horsemen, in the midst of the Sea? as you may read Exod. 14. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. If nay, Whe∣ther your power be not the same now, in oppressing the innocent children of God now, whom he hath appointed to offer a sacrifice to him in righteousness? And whether ever any that stood in the power of God, and was guided by the Spirit of God, was ever persecutors, yea or nay?
3. Where did ever Pharoah King of Aegypt fine or im∣prison any of the people of the Lord for such a small thing as not for putting off their Hats, as many of you have done? Or whether he did oppress the people of God so many waies as you have done within these late Years, yea or nay? 4. Where did ever Moses▪ who was a true and faithful Judge over all Israel, fine or imprison any that came be∣fore him for not putting off their Hats? Shew one exam∣ple either among the Christian Magistrates throughout the Scriptures, or among the Heathenish Rulers in former ages and if you cannot find one example among either of them, then confess your selves to be grown higher in pride and ambition then the persecutors in former ages. 5 VVhether there be anie transgression where there is no Law? If you say Yea; shew how, or wherein; If Nay, then whether do not you persecute and imprison them that are no transgressors for not putting off their Hats, when there is neither Law of God, nor man that com∣mands it. 6. VVhere did Balaak King of the Moabites, whose enmitie was against the people of God, whom God had delivered from under the hand of Pharoah, as you may read Numb. 22. 4, 5, 6. yet shew where he persecuted or imprisoned so many of them as you have done of the chil∣dren of the Lord, who are in derision called Quakers, in the Nation of England, without any justcause? and whe∣ther the power was not in him to do it, aswell as you, yea or nay. 7. VVhether Haman (who was full of wrath when Mordecai could not bow unto him as others did) was in the power of God, or in the pride of his heart, who made a Gallows to hang Mordecai on, because he crossed his lust? as you may read Esth. 5. Now whether you who are full of
rage and fury when the people of God cannot bow down to your pride and lust, be not in the same steps, yea or nay? Therefore consider what was the end of Haman, read Esth. 7. 9, 10. 8. VVhether Nebuchadnezzar (who was a heathenish King) stood in the power of God, when he commanded to bind he three children of God, and cast them into the fiery Fornace because they could not bow to his will, as you may read Dan. 3. the whole chapter? Now you that say all power is of God, and therefore ought to be obey∣ed, whether did Shadrak, Meshek, and Abednego well in resisting this power, and choosing rather to suffer under it, then obey it, yea or nay? as you may see Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. So you who commands the people of God to bow un∣to that which in conscience to the Lord they cannot, are not you full of rage and fury, and commands them to be cast into prison without Bail or Mainprise, and makes their affliction seven-fold worse then it used to be to others who were offenders? So what this Power and command differs from Nebuchadnezzars, let that in all your consciences judge, 9. VVhether Darius the King stood in the power of God when he commanded Daniel to be cast into the Den of Lyons for praying to the true God? as you may read Dan. 6. 16. If you say Yea; VVhether did Daniel well, yea or nay, in not regarding the King, nor the Decree that he had signed? Dan. 6. 13. If Nay; VVhether you stand not in the same power now, who casts into Dens and Holes the children of the Lord, whose prayers he hears, because they cannot bow down to any but to the com∣mand of God, yea or nay? 10. VVhether Herod who imprisoned Peter the servant
of God, was in the power of God, yea or nay? as you may read Act. 12. 3. 4. If you say Yea, then why did God send his Angel, and deliver Peter from him, and smite He∣rod that he was eaten with VVorms? as you may read A. 12. 7, 8, & 23. If you say Nay, Then all power is not of God by your own confession, but the Devil keeps many under his power, to act his will upon the children and ser∣vants of God. 11. VVhether King Agrippa, or Festus, or Foelix, who had as much power to execute their wills upon the servants of God as you have now, yet shew wherein they acted half so much rigor upon the servants of Christ, as many of you have acted? Therefore now consider your state, and weigh your actions and fruits; and in this your day I warn you all, high and low, to mind the things that belongs to your peace before they be hid from your eyes, and you be shut up in utter darkness; for the Spirit of the Lord will not alwaies strive vvith you as it hath done. Therefore be wise now ye Kings, and be instructed ye Judges and Rulers of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and you perish from the way; for if his VVrath be kindled a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him: And cease persecuting the inocent, vvho neither vvrongeth you, nor any man; and consider the end of the persecutors in for∣mer ages, Pharoah the oppressor of Gods people vvas drovvned in the depth of the Sea, as you may see Exod. 14. 27, 28. Haman vvas hanged on the Gallovvs that he pre∣pared for Mordecai, read Esth. 7 9, 10. Nebuchadnezzar his Kingdom vvas rent from him, and his dvvelling vvas vvith the Beasts of the field, and did eat grasse as the Ox∣en: Read Dan. 4. 32, 33. Darius was made to repent, and confess to the truth, That it vvas the true God that Daniel served, vvhom he persecu∣ted, as you may read Dan. 6. 26, 27.
Herod vvas eaten vvith VVorms vvho prisoned and persecuted the servants of God as you may read, Acts 12. 23. These things I vvrite unto you that you may see the just judgements of the Lord upon the persecutors of his in former ages; not that I desire in the least such things to come upon you, but that vvhile you have time, to prise it, and return to the Lord, if so be you may be hid in the day of his fierce vvrath. So thus far am I clear of all your blood, vvho am knovvn in England by the Name of Ambrose Rigge. FINIS.
