R1422 E145_8 99860143 156639
NEWES FROM FRANCE. BEING A True Copy of a Letter sent from Mounsieur Du Plesis Cardinall Richlieu, Cardinall of France, to the Queen, concerning many Matters of great Note, and high Consequence. Faithfully translated out of French into English, by Richard Jackson. TOGETHER WITH HIS MAJESTIES SECOND Message to the Parliament, concerning Sir Iohn Hothams Refusall to give his Majestie Entrance into his Town of Hull. April 28. MDCXLII. London, Printed for John Tompson, 1642.
THE True Copy of a Letter, sent from John Du Plosis, Cardinall Richleie, Cardinall of France. Most illustrious Princesse, THe News of your absence from England, and your arrivall in Hol∣land, did cause most wonderfull astonishment in your Royall Brothers Breast, and did beget a passion correspon∣dent to the Excellency of his Affection and Person. We do conceive the cause to be the deniall of your Liberties of Religion; wherin the greatest part of that discon∣tent must of necessity redound unto our Royall Musters Dishonour.
The Conditions which were promi∣sed when you were first thought worthy to be joyned to Englands Monarch, are violated, and the most weighty priviledg which then was entreated of, and allow∣ed, is now abridged you, and denyed you, His propriety of Nature cannot be ex∣tinguisht by the Remote distance of your Royall Person; Neither will He wink at your wrongs, wherin himself must, and will stain a particular share. Your Excellency may still believe, and shall find, that although we have lost the splendor and presence of your Per∣son; you have not lost the faith and truth of your Servants, whose Lives and Fortunes, shall alwais be prepared in an Honourable Cause to serve your High∣nesse. The Cause of your remaining now in Holland may need no other demonstra∣tion unto us, then what the Information of the Occurrences of the Affairs in Eng∣land doth instruct us withall; by which we can apprehend the great affronts and
injuries offered unto your Excellent Ma∣jesty, in the abridgment of your Liebrty of Conscience, and the tequestration of those Persons from your Presence: in whose Loyalty you were pleased to re∣ceive some satisfaction and content. I beseech you, let not your Grace be by this sudden storm any way discou∣raged, but shine with your Native glory in despight of your Enemies prohibition, which must not last long, but like a thick Cloud will be blown over and dissolved. Your Glorious Constancie to your Faith, and exemplarie patience in your sufferings, will be both remembred and revenged. The same Almighty God, by whose providence you were born, and preserved unto this height of Dignitie, will also according to the merit of your Faith, preserve you therin, and reward you a∣bundant devotion, and constancie. They deserve not the victorious Crown, who desist in the heat of the battle, and whose
timorous spirits aim at a victorie with∣out opposition. But I hope that rather pleasure and desire of seeing those parts, rather drew abroad, then any conceit of discontent, vnto your Royall Person, for it cannot be believed, that His Majestie Your Royall Englands King, would per∣mit or conjure at the least Dishonour which should be imagined to disquiet your sacred peace. I beseech your Excellencie to pardon, if in devotion of my engaged service I have slipt forth any unbeseeming Lan∣guage, in Clemencie vouchsafe to look up∣on my Errors, and Infirmities, if at this time any have rudely pressed into Your Graces privacie, and wink at them as the dutifull mistakes of Your Highnesse most faithfull Servant, Joh. Richley. Paris, April 1642.
His Maiesties second Message to the Par∣liament, concerning Sir Iohn Hothams Refusall to give his Majesty Entrance into his Towne of Hull. WEE are so much concerned in the undutifull affront (an indignitie all our good Subjects must disdaine in our behalfe) Wee received from Sir Iohn Hotham at Hull, that wee are impatient till we receive Justice from you; and are compel∣led to call againe for an Answer, being confident (however you would be so carefull, (though with∣out Our consent) to put a Garrison into that Our Towne, to secure it and Our Magazine against any attempt of the Papists) that you never intended to dispose and maintaine it against Vs your Soveraign: Therefore we require you forthwith (for the busi∣nesse will admit no delay) That you take some speedy course, that our said Towne and Magazine be immediately delivered up unto Vs, and that such severe exemplary proceedings be against those per∣sons (who have offered Vs this unsupportable af∣front and injury) as by the Law is provided: And till this be done, Wee shall intend no businesse whatsoever (other then the businesse of Ireland)
For if wee are brought into a Condition so much worse then any of our Subjects, that whilst you all enjoy your Priviledges, and may not have your Possessions disturbed, or your Titles questioned, VVee onely may bee spoiled, throwne out of our Townes, and our Goods taken from us; 'tis time to examine how VVe have lost those Priviledges, and to try all possible wayes, by the helpe of God, the Law of the Land, and the affection of Our good Subjects, to recover them, and vindicate our selfe from those Injuris. And if we shall miscarry here∣in, We shall be the first Prince of this Kingdome that hath done so; having no other end, but to de∣ The true Protestant Profession, The Law of the Land and The Liberty of the Subiect: And Ood so deale with Vs, as we continue in those Resolutions. FINIS.
