S1202A E432_20 R206154 99865331 161534
A DECLARATION FROM The Lords and Commons assembled at Edinburgh, To the Right Honourable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councell of the City of ondon; concer∣ning the Report of the Commissioners touch∣ing the said City and Army. Agreed upon by the Generall Assembly of the Kingdm of Scotland, Signed, CRAWFORD and LINDSAY, President of Parliament. Together with their Protestation, to defend and maintain the Kings Majesties Royall Person, Honour, and Estae, according to the Nationall League and Covenant. Also, a Letter from the Generall Assembly of he Kirk of Scotland, touching the Kings Majesty, and the Parliament of England. Sent by the Lord MAITLAND. SVbscibed in Nme and by Command of the Commission of the Generall Assembly, by Robert Douglasse, Moderator. . Johnstn, Cler blazon of the City of London, consisting of a shield bearing the cross of St. George (patron saint of England) with a sword (emblem of the martyrdom of St. Paul, patron saint of London) in the first quarter of the shield march iij London, Printed for R. W. 1648. 1647
A Declaration from the Generall Assembly of the King∣dome of Scotland, to the Right Honourable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councell of the City of London. Right Honourable, YOur severall addresses to the Honourable Houses of Parliament, and the relation of your Commis∣sioners, have given us some knowledge of your af∣fection, and true zeal for the Reformation of Re∣ligion, and Uniformity of Church-Government, as hath much refreshed us in our greatest difficulties, and doth far exceed our acknowledgments. Your constant care of advancing and furnishing very great sums of money to the Army, who stood for defence of Religion, and the just publike Liqerty of the Subjects in all the three Kingdoms, hath caused an evident demonstra∣tion how much you prefer the good of the Publike to your private Interest.
And likewise your speciall regard, in providing all other necessary proision, in the times of their most ugent ne∣cessities, hath so greatly endeared unto us the Brotherly af∣fection of that famous City, as will not only be a reall tye of Amity for the present, but will likewise lay a firme foundation of reciprocall kindnesse, and inviolable riend∣ship for all succeeding Ages. And as the many reall proofs of your affection and fide∣lity, in doing and suffering for the cause of God, gives unto Us full perswasions and confidence of your constancy for promoting thereof, till (by Gods blassing upon the joynt endeavours of both Nations) Truth with a just Peace (which is the highest of our Desires) be setled in all the Kingdoms. So do we conceive it suitable to your deserts, and agree∣able to the gratitude of this Kingdom, to returne you most hearty thanks, and to assure you, that all our Actions shall witnesse the cander and sincerity of our intentions, and most earnest desires to embrace and improve all opportunities, which may conduce to the prosperity of your City, and te∣stifie the Brotherly affection of Your most loving and faithfull friends, Crawford and Lindsay, President of Parliament. For the Right Honourable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Councell of the City of London.
The Protestation of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, now assembled at Edenburgh, touching the Kings Ma∣jesty, and the Kingdome of England. WHereas the Honour, Greatnesse, and Happinesse, of the Kings Royal Majesty, and the welfare of the Subject, dependeth on the purity of Religion, the Laws, Li∣berties and peace thereof, which ought to be sought after by all good Christians, loyal Patriots, and true Subjects, and to be furthered and maintained by them, against all such, as shall by any meanes endeavour to shake or subvert the same. Therefore we under-scribers, and every one of us, doe in the presence of Almighty God, promise and vow, that in this present Parliament, we shal faithfully and freely speak answer and expresse our selves upon all and every thing which shal be propounded, so far as we think in or on∣science may conduce to the glory of God, the good and peace of the Kirk, and State of this Kingdome, and employ our best endeavours to promote the same, and shall in no way advise, voice, nor consent to any thing to our best knowledge, we think not most expedient and conduceable thereunto. As also, that we shall defend and maintaine with our lives, powers, and estate, his Majesties Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, as is expressed in our National Covenant.
As also, that wee shall endeavour to preserve and defend His Majesties Royal Person, the power and priviled∣ges of Parliament, and the Laws and Liberties of the Sub∣ject, and by all good wayes and meanes oppose and endea∣vour to bring to exact tryal all such, as either by plots or conspiracies have done, or shal doe any thing to the preju∣dice of the purity of Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdom. And further, that we shal in all just and ho∣nourable wayes endeavour to preserve union and peace be∣twixt the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland, and neither for hope, fear, nor other respect shal relinquish this vow and promise. The true Copy of the Declaration sent from the Generall Assem∣bly of the Kirk of Scotland, to the Assembly of Divines assembled at Westminster. Right Reverend and beloved in the Lord Iesus, YOu may perceive, that your last Letter which came so seasonably into our hands, was not onely acceptable unto us, but hath also encouraged us to renew, both to the Kings Majesty, and his great Councel, the desires of the Commissioners of this Kingdom, for unity in Religion in the four particulars remembred by you. We cannot be ignorant, but the opposition from Sathan, and worldly men in Kirk, will still be vehement, as it hath beene already. But we are confident, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that
the prayers and endeavours of the godly in both Kingdoms will bring the work to a wished and blessed issue. This whole National Kirk is so much concerned in that Reformation and Unity of Religion in both Kingdoms, that without it, we cannot hope for any long time to enjoy our purity and peace, which hath cost us so deer, and is now our chiefest comfort and greatest treasure; which one cause, beside the honour of God, and the happinesse of the people of God in that Kingdom) more desired of us then our lives, is more then sufficient to move us to contribute all that is in our power for bringing it to passe. And since we have with so great liberty made our de∣sires and hopes known both to King and Parliament, it is a duty incumbent both to you and Us, who make menion of the Lord, and are Watchmen upon the Wals of Jerusalem, never more to keep silence, nor to hold your peace day nor night, till the righteousnesse of Zion go forth as brightnesse and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burneth And if it shall please the Lord to move the hearts of King and Parliament to hearken unto the motion (for which end we have resolved to keep a Solemn Fast and Humilia∣tion in all the Kirkes of this Kingdome, the meane by which we have prevailed in times past) we wish that the Worke may be begun with speed, and prosecuted with great dili∣gence, by the joynt labours of Divines in both Kingdomes, who may prepare the same for the view and examination of a more frequent and Ecclesiasticke meeting of the best affected to Reformation there, and of the Commissioners of the General Assembly here, that in the end it may have the approbation of the General Assembly here, and of all the
Kirks there, in the best way that may be, we wish and hope at last in a National Assembly. Our Commissioners at Edenburgh shal in our name e∣ceive and return answers for promoting so great a Work, which we with our heart and soule recommend to the bles∣sing of God, and continue, Your loving Brethren, and Fellow-Labourers The Commissioners of the Generall As∣sembly; subscribing by our Moderator, and Clerk. Vera Copia, Robert Douglasse, Moderator. A. Johnston, Cler. This Letter was presented to the Assembly of Divines by the Right Honourable, the Lord Maitland. Imprimatur, G. M. FINIS.
