S1955 R230005 99895769 153331
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE A PROCLAMATION, Offering a Reward to such as shall discover and apprehend any of these persons guilty of a late horrid villany and assasination made upon the Tovvn Major of Edinburgh, and others. CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To our Lovits,  Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our She∣riffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting; For∣asmuch as notwithstanding of Our tenderness and clemency to all Our Subjects, which hath extended even to those who have not cared to conform themselves to Our Laws, yet severals pretending to be of the Protestant profession, have not only disgraced, and endeavoured to ruine the true reformed Religion, esta∣blish'd in this Our Kingdom, and overturn'd the Principles of all Society and Go∣vernment by a bloody and distracted false Zeal, which hath prompted them to open Rebellion, to the Printing of Jesuitical murthering Tenents, and the de∣forcing and invading such as are cloathed with Our Authority: but also have proceeded to such extravagant and inhumane practices, as tend to the destruction of Mankind it self. Amongst many instances whereof, some villanous murther∣ers, did lately lay a design to kill, and assasinat the Town Major of Edinburgh; for whom they having sent, upon pretext to disipat a Conventicle, they did discharge many Shots at him, and other Soldiers who assisted him, and thereafter wounded him and them mortally in several places of their bodies, threatning to kill him if he would not swear never to put Our Laws in execution: Which affront being done pub∣lickly to Our Authority, in the Capital City of Our Kingdom, the very day of the meeting of Our Council, and being a practice laid down to terrifie all such as serve Us, and to involve all in a confusion, which they most ear∣nestly wish. Therefore We, with advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby invite all such as can make any discovery of that designed horrid villany and assasination; and assure all such as can make any discovery, even such as have had accession thereto, of Our full Indemnity, and of the sum of one thousand merks to him who shall be the disco∣verer of any in accession thereto, so as they may be apprehended, but especially of Mr. John Kae, son to the de∣ceast Mr. Adam Kae, late Minister at Borg, (who is proved to have been the ringleader of these miscreants, and who was formerly apprehended in the like Fanatick Tumult, and outragiously cryed to stob the Town Major) as also  Turnbul, Tennent to Broomhall, and  Turnbuls, his two Sons, Michael Cameron, Son to Allen Cameron, and  Crawfoord, Sister to Captain James Crawfoord who lodged these Assasinats, and is fled with them. Our Will is herefore, and We charge you straitly, that incontinent thir Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mer∣cat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat in Our Name and Authority, make publication of the Premisses. And ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh,  the 12. day of March, 1679, And of Our Reign the threttieth one Year. Per actum dominorum Secreti Concilij, Tho. Hay, Cls. St. Clij. GOD save the KING. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1679
