s5530 e54_19 99859597 111689
A FULL RELATION Of the late VICTORY OBTAINED (Through GODS Providence) By the Forces under the command of Generall Lesley, the Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of Manchester; Being about Twenty seven thousand Horse and Foot. Against His Majesties Forces under the command of Prince RUPERT and the Earl of NEWCASTLE, Being much about the same number. Fought on MARSTAM-MOOR, within 5. miles of YORK, on the Second of July, 1644. With a Relation of Prince Ruperts march towards Lancashire, and of the Forces sent in pursuit after him; as also of the E of Newcastle and Gen: Kings taking Ship for Holland. With the weak condition that York is now in, having quit their great Fort, there not being 500. Souldiers in the Town besides Citizens. Together with a LIST of the Cornets and Ensignes, with their severall Motto's. Sent by the three GENERALS to the Parliament, By Captain STEWART. Published by Authority. London: Printed by J. F. for Z. Blaiklock, July 11. 1644.
SIR; MY earnest desire to satisfie your expe∣ctation, and the fear which I have, least our affairs here should not be truly represen∣ted unto you, hath moved me to give you this short account of the late Fight: Upon Munday last, understanding that Prince Rupert, with about Twenty thousand Foot and Horse, did march towards us, our whole Army arose from the Siege, and mar∣ched towards Longmarston Moore, about four or five miles from York, where we quar∣tered that night: But the Prince having no∣tice of our march, passed with his Army by the way of Burronbridge; so that by reason of the interposing River, we could not hinder his passage into York: Whereupon we mar∣ched to Todcaster, to prevent his going south∣ward; but before our Van was advanced, within a mile of Todcaster, we were adverti∣sed that the Prince was upon our Reare, and
was come the length of Longmarston, where he drew up his Army in a place of great ad∣vantage, having the addition of the Earle of Newcastles Forces, reported to be about 6000. with as great expedition as could be, our Ar∣my was called back. In the mean while the Enemy perceiving that our Cavalry had possessed themselves of a corn hill, and having discovered neer unto that hill a place of great advantage, where they might have both Sun and Winde of us, advanced thither with a Regiment of Red Coats, and a party of Horse; but we understanding well their In∣tentions, and how prejudiciall it would be unto us, if they should keep that ground, we sent out a party which beat them off, and planted there our left wing of Horse; having gained this place, Generall Lesley gave order for drawing up of the Battell: The right wing of Horse was intrusted to Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of known Valour and Reso∣lution, it did consist of his whole Cavalry, and three Regiments of the Scottish Horse, commanded by the Earl of Dalhousie, Earl of
Eglington, and Lord Balgony; next unto them was drawn up the right wing of the Foot, consisting of the Lord Fairfax his Foo, and two Brigades of the Scottish Foot for a Reserve. In the main Battell was the Regi∣ments of the Earl of Lindsey, Lord Mair∣land, Earl of Cassilis, and Kelheads, and two Brigades of the Earl of Manchesters; In the Reserve was the Earl of Backleign his Regi∣ment, the Earl of Lowdons, Earl of Dum∣ferlings, Lord Coupers, Generall Hamiltons, Generall of the Artillery, Edinburgh Regi∣ment had a Brigade of Manchesters Upon the left Wing of Horse, was the Earl of Man∣chesters whole Cavalry, under Command of Lieut. Generall Cromwell, and three Regiments of the Scotish Horse, Commanded by Gene∣rall Major Lesly, and upon their left hand neer a crosse ditch, where the enemy had a Re∣giment of Foot, was placed the Scotish Dra∣goones, under the Command of Colonell Frizell: Orders being given to advance, the Battell was led on by Generall Hammilton, Lieutenant Generall Baylie, and Major Gene∣rall Crawford; the Reserve being committed
to the trust of Generall Major Lumsdaine: There was a great Ditch between the Enemy and us, which ran along the front of the Bat∣tell, only between the Earl of Manchesters foot and the enemy there was a plain; in this Ditch the enemy had placed foure Brigades of their best Foot, which upon the advance of our Bat∣tell were forced to give ground, being gallant∣ly assaulted by the E. of Lindsies regiment, the Lord Maitlands Cassilis, and Kelheads, Generall Maior Crawford having overwinged the enemy set upon their flank, and did very good execu∣tion upon the enemy, which gave occasion to the Scottish Foote to advance and passe the Ditch. The right wing of our Foot had seve∣rall misfortunes, for betwixt them and the e∣nemy there was no passage but at a narrow Lane, where they could not march above 3. or 4. in front, upon the one side of the Lane was a Ditch, and on the other an Hedge, both whereof were lined with Musketiers, not∣withstanding sir Thomas Fairfax charged gal∣lantly, but the enemy keeping themselves in a body, and receiving them by threes and foures as they marched out of the Lane, and (by what
mistake I know not) sir Thomas Fairfax his new leavied regiments being in the Van they wheeled about▪ and being hotly pursued by the enemy cme back upon the L. Fairfax Foot, and the reserve of the Scottish Foot, broke them wholly, and trod the most part of them under foot. Sir Thomas Fairfax, Colonell Lambert, and sir Thomas his brother with five or six Troopes charged through the enemy and went to the left wing of Horse, the two Squadrons of Balgomes regiment being divided by the ene∣my each from the other, one of them being Lanciers charged a regiment of the enemies foot, and put them wholly to the rout, and after ioyned with the left wing of Horse, the other by another way went also to the left wing; The Earle of Eglingtons regiment main∣tained their ground (most of the enemies go∣ing on in the pursuit of the Horse and Foote that fled) but with the losse of four Lieute∣nants, the Lieut. Colonell, the Maior, and Eglingtons Sonne being deadly wounded, Sir Charles Lucas, and Generall Maior Porter ha∣ving thus divided all our Horse on that wing,
assaulted the Scottish Foot upon their Flanks, so that they had the Foot upon their front, and the whole Cavalry of the enemies left wing to fight with, whom they encountered with so much courage and resolution, that ha∣ving enterlined their Musquetiers with Pike∣men they made the enemies Horse notwith∣standing for all the assistance they had of their foot at two severall assaults to give ground; and in this hot dispute with both, they conti∣nued almost an houre, still maintaining their ground; Lieut. Generall Baily, and Generall Maior Lumsdain (who both, gave good evi∣dence of their courage and skill) perceiving the greatest weight of the battell to lye sore upon the Earl of Linsies, and Lord Maiklands regiment, sent up a re∣serve for their assistance, after which the ene∣mies Horse having made a third assault upon them, had almost put them in some disorder; but that the E. of Lindsey, and Lieut. Colonell Pitscotti, Lieut. Col. to the Lord Maitlands Re∣giment behaved themselves so gallantly, that they quickly made the enemies Horse to re∣treat, killed sir Charles Lucas his Horse, tooke him Prisoner, and gained ground upon the foote.
The Scottish Dragoons that were placed up∣on the left wing, by the good managing of Co∣lonell Frizell acted their part so well, that at the first assault they beate the enemy from the ditch, and shortly after killed a great many, and put the rest to the rout. L. Generall Cromwell charged Prince Ruperts horse with exceeding great resolution, and maintained his charge with no lesse valour. Generall-major Lesley charged the Earle of Newcastles brigade of White-coats, and cut them wholy off, some few excepted who were taken prisoners, and after them charged a brigade of Green-coats, where∣of they cut off a great number, and put the rest to the rout, which service being performed he charged the enemies horse, (with whom L. Generall Cromwell was engaged) upon the flanke, and in a very short space the enemies whole Cavalry was routed, on whom our fore-troopes did execution to the very walls of Yorke; but our body of Horse kept their ground. Lieut. Generall Cromwell and Major-generall Lesley being joyned, and receiving advertisment that our Foot were engaged with the enemies Horse and Foot, marched to their assistance, and met with the enemies Horse (being retreated upon the repulse they had from the Scottish Foot)
at the same place of disadvantage where they had routed our Horse formerly; and indeed their successe was answerable, if not much worse, for we routed them wholly, killed and tooke their chiefe Officers, and most part of their Standards. After which we set upon the reare of their Foot, and with the assistance of our maine battell, which all this time stood firme, we put them wholly to the rout, killed many, and tooke their Officers and Colours; and by this time we had no enemy in the Field. We tooke all their Ordnance being in number 25. neere 130 barrels of Powder, besides what was blowne up by the common Souldiers, above an hundred Colours, and ten thousand Armes be∣sides two Waggons of Carbines and Pistols of spare Armes. There were killed upon the place 3000. whereof, upon a judicious view of the dead bodies, two parts appeared to be Gentle∣men and Officers. There were 1500 prisoners taken, whereof Sir Charles Lucas Lieutenant-generall of the Earl of Newcastles Horse, Major-generall Porter, and Major-generall Tillier, be∣sides divers Colonels, Lieutenant-colonells, and Majors. The losse upon our part, blessed be God, is not great, being onely of one Lieute∣nant-colonell, some few Captaines, and not 300
common Souldiers. Upon Wednesday, the day after the fight, P. Ruperts Sumpter-horse was found in the Wood, with some of their provi∣sions; upon Thursday morning the Souldiers being drawn to their Armes upon a false Alarm, occasion was taken to march towards Yorke to our old Leaguer; about seven of the clocke the Towne was summoned to render upon mercy, whereunto answer was returned under Sir Tho∣mas Glenhams, and the Major of the Townes hands, that they could not give it up upon such termes; and if they shall continue in their ob∣stinate refusals, we are resolved by Gods assist∣ance to storme it once this weeke following, for our Scaling-ladders and all other necessaries for a storme are in readinesse, there not being 500 fighting men in the Towne, besides the Citizens; especially, the enemy having quitted their great Fort for want of men to maintaine it. We heare that there have beene some diffe∣rences betweene the Prince and the Earle of Newcastle, which appeare to be more reall, that they have parted since; the Earle of New-castle, Generall King, and the Lord Widrington are gone to Scarsborough, and as wee understand since are shipped for Holland, and Prince Rupert
toward the North; his Rendezvous was twelve miles on the North side of Yorke, where appea∣red about fifteene or sixteene hundred horse, and eight hundred foot. Upon Thursday at night he was at Richmond, so that it is yet doubtfull whether he intends for the Bishoprick of Dur∣ham or Lancashire; if he shall goe to Durham and those parts, we hope Calender (who for cer∣taine is before New-Castle) will entertaine him; however, we have sent after him all the Scottish Cavalry, all the Lord Manchesters, 1000 of the Lord Fairefax's, and one thousand Dragoones, in all seven thousand. While I was about to close my Letter we received information, that the Lord Clavering with about 2000 foote and horse are joyned with the Prince, and that he is gone to Lancashire, whereupon Sir Iohn Meldrum with the Lancashire and Scottish foot that were there formerly, and Sir William Brereton with 1500 horse are returned the neerest way to Lancashire to stop the Prince his passage into the the South, till our Horse be able to overtake him. The three Generalls have sent the bearer hereof Captaine William Stewart (a Scottish of∣ficer that did good service in the late fight) to the Parliament with the Earle of New-Castles com∣mission
for being Generall, and his Commis∣sion for making of Knights, which were taken at the sight together with some Letters of Sir Iohn Hothams, whereby it is clearely made known that he intended to betray Hull to the Enemy; There are likewise sent by him all the Coronets, and colours which could be got from the Soul∣diers, who esteeme it a great glory to divide them in peeces and weare them; And before Proclamation was made for delivery of them had disposed of the most part of them. I have sent you here inclosed a list of such as were preser∣ved and now sent, with their severall Motto's, and so for the present I take my leave and rest, At the leaguer neere York, Iuly 6, at ten at night. Yours, &c.
A List of the enemies Coro∣nets and Colours, sent by Cap. William Stewart. 1. A White Coronet of Dragoones with a blew and white fringe, in the midst whereof is painted a round beads face, and on its top the letter P. (which is conceived to signifie a Puritan) with a Sword in a hand reached from a Cloud, with this motto, fiat Iu∣stitia. 2. A Blacke Coronet with a black and yellow fringe and a Sword reached from a Cloud, with this motto, Terribilis ut acies ordinata. 3. A Blew, and on it a Crowne toward the top, with a Myter beneath the Crowne, with the Parliament painted on the side and this motto, Nolite tangere Christos meos, to wit, the Crowne and Myter. 4. A Blacke with a blacke fringe, and in the mid∣dle three Crownes gilded, with this motto, Quarta pe∣rennis erit.
5. A Blew with a silver fringe. 6. A Willow Green, with the pourtraiture of a man, holding in one hand a Sword, and in the other a Knot, with this motto, This shall untie it. 7. A Yellow, and in the middle a stooping Lyon, at whose breech lyeth snatching a mastife Dog, with this word as it were proceeding from his mouth, Kimbol∣ton, and at his feet little beagles, and before their mouthes, Pym, Pym, Pym, with these words proceed∣ing from his mouth, Quousque candem abutere pa∣tientia nostra? that is, how long wil you abuse our pa∣tience? 8. A Blew, with a motto that cannot be read. 9. Another coloured, with a Face and this motto, aut mors, aut vita decora. 10. A White with a blew and white fringe, and a red crosse in the middle. 11. A Red with White Crosse, and this motto, pro Rege & Regno. 12. A Blacke, with a black and yellow fringe, and a red and white crosse in the middle, and a yellow strea∣mer sloping downe from the crosse. 13. A Red with a red fringe. 14. A Red with a silver fringe. 15. A Blew with a blew fringe. 16. Another of the same.
17. A Red with a Red and gold fringe. 18. A white with a red and white fringe. 19. A Red with a blacke fringe. 20. A Blacke with a blacke and white fringe. 21. A flesh coloured Coronet. Some torn. Ensignes. Prince Ruperts Standard with the Ensignes of the Palatine, neere five yards long and broad, with a red crosse in the middle. Three Greene Ensignes wherof two with a red crosse upon white, and four or five little white crosses sloping downeward. Six Yellow Ensignes with red crosses, and one with a red crosse, and three black roses, The rest only Yellow. Foure white with red crosses, whereof one with five blacke streamers. Eleven Red with white crosses. A Blew with a red and white crosse. FINIS.
