T2711 E404_14 R201850 99862339 114496
TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM THE VVEST: OR A true Relation of the desperate Pro∣ceedings of the Rebels, and Cavaliers gathered together at Angry-Fisherten in WILT-SHEIRE. WITH Their Barbarous cruelty exercised on the Minister, his Wife and Child. ALSO The manner of their falling upon some par∣ty of the PARLIAMENT forces, some of them departing wounded. Written by a Gentleman of good quallity in the said to was, and Published for satisfaction of all those that desire true information. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Tempes 1647.
AN EXACT RELATION OF The barbarous Proceedings, of the Rebels in WILT-SHERE. MAny are the Enemies of this Kingdome, who have continu∣ally beene plotting and contri∣ving mische against this Real e; Yet hath it pleased God in the midst of all their treachery to frustrate their designs. And as they have been so do they still persist in their wicked and barbourous cruelties, as may plainly appeare by this ensuing relation.
On Sunday last, certain Souldiers by the appointment of the Honourable Committee of Parliament, with a War∣rant under their hands, went to the Church of Angry-Fisherton, and deman∣ding the Person of Kent then officiating with their Masse-Booke; where being assembled a great number of active Ca∣valiers, their present answer was given in a most outragious manner with stones and Brick-bats about the Souldiers eares; who by way of entreaty, dsired that wretched rabble to keepe their seates, and no hurt should in the least be done unto them; but they in an insulting man∣ner would not desist. Whereupon the Souldiers being con∣strained for their own safety, drew their swords in their defence, hurting some of the most notorious active varlers, who being much more incensed the whole multitude in a most violent manner fell upon them, and iambling the bels to call more of that bloudy minded crew, (who comming in an instant well Armed)
they were constrained to retreae out of the Town. After this, the violent multitud of these wicked varlots, in a violent manner be∣ing still more greedy (as a Lion) of their prey, with cruell rage ranne down to the House of their aged Minister, (who then performing those duties to God which he could not be Permitted to ex∣cercise in that Church, brake open his doores rushing in with drawne swords, most barborously, and in cruell manner wounding him, on the head in two or three severall places to the terrour of all honest people that were in and abou that Towne. They likewise strok down his wife & daughter most furiously ruing at on with their weapon who through Gods great mercy escaped their cruell rage; then throwing the grave minister with his aged wife downe the staires they ed them out of doores possessing themselves of what he had: and making themselves merry with what they foud in his house. This was no sooner performed but they began to barricado both ends of the Parish very strong∣ly with timber being provided with armes and
Ammunition sufficient for so  ∣petent time to withstand a considerable party they being certaine that they should have a sufficient supply to joy with them in this their designe, (if oc∣casion required) out of their neigbou City. A while after the Souldiers being ga∣thered together, and drawing themselves up in a body▪ faced them in the field  a good space▪ and perceiving that they could not for the present draw them forth out of their strengths, they whee∣led about and mached home ward  ther way. No sooner was this performed by this rebellious tumult but still they pro∣ceeded forward in this their barbarous designe, for certaine of these murderous Rebbels seeing which way these Sould∣ers retreated, crossing ouer some Med∣dowes by a neere ath▪ ay in A¦cadoe where they were to passe and in most bloudy manner, furiously discharg∣ing upon  they  one of
the Souldier in his Legg▪ which much  they departed backe againe peace∣ably to their owne quarters. Thus have you this sad relation of these bloudy minded Cannibals who most inhumanly gloryed in this their wicked designe which I doubt not but will be repayed to some of them  ustice at this next Assises, to which and the Gallowes I leave them, for exam∣ple to their posterity that shall come after them. These things if they be not taken into consideration, are like to bring this Kingdome into a sad condition except some speedy course be ta∣ken
for the timely preventing ther∣of; and that such Offenders may be brought to tryall and punished according to their deserts. FINIS.
