w1526 e555_31 99864005 116223
THE DECLARATION AND UNANIMOUS RESOLUTION OF Colonel Whaley, And all the Officers and Souldiers of his Regiment, now present with their Cullors. With a particular List of all their names that signed it, on Munday the 14. of this instant May, 1649. Published to prevent mistakes, and presented to every honest heart, especially to our deare Fellow Souldiers of the Army under the Command of our ever honored Generall Thomas Lord Fairfax, his Excellency. London, Printed by John Clowes, and are to be sold neer the Royall Exchange, and in Popes-head-Alley. 1648.
The Declaration and unanimous Resolution of Col. Whalley, and all his Officers and and Souldiers present with their Cullors. WHereas many scandalous and dangerous Papers have been lately published in print, tending to seduce, and divide the Army, and dissolve the present Government and power thereof; as also to sub∣vert the Parliament and Councel of State, in this juncture of time, wherein they are endeavou∣ring so necessary a work, as setling the peace of the Nations, securing of trade, by a Fleet at Sea, already by them set out; setling and supplying Garrisons, especially Maritine, for preventing Invasions and Insurrections, taking of Free quarter, establishing (by an equall Leavie) constant pay for the Army, pro∣viding effectually for their Arrears, and the speedy transporting of a considerable Army into Ireland, for the reliefe of many thousand of our distressed Brethren and fellow Souldiers, who are ingaged with us in the same quarrell, and (its more then probable) must all perish, if not speedily relieved from hence. Which considered: we cannot conceive that those who contrived & dispersed the aforesaid papers, and endeavour otherwise to make obstructions, and hinder those good transactions before mentioned, (which are so really in∣tended, and neer effected by those now in power) to be either friends to us, or the common-wealth; but rather enemies: And we humbly conceive it necessary, that such persons may be discovered and supprest. And having lately observed, to our great griefe, the disaffections of those to whose lot it fell, to relive poore Ireland, and the secret and malacious insinuations of divers who (under the specious pre∣tences of procuring Liberty here; and of the unwarrantablenesse of the Warre there) have by their suggestions, deceived many (even honest men) into a beliefe thereof, and divided them from that Ingagement; thereby retarding the service: And (this we be∣lieve) as it is on purpose to promote and advance the distru∣ctive designes of the Common Enemy in the intentions of the Master Projectors: So it is in the intentions of the rest of that Fa∣ction, against all, or at least against all just and good Government,
which we desire from our very souls, may be setled and maintained by this Prl. for the countenancing of those that doe well, and the terrour of those that do evill; and this we dispaire not of, since they have already done so many Acts of Justice, and accomplished so many excellent things in order thereunto, notwithstanding the violent threats and intrusions of a detestable Anarchy; and the seri∣ous thoughts of the present miseries of Ireland, and how ill that Ingagement resents with some of those whom the finger of God hath shared thereto, have wrought very much sorrow upon our spirits, and we must needs say, if Providence in the Decision had cast the lot upon us, we should all, or most of us, have imbraced the service, hoping the protection and blessing of the most high God, will be upon the upright endeavours of those that under∣take it: And if they should not have help now at last, considering their constant patience and faithfulnesse in that difficult and haz∣ardous service, and immediate dependance upon this Nation, es∣pecially the Army) it would be the sadning of all honest hearts, and the greatest dishonour and danger that can befall the English State. Wherefore we earnestly beseech our fellow Souldiers, and others who have any love to peace, not to entertain such pernici-Notions, as may set up, or begit any disorder and confusion, which doubtlesse is not of God, and will inevitably involve this too much wasted Re-publique, into greater Warres and Famine, which we already tast of, being miseries we are not long able to endure: and so instead of Freedoms and Liberties, (in our poverty and weaknes) to be all inthralled, and subverted to the furious cruel∣ties of the worst enemies viz. Strangers and Forraigness, And taking notice how Deceivers by their false informations, and substill instigations doe endeavour to perswade us, our Fellow Souldiers, and others to joyn with them in their wicked designes, to desolve the Parliament and Councel of State disorderly; and to cast off the Lord Gen. Lievt. Gen. and the rest of the most faithfull now in Authority, (no necessity leading thereunto.) Wee declare that such traiterous plots and actions, we abhorre and utterly dis∣claime, and that we shall continue our due obedience to the Par∣liament, our Generall, and Lievt. Gen. and all others now in Au∣thority over us, and doe blesse God for the good wee, and this Nation have, and doe enjoy by their pious acts of Justice, and wise
mannaging the publique affaires, for the establishment of peace upon good and sure grounds. In the prosecution whereof we are ingaged, and doe engage with them to stand or fall against all at∣tempts contrary hereunto whatsoever, and by whomsoever. The Collonels Troop. Edward Whaley Collonel. Daniel Dale, Capt. Lieut. John Wright Cornet Philip Rusey Quartermaster Mathew Wealey Corporall. Rich ilder Corporall. Will Shephard Corporall. Richard Johnson Trumpet. Tho: Medhouse Trumpet. Philip Bitts Trumpet. John Lanckstone Farrier. John Perriemount Sadler Hancserd Knowles Chaplin Walter Stevenson Chirurgeons Edw: Wentworth Mate. William Fitts Mate. James Horne Provist-Marshall John Fowle Marshall man John Piggot Marshall man John Kingsley John Cope James Brett Simon Ruland Tho: Howard Joseph Prior Edmond Pooley John Thompson John Stanton Dan: Walltafeskie Jo: Shepheard Jo: Godbold Robert Thorpe Jerem: Garrard James Harlwin Christo: Pell Rich: Cowlea Rich: Brawdbent Adam Thurder James Johnson John Lord Wil: Cooke Senior Richard Chittocke Nich: Kirton Rich: Watts Daniel Wealey John Car Junior Jo: Duncom William Cooke Junior Robert Feilding Richard Neale Francis Jessop William Parker William Robinson Rich: Robinson John Car Senior John Haruey Sam: Haruey Nath: Cole John Case Dan: Harlwin Abraham London Jo: Shearman Rob: Caroile Tho: Bidley
Rich: Floyd Luke Crow James Mottes Rich: Stanford Rob: Gooch Jo: Lucey William Sliverey Tho: Matchet Fran: Jones George Farmer Abraham Baley Rich: Bradford Rob: Smith Edw: Watlin James Ballard Peter Belvoire William Alldred Francis Robinson Tho: Whealtand Fran: Ball Hen: Jolley Tho: Kent Rich Comes Hen: Rayles Jo: Hagger Edw: Spencer Jo: Humphreys Jo: Brothers Lionell Brothers William Feild Rich: Edwards Thomas Farthing Philip Watling Jo: Woodraft Tho: Beverstocke Jo: Curde Walter Davis William Cooker Jam: Burven William Overton Jo: Sheeming William Hubbard John Ire Simon Gayle John Simons Tho: Veale Jo: Bradley. Iohn Sanders Captain Evansons Troop. Wil. Evanson Capt. Edmond Chillenden Lieut. Anthony Lacon Cornet Wil. Linley Quartermaster Cuthburt Reynoldson Corporall. George Turner Corporall. John Calloway Corporall. Iacob Kempe Trumpet. Anthony Blith. Trumpet. Matthew Cooney Farrier. Thomas Quarry Sadler. William Russell Nath: Evanson Iohn Williams Edward Calloway Nath: Rignell Thomas Huckell Iohn King Iohn Evans Richard Hanies Iohn Gledwell Robert Payton Christopher Reynoldson Iohn Slater Henry Barker
Thomas Knight Stephen Skinner Christopher Smith Thomas Coles Edward Binney Robert Wilson Laurence Proctor Luke Martin George Susham Thomas Hayes. William Drewrey Edward Wright Pearson Russel Io: Bray Richard Mattinley Richard Reynolds Thomas Perrey Richard Ingram Thomas Gearey Hen: Gearey Iohn Lovedell Iohn Stevens Thomas Missenden Hen: Wouley William Goodwin Walter Stone Hen: Tharpe Abraham Have Io: Austin George Wetherley Woolston Everard Hen: Calloway Rob: Cabel Peter Woodward William Butler Rob: Saywell Peter Moore Thomas Cooper William Marriot Iohn Rickets Nick: Rice Iohn Osburne Thomas Cleaveley William Rawbones Io: Ostler Io: Abraes Iohn Baker Rich: Perrey Henry Sleech Iohn Enowes Thomas Goldring Sam: Chanler Io: Colson Io: Davis William Paybody Iohn Knowles Christopher Greenhill Rich: Mason Rob: Flowre Thomas Punt Iohn Hills Thomas Rogers Nick: Allin William Hall Iohn Harris Fran: Ickley William Clarks Simon Brown Ben: Godfrey Samp. Bourn Roger Weight Nath: Harris Rich Simons Iohn Geare
Iohn Pearce Rich York Thomas Turner Thomas Sprigg William Rice Iohn White Hen: Catcut Captain Groves Troop. Iohn Grove Captain. Thomas Chamberlaine Lieut. Abell Warren Cornet Geoage Sanders Quartermaster Richard Ireland Corporall. Thomas Throwley Corporall. Thomas Campion Corporall. Ionath Loader Farrier Io: Iacus Sadler Hen: Grove Brian: Thomas George Perdue Thomas Iones Evan Morgan Edw: Thomas William Thomas Edw: Williams Io: Taylor Rob: eakins Io: Ley Io: Colley Hen: Fleming Rog: Leonard Thomas Bell Thomas Fitz Junior Thomas Harris Giles Harris Iam: Broadrib Hen: Watkins Hen: Leonard Io: Smith Steph: Forren Rich: Coincent Fran: Norton Rob: Wedgebar Rich: Buines Mat: Mason Iohn Soundey Francis Wagman Francis Allin Io: Perrey Reynold Hoxon Stephen Walker David Smith Rich: Winter Iohn Auldridge Iohn Collins Thomas Thomlinson Io: Chidocke Isaack Perke Iacob Perke Iohn Spinkes Mat: Iones Thomas Reeve Ben: Leaver Nich Estoe Io: Douty Thomas Hall Rob: Car Thomas Worsley Lewis Ames Hen: Eliot Iames Medicen Edward Clewes Iohn Brandison
Richard Rich Thomas Loxden Jo: Kengton Jo: Saraker Der: Hoare William Fellow John Eartsman Nath: Bawin William Bolton John Webster Edward Street William Shepre Thomas Shepre Io: Parsons Io: Thomas Thomas Pilborough George King Richard Inwood Io: Sanders Major Swallowes Troop. Rob. Swallow Major Iosse Sabbartan Leivt. Thomas Stewart cornet. Tho. Kendaall Quarter Mr, David Canbey Corp. Iohn Allen Corp. Tho. Willsen Corp. Tho. Ainsworth Trump. Michael Prior Trump. Tho. Sicklemoore Farrier. Tho. Raynier Sadler. John Revet Hugh Darley Samuel Cariage Roger Aldridge Robert Keyes Edward Potter John Simons Robert Winn Will. Wellborrough Richard Howse James Rishtown Iohn Pitts Thomas Ablet Iohn Thorey Iohn Gile Andrew Fernon Jos. Pcarce Iohn Hartlie Richard Downes Iohn Fox Michael Odye Iohn Papworth Iohn Ratcliffe Iohn Pits Iohn Wellborough Iohn Crane Iohn Emson Iames Dickes Iohn Sadler Ios. Whitlock Thomas Fanner Robert Blackborn Ralph Young Richard Ratcliffe Edward Story Iohn Parsons Thomas Church Iohn Wilcocks Senior Henry Lister Iames Stewart William Sprint Robert Wiildman
Edward Littleberry Iohn Wilcocks Junior Nicholas Spilman Iohn Sage Iames Hayden Robert Stoney Iohn King Thomas Radmell Ruben Simons Ios. Bucknam Iohn Bieksbee Robert Evitts Ieremiah Clerke William Teargoose Philip Mardocke Edward Round William Linsey Iames Sprint Thomas Stiles Iohn Lovet Iohd Gadesby Iohn Harvey George Cooper Gregory Ellis Edward Speachly Iames Denison Nicholas Southerwood William Strange Francis Thrower Samuel Spooner Samuel Stephens Chrispopher Tolson Thomas Ives Iohn Warren Thomas Gerrard George Goodman Iohn Whiston Iohn Waiford Clement Brotherwick William Short Griffiu Lewis Jos, Bridger Matthew Godheard Thomas Tomson Samuel Smith John Whaley Francis Flaxman Thomas Flaxman Samuel Teargoose Edward Gee Caleb. Latten Fardinando Hill Joseph Gifford John Sadler Captain Savage Troop. John Savage Captain. Benjamin Bracey Lievtenant Nathanael Holt Cornet Time. Thoruborough Quar. Mc. Robert Jackson Corporall. John Hawkins Corporall. James Sharpe Corporall. Solomon Sharpe Trumpeter. Benjamin Barnes Trumpeter. George Butler Farrie. John Lovet Sadler. Iohn Richardson Iohn Grayes Nicholas Mew Iohn Crowson Humpdrey Taylor Samuel Driver Iames Townsend Richard Whaley Iohn Leech Humphrey Roberbs
Iohn Godfrey Ioseph Lepton David Caperoon Nicholas Gourder Matthew Hepworth Henry Ball Randall Iohnson Iohn Kirhey Ieremiah Ives Henry Sudbury Iohn Ely Thomas Dunsmore Benjamin Thornborough Henry Brillock Iohn Grant Thomas Leichfield Henry Powell Roger Bradbrooks Thomas Laud Edward Head Richard Boswell William Round Richard Hodges Iohn Hill Iohn Whittington Richard Lewn William Scarbat William Mills Nicholas Williamson Edward Capps Richard Green Mihill Le Mot Iohn Emet Francis Norton Lazerus Smith William▪ Brown Iohn Gentle Edward Bayley Edward Simons Thomas Terrill Francis Wharton Henry Demeroy Thomas Scot William Nest Thomas Perkeson Henry Lawrelson Richard Loret George Reeve Henry Garrat William Bigs William Wickes. Francis Byot Iohn Willcocks Thomas Gearey Mihill Lewis Edward Butler Samuel Taylor Iohn Grayer Iohn Roberts Capt. Cannons Troop. Henry Cannon Capt. Iohn Franke Tievtenant Iohn Due Cornet Thomas Thomson Quar. Mr. Iohn Harison Corporall Iohn Row Corporall Luke Cooke Corporall Rob, Fadrey Trumpeter Iohn Reynold Trumpeter Nathaniel Hazelwood Sadler Thomas Kempe Farrier William Muschion George Dyos Daniel Hafford Iohn Washinton Humbl. Broom
Iames Row George Day Robert Balston Richard Yeelding Iohn Ebbs Thomas Prior Nicholas Glover Thomas Brasebrey Henry Hoshkines Erasms Mushchion Iohn Powell Iohn Smith. Iohn Reynolds Laurence Andrewes Iohn Digger Charler Bringhurst Iohn Butter Iohn Coachead Daniel Drywood Richard Adams Robert Kaytes Robert Winter. Robert Saywell Robert Porter Iohn Day Peter Sprigg Iohn Grove Iohn Harrison Iohn Stidwell Thomas Gouge Allexander Fletcher Robert Brandon Iohn Taylor Iohn Fosskit Iohn Horton Iames Miller Iohn Reynolds Samuel Hancock Robert Fawdras Ios. Hall Iohn Taylor Iohn Frost William Parkison George Oliver William Bayley Robert Colan William Redhurn Eastaie Fielding William Lash Roger Chapman Robert Moore Andrew Beren Richard Templeman George Martin George Howart Samuel Fyler. Iames Glover Iohn Minter Iohn Dyos Iohn Parker Ios. Withrow Thomas Fawsdieke Robert Iacob Thomas Plumbe Iohn Rowe Thomas Beale Hugh Veasey Richard Smith FINIS.
