w1529 e419_14 99863777 161341
A MESSAGE AND DECLARATION SENT FROM Colonel Whaley, to the Right Honou∣rable WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire, Spea∣ker of the House of Commons, CONCERNING The Kings Majesties Royall Person, and Engagement. Together with his Demonstration and Pro∣posals, touching His Gracious Majesty, and Mr. John Ashburnham [now attending His Royal Person in the Isle of Wight.] THis Message and Declaration is appointed to be forthwith printed and published, by Order and Command of the said Colo∣nell Whaley. DECEMBER, 7. 1647. Imprinted at London for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill necre the Royall Exchange, 1647.
A Letter from Colonel Whaley to William Lenthal, Speaker of the ho∣nourable House of Commons. SIR, I Am bold to affirme to you, that my engage∣ments for the Parliament have bin with faith∣fulnesse and truth undertaken, and though I have alwayes set a hïgh price of the Houses fa∣vour▪ endeavouring to answer it by discharging the duty of my place and trust; yet I ever abhorred sinister and unlawfull wayes, especially such abho∣minable ones, as to ing a iate my self with them, by untruths, it is not God and my owne Conscience a∣lone, that will justifie me in this, but with confidence I may presume, all the Godly in the Army that knowes me, so far as man can judge, will testifie the same: Therefore, being now accused by M. Ashburn∣ham in a letter to you, for the not declaring his Maje∣sties disingaging himself by him [as hee saith he did] to me, the tendernesse of my reputation, boh with you and all honest men in the kingdome puts me up∣on it, to write something in answer to his Letter, that this grosse failing, I should speak another language, did
not I think his memorie failed him, may appear both to you himself, and the kingdome. Mr. Ashburnham in the beginning of his Letter saith he was the occasion, that drew on his Majesties En∣gagement how this should be I cannot imagine, for the King made his Engagement to mee at New mar∣ket, which I made known to the Generall and Offi∣cers, when Mr. Ashburnham was in France. I confesse as I did declare, the King voluntarily renewed his Engagement at Wooburn, but that M. Ashburnham had so much as a hand in that, it is more then ever I heard. Mr. Ashburnham further saith, that soone after ee came to wait on his Majestie at Woburn, Col. Whley came to me, as he said by command from the Armie, to desire I would give my word, that his Majestie would not depat from them wthout their consent, &c. I hat I spake to Mr. Ashburnham to ngage him∣self for the Kings safe abiding with me. I will not de∣ny, I have affirmed as much, but I am exceeding con∣fident, I did it not in the name of the Armie, for I had no such Commission and it hath ever beene my eare to keep to my Commands. That Mr. Ashburnham found me walking b the River side, and there did disingage himself from his former Engagement, I have already declared, but that I should say, then the King doth so too, and he should tell me, you are to understand it so, 'tis as true as the reason he backes it with: For he saith, to shew you, that Colon II Whaley rightly apprehended what I meant, hee soone after went to the Head Quarters, where he declared unto them (as I am credibly in∣formed)
that the King and my selfe had withdrawne our words, &c. As to this, the Generall and all the Councel of War then met, are my witnesses, I told them no such thing, I acquainted them indeed M. Ashburnham had taken off his Engagement but when they asked me, whether the King hath done it, I answered, as I id you in the House upon the same Question, which is in my Narrative, and left it to them to judge; and therefore I must return this upon Mr. Ashburnham, and use it as an Argument agaist him, That if the King did command him to take off his Engagement, he did not discharge his Trust for had he, I should sooner have acquainted the Generall and Officers that the King had discharged himselfe, it being of greater weight then that Mr. Ashburnham had. I should like wise have made known so much to his Excellencie in my Letter, when I writ to him, that Mr. Ashburnham had dissingaged himselfe. And since he goes about to prove his assrtion, by circumstances ed ll further make is ppar, how lit∣tle they make for him, had Mr. Ashburnham taken off the King from his Engagement, he would have acquainted the Lieutenant Generall and Commissn∣ry Generall with it, as wel as with his own disingag∣ment, but they affirme to me the contrary, for about the same time, that Mr. Ashburnham disingaged himself, when he pretends he took off the Kings also, he went to putney to speak with the Lieutenant Ge∣nerall, and Commissary Generall, they refusing to speak with him, he sent them word, hee would stand engaged for the King no longer, and gave this for his
reason, There was so much Scotch spoken at the Court, but not one word of disobli∣ging the King. I shall likewise appeale to all that knowes me, wheher they conceive me to be so sim∣ple, and of so poor a spirit, that when the King had personally engaged himself to me, J should remain satisfied, that Mr. Ashburn∣ham should tell me the King withdrew his Engagement, certainly I should have known the Kings pleasure in it, J was never at such a distance from the King, neither wanted so much boldnesse, to ask him a question of such concernment. Mr. Speaker, I think J have sufficiently demonstrated, to you, and J doubt not, but it will satisfie all indifferent men, that if the King did com∣mand Mr. Ashburnham, as it seemed to him he did, to take off his Engagement, he hath not discharged his-trust; and this for the clearing my owne integrity J have done,
And the Righteous GOD that shall judge us all, knowes J have related the truth; and whatever men believe, J matter not, it is not the praise of men J seeke, my witnesse is with God, J remaine SIR, Your very humble and faithfull Servant, For the Right Honourable WILLIAM Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons. FINIS.
