W3189 E37_13 99859044 111105
Se Defendendo. A SHIELD, and SHAFT, against DETRACTION. Opposed, and drawn, by Capt. GEORGE WITHER, by Occasion of Scandalous Rumours, touching his deserting of Farnham-Castle; and some other malicious Aspersions. Read; for, this Private Cause, if, rightly, tri'd, The publike Wrongs hath, partly, typifi'd: And, for Himselfe, if You will heare Him, now, Perhaps, ere long, Hee'l say as much, for You. IT was my hope, that, ere this, I should have had occasions, and incou∣ragements, to salute you with my VOX PACIFICA, mentioned in my CAMPO-MVSAE; that Preparation might have beene made for that Way of Peace, which we, yet, know not. But, most men have such By-wayes, to walk in, such private paths, of their own; and make so many Crosse passages, that, the right Tract, to a blessed Peace, will not, yet, be found; nor, the newes of it, much regarded. Selfe-love, Selfe-conceit, hu∣mane Policy, Carnall Dependencies, Private Interests, Partiall Respects, Wil∣fulnesse, Covetousnesse, Ambition, Malice, hypocrisie, Infidelity, Impiety, and Vnmercifulnesse, (a strong Malignant Party) have made such lowd noi∣ses, and such mad confusions, among us, that, the still-voice of PACIFI∣CATION, tending to the Peace desired by all good men, cannot possibly be heard, or uttered, with any profitable successe. And, though the houre were at hand, which brought Evidences, of Qualifications, making us capable of Good-Tidings; and had filled me, also, with notions, urging their Publicati∣on: yet, having my Repute, lately, sullied, by scandalous Rumours, it would be comely, and convenient, I should purge my self of those mis-impu∣tations, before I presented them to the Publike; because, few regard that which is brought them, by an unworthy, or suspected Messenger. It is, now, above 30 years, since I first began to suffer for my good affe∣ction to the publike welfare: and I have been, hitherto, by Gods mercy, so happy therein, that neither Mischiefe, nor Detractions, have much harmed me, though I had so many powerfull, and malicious Adversaries, that, for
well-doing, if I escaped undoing, I ever thought my self highly favoured. This long experience (and a beliefe, that, No mans evill, but his own, can much dam∣nifie, or disparage him) inabled my patience to passe over many losses, and in∣dignities, as if unperceived: whereby the present Inconveniences became the lesse; and, my future advantages, the more. And, for that cause, I smo∣thered many wrongs, which others, seldome, pretermit, with so little shew of discontent: And, I could have beene well pleased, that it might have stood with my Reputation, to have spared this Defence. But, the honour of a Commander, is not, so meerly, his own, that the losse or preservation thereof concerns himself, onely; otherwhile the Republike, and the effectuall execution of his Calling, may be much advantaged, or dis∣advantaged, thereby. The disparagement of a Captaine, incourageth his e∣nemies, dishearteneth his own souldiers, and, many wayes, disableth his per∣formance of due services: And, my particular repute, ought not, onely, to be precious to me, in those respects; but in regard, also, of such reproofs of e∣vill, or incouragements to vertue, as already are, and may, hereafter, be pub∣lished to the world: and which may be made lesse profitable to the Readers, when the credit, worth, or sincerity of their Authour is much traduced. Compelled, therefore, by that duty, which, in Justice, and Charity, I owe to my selfe, and my Countrey, I make tender (to whomsoever it, shall con∣cern, or may content) of a Vindication of my Courage and Fidelity in the publike Service, which hath beene disparaged by malicious aspersions, long whispered in secret, and now lately brought openly to my, knowledge. I have, heretofore, heard ambiguous words, cast forth, and observed Fleers, and scornfull Aspects, making me, justly, jealous, that some scandalous report was raised, and entertained of me; and thereof, also, have seen symptomes among some of my Honourable Friends, and by whose, undeserved, neg∣lect of my necessities, and faithfull services, I might be assured, that ill tongues had influences upon me: yet, having no certainty thereof, I thought it more discretion to be silent, then to answer Voices in the Clouds; and so, be thought, perhaps, to labour a Defence for that, whereof no man had accu∣sed me. I have, now, assurances of what I suspected. And, that you, to whom this Vindication shall come; may know, I thrust not my selfe impertinently hereupon; I will acquaint you with what is rumoured, and how I am (as it were) challenged hereunto; that, you may the better judge, how reasonably I am obliged to this Defence: and that they, upon whom I shall cast off the blame, which is imputed mine, may hold me excused, if I leave them to beare their own burthen. For, though I know it was by the unfaithfulnesse, negli∣gence, or, at least, the ignorance, of some body, that the publike safety was
violated, in the desertion of Farnham-Castle; and whereby, likewise, I have greatly suffered, both in Estate, and Reputation: yet, I will urge nothing in Splene, nor by way of Recrimination, so, as if anothers faultinesse could make me guiltlesse; nor take upon me to condemne any one; but, onely de∣clare so much, as (I think) may sufficiently cleare me, of what is famed a∣gainst me, and give some hints for the publike Security. That which is reported, to my disparagement, touching Farnham Castle, was lately signified unto me, from a Gentleman of Quality, by a Letter, in these words. VVOrthy Captain, I have read most of your Works, wherein you expresse much zeal to this Cause of God's; and, I believe (though it be a dissem∣bling Age) that your words and thoughts are the same. I pray pardon my bold∣nesse, if I acquaint you with a Report which flies abroad in the County of Sur∣rey, and likewise in London, which is, that you, being Governour of Farnham Castle, should desert it, shamefully. It is expressed in grosser Language, which I forbeare; for manner sake. As a friend, I could wish you to vindicate your Re∣putation. Thus with my respects remembred unto you, I rest, Your loving friend, J. M. Since the receipt of this Letter, I have heard from others, that the same scandall hath been reported in Hampshire, Surrey and London, above a yeare past, and expressed with such jeers, and scorns, that it made them unwilling to inform me thereof, lest I should be more afflicted, then advantaged there∣by: For which tendernesse of their, I but a little thank them. For, though I neither vapour, roare, plunder, or imprecate my own damna∣tion, so valiantly, as many other Captains: yet, I am as sensible of my Re∣putation, as becomes a Christian Souldier; and shall finde, I hope, spirit e∣nough to beare, without base dejection, whatsoever God shall permit me to be exercised withall, and to make it appeare also; that I failed, neither in Cou∣rage, Discretion, or Faithfulnesse, in execution of the Trust reposed in me at Farnham, or in any other Command. Whereof, that you may the better judge, I offer to consideration, both my Commission, and my proceedings thereupon. This, following, is a true Copie of my Commission. The Committee of the Lords and Commons, for the safety of the Kingdome, to Captaine George Wither. BY Virtue of an Ordinance of Lords and Commons in Parliament, autho∣rizing us, we doe constitute and appoint you Captaine and Commander of Farnham Castle in the County of Surrey, and of such Foot as shall be put into your hands by Sir Richard Onslow Knight, and Nicolas Stoughton Esquire, for the defence of the King, Parliament, and Kingdome. Which said Castle, and Foot, you shall, by virtue of this Commission, receive into your Charge
and Custody; commanding you also, hereby, to attend with, and bring unto the said Castle, that Troupe of Horse which is already raised in the said County, whereof you are Captaine, or as many of them as the said Sir Richard Ons∣low, and Nicolas Stoughton, shall think convenient for the said Service, for the best safeguard of that place, as occasion shall be from time to time offered. These are therefore to will and require you, to make your present repaire to the said Castle, and take the same, together with the said Foot and Horse, into your Charge and Command, and diligently to command, governe, exercise, and order the said Castle, and Forces, with all faithfulnesse and care. And also to command, govern, rule and exercise all inferiour Officers and Souldiers, both Horse and Foot, committed, or to be committed to you, as aforesaid: comman∣ding them, and every of them to obey you as their Captaine and Commander for the Service aforesaid: And you likewise to obey, and follow such Orders and Directions, as you shall from time to time receive, from us, His Excellency the Earle of Essex, or the said Sir Richard Onslow, and Nicolas Stough∣ton, according to the Discipline of Warre. Given this 14. of October. 1642. Northumberland. Holland. Bullingbrooke. Gray & Warke. Ed. Howard. Gilbert Gerard. Antho. Nicoll. Jo. Pym. According to this Commission, I repaired, immediately, to the said Castle (which, for many years before, had no inhabitants, but Dawes and Crowes.) And, if I had been vouchsafed the respects due to a Souldier, having (as shall hereafter appeare) discharged the trust reposed in me, and no way merited lesse regard, I should have obtained, againe, the same command, or somwhat equall thereto, rather then have been sent out of the County, as I was, disre∣spectively, and disgracefully, in the taile of a Regiment; which I would have disdained, had not the present necessities of the publike, been more prevalent with me, then my private content. As soone as I came to the Castle, I dili∣gently viewed the place, observing of what consequence it was: and tooke into serious consideration, such particulars, as I judged pertinent, to the well-governing, and safe-keeping thereof. The verie first day (for delay hath been our greatest mischiefe) perceiving the water might be soone cut off, I prepa∣red for sinking a Well, without which a Garison could not have there subsist∣ed. Within three daies, I fitted up Stabling for my Horses, of which there was none within the Walls, and without which, the Malignancie of the Townes-men (being, for the most part, Tenants, or Creatures of the Bishops) might have betraied my Cavalrie, when I should have most needed them: And, in short time, I would have cleared the Ditches, and all the grounds, round about the Castle, of whatsoever might have made the place lesse defen∣sible,
or sheltred an enemies approaches. I had contrived a Draw-Bridge, a Sally-Port, Plat-formes, Palisadoes, Counterscarfes, with all other reasona∣ble Provisions, in my judgement, necessarie for securing my charge; and forthwith, (as I can make proofe) requested of those, by whom I was to be ordered, an Engineer, Ordnance, and what else was pertinent to the worke. But, I was faine to be active in imagination, only, which is more proper∣ly exercised about fortifying of Castles in the aire, then upon the Land. There is a thrift lately practised, much like the saving of a half-penny worth of Tarre by the losse of a Hogge, jeered in an English Proverb; and this way of saving, hath, in my observation, more then trebled the expences of this Warre: For, when Propositions are made tending to the prevention, both of future expences, and apparent dangers; it frequently happens, that, till the perill is begun, or the remedy too late, some seeming good husbands, for the Publique, (and otherwhile Malignants, under that pretence) delay their exe∣cution, to avoid cost; and so undoe us, to save charges. This epidemicall folly frustrated my intentions at Farnham, and hath occasioned the losse, or wast, of above 100000 pounds; beside the shedding of blood, and other mis∣chiefes, hazzards and inconveniences, most of which might probably have been prevented, by the timely disbursement of small fummes. For, I had neither Men, Money, Ordnance, Spades, Pick-Axes, Armes, nor any other Ammunition; save only, about two squadrons of a Troope halfe armed; a few irresolute Voluntiers, of my owne procuring, by intrea∣tie; sixtie Musquets, and some Powder, Match, and Bullets: Nor had I meanes, or authority, to make such Provisions, as I knew neeedfull: which appeares by the forerecited Commission, limiting my Government, and Com∣mand, to be altogether ordered by the discretion of others, and subjecting me to waite absolutely upon their pleasure, for Forces, or Supplies, and to be regulated, from time to time, according to their Orders, whatsoever neglect or extremity should happen; which was, in effect, an imprisoning of mee in the Castle. Neverthelesse, I knew my self inexcusable, if I did not my utmost indea∣vour to secure the place. Therefore, seeing two or three daies passed, and nei∣ther men or Provisions comming or preparing for mee, (and perceiving also, that I had almost wearied out my Officers, Troopers, and those few well-affected Townesmen, whom I had procured to help guard the Walls) I put those in remembrance of my necessities, whom it concerned, to provide for me, as will appeare by those Letters, yet in my custodie, which they return∣ed, in answer of my demands, with promises of timely accommodation. I dispatched Messengers also among my kindred, and acquaintance, in Hamp∣shire,
to mediate for some compliance from those parts, in regard, as well of their neighbourhood, as, of the comfort and security which that Castle might have been to the well-affected therein; and my motion succeeded so well, that I was immediately visited by the Captaines, or the Lievtenanes, of the foure Traine-Bands nearest thereunto; and by them, was cheerfully pro∣mised, that assoon as they saw me furnished with Ordnance, and other things likely to enable me to be a saveguard unto them, I should, in all extremities, have their best aid, upon short warning. I then doubled my Messages, and made a personall visite, to intreate for what was necessary to enable the discharge of my duty: yet till the time of my removall, I never obtained toward the paiment of Souldiers, buying Swords, sinking the Well, and for other necessarie works and disbursments, any more then 50. l. and so many men only, as together with my Three∣quarter-Troop, (as then it was) would almost have made a Guard for one night, provided I kept no reserves for relief, for Scouts, or other necessarie services: And, then, the small number of Auxiliaries, which I had, being drawne thither, meerly upon intreatie, and finding nothing there prepared for their sustenance, or defence, departed alwaies within a day, or two, and left me to get other where I could. Insomuch, that, everie night, I was faine to do the service of inferiour Officers, in teaching new commers to mannage their Armes, and how to behave themselves upon the watch; who, usually, also, before they were perfect, gave me leave to instruct others, and went a∣way, publishing the ridiculous feeblenesse of the Garrison, to our further weakning, and my secret vexation. For I durst not seeme, openly, to un∣derstand our contemptible condition, least I should have quite discouraged all about me and have given occasion to the Malignants of that place, (who were foure fold more then the Well-affected) to worke our disadvantage thereby. But, doe what I could, they knew so much of our wants; saw me so neg∣lected, and their insolent behaviours to be so connived at, that, as I have since heard, they became impudent in their derisions: had many secret meetings and consultations, concerning the bringing of the Rebels in upon us; acquaint∣ing them daily, (they being but 15. miles distant) with whatever they knew to our disadvantage. And, how I could have been any way reasonably a∣ctive, for prevention of their malice, I understood not, unlesse I might have had better accommodations within the Castle, to secure it, whilest I marched out with my Troope. Doubtlesse, if any thing, more then the meere providence, and mercie of God, kept the Enemie from attempting the Castle, whilest I was therein, it was only this, that their opinion, I had more wit, then to undertake a
place so miserably accommodated, made them incredulous of what they were informed; how else could I have remained unassaulted? how could I have possibly kept the Souldiers close to their duty within those Walls, which af∣forded neither meanes of safety, nor lodging, nor Victualls for their enter∣tainment? how toilesome was it for mee, they being necessitated to goe forth, to recollect and keep them together, when their service was needfull? how unsafe was it, to have them, day and night, mingled and conversing a∣mong their secret adversaries, (more then doubling their number) especially, suspecting probably, as I did, that most of the neighbouring Villages (aswell as the Towne) were at best, Newters, if not ill-willers, to our Cause? For, I seriously protest, (take it as they will) I, then knew neither one Captaine, nor above two Officers of the Trained Bands, or above sixe Gentlemen, (to my now remembrance) in all the foure hundreds of Surrey next Farnbam, of whom I did not rather expect mischief, then willing aid, in that service. And how rightly I guessed, partly appeared, by what followed, upon my removall; and may, perhaps, more fully appear hereafter, if Gods mercy, and good heed, prevent not. But, All my Conjectures are as vainely told, As were Cassandra's Prophesies of old, These inconveniences, made me carefull and watchfull, but not hopelesse; therefore, I still projected how to remedy, as many of them as I could, by supplying, some of our most extream necessities, and concealing the rest, whilest they might be hidden, and so kept my Souldiers in expectation of supplies, before it was too late. I my self continued not the mean time in an idle attendance, for what I wanted. But, having at my leasure considered fully, what advantages might happen to those parts, to the Garrison at Portsmouth, to the Citie of London, and to the whole Republique, by the ob∣struction of that passage: weighing also what security, and addition of pow∣er I might bee hopefull of, by being timely enabled to make that Castle a safe Retreating-place, and by having a competent number of Dragoones annexed unto my Troop, to fetch in provisions, suppresse our enemies, and incourage our friends, in those quarters, of Surrey, Sussex, and Hamp-shire, I signified to an honourable person, whom I thought it might concerne, the considerablenes of the Place, the speedy necessity of securing the same, and what else I conceived helpfull to the like end, which it seems were then sup∣posed, but the needlesse impertinencies of a Captaine, more officious then was cause. For, instead of that full, and speedy Accommodation expected, contrary to my hope (almost to my amazement) and to my great sorrow, for those mischiefs and inconveniences, which I foresaw would shortly follow, I was
called from the said Castle soon after, and by Order commanded to march immediately with my Troupe to London, and to leave the Castle in custody with one of my Officers. The said Order, (which I keep for my discharge) I a∣ctually obeyed; but, I confesse, with much unwillingnesse, and with some indignation: because, the verie same day, in which my Troupe left the Ca∣stle, there was an appearance, neer Guilford, of about a thousand men, where∣of one third, with some of those Armes and Horse (of which the Rebels, a while after, plundered the West division of Surrey) being sent into Farnham, while I was there, might, in probabilitie, have prevented, not onely, the un∣timely death of that honourable Patriot, Colonell Fane, and other disasters; but, perhaps, also, inabled me, ere this, to have performed some eminent ser∣vices, as well as other. Or, had I been vouchsafed a Commission, whereby I might, at least, in ex∣tremities, have been some way active, according to my discretion, I doubt not, but, by Gods assistance, I had found meanes to keepe my selfe, both in possession of the Castle, and of my lost estate, to this day; and, with far lesse charge, and grievance, to the Countrey, then hath since happened. For, knowing, (or how I might have known) in what degree of good, or ill af∣fection to the Parliament, the Generalitie, and most considerable men, in par∣ticular, stood in those parts, of Surrey, and Hampshire, I could have then contrived means, so to have levied, both men, and ammunition, for the pre∣sent necessitie, in such manner, as no man should, afterward, have justly com∣plained: and, by warily proportioning Power, Perswasion, Force and Gen∣tlenesse, speedily have gathered that strength, which might have attracted more and more, till I had been able to command a sufficient Guard. But, this Honour, and Trust, is too often conferred for private fancies and respects; els I was every way as considerable, by giving publike Testimo∣nies, of being to be confided in, as many other of larger Fortunes; and as likely to have understood, how discreetly to have proceeded, as most other of those unexperienc'd souldiers, who have been lately imployed. But, soft, By the mighty King The little City, is not strightned, yet, Enough, to show, it needs, the poore-mans Wit. Having, according to Order, as is aforesaid, brought my Troupe to Lon∣don (where I attended further Commands) I thought my selfe not wholly discharged from the Castle; neither did my care of the publike safety, permit me to be negligent of the same. I repaired, therefore, to the Committee, from whom I had my Commission, and acquainted them with the defects of the Garison there, and with such consequences, also, as, I thought, would fol∣low the neglect thereof, by reason of the nearnesse of Prince Ruperts Forces;
which they taking into serious consideration, (and, as it seemed, not before knowing how I was neglected) resolved to send me speedilie back to Faru∣haw, with provisions for the securing of the said Castle; and to that end gave me a Warrant for Artillery out of the Tower, which I got ready the same day. But, hearing at the Tower that the Traitors, calling themselves the Kings Forces, had entred Surrey, I returned to the said Committee for a more suf∣ficient Convoy, purposing to gather up Victualls, and such other needfull stores as the Countrey afforded, in my march thitherward: Having then in my owne House, (about four miles short of the Castle) above 1000. weight of Cheefe, nigh 800. weight of Butter, many quarters of Wheat and Mault, sixe or seven Flogs-heads of Beere and Cider, Bacon, Beef, and other neces∣saries. Also in my Grounds, nigh 300 fat Sheep, above 60. fat Beasts, and almost as many fat Hoggs, which I resolved to take along with me by the way. All which, with much good houshold stuffe, Teems, Cattell, Corne, Hay, and other things, I was soon after robbed of by the Enemie, to my dammage, in losses and reall hinderances, (though Malignants impudently have averred otherwise) above two thousand pounds. When I came back to the said Committee, to the purpose aforesaid, they told me they were sending to countermand my Warrant for Ordnance, &c. In regard they heard, the Forces aforesaid were entred Surrey. Whereat, being much grieved, I requested that the Demiculverins, might be exchanged for Drakes, which (though lesse serviceable in the Castle) I could better mannage upon the way; and offred (with confidence I should safely have done it) to adventure my life with them to Farnham. And, I thinke my proffer had been accepted, if other newes of the enemies nearer approaches had not been brought in, at that instant: But, thereupon my motion was pe∣remptority rejected. I then besought them, that I might march away with my Troope onely, to take my hazzard among my neighbours, by whom I was armed for the protection, of their habitations: And, considering I knew the By-passages of the Countrey; had the Castle at that time in the possession of my Offi∣cers, for a retreating place; about 30. of my Neighbours also, there, expect∣ing my comming; the provisions aforementioned, in my House, so neare the Castle, and hopes that some honest men, would suddenly have joined them∣selves to me, for their owne and the Countries preservation; I thought the adventure not so desperate as it seemed, perhaps to others. And, doubtlesse my presence would have prevailed with some Newtralls, to have procured me, at least, private aid; and kept many Malignants from being openly act∣ive to the incouragement of others against the Parliament.
Whatever the event would have bin, I verily believed, God would by these or other meanes, have wrought some deliverance by my hand. Yea, I have yet the same confidence. For, I should almost have scorned to have desired the aid of above two squadrons of my Troop, to have scattered that despica∣ble Rout, where with Sheriffe Denham, Captain Hudson, Master Tichborne, Brewer Brodnoxe, and other such like Leaders of the same Countie, first robbed my House, and afterward seized the said Castle, and victualled the same with my stores, as I purposed to have done. But, seeing it was not conceived by my Superiors, convenient to permit me to march to Farnham, as I desired: I then humbly offered to consideration, what should be determined concerning the foresaid Castle, the smal Magazine there left, and my Officers, who had still the custody of those Walls: Where∣upon, it was resolved (it being impossible, in that streight to provide better) that they should immediately quit the place, and bring away their Ammu∣nition, if they could. To which purpose, an Order was forthwith sent a∣way, and, I, thereby fully discharged of my Trust. Neverthelesse, so farre was I from shamefully deserting the Castle, as it is maliciously rumored, that, the thought and care of it would not out of my heart, though I was, untimely, oured from thence; but, I had many sad musings concerning the faid place, and those whom I left there ingaged; which musings were not without some good effect. For, having considered their danger, aswell in respect of the Malignant Townesmen, as of the ap∣proaching Armie; and, that if those my Souldiers, or the Parliament Am∣munition, should have, there, miscarried, (though without my fault) it might have redounded to my disparagement; I resolved to fetch them off in per∣son, whom I had personally brought on. And, therefore, the evening of the same day, in which the forementioned Order, was sent to call them from the Castle, I took my Horse, all alone, (having no other Horse swift enough to bear me companie) and posted to Farnham, to see a due execution of the said Order. By the way, (it being late in the night) I called at my owne House, whi∣ther newes came, about half an houre before, that some of the Enemies for∣ces, being at Hartly-Rowe, about four miles from Farnham, were expected to visite the Castle that night, or early the next morning; and that Farnham men would neither permit my Souldiers, to have meat for their Suppers, or Teams to carry away their Ammunition. Whereupon, I commanded my Servants to follow me with two of my own Waggons, and to drive throgh the little Parke on the backside of the Castle, to avoid surprisal by the Towns∣men; which, being speedily performed, we, by that means, orderly, and not shamefully, quitted the Castle, marching with our Ammunition Soul∣dier-like
through the Towne, in a posture ready to receive an enemie; to the vexation of the Malignants, who, as I heard, snarl'd and barked at us, when we were out of sight. This service prevented the losse of our Ammunition, and a greater losse, in disappointing the Enemie thereof. And, this service I performed, uncommanded, unheeded, and without recompence for my Teems, which carried the Magazine to Kingstone, whilest they might have been imployed in saving my own goods, whereof I preserved but one Load. Soon after the remainder of my estate was plundred, by the Malignants of the same Countie, who were neverthelesse, afterward, more favoured then I, by some, who pretend fairlie for the Parliament, This being the truth, what could I have done more to witnesse my cou∣rage, willingnesse, diligence and faithfullnesse, to be without blame? and how great is their impudence who can report I either kept or left the Castle other∣wise then became a Souldier? The Countrey thereabout, generallie knowes, I had neither Ordnance, nor Horse, nor Foote, nor Works, nor Walls, not Victualls enough to have held the Castle against an Enemie two daies, or to have withstood a sharp assault half an houre: I saw no preparation made for me by others, or anie Authoritie granted me to provide for my self: Yea, I saw my proffered Councell and Service neglected, and my self likely to be disgraced, (as hath since hapned:) And, yet, so farre was I from an un∣timely or undue desertion, of the Castle; or from being any way negligent of the publique advantage, that (when I was absolutelie discharged from the same, and Order sent away to dissolve the Garrison) I personallie, and un∣required, went, all alone, as is aforesaid, in the night, above 30. miles, to fetch off my Officers and Souldiers; even that night, in which I heard the Enemie was, there expected; and, brought also meanes with me, to my own losse, for the safeguard of that Ammunition, which had been else lost un∣to the Publique. Thus have you the true Storie of my short Government in Farnham Ca∣stle, with the right cause, and manner of my relinquishing the same; which, J hope, will sufficientlie acquit me from a base or unworthie desertion there∣of Jn this Relation, J had occasions to have amplified some things, to my credit in other particulars: But, I forbear it, least I may thereby more dis∣advantage others, then benefit my selfe, whose desire is, that, everie mans oversights, who erres not willfullie, should bee, charitablie covered; though my best words and actions are not so favourablie construed, but of∣ten wrested to my disprofit, or disgrace. I had here ended; But being now upon my Guard, and perceiving other ma∣litious Arrowes, whizzing about mine eares, from the Bow of Detracti∣on, I will neither lay downe my Buckler, nor unbend my Bowe, till I have
gathered up one of those poisoned shafts, and shot it out of the way; least my friends may stumble at it, There, flies a rumour, that by an Order obtained from the Honourable House of Commons, I have recovered more then double my losses, out of the Estates of Malignants, plundred by me in Kent, Surrey, and elswhere; and that my Troopers, also, have much inriched themselves by plunder, under my command: Yea, this false report hath reached the eares of some Parliament Men, my Noble Friends, to my disadvantage: For, words to this purpose were objected unto me immediately before our expedition to Gloucester, by Master Pym, in his Excellencies Quarters at Vxbridge, who, perhaps tooke notice thereof: For, it was openly spoken in his presence, by reson of a mo∣tion, which I then made unto him, touching 1300. l. then, and yet due to me by Warrant, and many hundred pounds more, of which I despaire not. I believe that Honourable Patriot, lived and died assured of my innocency, by that satisfaction which I gave him: and, because others also may be satisfied thereof, I will here brieflie deliver, for my justification, that which shall be sufficient to prevaile for me with reasonable men; and, that, which no malice shall be able to disprove. I confesse, with all humble thankfullnesse, that the Honourable House of Commons vouchsafed me an Order to repair my losses, out, of the goods and Estates of my Plunderers, or of such as were in Armes against the Parlia∣ment; which, had I emploied for my private reparation, without other due respects, I might ere this time, have recruited my Estate: But, I taking it as a great and extraordinarie favour to be intrusted with so free and full an Or∣der, thought myself the more bound, to proceed moderately and honestlie in the execution thereof; and therefore, did not politiquely and greedily, seek to gather up my losses thereby, as they would have done who are distrust full of the Publique-Faith, or of the justnesse or prosperous successe of our Cause. It was not, by reason I was ignorant what Souldiers did, for their private ad∣vantage, nor was it for that I knew not what insolencies are connived at in times of Hostilitie; nor because I understood not, what use I might have made of my Troop by that Order, to my private profit: But, I so proceeded, be∣cause I had more care of the Publike, then of my private Estate; because, I desired not, in so mischievous a time, to be troubled with more then I had need of, and, because I believed, as I yet believe, (though some have endea∣voured to make it void) that in the conclusion, or when I shall have more need of it, the Parliament will make good unto mee, what was intended by that Order. Yet, by my faire and moderate proceedings (other men seeming not so true to the Principles they made shew of, as I was to mine) I have been ex∣ercised
with manie wants, neglects and injuries, unexpected, which I might have prevented, by mixing a little more of the wisdome of this Generation, with my simplicity. For, my Plunderers were either so beggarlie, or had so ingaged, or conveyed their Estates; and, my attendance on the Publique Ser∣vice, so imployed me therein; that, whatsoever is murmured, all that I have reaped, by the foresaid Order, to ward the reparation of my losses, (as may appeare by the particulars, and Affidavit made) amounts not unto so much as the bare interest of my dammages; reasonable charges deducted. So, I have yet, nothing toward the principall, and that, also, which I sei∣sed, was in my extream necessitie, to preserve my Family from want; or, to relieve them, who had no livelyhood, but what they had put into my hands. That, likewise, which I took, I seised not with rigour, or without com∣passion, though it were from my Enemies; and, it wanted so much of being many thousand pounds worth, that it hath not amounted to hundreds; as will appear upon examination of these particulars. In Kent I seised, by the said Order, in one place, to the value of about 60. l. In Middlesex a parcell of goods of the same value. In Surrey, two parcells of goods and mo∣ney, arising to about 50. pound. Beside, some part of the Goods and Estates of Captain Andrewes; and Master Iohn Denham, and Master Tichborne, two of my Plunderers of which, I have yet received no profit at all. For, the said estates in Lands (late Denhams and Tichbornes) being in Mortgage, and that of Captain Andrewes, being now without Tenants, and formerlie made unprofitable by the wranglings and povertie of such as occu∣pied the Lands; and, great paiments issuing likewise out of it, for the publike use; I have disbursed more to make profit of these last, then I yet received, and perhaps, that which I have expended, may be all quite lost, by reason it lieth so near the Enemies Quarters: And, the Goods which were Master Denhams, are by an Order of some Sequestrators, taken out of my hands, and put into the possession of his Wife, who, (as do many other Delinquents) findes much more favour, then I, (who have been ever faithfull to the State. For, when my wife, and children, had been cruelly driven out of their ha∣bitation, and robbed of all they had, by her husband, and his confede∣rates, enemies to the Parliament (And, when, by virtue of the fore-menti∣oned Order, I justly entred upon the house of the said Denham, purposing to harbour my said wife and children therein) Mistris Denham, having long before deserted the house, and left there, onely some tables, with such like houshold-stuffe: (though her husband sought, and, yet, seekes the de∣struction of the Kingdome) was, upon ale suggestions, put againe,
by Order, into postession of that house: because, as her charitable Patron alledged, shee was, forsooth, a Gentlewoman, big with childe, and had a Fancie to the place. By which means, I, who had lost all my estate, and ad∣ventured my life, for the publike, was sleighted, in favour of an enemy there∣of; yea, in favour of the same enemy, that plundered me; and my adversaries wife preferred, not for her necessity, but to please her Fancie; whilest my wife, being (though not so gracious among Lords) as good a Gentlewoman as she, being, then, great with child, also, and nearer her time, (and having for the present, neither harbour, nor other necessarie succours for her selfe and her children) was compelled to get a habitation, not where she fancied, but, where she could. Such was the justice, such was the mercy, which I found, amongst some Committees, pretending for the Parliament; on whom (because, I know, their practice, is dishonourable, to the Parliament, and not agreeable to the noble, just, and charitable intentions of that high Court) I will distinguish them, from the true Patriots, by this brief Character. They are persons, easi∣ly inclined to propound, and apt to entertaine, without scruple, what may dis∣advantage the publike; and very punctuall in examining, and exceeding cau∣tious, in assenting, to Propositions, commodious thereunto. Their chiefest active∣nesse, in all Committees, is, as much as they can, in favour of Delinquents; and, as much as they dare, in mischieving, or discountenancing, the well-affe∣cted. Malignants and Royallists usually speake very respectively of them; and, in their Families, both men and women, frequently speake maliciously of the truest Patriots, and of the Parliament. And lastly, some carriages of theirs, have rendred them, so generally, suspected, that, wheresoever all these marks are found together (without some great evidence of a change) I will expect a mischiefe, rather then a favour, or a good turn; and so may the Com∣monwealth. By these, the Parliament is most perplexed; by these, our de∣sired Vnion, and Peace, is delayed; and, by these, I have suffered more wrongs, and affronts, then I will here complain of. For, He is unwise, who (wrong'd) complains on all: And, hee's a Foole, who, nothing, answer shall. By these means, I am yet so far short, of taking larger recompence then is due to me, by the foresaid Order, or by any other course; that, I have not yet received any part of my principall losse; nor wherewithall to maintaine my Familie, much longer, if the Parliament (whereof I nothing doubt) be not more mercifull to me, then some particular men. For a further vindication of my selfe, and of my Troupers (from that ca∣lumnie, wherewith we are unjustly charged) Be it known to all, unto whom this Apologie shall come; that, if any man can charge me for seizing ought,
by the foresaid Order, which I have not here confessed; or, if it be justly a∣verred, that, in any place where I quartered, I have taken Horse, or Armes, without Authority; or disposed of what I seized, for my private commo∣ditie; or, that I have taken, directly, or indirectly, to the value of a pennie, to favour any person; or injured any one, to the same value, since I was first armed for the publike; or, that I received (save by the hands of the Treasu∣rers, or Collecters, of the Counties where I was imployed, by Order, to make seizures) either Horse, Arms, Plate, or Money (except some Horse, and a few Arms, for compleating my Troupe, according to my Commission: and such horse, as I can make appeare, by discharge, to be delivered to recruit other Troupes) or, if any can, in like manner, affirm, that, with my privitie, then, or afterward, any Officer, or Trouper, of mine, compelled Free-quarter; or tooke ought violently, or fraudulently, from any man, for which I caused not a double value to be returned: or, if any man can say, I exacted free-Quarter for my selfe, so much as one night; or took it by way of courtesie, a∣bove three times; I do, hereby, promise, and oblige my selfe, to restore, in recompence thereof, tenfold, upon demand; not doubting, but challenge of satisfaction would soon be made, if any wrong hath beene so done, I ha∣ving made this publike offer, and being so well known, as I am. And, I do the rather make this publication, because, I heare, some others have plunder∣ed, in the name of my Troupe. I could, yet, further, justifie my selfe, from other scandalls, and objecti∣ons, and, thereby, put many to a harder task, in making their vindications, then I have had with this. But, my credit, with good men, is not so little, as that I need apologize against every malicious scandall: And, as for the rest, it is my honour, and shall be my advantage, that they hate, sleight and tra∣duce me. For my conclusion, therefore, I will only let flie this Shaft; and will draw it to the head, light where it will. Whosoever hath reported, that I have either committed, or omitted, any thing, through negligence, faithlesnesse, or want of courage; or, that I have o∣therwise behaved my selfe, then became a Souldier, in the ordering, keeping or quitting of Farnham Castle, or in any publike service or duty, since I tooke armes in defence of the King, Parliament, and Kingdome; and shall not call me to an account for it, either before a Councell of Warre, or where els it may beseem me to take notice thereof, and make answer for my selfe; That man (unlsse he shall heartily repent the scandall) is, thereby, injurious, as well to the publike, as to me: and (as most of my Detracters, and Oppressors, have hitherto proved) is a FOOLE, a COVVARD, or, a VILLAIN, or ALL. When I have spoke, DESPIGHTS to sports, are turn'd: When I am silent, my proud Foes, are scorn'd. Farewell.
