W40 E176_15 99859767 111864
CERTAINE REASONS WHY THE BOOKE OF COMMON-PRAYER BEING CORRECTED SHOVLD Continue. BY I.W. LONDON, Printed by A.N for Richard Lownds, at his shop adjoyning to Ludgate. 1641.
TO THE READER. CHRISTIAN READER, THe Motives that have induced me to publish these common Reasons (how mean soever you find them comming but from a common subject) hath procee∣ded partly from my frequent observing an irreli∣gious, illegall, and wilfull contempt of divers mis∣informed and misguided people, in refusing to come into our Church or Congregation on the Lords day, while any part of the Booke of Common Prayer was reading, though it were the ex∣presse word of God contained therein, (a thing indeed, which hath justly given much cause of griefe and offence to many true hear∣ted Subjects to the law of God, and of the Land, and may prove in the conclusion (with those opinions and practices that are ac∣companied with them) not only dangerous to the disturbance of our happy peace, the subversion of our Protestation, and our re∣ligion, but also the losse of our lives and liberties, and all wee have) As also from the over-confident presuming expressions of some others, that the Booke of Common prayer should be utterly abolished; which together with that sincere affection that I formerly have declared, and still beare unto them, and to the maintaining of the truth and peace of the Church and Com∣mon-weale (though to my great reproach and prejudice) hath the rather pressed me on hereunto. I am not ignorant what envy and uncharitable censures I have already endured, and must expect from those obstinate despisers and depravers of them,
and of Authoritie, and of those that conscionablie affect and fre∣quent them. But they may please to take notice, that it will be found not agreeable to that true religion which they so much professe; for it will not endure a Tryall, either by the law of God or Man: yet I am the rather content that they are become my enemies for speaking and justifying so necessarie a truth; nor is it any new thing with me to suffer for the maintenance of the Law and liberty of the Subject, God I trust in his due time will cleare my synceritie therein. Neither is it my case alone: for they spare none that comply not with their distemper'd humours, be they never so great or good. That true reformed Protestant Religion which I endevour to practise teacheth me otherwise, and to pray to God to forgive (them) my enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turne their hearts; and to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred and are deceived. However I am resolved to remaine a heartie lover of truth, and peace, and of uniformitie in the re∣verentiall feare and service of God, and will continue to pray that they to whom God hath committed the stewardship and dispensation of justice, and maintenance of our true religion and lawes (now after Tryall) may seasonably settle, confirme, and unite us in them, our Protestation, and our due and decent wor∣ship of God; lest the irreconciliable and bloudy adversaries of them and us take the advantage of the distractions to hinder our true, expected, and prayed for Reformation, and in stead thereof to bring us all into miserable and remedilesse confusion. I.W.
SOME REASONS WHY The Booke of Common Prayer being corrected should continue. First, because it was composed and approved of by godly refor∣med professors and Martyrs, and reverently used and fre∣quented by devout Protestants, in the times of religious Princes, the happy instruments and Propagators of the true reformed Religion. IT addes much to the due respect and e∣steeme of them, that they have such a re∣verend forming and consent of grave and orthodox Divines, Martyrs, and zealous Protestants; And why should we not be∣leeve, that the godly and religious Professors of those times (who had seene and felt the furie of the contrary religion, and best knew the inconveniences, and diffe∣rences in matters belonging thereunto then chiefely in agitation) did seriously and faithfully endevour a syn∣cere reformation? they were no wayes hindred in effe∣cting their desires, for they had the approbation of their Prince, and countenance of authoritie thereunto: why then should we not conceive, that the Spirit of truth
did guide them? Certainly if they had knowne any bet∣ter way for the due and decent service and honour of God, they would have propounded it, and it would have beene aswell established. And questionlesse if there had beene any such errours in them as are suppo∣sed, and slandered on them, some of them would have made some recantation and acknowledgement thereof at their suffrings, and not have made use of them, and commended them to others at their departure out of the world. Secondly, Because they have beene at severall times enacted and established as Lawes of the Land, in the times of most Religious and reformed Princes. They were first enacted in the fift and sixt yeare of King Edward the sixt. They were repealed in the first yeare of Queene Mary her reigne, That repeale was made voide, and the act of Edw. 6. was re-established, and confirmed in the first yeare of Queene Elizabeth her reigne. The due resort unto them on Sundayes accord∣ing to the aforesaid act of Qu. Eliz. was revived 3. Iacobi. He then that makes opposition against such wholsome and re-established Lawes, enacted by the prudent, Reli∣gious, and mature deliberation of severall Parliaments, ought to have more then ordinary grounds, and bring substantiall and absolutely necessarie Arguments for the repeale and abolishing of them: and seeing it is our hap∣pinesse
that we have them established and confirmed by law, If we know our own good, wee shall endea∣vour by all lawfull meanes to continue them under a law still. Thirdly, Because that which gives the offence therein is not matter of faith and salvation, But discipline, and the Cere∣monies of the Church. It is not to be denyed, that authority hath power to order and settle Discipline and Government, as well in Ecclesiasticall as Civill affairs, being not contrary to the written word of God; which once being setled, that which was formerly indifferent in its own nature, cea∣seth now to be indifferent to us as subjects being under that setled law; and truly methinks if there were no o∣ther argument but this, it were sufficient ground for a good Christian subject to conforme himselfe unto them. Againe, nor mans conscience ought to be troubled at that which is contained in the sacred Scriptures the expresse word of God, or evidently grounded thereon, But rather for the not performance of the same. Why then do we charge and burthen our consciences with those things which are not imposed upon us by the command of God? why do we stumble at straws, and leape over blocks? Tithe Mint and Comin, and let the greater works of the Law undone? shall we a∣gree
in the substance, and in the greater, in matters of faith and salvation, and shall we contend for shadows, and disagree in the lesser, in things indifferent in their own nature, and neglect things lawfully commanded by Authority? God forbid. The reason why some schis∣maticall and seditious professors are taken notice of to be so guilty of not walking according to the commande∣ments of God, the doctrine and rules of our Religion, is, because they so much overbusie themselves in oppo∣sing the lawfull discipline & ceremonies of the Church, and (thereby thinking to give satisfaction to themselves and their erronious consciences) in the meane time neg∣lect the honour and dutie to their Governours, their charity and love to their neighbours, which are the ex∣presse command of God in his word. Fourthly, Because they have endured opposition, & the greatest number of the opposers have been either weake and ignorant Christians, misled and misinformed, or perverse, seditious, and inconformable to the established government. That there are many weake Christians (though honestly affected to the true Religion) and that there is in the nature of man a perverse and froward disposition, and a spirit of contradiction in some, none that truly knowes religion, the nature of man, and the times, will denie. Solomon goes further, and tells us that
there is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet they are not washed from their silthinesse, so that then, there may be divers and severall ends in op∣position, some may only seem to oppose by way of trial, & inquiry to the end that the truth may be manifested. Some may oppose out of simplicitie and ignorance. Some out of an intemperate and indiscreete Zeal. Some may have sinister ends and by respects in their opposing. Some oppose them in envie and malice to the truth and our happinesse therein. But although God only seeth and knoweth every mans heart and end in oppo∣sing, and ponders all their doings, yet it is not unknown but well observed, That some endeavouring to shake off government, and to free themselves from their due obedience (out of pride or ambition, or out of a blinde and intemperat Zeal, or from the effect of them both) when they have beene lawfully checked by the reines of Authority, they have endeavoured and have sowne the Tares of Sedition and division in the Church and common-wealth; and further, such is the extraordinary perverse and arrogant disposition, and self conceitednes of some transported humours, that rather then they will acknowledg their errours though never so apparent, the very state and law it selfe must be condemned and con∣discend to their distempers.
I will not therefore condemne any thing, meerely because it is opposed; Because that the most sacred Scrip∣tures, the word of God, and our true reformed Prote∣stant Religion, hath received no small opposition from time to time; and that good and godly Governours and Christians have not wanted opposition and psecuti∣on too, even when they have best deserved, and the best men and best things have beene and are still subject to calumnie and misinterpretation. And it were to bee wished that it were not observed in these dayes, that those that were and are accounted and known to be re∣ligious and zealous Protestants, constant in the mainte∣nance of the truth, and of their reverentiall feare of God, and that make conscience also of their duties as Christi∣ans, to declare their affections to truth and peace, and to performe their duties of a subject to their Prince and wholsome Laws, that these which deserve commen∣dation and imitation, had not so much opposition and such uncharitable censures, of being only formall, car∣nall, and morall Christians, and sometimes worse de∣tractions too frequent in mens mouthes and writings, Moreover, That which the Apostle calls pure Religi∣on and undefiled before God, and that which is the Triall of a good Christian and Subject, some slande∣rously and censoriously oppose, and judg Pharisaicall & formall, &c. It is true (as they say) that it is possible for a morall honest man to go to Hell; But it is most cer∣tain
that none shall goe to Heaven, unlesse they have righteousnesse joyned to their holinesse; hee that makes not conscience of performing the duties of the second Table, there is just cause to suspect his syncerity in the performance of the first. The Apostle saith in the fifth of the Galathians, That all the Law is fulfilled even in one word; Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy selfe, and this is that second great Commandement that Saint Matthew speaketh of, which is the tryall of the first, according to that Assertion of Saint Iohn, He that loveth not his bro∣ther whom hee hath seene, how can hee love God whom hee hath not seene: Againe, without faith it is impossible to please God: now the main tryall of true faith is by the lively operation and expression of it in good works, shew mee thy faith by thy works, saith the Apostle. For as the bodie without the spirit is dead, so faith without good works is dead, Iames 2.26. and none shal ever be saved by a dead faith, Iam. 2.14.17. It were happy therefore if we would see or suspect the policy of the Devil or his agents, who envy our happinesse, and take advantage either of our judgements depraved, or natures corrupted, to make us their instruments to breake our blessed unity and peace in Church and Common-wealth, and so while we are striving and contending for shadows, we may be depri∣ved of the substance, and brought into irrecoverable confusion.
Fiftly, Because the oppositions have been divers times fully an∣swered by learned and Religious Protestants, but especially so fullie determined in a conference on mature deliberation by our late renowned King Iames of blessed memorie. This manifestly appeares by a Proclamation, for the uniformity of Common Prayer, and the decent service of God, dated the fifth of March, in the first yeere of K. James, and is prefixed before the Booke of Common-Prayer, part whereof I will mention, the rest (wherein you may receive further satisfaction) I refer you unto to peruse at your pleasure. The words are these. In the month of October last we gave intimation of a confe∣rence intended to be had with as much speede as convenientlie could be, for the ordering of the Church, which accordingly fol∣lowed in the month of Ianuary last at our Honour of Hmp∣ton Court, where before our selfe and our privie Councell, were assembled many of the grave Bishops, and Prelats of the Realme, and many other learned men, as well of those that are conformable to the state of the Church established, as of those that dissented, among whom what our paines were, what our patience in hearing and replying, and what the indifferencie & uprightnesse of our judgment, wee leave to the report of those who heard the same, contenting our selfe with the synceritie of our owne heart therein. But wee cannot conceale that the successe of that conference was such as happens to many other things, which moving great expectation before they be entred
into, in their issue produce small effects. For wee found mightie and vehement informations, supported with so weak and slender proofs, as it appeared to us and our Councell, that there was no cause why any change should have been at all in that which was most impugned, the Book of Com∣mon-praier, containing the forme of the publike service of God here established, neither in the Doctrine which appea∣red to be syncere, nor in the formes and rites which were ju∣stified out of the practice of the Primitive Church; not∣withstanding, &c. And concludes in these words, And last of all wee doe admonish all men, that hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any farther alteration in the common and publike forme of GODS service from this which is now established, For that neither will we give way to any to presume, that our owne judgment ha∣ving determined in a matter of this weight, shall be swayed to alteration by the frivolous suggestions of any light spirit; neither are we ignorant of the inconveniences that doe arise in government by admitting innovation in things once setled by mature deliberation; and how necessarie it is to use con∣stancie in upholding the publike determinations of states; for that such is the unquietnesse and unstedfastnesse of some dispositions, affecting everie yeere new formes of things, as if they should be followed in their inconstancie would make all actions of state ridiculous and contemptible, whereas the stedfast maintaining of things by good advice established is the weale of all Common-wealths.
In the Preface of the Booke of Common-prayer printed 1627, it is declared that all uncertaine Cere∣monies were left out, and nothing ordained to bee read, but the very pure Word of GOD the holy Scriptures, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same. In the Declaration of Ceremonies why some be abolished and some retained, it is manifested, that without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any order or quiet Discipline in the Church, and though some were thought worthy to bee cut off and cleane rejected, others there be which though they have beene devised by man, yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a decent order in the Church, for which they were first devised, as because they appertain to edification, whereunto all things done in the Church, as the Apostle teacheth, ought to be referred; and although the keeping or omitting of a Ceremonie in it selfe considered is but a small thing, yet the wilfull and contemptuous trans∣gression and breaking of a common Order and Di∣scipline is no small offence before God, Let all things be done among you, saith Saint Paul, in a seemly and due order, the appointment of which order appertaines not to private men, therefore no man ought to take in hand, or presume to appoint, or alter any publike
or common order in Christs Church, except hee be lawfully called and authorized thereunto, &c. as therein more at large appeares. Hee that desires satisfaction of the particular an∣swers to the severall objections against the Booke of Common-prayer, &c. may read and receive it in that learned Work of Master Hookers Ecclesiasticall Po∣litic, and in Master Robert Abbot his Tryall of our Church-forsakers, and in many other. In the mean-time they may informe their judge∣ments, and allay their rash and scandalous Censures by the perusall of these following places of Scrip∣ture, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. Davids set formes of Psalmes for severall speciall occasions, Ioel. 2.7. Mat∣thew 6.9. Luke 11.2. Ecclesiast. 5.2. Sixtly and lastly, Because they are and have beene so Common-prayers amongst us. Thanks be unto God, the time is not now as it hath bin with our Forefathers in this Kingdome, and with other Christians at this day in severall pla∣ces of the World; Wee need not hide our selves in Dens, and frequent the Caverns of the Earth, to serve the true God in. The Bible which was shut up in an unknowne tongue from the Generality is now become common in our owne mother tongue
and language of the Kingdome, and we all have not only liberty by Proclamation to enjoy it, but wee have severall established Acts of Parliament, to con∣firme our common use of it, our Religion, and our Book of Common-prayer also, and therefore God grant that that which is so great a mercy and happi∣nesse unto us, we make it not our misery, by turning the cause of our thanksgiving into murmuring and repining, depraving, and contemning of that and those who legally and conscionably affect and fre∣quent them. There was a time when the children of Israel surfeited of their Manna; I pray God that our loathing of the Hony-combe doth not argue too full a stomack in us. Doe wee not thinke that by our contemning of them, and by our ingratitude for the free and peaceable enjoyment of them? we do not provoke God to deprive us of them? yes surely we doe; when plenty makes us wanton and ingratefull, scarcity is not far off. Thus God deals with us in the abuse of our healths, our estates, our peace, and li∣berty, and he deals not so with us only in temporall Blessings, but in spirituall also. Wee accompt our selves (as all other Nations esteem us) happy in our good and Common Laws, we enjoy our Common prayers, not only by Common Law, but by a Title of Common also, so that now they are truly become
ours in Common, and they are our common good, our custome and freehold; in the publike good and welfare whereof, and of our Protestant Religion, every subject in England hath an interest and proprie∣ty. They have been our common orders for the due and decent worship of God, and God is the God of Order and Vnitie; they have beene our premedi∣tated and authorized formes of Discipline in our spi∣rituall warfare, in fighting against the Flesh, the World, and that great and subtle Commander of the Aire the Devill; the potent adversaries of Mankind, who have assuredly received many a deadly wound by these ancient and approved and experienced Bat∣taliaes, and shall wee now breake ranks and order, when our victory goes on so prosperously, and our warfare so nigh to an end, and so hazard an inrode, and rowting, and a confusion amongst us? God forbid. To conclude, it were to be heartily wished, that in matters that truly concerne so much the glory of God, the honour, peace, and welfare, of the Church and Common weale, that all single sinister and pre∣judicate opinions might be laid aside (much lesse so scandalously published) and that in contending for the truth we do not forget our dutie, and the unity that ought to be amongst Protestants: For it most
certain there can be no true contending for the truth, but that which is accompanied with sincerity, hu∣mility, and charity, that so the goodnesse of our cause may be manifested in our religious and Christian demeanours therein. And for as much as the Book of Common Prayers hath been so religiouslie begun, intended, and used by our forefathers, to the glory, and due, and de∣cent Service of God, and hath at severall times been established as Lawes in this Land in times of Religi∣ous Princes, and reforming Magistrates, and hath been often maintained against all oppositions, and so maturely determined, and so long peaceably and prosperously enjoyed, devoutly frequented, and hath beene so common and necessary for us, let us be thankfull to God, and our Governours, for the free and common use and continuance of them, and ac∣cording to that prudent and religious advice of au∣thority, let us quietly attend the reformation inten∣ded, without any tumultuous disturbance of the worship of God, and peace of the Kingdome. In the meane time, and ever, let us remember the Apostles counsell to pray for all those that are in Autho∣rity, that we may live a godly life under them with all peace and quietnesse, to which my heart and tongue, and all true hearted protestants will ever say, Amen. FINIS.
