A387A R173166 52528728 178692
An ACCOUNT of the several Treaties of the Allies, with the Crown of France. Dantzick, October 12. OUR last Advices from Poland say, That the new King's Affairs go on with all the success that can be desired; and that his Majesty, by the Advice of his best Counsellors, was resolved to go to Lemberg, to re∣ceive the Homage of the Polish Army in the Neighbourhood of that place, before he go to Warsaw. In the mean time 300000 Florins, rai∣sed by a certain Impost since the late King's death, is ready here to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think fit. The Prince of Conti hath not yet dar'd to go to Ma∣rienburg, nor to stay one Night ashoar, but keeps for the most part on board. Craici Coronni, the chief of his Party in the Neighbourhood, hath not as yet got above 400 Poles together at Oliva for Conti's Service: And the Castellan Bidgouski Nieme∣nouski, having come some days ago to salute the Prince of Conti, in a very reverend manner, he thought himself not kindly enough receiv'd, and thereupon rode im∣mediatly away, with 40 of his Retinue; whereof the Prince having ask'd the rea∣son, the Cardinal told him, That the Poles lov'd to be complimented. Many others have also deserted him, because they have been disappointed of their Money, in which they reckon'd to have wallowed. It's now said, that the Princes Creatures design to go to Lithuania, to try their fortune there, but with as little appearance of success as they have had in Prussia. Our Senate have now 4000 Soldiers on Foot, beside 6 Companies of Burghers, who keep Guard day and night. Hague, October 21. To day the Peace betwixt us and France was publish'd here with much solemnity, according to which all Hostilities are to cease in four Weeks, time beginning from the 2st of October 1697. being the day of publication here, and reaching to the 18th of November in the East and North Sea, from Terneuse in Norway to the end of the Channel, and from thence to Cape St. Vincent, after the 2d of December; and from thence after the 30th of December to the Line, and after the 21st of June 98, all over the World. The 6th of November is to be observed here as a day of General Thanksgiving. The Ratification from Spain is not yet arriv'd, but that under the Great Seal of England was exchang'd on the 17th. N. S. We expect every day that the German Ministers will terminate their Affairs so as to Sign the Treaty. Yesterday an English Ketch was stranded at Heye, but the Crew sav'd. The Earl of Portland is gone hence again to Loo. The Earl of Manchester be∣ing bound to Venice on his Embassy, hath been here with the English Ambassadors. Vice-Admiral Everts, and our Men of War from England, is arriv'd at Middleburg. The Treaty of Peace betwixt France and Spain consists of 38 Articles; the chief of which are, That there shall be a perpetual Peace betwixt the two Kings, their Heirs, Successors, and Dominions. That Gronne, Roses, Belveder, Barcelona, and all others taken since the Treaty of Nimeguen, shall be restored to Spain, in the same Condition they were taken. That the Town, Citadel and Dutchy of Luxemburg, with the Artillery taken therein, the County of Chiny and their dependencies shall be restored in the present state. Charleroy the like. Mons and its dependencies the like, except 16 Villages which are named Courtray, with the Artillery therein found, and it's dependencies, as they are at present. All such Places taken before or on the Day of this Peace, in what place of the World soever, shall be mutually resto∣red by the said two Kings. All the Places re-united by the most Christian King, since the Treaty of Nimeguen, shall be restored to Spain, according to the List, with their Sovereignity, immediatly after the Ratifications, except 82 Villages which the King of France pretends to, as the dependencies of Charlemont, Maubeuge, &c. which shall be treated of by Commissioners on both sides, or left to the Ar∣bitriment of the States of Holland. The French shall have the use of the Waggons in the Neighbourhood for two Months, to carry off their Artillery, &c. All Pri∣soners shall be released without ransom, on paying their Debts. That the Subjects on both side shall have freedom of Trade one with another, paying the ordinary Imposts. That all Papers belonging to the restored Places, as also those taken from the Citadel of Ghent and the Chamber of Ryssel, shall be restored. That all Contri∣butions and Arrears shall mutually cease, after the Ratification. The Subjects of both sides shall be restored to their Estates, but without any expectation of Arrears or Rents from one another, during the War. No Goods or Effects confiscated, shall be levied on either side. And those that have served the contrary side, shall be re∣stored
to their Estates, and the Protection of their Sovereign! Which Re-establishment shall be perform∣ed according to the 21st and 22d Articles of the Treaty of Nimiguen. The 24th and 25th Articles, con∣cerning Benefices, shall be executed; so that those who have Offices shall hold 'em. The Subjects of ei∣ther Prince are at free liberty to dispose of the Estates they have under either. Each of the Kings shll pay the Taxes the Generality of their Subjects is tax'd in, as shall be regulated by Commissioners. The Rents settled upon the Dominions by the foresaid Treaties, shall be paid to whom they are due. All the Prizes taken in 4 Weeks after the Publication, betwixt Terneuse in Norway and the end of the Canal, shal be restored in 6 weeks to the Cape of St. Vincent; 10 weeks to the Mediterranean, and to the Line; and in 8 Months all over the World. In case of a new Rupture, the Subjects of each are to have 6 Months to return their effects. The Troops are to retire to their dwn Territories immediatly, on the Ratification. The Rents of the Lands shall be continued to the Possessors: till the Day of Restitution. The Treaty of Nimeguen shall be executed, except where it is herein otherwise provided or altered. The Licenses granted by the Par∣liament of Tournay, shall take effect during the French Kings possession. The Town and Castle of Di∣nant shall be restored to the Bishop of Liege as they were taken. The King of Spain shall restore Pnz to the Duke of Parma. The Treaty 'twixt France and Savoy in 1696. shall be comprised in this. And the King of Sweden and others, as they are in the Treaty 'twixt England and France. The Treaty betwixt France and the States of Holland consists of 21 Articles: The principal of which are, That there shall be a perpetual Peace betwixt them and their Subjects. That by vertue of the said Treaty, they shall promote one anothers Welfare, agree to no other Treaty to one anothers disadvantage, but break the same, and the first that it's proposed to shall discover it: That any goods taken into Arrest, or Confiscated on either side, shall be restored without regard to differenced of Re∣ligion. That the Count d' Auvergne shall be restored to the Marquisate of Bergen op Zoom. That all Conquests in and out of Europe shall be mutually restored. That Prisoners of War shall be released without Ransom. All Contributions and Arrears shall cease upon the Ratification. All pretensions shall be annulled on both sides, the better to prevent a Rupture. Subjects on both sides shall have Ju∣stice done them in the ordinary way, without having recourse to Letters of Reprisal. If any thing be acted against this Treaty, the Transgressors shall only be punished. In case of a Rupture, the Sub∣jects on both sides shall have 9 Months to withdraw their Effects: The Treaty betwixt France and Brandenburg in 1679, shall be re-established. That betwixt France and Savoy in 1696. confirmed. The King of Sweden shall be comprehended in this Treaty, and those who in 6 Weeks after the Ratificati∣on shall be named by France, and on the part of their High and Mightinesses, the Kings of Great Bri∣tain and Spain, and all the Allies, who shall declare they will accept of the Peace 6 Weeks after the Ratification, as also the 13 Swiss Cantons, and particularly the Protestant Cantons, Geneva, and their Dependencies, the Grison Leagues. Neufchatel, St. Gall, Mulhouse, Bine, Be, Embden, &c. and the King of Sweden and all other Potentates, may be Guarantees of this Treaty. Hague, October 22. The Articles betwixt the Emperor and France are not yet Signed, which is as∣cribed to the Tricks of the French, that they may have opportunity to make new Proposals. An ac∣count of all the Conferences is sent to the King at Loo. Abundance of Vessels are ready, to sail hence for France. It's thought the King will stay for some time at Loo. The Officers are forbidden to trouble his Majesty there. We hear the Muscovite Ambassadors are to have their Audience of Leave next Week and that an expedient is found out to furnish them with some men of War, without doing any pre∣judice to our Trade in Turky. Hague Oct. 22. We hear from Turkey, That they are much alarm'd at the Elector of Saxony's being chosen King of Poland, because the French assured them, that  would carry it, and declare War a∣gainst Muscovy We hear from Danesick, That the French on board Conti Squadron begin to grow very sickly. And We are informed from Dunkirk, That the French Court have ordered their privateers there to be put to Sea, and seise all the Ships belonging to Dantzick, because they have declared for the E∣lector of Saxony. Hague, Oct. 23. We hear the Venetians have sunk divers Turkish Ships, and forc'd 7 Sualtana's into Harbour. That the English have taken 9 French Merchant-ment on the Banks of Newfoundland. The English and French Ambassadors have agreed to give mutual Pasports for English and French Ships, that are to go long Voyages: All the Points betwixt the Imperialists and France are now adjusted, ex∣cept the Pretensions of the Dutchess of Orleanc, which it's thought will be accommodated in a few Days. Paris, Oct: 18. The Re-establishment of Trade with the Dutch hath been published here. The King that his Subjects may enjoy the Fruits of the Peace, hth suppressed the Capitation, the Utensil and the Militia. It is not yet certain when We shall publish the Peace, some think that it will be de∣ferred till the Emperor sign. It's said the Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy is put off till January, be∣cause the Jewels, &c. designed for the Wedding Suits cannot be got ready before that time, M. Vil∣leroy is returned hither from Flanders. We hear, that the Prince of Conti hath not yet landed; and are impatient to hear of the success of his Affairs, of which we are now very doubtful. The Port Letters yesterday say, That the Content Transport Ship with 50. English Prisoners, is ar∣rived at Plimouth from St. Maloe; from whence Captain Purchase is a at Weymouth with 130. The latter reports, that upon the Peace's being proclaimed at St. Maloes, which was on Saturday sennight all the Prison Doors where the English lay, were thrown open, That the  Souldiers there seem'd very much dissatisfied at the Peaces being concluded; and that Companies, Wigs, Redcoats, &c. might be had there at an easie rate. They add, that a few days before they came away, a small En∣glish Brigantine with Wine, from Antegoa, and a Spanish Vessel of 200 Tuns were brought in thither and that the Privateers and Men of War are laid up as they come in. The Devonshire, and three o∣ther Men of War, are come into the Downes from Spithead; in order to be laid up. Sir Cloudesly Shovel continues still in the Downes with 8 or 10 of his Majesties Ships. London. There are Letters in Town by the last Mail, intimating, That the French King, upon dis∣banding his Soldiers, had given orders to his General Officers, to acquaint their Soldiers, That it was not his inclination to disoblige those who had been seviceable to him; but the Peace being concluded, He was willing to ease such as had been supporters of the War, and wished every one to retire to their native Countries to improve the ground; promising them a reward for their Services. And that to those who were inclinable to follow the Art of War, he would give Recommendations; and ordered them to give them thanks for what they have done. There are also Letters which say, That all the Commotions in Poland are procured by the Natives on purpose to draw what Money they can from each of the Competitors, into the Kingdom, where it has been very scarce for some years; and that afterwards they design to declare: And that the great est part of the Nobility, Gentry, &c. having already joyned with the Elector of Saxony, it is not doub∣ted that the Prince of Conti will fail in his Enterprize.
