1569 s126020 [ocm]82474491 185117
A BRIEFE RELATION Of certain speciall and most ma∣teriall passages, and speeches in the Starre-Chamber, occasioned and delivered Iune the 1th. 1637. at the censure of those three worthy Gentle∣men, Dr. BASTWICKE, Mr. BVRTON and Mr. PRYNNE, as it hath beene truely and faithfully gathered from their owne mouthes by one present at the sayd Censure. Printed in the Yeere 1637.
A Briefe Relation of certain speciall and most materiall passages, and speeches in the Starre-Chamber, occasioned and delivered Iune the 14th. 1637. at the censure of those three worthy Gentlemen, Dr. BASTWICKE, Mr. BVRTON and Mr. PRYNNE, as it hath beene truely and faithfully gathered from their owne mouthes by one present at the sayd Censure. BEtweene eight and nine a clocke in the morning (the 14. of Iune) the Lords being sett in their places in the said Court of Starre-cham∣ber, and casting their eyes upon the Prisoners, then at the Barr, Sr. Iohn Finch (chiefe Iustice of the Common Pleas) began to speake after this maner. Sr. Iohn Finch. I had thought Mr. Prynne had had no eares, but me thinkes hee hath eares; which caused many of the Lords to take the stricter view of him; and for their better satisfaction, the Vsher of the Court was commaunded to turne up his haire, and shew his eares: upon the sight whereof the Lords were displeased they had beene for∣merly no more cut off; and cast out some disgracefull words of him. M. Prynne To which Mr. Prynne replied; My Lords, there is never a one of your Honours, but would be sorry to have your eares as mine are.
L. Keeper. The Lord Keeper replied againe; In good faith hee is somewhat sawcy. M. Prynne I hope (sayd Mr. Prynne) your Honours will not be offended, I pray God give you eares to heare. L. Keeper. The busines of the day (sayd the Lord Keeper) is to proceed on the Prisoners at the Barr. M. Prynne Mr. Prynne then humbly desired the Court to give him leave to make a motion or two, which being graunted, he mooves. First that their Honours would be pleased to accept of a crosse Bill against the Prelates, signed with their owne hands, being that which stands with the Iustice of the Court, which he humbly craved, and so tendred it. L. Keep r. As for your crosse Bill, it is not the busines of the day; Hereaf∣ter if the Court shall see just cause, and that it savours not of Li∣belling, we may accept of it; for my part I have not seene it, but have heard somewhat of it. M. Prynne I hope your Honours will not refuse it, being it is on his Maje∣sties behalfe; wee are his Majesties Subjects, and therefore require the Iustice of the Court. L. Keeper. But this is not the busines of the day. M. Prynne Why then, My Lords, I have a second motion, which I hum∣bly pray your Honours to graunt; which is, That your Lordships will be pleased to dismisse the Prelates, here now sitting from ha∣ving any voyce in the censure of this cause (being generally knowne to be Adversaries) as being no wayes agreeable with equity or rea∣so, that they who are our Adversaries, should be our Iudges: Therefore wee humbly crave they may be expunged out of the Court. L. Keeper. In good faith its a sweet motion is't not? Herein you are be∣come Libellous. And if you should thus Libell all the Lords and Reverend Iudges, as you doe the most Reverend Prelates, by this your Plea, you would have none to passe sentence upon you for your Libelling, because they are parties. M. Prynne Vnder correction (My Lord) this doth not hold; your Honour need not putt that for a certainty, which is an uncertainty; wee have nothing to say to any of your Honours, but onely to the Pre∣lates.
L. Keeper. Well, proceed to the busines of the day; Read the Information. Which was read, being very large; and these five Bookes annexed therevnto (viz.) a Booke of Dr. Bastwicks written in Latin. The second a little Booke, intiteled, Newes from Ipswich. The third intiteled, A Divine Tragedy, recording Gods fearefull judge∣ments on Sabbath breakers. The fourth Mr. Burtons Booke, intite∣led, An Apology of an Appeale to the Kings most Excellent Maje∣sty, with two Sermons for God and the King, preached on the fifth of November last. The fifth and last Dr. Bastwickes Letany. The Kings Counsell (being five) tooke each of them a severall Booke, and descanted there at the Barre upon them accor∣ding to their pleasure. Mr. At∣torney. Mr. Attorney began first with Dr. Bastwickes Latin Booke, pick∣ing out here and there particular conclusions that best served for his owne ends, (as did all the other Counsell out of the fower other Bookes) to the great abuse of the Authors, as themselves there im∣mediately complained, intreating them to read the foregoing grounds upon which the sayd conclusions depended, without which they could not understand the true meaning of them. Ser. Next unto the Attorney, Serjeant Whitfeild falls upon Reverend Mr. Burtons Booke, who vented much bitternes against that unre∣prooveable Booke (as all that read it with an honest and orthodox heart may clearely perceive) swearing, In good faith, My Lords, there is never a page in this Booke, but deserves a heavier and dee∣per Censure then this Court can lay upon him. Next followed A. B. who in like maner descanted upon the Newes from Ipswich, charging it to be full of pernitious lyes, and especially vindicating the honor of Mathew Wren, Bishop of Nor∣wich, as being a learned pious and Reverend Father of the Church. Mr. Little∣ton. In the fourth place followes the Kings Solicitor, who acts his part upon the Divine Tragedy; To which part of it, concerning Gods judgements on Sabbath breakers, hee had little to say, but onely putt it off with a scoffe, saying; that they sate in the Seate of God, who judged those accidents which fell out upon persons suddainly strooken, to be the judgement of God for Sabbath-breaking, or
words to the like effect: but enlarged himselfe upon that passage, which reflected upon that late Reverend (as hee termed him) and learned Professor of the Law, and his Majesties faithfull Servant Mr. William Noy, his Majesties late Attorney, who (as hee said) was most shamefully abused by a slaunder layd upon him; which was, That it should be reported, that Gods judgement fell upon him for so eagerly prosecuting that innocent person Mr. Prynne; which judgement was this; That he laughing at Mr. Prynne while hee was suffering upon the Pillory, was strooke with an yssue of blood in his privy part, which by all the art of man could never be stopped unto the day of his death,a. which was soone after. But the truth of this (My Lords sayth hee) you shall finde to be as pro∣bable as the rest; for wee have here three or fower Gentlemen of good credit and ranke, to testify upon oath, that hee had that yssue long before; and thereupon made a shew as if hee would call for them in before the Lords, to witnesse the truth thereof (with these particular words, Make roome for the Gentlemen to come in there) but no one witnesse was seene to appeare: Which was a pretty delusion, and worth all your observations that read it: And so concluded (as the rest) that this Booke also deserved a heavy and deepe Censure. Mr. Har∣bert. Lastly followes Mr. Harbert, whose descant was upon Dr. Bast∣wickes Letanie, picking out one or two passages therein, and so drawing thence his conclusion, that jointly with the rest, it deserved a heavy Censure. The Kings Counsell having all spoken what they could, the Lord Keeper sayd to the Prisoners at the Barre. Lord Kee∣per. You heare Gentlemen wherewith you are charged; and now, least you should say you cannot have liberty to speake for your selves, the Court gives you leave to speake what you can, with these conditions: First, that you speake within the bounds of modesty. Secondly, that your speeches be not Libellous. Prisoners. They all three answered, they hoped so to order their speech as to be free from any immodest or Libellous speaking. L. Keeper. Then speake a Gods name, and shew cause why the Court should not proceed in Censure (as taking the cause pro confesso) against you.
M. Prynne My honorable good Lord, such a day of the moneth there came a Subpoena from your Honours, to enter my appearance in this Court; which being entred, I tooke forth a coppy of the Informa∣tion, which being taken, I was to draw my Answer, which I en∣deavoured to doe, but being shutt up close prisoner, I was deserted of all meanes by which I should have done it; for I was no sooner served with the Subpoena, but I was shortly after shutt up close prisoner, with a suspention of pen, inke and paper; which close im∣prisonment did eate up such a deale of my time, that I was hindred the bringing in of my Answer: You did assigne me Counsell, t'is true, but they neglected to come to me, and I could not come to them, being under lock and key: Then upon motion in Court, yee gave me liberty to goe to them; but then presently after that mo∣tion (I know not for what cause, nor upon whose commaund) I was shutt up againe: And then I could not compell my Counsell to come to me, and my time was short, and I had neither pen nor inke, nor Servant to doe any thing for me, for my Servant was then also kept close prisoner under a Pursevants hands; this was to put impossibilities upon mee. Then upon a second motion for pen and inke (which was graunted me) I drew up some Instructions, and in a fortnight time sent 40 sheetes to my Counsell; suddainly after I drew up 40 sheetes more, and sent to them; My Lord, I did no∣thing but by the advise of my Counsell, by whom I was ruled in the drawing up of all my Answer, and payd him twice for drawing it, and some of my Counsell would have set their hands to it. Here is my Answer, I tender it upon my oath, which your Lordships can∣not deny with the Iustice of the Court. L. Keeper. Wee can give you a President, that this Court hath proceeded and taken a cause pro confesso for not putting in an Answer in sixe dayes; you have had a great deale of favour shewed in affording you longer time, and therefore the Court is free from all calumny or aspersion, for rejecting your Answer not signed with the Counsells hands. M. Prynne But one word or two, my Lords, I desire your Honours to heare me; I put a case in Law, that is often pleaded before your Lordships, one man is bound to bring in two witnesses; if both or one of them sayle, that hee cannot bring them in, doth the Law (my Lords)
make it the mans act? You assigned me two Counsellors; one of them fayled, I cannot compell him; here he is now before you, let him speake, if I have not used all my endeavours to have had him sighed it (which my other Counsell would not have done, if this would have set his hand to it with him) and to have put it in long since. Counsell. My Lord, there was so long time spent ere I could doe any thing, after I was assigned his Counsell; that it was impossible his Answer could be drawne vp in so short a time as was allotted; for after long expectation, seeing hee came not to mee, I went to him, where I found him shut up close prisoner, so that I could not have accesse to him; Whereupon I motioned to the Lieftenant of the Tower, to have free liberty of speech with him concerning his Answer; which being graunted me, I found him very willing and desirous to have it drawne up; whereupon I did moove in this Court for pen and paper; which was graunted, the which he no sooner had gotten, but he set himself to draw up Instructions, and in a short time, sent me 40 sheetes; and soone after I received 40 more; but I found the Answer so long, and of such a nature, that I durst not set my hand to it, for feare of giving your Honours distate. M. Prynne My Lords, I did nothing but according to the direction of my Counsell, onely I spake mine owne words, my Answer was drawne up by his consent, it was his owne act, and hee did approove of it; and if he will be so base a Coward, to doe that in private, which hee dares not acknowledge in publick, I will not let such a sinne lye on my conscience, let it rest with him. Here is my Answer, which though it be not signed with their hands, yet here I tender it upon my oath, which you cannot in Justice deny. L. Keeper. But Mr. Prynne the Court desires no such long Answer; Are you guilty or not guilty? M. Prynne My good Lord, I am to answer in a defensive way, Is here any one, that can witnes any thing against me? Let him come in. The Law of God standeth thus; That a man is not to be condemned, but under the mouth of two or three witnesses. Here is no witnes comes in against me, my Lord, neither is there in all the Information one clause that doth particularly fall on mee, but onely in the gene∣rall, there is no Booke layd to my charge. And shall I be condemned
for a particular act, when no accusation of any particular act can be brought against mee? This were most unjust and wicked. Here I tender my Answer to the Information upon my oath; My Lord, you did impose impossibilities upon me, I could doe no more then I was able. L. Keeper. Well hold your peace, your Answer comes too late. Speake you Dr. Bastwicke. Dr. Bast∣wicke. My Honorable Lords, me thinks you looke like an Assembly of Gods, and sit in the place of God; yee are called the Sonnes of God: And since I have compared you to Gods, give me leave a little to paralell the one with the other, to see whither the compari∣son betweene God and you doth hold in this noble and righteous cause. This was the carriage of Almighty God in the cause of So∣dome: Before hee would pronounce sentence, or execute judge∣ment, hee would first come downe, and see whither the crime was altogether according to the cry that was come up. And with whom doth the Lord consult, when hee came downe? with his Servant Abraham, and hee gives the reason; for I know (sayth hee) that Abraham will commaund his children and household after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord to doe Iustice and Iudgement. My good Lords, thus stands the case betweene your Honours and us this day; There is a great cry come up into your eares, against us, from the Kings Attorney; why now be you pleased to descend and see if the crime be according to the cry, and consult (with God) (not the Prelates being the adversary part, and (as it is apparant to all the World) doe proudly set themselves against the wayes of God, and from whom none can expect Iustice or Iudgement) but with righteous men, that will be impartiall on either side, before you proceed to Censure, which Censure you cannot passe on us, with∣out great injustice before you heare our Answers read: Here is my Answer, which I here tender upon my oath; My good Lords, give us leave to speake in our owne defence; wee are not conscious to our selves of any thing wee have done that deserves a Censure this day in this Honourable Court, but that wee have ever laboured to maintaine the Honor, Dignity, and Prerogative Royall of our So∣veraigne Lord the King, Let my Lord the King live forever. Had I a thousand lives, I should thinke them all too little to spend for the
maintenance of his Majesties Royall Prerogative, My good Lords, can you proceed to Censure before you know my cause? I dare undertake, that scarce any one of your Lordships have read my Bookes; And can you then Censure me for what you know not, and before I have made my defence? O my Noble Lords! Is this righteous Iudgement? This were against the Law of God and man, to condemne a man, before you know his crime. The Go∣vernour before whom S. Paul was carried (who was a very Hea∣then) would first heare his cause before he would passe any Censure upon him; And doth it beseeme so Noble and Christian Assembly to condemne me before my Answer be perused and my cause knowne? Men, Brethren, and Fathers, into what an age are wee fallen? I desire your Honours to lay aside your Censure for this day, and inquire into my cause, heare my Answer read; which if you refuse to doe, I here professe, I will cloath it in Roman Buffe, and send it abroad unto the view of all the World, to cleare mine inno∣cency, and see your great injustice in this cause. Lord Kee∣per. But this is not the busines of the day; Why brought you not in your Answer in due time? Dr. Bast∣wicke. My Lord, a long time since I tendred it to your Honour, I say∣led not in any one particular: And if my Counsell be so base and cowardly, that they dare not signe it for feare of the Prelates (as I can make it appeare) therefore have I no Answer? My Lord, here is my Answer, which though my Counsell out of a base spirit dare not set their hands unto, yet I tender it upon my oath. L. Keeper. But Mr. Dr. you should have beene briefe; you tendred in too large an Answer, which (as I heard) is as Libellous as your Bookes. Dr. Bastw. No, my Lord, it is not Libellous though large, I have none to answer for me but my selfe, and being left to my selfe, I must plead my conscience in answer to every circumstance of the Informa∣tion. L. Keeper. What say you Mr. D. are you guilty, or not guilty? Answer aye or no, you needed not to have troubled your self so much about so large an Answer.
Dr. Bast∣wicke. I know, none of your Honours have read my Bookes; And can you with the Iustice of the Court, condemne me before you know what is written in my Bookes? L. Keeper. What say you to that was read to you even now? Dr. Bastw. My Lord, He that read it did so murther the sence of it, that had I not knowne, what I had written, I could not tell what to have made of it. L. Keeper. What say you to the other Sentence read to you? Dr. Bastw. That was none of mine, I will not father that which was none of my owne. L. Dorseit. Did not you send that Booke, as now it is, to a Noble mans house, together with a Letter directed to him? D. Bastw. Yea, my Lord, I did so, but withall you may see in my Epistle set before the Booke, I did at first disclayme what was not mine; I sent my Booke over by a Dutch Merchant, who it was that wrote the addition I doe not know, but my Epistle set to my Booke, made manifest what was mine, and what was not; and I cannot justly suf∣fer for what was none of mine. L. Arund. My Lord, you heare by his owne speech, the cause is taken pro confesso. L. Keeper. Yea, you say true my Lord. Dr. Bastw. My noble Lord of Arundell, I know you are a noble Prince in Israel, and a great Peere of this Realme; There are some honorable Lords in this Court, that have beene forced out as combatants in a single duell; it is betweene the Prelates and us, at this time as be∣tweene two that have appointed the feild. The one being a coward goes to the Magistrate, and by vertue of his Authority disarmes the other of his weapons, and gives him a Bullrush, and then challenges him to fight. If this be not base cowardice, I know not what be∣longs to a Souldier. This is the case betweene the Prelates and us, they take away our weapons (our Answers) by vertue of your Au∣thority, by which we should defend our selves, and yet they bidd us fight. My Lord, doth not this favour of a base cowardly spirit? I know, my Lord, there is a Decree gonne forth (for my Sentence was passed long since) to cut of our eares.
Lord Kee∣per. Who shall know our Censure, before the Court passe it? Doe you prophesy of your selves? Dr. Bastw. My Lord, I am able to proove it, and that from the mouth of the Prelates owne Servants, that in August last it was decreed, that Dr. Bastwicke should loose his eares. O my Noble Lords! Is this righteous judgement? I may say, as the Apostle once sayd, What, whipp a Roman? I have beene a Souldier able to lead an Army into the field, to fight valiantly for the honour of their Prince; Now I am a Physitian, able to cure Nobles, Kings, Princes and Emperors: And to curtolize a Romans eares, like a Curre, O my honorable Lords! is it not too base an act for so noble an assembly, and for so righteous and honorable a cause? The cause my Lords is great, it concernes the glory of God, the honour of our King, whose Pre∣rogative wee labour to maintaine and to set up in a high maner, in which your Honours Liberties are engaged: And doth not such a cause deserve your Lordships consideration, before you proceed to Censure? Your Honours may be pleased to consider, that in the last cause heard and censured in this Court, betweene St. Iames Bagge and the Lord Moone, wherein your Lordships tooke a great deale of paynes, with a great deale of patience, to heare the Bills on both sides, with all the Answers and Depositions largely layd open before you; which cause when you had fully heard, some of your Honours, now sitting in Court, sayd, You could not in conscience proceed to Censure, till you had taken some time to recollect your selves: If in a cause of that nature, you could spend so much time, and afterwards recollect your selves before you would passe Cen∣sure: How much more should it moove your Honours, to take some time in a cause wherein the glory of God, the Prerogative of his Majestie, your Honours dignity, and the Subjects Liberty is so largely ingaged? My good Lords, it may fall out to be any of your Lordships cases to stand as Delinquents at this Barre, as wee now doe: It is not unknowne to your Honours, the next cause that is to succeed ours, is touching a person that sometimes hath beene in greatest power in this Court: And if the mutations and revolutions of persons and times be such, then I doe most humbly beseech your Honours to looke on us, as it may befall your selves. But if all this will not prevaile with your Honours, to peruse my Bookes, and
heare my Answer, read, which here I tender upon the word and oath of a Soldier, a Gentleman, a Scholler, and a Physitian: I will cloath them (as I sayd before) in Roman Buffe, and disperse them throughout the Christian world, that future generations may see the Innocency of this cause, and your Honors unjust proceedings in it; all which I will doe, though it cost me my life. L. Keeper. Mr. Dr. I thought you would be angry. Dr. Bastw. No my Lord, you are mis-taken, I am not angry nor passionate, all that I doe presse is, that you would be pleased to peruse my Answer. L. Keeper. Well, hold your peace. Mr. Burton, what say you? M. Burton. My good Lords, your Honors (it should seeme) doe determine to Censure us, and take our cause pro confesso, although we have la∣boured to give your Honors satisfaction in all things: My Lords, what you have to say against my Booke, I confesse I did write it, yet did I not any thing out of intent of Commotion or Sedition: I delivered nothing, but what my Text ledd me too, being chosen to suite with the day, namely the fifth of November; the words were these, &c. L. Keeper. Mr. Burton, I pray stand not naming Texts of Scripture now, we doe not send for you to preach, but to answer to those things that are objected against you. M. Burton. My Lord, I have drawne up my Answer to my great paynes and charges, which Answer was signed with my Counsells hands, and re∣ceived into the Court, according to the Rule and Order thereof. And I did not thinke to have beene called this day to a Censure, but have had a legall proceeding by way of Bill and Answer. L. Keeper. Your Answer was impertinent. M. Burton My Answer (after it was entred into the Court) was referred to the Iudges, but by what meanes I doe not know, whither it be impertinent, and what cause your Lordships had to cast it out, I know not. But after it was approoved of, and received, it was cast out as an impertinent Answer.
L. Finch. The Iudges did you a good turne to make it impertinent, for it was as Libellous as your Booke, so that your Answer deserved a Censure alone. L. Keeper. What say you Mr. Burton, are you guilty, or not? M. Burton My Lord, I desire you not onely to peruse my Booke, here and there, but every passage of it. L. Keeper. Mr. Burton, time is short, are you guilty, or not guilty? What say you to that which was read? Doth it become a Minister to de∣liver himself in such a rayling and scandalous way? M. Burton In my judgement, and as I can proove it, it was neither rayling nor scandalous; I conceive that a Minister hath a larger liberty then alwayes to goe in a milde strayne: I being the Pastor of my people, whom I had in charge, and was to instruct, I supposed it was my duety to informe them of those Innovations that are crept into the Church, as likewise of the danger and ill consequence of them: As for my Answer, yee blotted out what yee would, and then the rest which made best for your owne ends, you would have to stand: And now for mee to tender onely what will serve for your owne turnes, and renounce the rest, were to desert my cause, which be∣fore I will doe, or desert my conscience, I will rather desert my body, and deliver it up to your Lordships to doe with it, what you will. L. Keeper. This is a place, where you should crave mercy and favour, Mr. Burton, and not stand upon such termes as you doe. M. Burton There wherein I have offended through humane frailty, I crave of God and man pardon: And I pray God, that in your Sentence, you may so Censure us, that you may not sinne against the Lord. Then the Prisoners desiring to speake a little more for them∣selves, were commaunded to silence. And so the Lords proceeded to Censure.
The Lord Cottingtons Censure. I Condemne these three men to loose their eares in the Pallace-yard at Westminster; To be fined five thou∣sand pounds a man to his Majestie: And to perpetuall imprisonment in three re∣mote places of the Kingdome, namely, the Castles of Carnaruan, Cornwall, and Lancaster. The Lord Finch added to this Censure. MR. Prynne to be stigmatized in the Cheekes with two Letters (S & L) for a Seditious Libel∣ler. To which all the Lords agreed. And so the Lord Keeper concluded the Censure.
THe Execution of the Lods Censure in Starre-Chamber upon Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Prynne, and Mr. Burton, in the Pallace-yard at Westminster, the 30th. day of Iune last 1637. at the spectation whereof the number of people was so great (the place being very large) that it caused admiraton in all that beheld them; who came with tender affections to behold those three renowned Souldiers and Servants of Iesus Christ, who came with most undaunted and magnanimous courage thereunto, having their way strawed with sweet hearbes from the house out of which they came to the Pillary, with all the honour that could be done unto them. Dr. Bastwicke and Mr. Burton first meeting, they did close one in the others armes three times, with as much expressions of love as might be, rejoycing that they mett at such a place, upon such an occasion, and that God had so highly honoured them, as to call them forth to suffer for his glorious Truth. Then immediately after, Mr. Prynne camme, the Dr. and hee salu∣ting each other, as Mr. Burton and hee did before. The Dr. then went up first on the Scaffold, and his wife immediately following came up to him, and like a loving Spouse saluted each eare with a kisse, and then his mouth; whose tender love, boldnes, and cheere∣fullnes so wrought upon the peoples affections, that they gave a marvailous great showte, for joy to behold it. Her husband desired her not to be in the least maner dismay'd at his suffrings: And so for a while they parted, she using these words: Farewell my Deerest, be of good comfort, I am nothing dismay'd. And then the Dr. began to speake these words. There are many that are this day Spectators of our standing here,Dr. Bast∣wicke. as Delinquents, though not Delinquents, we blesse God for it. I am not conscious to my self wherein I have committed the least trespasse (to take this outward shame) either against my God, or my King. And I doe the rather speake it, that you that are now be∣holders, may take notice, how farre Innocency will preserve you in such a day as this is; for wee come here in the strength of our God, who hath mightily supported us, and filled our hearts with greater comfort then our shame or contempt can be. The first oc∣casion
of my trouble was by the Prelates, for writing a Booke against the Pope, and the Pope of Canterbury sayd I wrote against him, and therefore questioned mee: But if the Presses were as open to us, as formerly they have beene, we would shatter his Kingdome about his eares: But be yee not deterred by their power, neither be affrighted at our sufferings; Let none determine to turne from the wayes of the Lord, but goe on, fight couragiously against Gog and Magog. I know there be many here who have set many dayes apart for our behalfe, (let the Prelates take notice of it) and they have sent up strong prayers to heaven for us, wee feele the strength and benefit of them at this time; I would have you to take notice of it; wee have felt the strength and benefit of your prayers all along this cause. In a word, so farre I am from base feare, or caring for any thing they can doe, or cast upon mee, that had I as much blood as would swell the Theames, I would shedd it every droppe in this cause. Therefore be not any of you discouraged, be not daunted at their power, ever labouring to preserve Innocency, and keep peace within, goe on in the strength of your God, and he will never fayle you, in such a day as this; As I sayd before, so I say againe; Had I as many lives as I have heires on my head, or dropps of blood in my veynes, I would give them up all for this cause. This plot of sending vs to those remote places, was first consulted and agitated by the Iesuites, as I can make it plainely appeare. O see what times wee are fallen into, that the Lords must sit to act the Iesuites plots! For our owne parts wee owe no malice to the persons of any of the Pre∣lates, but would lay our necks under their feet to doe them good as they are men, but against the usurpation of their power, as they are Bishops, wee doe professe our selves enemies till doomes day. Mr. Prynne shaking the Dr. by the hand, desired him that hee might speake a word or two. With all my heart, sayd the Doctor. The cause (sayd Mr. Prynne) of my standing here,M. Prynne is for not bringing in my Answer, for which my cause is taken pro confesso against mee. What endeavours I used for the bringing in thereof, that, God and my owne conscience, and my Counsell knowes, whose cowardise stands upon Record to all ages. For rather then I will have my cause a leading cause, to deprive the Subjects of that
liberty which I seeke to maintaine, I rather expose my person to a leading example, to beare this punishment: And I beseech you all to take notice of their proceedings in this cause. When I was served with a Subpoena into this Court, I was shut up close prisoner, that I could have no accesse to Counsell, nor admitted pen, inke or paper to draw up my Answer by my Instructions, for which I feed them twice (though to no purpose) yet when all was done, my Answer would not be accepted into the Court, though I tendered it upon my oath. I appeale to all the world, if this were a legall or just pro∣ceeding. Our accusation is in point of Libell (but supposedly) against the Prelates. To cleare this now I will give you a little light, what the Law is in point of Libell (of which profession I have sometimes beene, and still professe my selfe to have some know∣ledge in) you shall finde in case of Libell, two Statutes: The one in the second of Queen Mary; The other in the seaventh of Queen Elizabeth. That in the second of Queen Mary, the extremity and heighth of it runs thus: That if a Libeller doth goe so farre and so high as to Libell against King or Queen by denomination, the higth and extremity of the Law is; that they lay no greater fine on him then an hundred pounds, with a moneths imprisonment; and no corporall punishment, except he doe refuse to pay his fine; and then to inflict some punishment in liewe of that fine at the moneths end: Neither was this Censure to be passed on him, except it were fully prooved by two witnesses, who were to produce a certificat of their good demeanor for the credit of their report, or else confessed by the Libeller. You shall finde in that Statute 7. Eliz. some further ad∣dition to the former of 2. Mariae, and that onely in point of fine and punishment; and it must still reach as high as the person of King and Queen. Here this Statute doth set a fine of two hundred pounds; the other, but one: This sets three moneths imprisonment; the former but one: So that therein onely they differ. But in this they both agree, namely, at the end of his imprisonment to pay his fine, and so to goe free without any further questioning: But if hee refuse to pay his fine, then the Court is to inflict some punishment on him correspondent to his fine. Now see the disparity betweene those times of theirs, and ours. A Libeller in Queen Maries time was fined but an hundred pounds, in Queen Elizabeths time two
hundred: In Queen Maries dayes but a moneths imprisonment; in Queen Elizabeths three moneths; and not so great a fine, if they li∣belled not against King or Queen. Formerly the greatest fine was but two hundred pounds, though against King or Queen; Now five thousand pounds, though but against the Prelates, and that but sup∣posedly, which cannot be prooved: Formerly, but three moneths imprisonment; Now perpetuall imprisonment: Then, upon paying the fine, no corporall punishment was to be inflicted: But now, in∣famous punishment with the losse of blood and all other circum∣stances that may aggravate it. See now what times wee are fallen in∣to, when that Libelling (if it were so) against Prelates onely, shall fall higher, then if it touched Kings and Princes. That which I have to speake of next, is this: The Prelates find themselves exceedingly agrieved and vexed against what wee have written concerning the usurpation of their calling, where indeed wee declare their calling not to be Jure Divino. I make no doubt, but there are some Intelligencers or Abbettors within the hearing, whom I would have well to know and take notice of what I now say. I here in this place make this offer to them, That if I may be admitted a fayre dispute, on fayre termes, for my cause; that I will maintaine, and doe here make the challenge against all the Prelates in the Kings Dominions, and against all the Prelates in Christen∣dome, (let them take in the Pope, and all to help them) that their calling is not Iure Divino. I will speake it againe; I make the chal∣leng against all the Prelates in the Kings Dominions, and all Chri∣stendome to maintaine, that their calling is not Iure Divino. If I make it not good, let me be hanged up at the Hall-Gate: Where∣upon the people gave a great shout. The next thing that I am to speake of, is this: The Prelates find themselves exceedingly agrieved and vext against what I have written in point of Law, concerning their Writs and Proces, That the sending forth of Writs and Proces in their owne name, is against all Law and Iustice, and doth entrench on his Majesties Prerogative Royall, and the Subjects Liberties. And here now I make a second challeng against all the Lawyers in the Kingdome in way of fayre Dispute, That I will maintaine, the Prelates sending forth of Writs and Proces in their owne names, to be against all
Law and Iustice, and entrencheth on his Majesties Prerogative Royall, and the Subjects Liberty. Least it should be forgotten, I speake it againe, I here challeng all the whole Society of the Law upon a fayre Dispute to maintaine, That the sending forth of Writs and Proces in the Prelates owne names, to be against all Law and Iustice, and entrencheth on the Kings Prerogative Royall, and the Subjects Liberty. If I be not able to make it good, let me be put to the tormentingest death they can devise. Wee prayse the Lord, wee feare none but God and the King: Had wee respected our Liberties, wee had not stood here at this time: it was for the generall good and Liberties of you all that wee have now thus farre engaged our owne Liberties in this cause. For did you know, how deepely they have entrenched on your Li∣berties in point of Popery; If you knew but into what times you are cast, it would make you looke about you: And if you did but see what changes and revolutions of persons, causes and actions, have beene made by one man, you would more narrowly looke into your Previledges, and see how farre your Liberty did lawfully ex∣tend, and so maintaine it. This is the second time that I have beene brought to this place, who hath beene the Author of it, I thinke you all well know: For the first time, If I could have had leave given me, I could easily have cleered my self of that which was then layd to my charge: As also I could have done now, if I might have beene permitted to speake, That Booke for which I suffered formerly, especially for some par∣ticular words therein written, which I quoted out of Gods Word and auncient Fathers, for which notwithstanding, they passed Cen∣sure on me; That same Booke was twice licensed by publike Au∣thority, and the same words I then suffered for, they are againe made use of, and applyed in the same sence by Heylin in his Booke lately printed, and dedicated to the King, and no exceptions taken against them, but are very well taken.
Aye (sayd Dr. Bastwicke) and there is another Booke of his licensed, wherein hee rayles against us three at his pleasure;Dr. Bast∣wicke. and against all the Martyrs that suffered in Queen Maries dayes, calling them Schismaticall Hereticks. And there is another Booke of Pock∣lingtons licensed; they be as full of lyes, as doggs be full of fleas; but were the Presses as open to us, as they are to them, wee would pay them and their great Master that upholds them, and charge them with notorious Blasphemy. Sayd Mr. Prynne, You all at this present see,M. Prynne there be no degrees of men exempted from suffering: Here is a Reverend Divine for the Soule, a Physitian for the Body, and a Lawyer for the Estate: I had thought they would have let alone their owne Society, and not have medled with any of them. And the next (for ought I know) may be a Bishop. You see they spare none of what society or calling soever, none are exempted that crosse their owne ends. Gentlemen, looke to your selves; If all the Martyrs that suffered in Queen Maries dayes, are accounted and called Schismaticall Here∣ticks and Factious Fellowes: What shall wee looke for? Yet so they are called in a Booke lately come forth under Authority. And such Factious Fellowes are wee, for discovering a Plott of Popery. Alas poore England, what will become of thee, if thou looke not the sooner into thine owne Previledge, and maintainest not thine owne lawfull Liberty? Christian people; I beseech you all, stand firme, and be zealous for the Cause of God, and his true Religion, to the shedding of your dearest blood, otherwise you will bring your selves, & all your posterities, into perpetuall bon∣dage and slavery. Now the Executioner being come, to seare him and cut off his eares, Mr. Prynne spake these words to him: Come friend, Come, burne mee, cut mee, I feare it not. I have learn'd to feare the fire of Hell, and not what man can doe unto mee: Come seare mee, seare mee, I shall beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesus: Which the bloody Executioner performed with ex∣traordinary cruelty, heating his Iron twice to burne one Cheeke: And cut one of his eares so close, that hee cut off a peice of his Cheeke. At which exquisit torture hee never mooved with his body, or so much as changed his countenance,
but still lookt up as well as he could towards heaven, with a smiling countenance, even to the astonishment of all the beholders. And uttering (assoone as the Executioner had done) this heavenly sen∣tence: The more I am beate downe, the more am I lift up. And re∣turning from the execution in a boate made (as I heare) these two verses by the way on the Two Characters branded on his Cheekes. S.L. STIGMATA LAVDIS. STIGMATA maxillis bajulans insignia LAVDIS Exultans remeo, victama grata Deo. Which one since thus Englished. S.L. LAVDS SCARS. Triumphant I returne, my face descries, LAVDS scorching SCARS, Gods greatefull sacrifice.
Mr. Burtons heavenly and most comfor∣table Speech, which hee made at the time of his suffering, both before, and while hee stood in the Pillary, which was set something distant from the other double Pillary, wherein Dr. Bast∣vvicke and Mr. Prynne stood. THE night before his suffering, about eight a clocke, when he first had certaine notice thereof, upon occasion of his wives going to aske the Warden, whither her hus∣band should suffer the next day, immediately he felt his spirits to be raysed to a farre higher pitch of resolution and courage to undergoe his sufferings, then formerly he did, so as hee intreated the Lord to hold up his spirits at that heigth all the next day in his sufferings, that hee might not flagg nor faint, least any dishonour might come to his Majestie or the cause: And the Lord heard him: For all the next day in his suffering (both before and after) his spi∣rits were carried aloft as it were upon Eagles wings (as himself sayd) farre aboue all apprehension of shame or paine. The next morning (being the day of his sufferings) hee was brought to Westminster, and with much cheerefullnes being brought into the Pallace-yard unto a Chamber that looked into the Yard, where hee viewed three Pillaries there set up: Me thinkes (sayd hee) I see Mount Calvery, where the three Crosses (one for Christ, and the other two for the two theives) were pitched: And if Christ were numbred among theives, shall a Christian (for Christs cause) thinke much to be numbred among Rogues, such as wee are condemned to be? Surely if I be a Rogue, I am Christs Rogue, and no mans. And a little after, looking out at the case∣ment towards the Pillary, hee sayd: I see no difference betweene looking out of this square window and yonder round hole, (poynt∣ing towards the Pillary) hee sayd: It is no matter, of difference to
an honest man. And a little after that, looking somewhat wisely upon his wife, to see how shee did take it; shee seemed to him to be something sadd; to whom hee thus spake: Wife, why art thou so sadd? To whom shee made answer; Sweet heart, I am not sadd: No sayd hee? See thou be not, for I would not have thee to disho∣nour the day, by shedding one teare, or fetching one sigh: for be∣hold there for thy comfort my triumphant Chariot, on the which I must ride for the honour of my Lord and Master: And never was my wedding day so wellcome, and joyfull a day, as this day is; and so much the more, because I have such a noble Captaine and Lea∣der, who hath gonne before mee with such undauntednes of spirit, that hee sayth of himselfe, I gave my backe to the smiters, my cheekes to the nippers, they pluckt off the haire, I hidd not my face, from shame and spitting, for the Lord God will help mee, therefore shall I not be confounded, therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know I shall not be ashamed. At length being carried toward the Pillary, hee mett Dr. Bastwicke at the foot of the Pillary, where they lovingly saluted and eimbraced each other; and parting a little from him, hee returned (such was the ardency of his affection) and most affectionately embraced him the second time, being heartily sorry hee missed Mr. Prynne, who was not yet come before hee was gonne up to his Pillary, which stood alone next the Starre-Chamber, and about halfe a stones cast from the other double Pillary, wherein the other two stood: so as all their faces looked Southward, the bright Sunne all the while for the space of two howers shining upon them: Being ready to be put into the Pillary, standing upon the Scaffold, hee spied Mr. Prynne new come to the Pillary, and Dr. Bastwicke in the Pillary, who then hasted of his band, and called for a Handkercher, saying, What, shall I be last? or shall I be ashamed of a Pillary for Christ, who was not ashamed of a Crosse for mee? Then being put into the Pillary, hee sayd: Good people, I am brought hither to be a spectacle to the world, to Angells, and men; And howsoever I stand here to undergoe the punishment of a Rogue, yet except to be a faithfull Servant to Christ, and a loyall Subject to the King, be the property of a Rogue, I am no Rogue. But yet if to be Christs faithfull Servant, and the Kings loyall Subject, deserve the punishment of a Rogue, I glory
in it, and I blesse my God, my conscience is cleare, and is not stained with the guilt of any such crime, as I have beene charged with, though otherwise I confesse my self to be a man subject to many frailties and humane infirmities. Indeed that Booke intiteled, An Apology of an Appeale with sundry Epistles, and two Sermons, for God and the King, charged against me in the Information, I have and doe acknowledge (the misprinting excepted) to be mine, and will by Gods grace never disclayme it whilst I have breath within mee. After a while, hee having a Nosegay in his hand, a Bee came and pitched on the Nosegay, and began to suck the flowers very savourly, which hee beholding and well observing, sayd, Doe yee not see this poore Bee? She hath found out this very place to suck sweetnes from these flowers; And cannot I suck sweetnes in this ve∣ry place from Christ? The Bee sucking all this while, and so tooke her flight. By and by hee tooke occasion from the shining of the Sunne, to say, You see how the Sunne shines upon us, but that shines aswell upon the evill as the good, upon the just and unjust, but the Sonne of righteousnes (Iesus Christ, who hath healing un∣der his winges) shines upon the soules and consciences of every true beleever onely, and no clowd can hide him from us, to make him ashamed of us, no not of our most shamefull sufferings for his sake: And why should wee be ashamed to suffer for his sake, who hath suffered for us? All our sufferings be but fleabitings to that hee endured, hee endured the Crosse, and despised the shame, and is set on the right hand of God: Hee is a most excellent pat∣terne for us to looke upon, that treading his stepps, and suffering with him, wee may be glorified with him. And what can we suffer, wherein hee hath not gonne before us, even in the same kinde? Was hee not degraded, when they scornefully put on him a purple Robe, a Reed into his hand, a thorny Crowne upon his head, salu∣ting him with Hayle King of the Iewes, and so disrobed him againe? Was not hee deprived, when they smote the Shepherd, and the Sheepe were scattered? Was not violence offered to his sacred per∣son, when hee was buffited, and scourged, his hands and his feet peirced, his head pricked with thornes, his side goared with a Speare &c.? Was not the Crosse more shamefull, yea and more painfull then a Pillary? Was not hee stript of all hee had, when hee
was left starke naked upon the Crosse, the Souldiers dividing his garments, and casting lots upon his vesture? And was hee not con∣fin'd to perpetuall close imprisonment in mans imagination, when his body was layd in a Tombe, and the Tombe sealed, least hee should breake prison, or his Disciples steale him away? And yet did hee not rise againe, and thereby brought deliverance and victory to us all, so as wee are more then Conquerors through him that loved us? Here then wee have an excellent Patterne indeed. And all this hee uttered (and whatsoever else hee spake) with marvailous ala∣crity. One sayd unto Mr. Burton, Christ will not be ashamed of you at the last day. Hee replied, Hee knew whom hee had believed, and that Christ was able to keepe that he had committed to him against that day. One asked him how hee did? Hee sayd, never better, I blesse God, who hath accounted mee worthy thus to suffer. The Keeper keeping off the people from pressing neere the Pillary; hee sayd, Let them come and spare not, that they may learne to suffer. This same Keeper, being weary, and sitting him downe, asked Mr. Burton, if hee were well, and bad him be of good comfort. To whom hee replied, Are you well? If you be well, I am much more, and full of comfort, I blesse God. Some asked him, if the Pillary were not uneasy for his neck and shoulders. Hee answered: How can Christs yoake be uneasy? This is Christs yoake, and hee beares the heavier end of it, and I the lighter, and if myne were too heavy, hee would beare that too. O good people, Christ is a good and sweet Master, and worth the suffering for! And if the world did but know his goodnes, and had tasted of his sweetnes, all would come and be his Servants; and did they but know what a blessed thing it were to beare his yoake, O who would not beare it? The Keeper going about to ease the Pillary by putting a stone or a bricke batt betweene, Mr. Burton sayd, Trouble not your self, I am at very good ease, and feele no wearinesse at all: And espying a young man at the foote of the Pillary, and perceiving him to looke pale on him; Hee sayd, Sonne, Sonne, what is the matter you looke so pale? I have as much comfort as my heart can hold, and if I had need of more, I should have it. One asked him a while after, if hee would drinke some Aqua vitae. To whom he replied, that he needed it not; for I
have, sayd hee, (laying his hand upon his breast) the true water of life, which like a well doth spring up to eternall life. Pawsing a while, hee sayd with a most cheerefull and grave countenance, I was never in such a Pulpit before, but litle doe yee know (speaking to them that stood about him) what fruits God is able to produce from this drye tree; They looking stedfastly upon him, hee sayd, Marke my words and remember them well, I say, Little doe you know, what fruites God is able to produce from this dry tree, I say, remember it well, for this day will never be forgotten; and through these holes (poynting to the Pillary) God can bring light to his Church. The Keeper going about againe to mend the Pillary, hee sayd, Doe not trouble your self so much: But indeed wee are the troublers of the world. By and by after, some of them offering him a cup of wine; Hee thanked them, telling them, hee had the wine of conso∣lation within him, and the joyes of Christ in possession, which the world could not take away from him, neither could it give them vn∣to him. Then he looked towards the other Pillary, and making a signe with his hand, cheerefully called to Dr. Bastwicke, and Mr. Prynne, asking them how they did. Who answered, Very well. A woman sayd unto him, Sr. every Christian is not worthy this ho∣nor, which the Lord hath cast upon you this day. Alas (sayd hee) who is worthy of the least mercy? But it is his gracious favour and free gift, to account us worthy in the behalf of Christ to suffer any thing for his sake? Another woman sayd, There are many hun∣dreds which by Gods assistance would willingly suffer, for the cause you suffer for this day. To whom he sayd, Christ exalts all of us that are ready to suffer afflictions for his Name with meekenes and pa∣tience: But Christs military discipline in the use of his spirituall war∣fare in point of suffering, is quite forgotten, and wee have in a man∣ner lost the power of Religion, in not denying our selves and fol∣lowing Christ aswell in suffering, as in doing. After a while Mr. Burton calling to one of his friends for a Handkercher, returned it againe, saying it is hott, but Christ bore the burthen in the heate of the day; Let us alwayes labour to approove our selves to God in all things, and unto Christ, for therein stands our happines, come of it what will in this world.
A Christian freind sayd to Mr. Burton, The Lord strengthen you. To whom hee replied, I thanke you, and I blesse his Name hee doth strengthen me. For though I am a poore sinfull wretch, yet I blesse God for my innocent conscience in any such crime as is layd against mee; and were not my cause good, and my con∣science sound, I could not enjoy so much unspeakeable comfort in this my suffering as I doe, I blesse my God. Mris. Burton sends com∣mendation to him by a friend: Hee returned the like to her, saying, Commend my love to my wife, and tell her, I am heartely cheere∣full, and bidd her remember what I sayd to her in the morning, na∣mely, That shee should not blemish the glory of this day with one teare, or so much as one sigh. She returned answer, that shee was glad to heare him so cheerefull; and that shee was more cheerefull of this day, then of her wedding day. This answer exceedingly re∣joyced his heart, who thereupon blessed God for her, and sayd of her, Shee is but a young Souldier of Christs, but shee hath already endured many a sharpe brunt, but the Lord will strengthen her un∣to the end: And hee having on a payre of new gloves, shewed them to his freinds there about him, saying, My wife yesterday of her owne accord bought me these wedding gloves, for this is my wedding day. Many freinds spake comfortably to Mr. Burton, and hee againe spake as comfortably to them, saying, I blesse my God that called me forth to suffer this day. One sayd to him, Sr. by this Sermon (your suffering) God may convert many unto him. Hee answered, God is able to doe it indeed. And then hee called againe to Dr. Bast∣wicke and Mr. Prynne, asking them how they did. Who answered as before. Some speaking to him concerning that suffering of shed∣ding his blood: Hee answered, What is my blood to Christs blood? Christs blood is a purging blood, but mine is corrupted & polluted with sinne. One freind asking another standing neere Mr. Burton, If there should be any thing more done unto him; Mr. Burton over∣hearing him, answered; Why should there not be more done? For what God will have done, must be accomplished. One desiring Mr. Burton to be of good cheere. To whom hee thus replied: If you knew my cheere, you would be glad to be partaker with mee; for I am not alone; neither hath God left me alone in all my suffe∣rings
and close imprisonment since first I was apprehended. The Halbertmen standing round about, one of them had an old rusty halbert, the Iron whereof was tacked to the staffe with an old crooked nayle; which one observing, and saying, What an old rusty halbert is that? Mr. Burton sayd, This seemes to mee to be one of those Halberts, which accompained Iudas when hee went to betray and apprehend his Master. The people observing Mr. Burtons cheerefullnes and courage in suffering, rejoyced, and blessed God for the same. Mr. Burton sayd againe, I am perswaded that Christ my Advocate, is now pleading my cause at the Fathers right hand, and will judge my cause (though none be found here to plead it) and will bring forth my righteousnes as the light at noone day, and cleere my innocency in due time. A freind asking Mr. Burton, if he would have beene without this particular suffering. To whom hee sayd, No not for a world. Moreover hee sayd, that his conscience in the discharge of his Ministeriall duety and function, in admonishing his people to beware of the creeping in of Popery and Supersti∣tion, exhorting them to stick close unto God & the King in dueties of obedience, was that which first occasioned his sufferings, and sayd, as for this truth I have preached, I am ready to seale it with my blood, for this is my Crowne both here and hereafter. I am jealous of Gods honour, and the Lord keepe us that wee may doe nothing that may dishonour him, either in doing or suffering, God can bring light out of darkenes, and glory out of shame: And what shall I say more? I am like a Bottle which is so full of liquor, that it cannot runn out freely; So I am so full of joy, that I am not able to expresse it. In conclusion, some told him of the approach of the Executio∣ner, and prayed God to strengthen him. Hee sayd, I trust he will, why should I feare to follow my Master Christ, who sayd, I gave my backe to the smitters, and my cheekes to the nippers, that pluc∣ked off my haire, I hidd not my face from shame and spitting, for the Lord God will help mee, therefore shall I not be confounded, therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.
When the Executioner had cut off one eare, which hee had cut deepe and close to the head in an extraordinary cruell manner: Yet this Champion of Christ never once mooved or stirred for it, though hee had cut the veyne, so as the blood rann streaing downe upon the Scaffold, which divers persons standing about the Pillary seeing, dipped their handkerchers in, as a thing most precious, the people giving a mournefull shout; and crying for the Chirurgion, whom the crowd and other impediments for a time kept off, so that hee could not come to stopp the blood: This Patient all the while held up his hands, and sayd, Be content, it is well, blessed be God. The other eare being cut no lesse deepe, hee then was freed from the Pillary, and come downe, where the Chirurgeon waiting for him; presently applyed remedy for stopping the blood after a large effusion thereof, yet for all this hee faynted not, in the least man∣ner, though through expense of much blood hee waxed pale. And one offering him a little wormewood water; hee sayd, it needs not, yet through importunity hee onely tasted of it, and no more, saying, his Master Christ was not so well used, for they gave him gall and viniger, but you give me good strong water to refresh me, blessed be God. His head being bound up, two Freinds ledd him away to an house provided for him in Kings Street, where being set downe, and bidd to speake little, yet hee sayd after a pawse, This is too hott to hold long: Now least they in the roome, or his wife should mis-take, and thinke hee spake of himself concerning his paine, hee sayd, I speake not this of my self: for that which I have suffered is nothing to that my Saviour suffered for mee, who had his hands and feete nayled to the Crosse: And lying still a while, hee tooke Mr. Prynnes sufferings much to heart, and asked the people how hee did, for (sayd hee) his sufferings have beene great. Hee as∣ked also how Dr. Bastwicke did, with much compassion and grief, that hee (being the first that was executed) could not stay to see how they two fayred after him. His wife being brought to him, be∣haved herself graciously towards him, saying, Wellcome Sweet heart, wellcome home. Hee was often heard to repeate these words: The Lord keepe vs that wee doe not dishonour him in any thing. AMEN.
THƲS Christian Readers, you have heard the Relation of such a Censure (and the Execution thereof) as I dare say, all circumstances layd together, cannot be paralled in any age of man throughout the Christian world, and I thinke I may take in even the world of Pagans and Haethens to it. Which though it be not drawen up in so elegant astraine as it was delivered and deserved, nor all the Heavenly words and eloquent speeches recorded, which were uttered by these Three Worthies of the Lord, both in the pre∣sence of the Lords themselves at their Censure, and also at the place of Execution: Yet I earnestly beseech you in the bowels of Iesus Christ, that you doe not in the least manner under-value the glory and dignity, either of the persons, or the cause, but rather lay the blame upon the rudenes and meane capacity of the Composer, who is an unfeyned Well-wisher to them both.
