B5114A R173186 [ocm]80921996 191815
AN ALARM To all Impenitent SINNERS. OR, The Spirit of Bondage raised up in Judge∣ment and allayed in Mercy. Declared in a short Treatise of the sweet∣nesse of God's love discovered in the bitterness of his wrath. By Humphrey Browne, M. A. Confessio est salus animarum: dissipatrix vitic∣: oppugnatrix daemonum: Quid plura? ruit os inferni, portas aperit Paradisi. Augustin. in Lib. de paenit. Lam. 3. 19, 20, 21. Remembring mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is mbled in me. This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope. LONDON, Printed for Edw. Blackmore, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Angel in Pauls Church-yard, M. DC. L.
The Author to the Reader. THe great Physitian of our soules, doth often cure the sore of sin, by the sence of sin: and makes his Patients rize the greatnesse of the remedy, by e grievousnesse of the disease. OurQuàm dives¦es in miseri∣cordia, quàm magnificus in justitia, quàm munificus in gratia, Domi∣ne Deus no∣ster? non est qui similis fit tibi. Bern. Serm. 57. eavenly Father makes his children ste the bitternesse of his wrath, that ey may the more admire the sweet∣esse of his loving kindnesse; he suf∣ers them to be almost drowned, in he raging Sea of the one, that they ight be saved in the Arke of the o∣er. Behold therefore the goodnesse nd severity of God: On them which ll severity, but towards me good∣esse, if I continue in my goodnesse: therwise I also shall be cut off, as
indeed of late I was verily perswadRom. 11. 22. I should have been; for being a Taverne in London, where too o¦tenEbrietas ma∣nifestissimus est Daemon. Bern. drunkennesse that most manif Devil keeps his Randezvous, I pla¦ed with an acquaintance of mine Tables, for a pinte of Sack, but wit in a while doubling our files, we b¦ganIra furor bre∣vis est. to quarrell; whereupon my re¦son, and that small Religion whi I had, was overcome with unru passion; I wisht the Devill mig have my soul, if I did not fight wi him the next morning, and kill be killed: but mine own wrath w not long over, before Gods wra overtooke me: for the thought  that abominable execration, did  trouble me, that I knew not w whether I were in Hell, or Hell in m the fearfull roaring of that one s against me, brought all my other si with gastly looks to gaze upon m As the woman of Samaria concer¦ingJohn 4. 29. Christ, so I may say of my co
ence, it told me al the sins that ever ommitted: and presented them un∣ me in the ugly picture of Devils, ich before I looked on in the form  Angels; as before they seemed to y palate all honey, so in the anguish  my soul they were all sting. I saw ine sit on the brow of Gods offend∣ Soveraignty, each look sparkled dignation, and that indignation eath: there was a storme in Gods untenance, and a tempest in mine n heart and tongue, crying out,  hell, and damnatinn, as my por∣on; supposing my self to have no terest at all in Christ. No Cordiall f mercy could work on my Nauseous omach: no Gospel-physick could I ake, in those raging Dog-daies of ny spiritual distempers; wherein I ounted my self a Dog, shut out of eaven, and onely fit for the kennellRev. 22. 15. f hell: but at last, being often visit∣d, by my worthy, and much honour∣d friend Mr Blakemore, Pastor
of S. Peters Cornhill, the pulse o my conscience began to beat mor mildly, being touched with the han of mercy. Prospera lux oriturProspera lux oritur linguis animis{que} fave∣te: nunc di∣cenda bono sunt bona ver∣ba die. Ovid. Fast. l. 1. light proceeded out of darknesse  joy out of sorrow: comfort out o despaire: and as I may say, Heave out of Hell. God my mercifull Fathe scourg'd me, I cryed bitterly, crying he heard me, and hearing, he com∣forted me: he continued not long in his dreadful posture of warre, bu condescended to a treatie, making (a I trust) a perpetuall peace with my soule. Wherefore I will praise thee O Lord among the people: for thyPsal. 108. 3, 4. mercy is great above the heavens▪ and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds. The Lord is my portion,Lam. 3. 24, 25. saith my soule, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul thatDan. 9. 3. seeketh him. Set your face therefore (Deare Christian friends) unto the Lord God, by prayer and supplica∣tion.
And if any good shall accrue o you out of these my poore endea∣rs, let Gods have the praise, and  your prayers that I may grow in ace, and in the knowledge of our rd, and Saviour Jesus Christ:2 Pet. 3. 8. o I hope will perfect that which  hath begun that, I suffer not ship∣ackDomine quod coepisti per∣fice ne in portu nanfra∣gium accidat. Aug. Phil. 4. 8. in the heaven. Finally, brethren, whatsoever ings are true, whatsoever things e honest, whatsoever things are st, whatsoever things are pure, hatsoever things are lovely, what∣oever things are of good report: if here be any vertue, and if there be ny praise, thinke on these things: And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Yours in Christ Jesus, H. BROWNE.
AN ALARME TO ALL Impenitent Sinners. WHen a man hath not blushed, at the qu. of Satans temptati∣on, to come on the Stage as a sinner; e thinkes he should not be a∣amed of publique view, when e scene is changed, and the part  a convert acted: for so to do, ere in this, to cloud the glory of ercy, as in the other, to pro∣ke the rigour of justice: andJer. 3. 3. have a whores fore-head in sin∣ng, though a virgins bashful∣nesse
in confessing, for mine ow part therefore, as declaring mIsa. 3. 9. sin as Sodom, was to me a Com¦die, so to declare Gods merc in my longed-for reformation shall not be to me a Tragedie but rather the old man's ExiPsal. 7. 13. with the instruments of death and the new mans Intrat, witIsa. 38. 20. the stringed instruments, soun¦ing by the finger of the holy sp¦rit, shall be to me the sweete soul-ravishing musick, mo comfortable then Davids Harp1 Sam. 16. to Saul, possessed with an ev spirit, and if in declaring God goodnesse to me, I act to plea my heavenly Spectator, I have m reward: I seek not the applau of any, but the happy conversio of all, who hug sin in their hear with as great danger, as the L¦cedemonianPlutarch. Quod durum pati meminis∣se dulce. Sen. in Hero. fur. boy did his fox; O when I remember mine afflictio and my misery, the wormwood, an
eg all, Lam. 3. 19. mine afflicti∣n is renewed, to recount the isery of a sinner, without theChrys. in Psal. 50. Paenitens de peccato dolet & de dolore gaudet Aug. omfort of a Saviour, si mihi sint ntum linguae, I could not ex∣resse it: for I know by the pulse f mine own conscience, the earful agonies of a sick soul, ung with the sence of sin: con∣ientia peccati formidinis mater: e conscience of sin is the mo∣er of fear: and albeit to the odly, it be faire, yet it presents arful phantasies, and hideous ectacles, to the eyes of sinful ules. This I know, by a late woful, oyful experience, I call it so; be∣ause (blessed be God) it proved  a bitter-sweet unto e: But first of the bitternesse, nd then of the sweetnesse. Saint Bernard makes mention f a four-fold conscience: first, conscience quiet, and good, as
1 Tim. 1. 5. and this is a continu feast, Prov. 15. 15. Secondly, conscience good, but not quie and this was Davids case, in h complaint thus, Thou hast la me in the lowest pit, in darknesse,  the deeps: Thy wrath lieth hard uPsal. 88. 6, 7; on me: and thou hast afflicted  with all thy waves. Thirdly, conscience quiet, but not good and such a one hath he, wh hearing the words of the curs blesseth himself in his heart, say¦ing, I shall have peace, though I wal in the imagination of mine heart, Deut. 29. 19. adde drunkenness to thirst: O qua¦ta tempestas est haec tranquillitas what a tempest is this calme what a war is this peace? for the that thus would have a peace make a truce without the Broad seal of the King of kings: are nHos. 4. 17. better then Rebels, and ma well expect his fearful march a¦gainst them: though his marc
the longer, his assault will be e fiercer; the longer the aught, the stronger the shoot▪ setling on our lees of sin, we r Gods dregs of fury, he that eeps long in the pleasures of sin  earth, may ('tis to be feared)Saepe quem tentationis certamen su∣perare non valuit, sua de∣terius securi∣tas stravit. Greg. Moral. wake in the paines of hell: find∣g thorney thickets of sharpest rrows, for rosie beds of his eetest pleasures. 4. a conscience neither quiet; or good; and this was my case hen the book of my conscience as opened, and all my sins in apitall letters, were read by the ye of my wofull soul. And then sinfull I, according to the Con∣ents of those records, gave sen∣ence of damnation on my self.Iob. 7. 15. Ier. 8. 3. Iob. 15. 16. y soul chose strangling, and eath rather then my life. I that efore had drunk iniquity, like ater, as Job speaks, do behold ustly a torrent of divine wrath,
ready to overwhelme me: t waters of Marah compasse the litle Isle of man in m round about: and no fre streames of Heavenly consolat¦on, could passe through the sa Sea of these hellish terrours: a the streames of my vaine world¦ly pleasures, in the Channell  presumtion, emptied themselv into the gulph of despaire,  the river Jordan into the dea Sea. Then, O then I found aEphes. 4. 22. 1 Tim. 6. 9. Horat. 1. ep. ad Lollium. Malorum esca voluptas. Cato. Major. my former pleasures, to be b deceitfull lusts, foolish an hurtfull lusts, according to th of the Poet, Sperne voluptates nocet empta dolore voluptas de¦spise pleasures: pleasure purcha¦ed with griefe, is hurtfull, if an pleasure was purchased wit grief, surely mine was, for whil I with it as Satans Engine, rushe like an unruly horse, into th battell of rebellion, against th
cred Majesty of my God, heIob. 6. 4. ercifull King, being provoked, ts his terrors in array against e, masters up all my sins, before y face, as threatning to cut e off, with my own formerly eloved, but now terrible par∣y, even my transgressions; nay ore, the high and mighty Lord f Hosts, discharges in a ful vol∣ey, all the roaring Canons of is irefull and direfull menaces gainst me, insomuch that the weak bulwarke of all my hope, was soon battered down: & then I hope-less, help-less wretch, found by woefull experience, that the ins of Preachers, were not only the Preachers of sins, to others, but also of most heavie judge∣ments to themselves. Then I found that I had onely spoke for Jerusalem, but wrought for the building up of Jericho, & Babylon: then I found that I had sailed by
Satans compasse, & not Gods; b the false light of his delusion,  not by the Pole-starre of GoRev: 4. 6. grace, on this Sea of glasse, th world: which made the Sou ship-wrack by me, cry out a 'twere in my ears, for vengeance against my soul, cast on the Syrte of a most sad condition: as Pau and Timothie, in Asia were presse2 Cor: 1. 8. out of measure above strength: in¦somuch that they despaired of lif naturall: so I was so pressed with the burthen of my sins, above m strength, that I even despair∣ed of life eternall, and yet de∣spised life naturall, desiring (a I may say) to die, if there were no heaven, who lived as if there were no hell. Such an horrour overwhelmed me, such a hor∣rourPsal: 55. 5. laid hold upon me, that as before I lived as if there were no law, no justice; so now I lay as if there were no Gospel no mercie.
My sins that cloud of wit∣essesDicit quidem Plato animas hominum dae∣mones esse, &c. Aug. de civit. Dei l. 9. c. 11. against me, did so hinder e Sunshine of Gods favour rom me, that I beheld the Sun f divine justice, without any eames of mercy: so that I con∣eived my soul to be no better hen a Devil, in my body; as lato held the souls of men, to be Devils separated from the body, whereas a sanctified soul is as were a certain God, dwelling n a humane body, or a heavenlyAnima Deus est aliquis hu∣mano corpore vivens Sen. ad Sunil. Epist 3. ing, taking up his mansion in arthly cottage. Oh, such bitter things were written against me, by the pen of Gods justice, dipt in the gall nd vineger of his sore displea∣ure, that I then possessed the in∣quitiesJob. 13. 26. Dan. 5. of my youth; which made me tremble, as Belshazzar, at the hand-writing. Me thoughts I read also, Mene Mene Tekel Ʋphar∣in: I was weighed in the bal∣lance
and found wanting, eve of true zeal and pietie, whic crownes Christ ministry. I look¦ed therefore on the kingdom o heaven, as divided from me; anM. Blackmore. on hell as my right inheritance insomuch that when a learne Godly minister of London, (fo whom I am bound to praise God came to visit me, in my extremi¦tie, and desired like the goo Samaritan to powre in oyl oLuke 10. comfort, into my wounded con∣science, it swimmed (as I may say on the top of the overflowing of mine iniquitie: and neve touched my conscience, as a re¦medie. All Gospel-salves wer to me corrosives: God's woun though the mildest, was to me  sword; such sinfull malignan humours did so over-charge th stomach of my soul; that the brea of life could not be disgested by me, as any thing nourishable unto
e. I looked on my selfe as noMagna est vis conscientiae in utram{que} partem: ut ne{que} timeant qui nihil com∣miserint: & paenam sem∣per ante oc∣los versari pu∣tent qui pec∣caverint. Cato major▪ pro Milone. raelite, and therefore I could ot rellish that Sacred Manna. he Scriptures are Gods Armou∣y, wherein are weapons both ffensive, and defensive: but alas, ll the weapons therein were ffensive unto me, in that sad esertion; so focible was my con∣cience, in terrifying me, that he sword of Gods vengeance dged by my disobedience, was drawn before my face, covered with confusion. Then I who Jehu∣ike marched furiously in the broad way, in this woefull streight I lay down, roaring for terror, and yet not able to cry for quarter, to ask for mercie; deeming or rather dooming my selfe (Spira-like) out of heavens protection, because not within the lines of Christs communica∣tion. The Schoolemen observe that a Child of God, may so fall,
that he may therein loose aptitu¦dinem regnandi: the fitness of reigning: but never jus regni the right of the kingdome: bu I poor Creature, seeing my sel destitute, of the Royall Charte of grace, shut my self clean ou of the Citie of glory. I measure my right by my aptitude, and s found no place to enter, being fully perswaded by the enemie▪ that I had lost Christ, the way and herein the devil played the part of a cunning, deceitful Physitian, who recounts althing that may endammage, not any thing that may recover his pati∣ent. A sick patient indeed was I, and my sicknesse threatned even. Basil. 1 Sam. 2. 25. the very death of immortality: and who could entreat for me? As old Eli said unto his wicked sonnes, if one man sin against ano∣ther, the Judge stall judge him: but if
man sin against the Lord who shall treat for him? he goes the way  silence the mouth of the blood  Jesus; and loe then against hom sin is the Sollicitor in the ourt of heaven, and for whom hrist Jesus is not the advocate, ost miserable is the state of at man, most grievous is the cknesse of that soul: yea truely it  the soul of sicknesse, the wholeIsa. 1. 5. ead is sick, and the whole heart int. I am sure it is a fearefull thingHeb. 10. 31. o fal into the hands of the living God: nay, most fearfull it is, when we have not the wounded ands of our Redeemer to hold s up: certainly then as presum∣tionDesperatio homicida est animae. Aug. was our heaven, despaire will be our hell; the one march∣ng in the front, the other very ften brings up the arreare, or ather falls upon it, routing allin Psal. 50. Serm. 6. ormer pleasures, marshalled by
presumption: and slaying th self-condemning soul; which Iob. 7. 20. as a marke set against God, an is a burden to it selfe. We see iGen. 4. exemplified in Cain, Achitophe2 Sam. 17. 1 Chron. 10. Mat. 27. Saul, Judas and the like: whos soules being appaled with th sense, and over-burdened wit the weight of their transgessions they despaired of the haven and so cast themselves, into th gulph. They that before, like  ship with full saile, hoised up the Top-gallant of their pride & the sailes of their affections to the poysonous blasts of Satan temptations, at last, like bases cowards, strucke saile to theSceleratior omnibus ô Juda & infeli∣cior extitisti: quem non paenitentia duxit ad Do∣minū: sed de∣speratio tra∣xit ad laqueū. Leo in Serm. Prince of darknesse, who upon their totall submission, boarded the pinnace of their souls: and being a cursed Pyrat, from the beginning, robbed them of the precious jewel of their salvation, which is the onely prize he seeks
or: as the King of Sodom said un∣o Abraham, da mihi animas, ive me the souls, Gen. 14. 21. ch is the devils method, if he ath the soul, which is mans all, e hath all his desire accomplish∣d, as in Judas; who sinned more n despairing of mercie, then in etraying his master, the Lord of f life, to death. Now in the fall of man. 1. the Devil tempts. 2. Man consents. 8. God forsakes. Satan tempts n malice, man consents in weak∣ness, and God forsakes in justice. Neither is he absent, where he seems to be a farre off: for whereGreg. Hom. 8. super. Ezek. he is not present per gratiam, by grace, he is per vendictam, by vengeance. Oh, when the just Judge of heaven, and earth is present, in the last acception, then the Lord is known executing wrath, who was not known suffering wrong:
then his Scorpions are feare whose rods were slighted: h sword is brandished to a dese¦ved slaughter, whose Scepte held out by the right hand  love, could not invite to a tim¦ly submission. Then, Oh then, tIsa. 47. 3. nakednesse of a miserable sinn shall be uncovered: yea his shamIsa. 59. 17. shall he seene: when God thus put on the garments of vengeance fo cloathing, and is clad with zea as a cloak. Who can stand wheIoh. 9. 5. the anger of the Lord is kindled he overturneth the highest moun¦tainesHab. 3. 12. in his anger. He threshetIsa. 63. 6. his enemies in anger: nay more, h treadeth downe the people in his an∣ger, and makes them drunk in his fury; and brings down their strength. Home. to the earth. God hath a revenging eye (saith the blind heathen &: where sin is long in the soul, as a black cloud; no marvell, if the storm
of vengance break forth in a. Chrys. Hom. 5. Isa 33. 23. Job 9. 17. Isa. 28. 2. Ier. 22. 28. Hose. 8. 8. Psal. 83. 15. hunder-clap of fury; wherein the poor soul hath the tacklings loosed, cannot well strengthen the mast, neither is able to spread the saile, and therfore is roken with the tempest as Job speaks, Gods storme is a destroy∣ing storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing it casts down to the earth with the hand. In this overflowing, all our pleasures and vain delights sinke; but our sins do swim in full view to the shame and confusi∣on of our faces, who may justly be esteemed in Gods sight as ves∣sels wherein is no pleasure. Such a one assuredly was I▪ when the most High thundred with his voice of displeasure, persecuted me with his tempest, and made me afraid with his storme, I saw no pleasure that
God had in me, neither had  any pleasure in my self, I could not but fall out with my self, be¦cause I had falne out with my God; vile I was in the sight o others, but viler in mine own. Terror without, and horro within, like Pharaohs lean kine, swallowed up all the fat kine oGen. 41. my former Carnall delights  which like the fair Nymphs in the Poets, brought forth the fowle Satyres of fierce wrath, trouble of an evil conscience, and despair of Gods mercie: conceiving it to be unprofitable to knock at the door, or wait at the pool, but be∣hold, I that was thus afflicted, tos∣sedIsa. 54. 11. with tempest and not comforted, behld with the eye of faith a Savi∣our, presenting himself as a Covert of mercie, from the storm of in∣censed Majestie. Though the cry of my sins were great at the dreadfull Tribunall, yet the cry
f my Redeemers blood was reater, at the Throne of grace: here it did awake mercie, and lled wrath a sleepe, so that I ill sing of mercy and judge∣ent, unto thee O Lord wil I sing.Psa. 101. 1 Lam. 3. 22.  is of the Lords mercies that I m not consumed, because his ompassions faile not. It is said, where the Philosopher nds the Physician begins; so where humane reason and flesh∣y wisdome was Non-plust in he without hope of remedie, he blessed Physician of our ouls (teaching me that Gods Metaphysickes are above mans ogick) speaks to me with heal∣g Aphorisms of mercie, saying n effect: for a smal moment have  forsaken thee, but with greatIsa. 54. 7. 8. mercies will I gather thee. In  litle wrath I hid my face from hee, for a moment; but with e∣verlasting kindnesse will I have
mercie on thee, saith the Lor thy Redeemer. But stay, doth a fountaine senIam. 3. 11. forth at the same place sweet wat and bitter? Yes, sweet streams  mercie, and bitter streams of j¦stice, flow both from the sa fountain of grace and glory. Out of the same Throne pr¦ceedRev. 4. 5. lightnings of Gods wi thundrings of his judgement and voices of his mercie: whicverse. 3. are evermore shrill in faithfu eares. The Rainbow about th Throne, the Covenant of gra is still visible in the Horizon  the Saints; though happily n beculae quaedam, some thin clou may interpose. When God is to shew merci like the father of the Prodig Currit, he runneth, as being wil¦ing, and rejoicing at it: but wh to shew his inward disple¦sure by his outward warlike p
ure in judgement, ambulate, he alketh, as at the casting Adam t of Paradise being pensive & scōtented at it. He is even grie∣ed at the heart (as I may say) hen mans sin as a fire burn∣g to destruction, will not e quenched without the pow∣ng forth of the full vials of his rath. Oh what a spring-tide f grief is in God, when he is rovoked to open the flud-gates f his fury to wash away the filth f our abominations? his expo∣tulationHose. 11. 8. in the Prophet, is a gra∣ious proclamation of his tender mercies to the proudest Rebels: How shall I give the up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? saith he Lord: who even ecchoes to his oice with sighs to this sad tune, mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled toge∣ther.
Mercy and judgement seem struggle in God, as Pharez & ZarGen. 38. did in the womb of Tamar: judg¦ment like the one, with the skarDeus cui pro∣prium est mi sereri, ex se miserandi su∣mit materiam: quod uutem condemnat, eum cogimus. Bern in Cant. Ger. 7. thread of vengeance stretche out the hand, but mercy plucks back, comes forth in triumph  conquerour over judgement. In that God sheweth merci is from a principle of love  himself; but in that he execut judgement, is from a princip of wickednesse in us: for he dot not afflict willingly, nor griev the children of men. I have nLam. 3. 33. pleasure in the death of him th dieth, saith the Lord God: where¦foreEzek. 18. 32. turne your selves, and liv ye. Before the Lord of Hosts wil giv the fierce assault, he offers afriend¦lyIsa. 1. 18. parlee: as we read in the Pro¦phet, Come now, and let us reaso together, saith the Lord. Whe all Gods other attributes as  formidable Army threaten mansJam. 2. 13. ruine, mercie the sweetest of al
Gods attributes, rejoicing a∣gainstPsal. 144. 4. judgement, intercedes, desires a treaty with man, who s like to vanity, and whose dayes are as a shadow that pas∣eth away. The Father of mercies angs out the white flagge, in oken of grace and favour, if re∣ellious man will submit; but if e will still refuse and rebell, ighting against the Lord, then2 Chron. 13. 12 s Abijah said to Israel, under the conduct of Jeroboam, he shall notVitiis patien∣tia victa est. Ovid. Amor. 3. rosper: his obstinacy overcomes Gods patience, which being abused turnes into fury, hangs out the red flagge of vengance in the day of wrath, trouble and distresse, wastness and deso∣ation, clouds and darkenesse. When terms of mercie are reje∣cted, fire & sword must be expect∣ed. The Lord of Hosts in the dayZephan. 1. of the trumpet and alarm will bring obstinate rebels to distress,
that they shall walke like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood shall be powred out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Woe unto him that strivethIsa. 45. 9. with his maker, saith the prophet: yet weak unworthy I, may now say, that I strove with my ma∣ker, wrestled with him in the strength of Jesus, till I obtained a blessing, even such a blessing as peace, to my troubled con∣science. His rod & his staff com∣fortedPsal. 24. 3. me; as he did chastise me with his rod, so he did uphold me with his staffe. God was toPsal. 84. 11. me a sunne and a shield, a sunne of righteousnesse arising withMal. 4. 2. healing in his wings: and a shield of salvation, to defend me from the assaults of my deadly foes, the world, the flesh, and the devil: so that they being swal∣lowed up in victory, the Lord
esus triumph'd in mine heart: is invincible goodnesse couldBonitas invi∣cti non vinci∣tur, infiniti misericordia uon finitur. Fulgent. Tota essentia Dei misericordia. Bern. ot be overcome by my wicked∣esse, neither would his infinite ercie admit a period from my nite miserie: but as if he had orgotten to be just, he came to e (as I may say) with a sweet omplement of love; saying, O infull soul thou hast destroyedHose 13. 9. hy self, but in me is thine help: according to the voice heard by Saint Augustine relying upon hisIn vita Aug. own strength, In te sias, & non stas, so long as I stood in my self in mine own strength, I fell; but as soone as I fell in the power of Jesus, then I stood; so that I mayIn vita Junii. say with Junius, Thou wast mindfull of me O my God: ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mercies, and calledst home thy lost sheep into the fold. I ran astray out of Gods field, into Satans inclosures; but the
great Shepheard of my soule, re∣call'd me, as an object of his lo∣ving kindness, who might have been a story of his vengeance: therefore (by his assistance) willIsa. 12. 1. I say, O Lord I will praise thee: thought thou wast angry with me,. thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. Where God is there is heaven: for in his presence is the fullness of all joy, and at his rightPsal. 16. 11. hand are pleasures for evermore.Quicquid mi∣hi vult dare Dominus me∣us, auferat to∣tum, & se mi∣hi det. Aug. in Psal. 26. Nothing is sweet besides God: whatsoever the Lord will give me, let him take away all from me, and give himself to me. It was the saying of one of King Cyrus his favourites, I care for nothing, Cyrus is my friend. better far may a sanctified soule. say so of God, I care for nothing; yet I enjoy all things, because God is my friend: in respect of whom I may say with Job to all my other friends, miserable com∣fortersJob. 16. 2. are ye all.
Now God is a friend to none, but in and through Jesus Christ: the Father embraceth none but such as kiss the Son with a kiss of love and homage God me thinksPsal. 2. 12. speaks unto us as Joseph to his brethren, Ye shall not see my face ex∣ceptGen. 43. 3. your brother be with you; ex∣cept Jesus our elder bother be with us, we cannot behold the smiling countenance of God, as a Father; though we may to our terror, behold his frowning look and austere, but as a Judge. Therfore, as the two Cherubims. Ex. 25. 20. looked one towards a∣nother, but both towards the mer∣cy-seat: So albeit we look (in this blasphemous and licentious age) one towards another as being con∣trary in judgement, yet we must al look towards Jesus Christ, if we look for mercie: there is no mer∣cie-seat but in him, God is no hear∣ing God, no helping God at all with∣out
him, for it pleased the FatherCol. 1. 19. Col. 3. 11. that in him should all fulness dwell. He is all in all. God the Father is covered with a cloud, where the glorious beames of his Sonnes love have no reflection. Christs presence turnes earth into Heaven: and without it, earth, nay Heaven it self were a very Hell. A naturall man pitcheth his Tent in this sublunary world, but a Spiritual man centred in Christ, soares higher: he is with Saint Paul caught up as 'twere into the third heaven: he is not where he is, but his love is where his Lord is; as Origen speaks of Mary Mag∣daleneMaria ibi non erat ubi erat; quia ibi tota erat, ubi Ma∣gister erat. Origen. seeking her Lord at the Sepulchre, supposing to have found the Lord of life, in the place of death. A precious soule whom Christ hath kissed with the kisses of his mouth, and betrothed unto himself in
righteousness and in judgement,Cant. 1. 2. Hose. 2. 19. and in loving kindness, and in mercies; such a one, I say, tram∣plesCui Christus incipit dul∣cescere, neces∣se est amare∣scere mun∣dum. Bern. Ser. in Cant. the world under foot, for having heavenly promises, he nothing regards earthly plea∣sures: though his worke be here below, yet his master and trea∣sure too are above: here onely is his pilgrimage; but there is his home, his inheritance, where he need feare no Councell of State, Committees or Sequestra∣torsPsal. 125. 1. to desturbe him: no no, he shall be as mount Sion, which can∣not be removed, but abideth for e∣ver. His Saviour is his strong tower and Castle of defence: he may not therefore fear the siege, no not the storm of an enemie; though Hyaenae instar cadaveribus delectatur, he deligheth to giveAmbros. Psal. 79. 2. the dead bodies of the Saints to be meate unto the fouls of the aire, and their flesh unto the
beasts of the earth. Lift up thine heart then, OPsal. 38. 4. thou afflicted soul, though thine iniquities are gone over thine head, and as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for thee: yetMat. 11. 28. they are are not too heavie for him, who hath promised to ease thee; for as the Poets faine that Atlas bore heaven on his shoul∣ders; thy Redeemer is willing to beare the hell of thy transgressi∣ons on his heavenly shoulders. He sweet Jesus dranke the bitter cup of his Fathers wrath, that we might drink deep of the sweet cup of his Fathers love; he was con∣tented to drink vineger of grief here on earth, that we might drinkMat. 26. 29. new wine of glory, with him in the kingdom of his Father. As Marius being accused before the Roman Senate of treasō against the State, came and shewed his wounds, saying, quid verb a loquar? vulner a
quntur: why should I use any ords unto you in my defence? y wounds declare my love, and y blood as flowing Rhetorick ay perswade you to a firm be∣ef of my loyalty: so the wounds f the Lord Jesus demonstrate is love, quot vulner a tot ora, every ound is a mouth to speake how eare and pretious we are in his ight. He trode the wine-presseIsa. 63. 3. lone: he became the sonne of man, despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrowes, and ac∣quaintedIsa. 53. 3. with grief, that man mighr become the son of God; & cry boldly, Abba Father: WhereRom. 8. 15. he Apostle useth an Hebrew and Greeke word, both signifying the same thing, to shew that Jew and Gentile have no salvation but by the spirit of adoption, in and through Jesus Christ. Gods mercy is the Arke that saves us from drowning in the
deluge of destruction; but Vu¦nus Christi, Ostium Arcae, thAug. de Civit. Dei. l. 15. c. 26. wound of Christ is the door  the Ark: Christs merit is the do of the Arke of Gods mercy, an his death is of greater efficacy tMulto effica∣cior Christi¦mors in bo∣num, quā pec∣cata nostra in malum, &c. Bern. our good, then our sins can be t our hurt: he is more powerfu to save, then Satan to destroy his power and will both are i league, where he is in love. O then, is any one sick? herMat. 9. 12. is physick for him: is any heartCant. 2. 5. faint? here are flagons of win to comfort him: Is any conscienc wounded? here is balme of Gi¦lead to heale it. The Lord dot proclaim himself by the mout of Jesus to be mercifull and gra∣cious,Exod. 34. 6, 7. long-suffering and abun∣dant in goodnesse and truth keeping mercie for thousands forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. All our sinnes are but as a drop to the Ocean of Gods mer∣cie
saith Fulgentius. Yet, let no man presume; for the same God is both a Savi∣our and a judge, a Lion, as well as a Lambe, he doth not onely take away the sinnes of penitent souls, in love, but he roars as fiercely against incorrigible sin∣ners, in wrath: his blood is a Red-Sea indeed; true Israelites onely are saved in it, but cursed Eypgtains are drowned, it is to the one a Sepulchre, to the other a Sanctuary. He onely that believeth onJohn 6. 47. Rev. 2. 10. Christ. Hath everlasting life by Christ. He onely that is faithfull unto death, shall receive a crown of life. Faith is the hand where∣by we receive Gods blessings, and he that wants it, is like one that stands for an almes, and wants an hand to receive it. O shew thy faith then by thy works, acquaint thy self, more &
more with thy redeemer, and be at peace, thereby everlasting goodJob. 22. 21. shall come unto thee. Come out o Babylon, dwell no longer in Me∣sech, neither have thy habitation in the Tents of Kedar: but shewPsal. 120. 5. thy self a Burgess of the new Jeru∣salem, by that golden chain o two links, faith and true repent∣ance. Is God incensed by thy pre∣sumption? labour to pacifie him with thy humiliation: and as thou hast sent thy sins in a storm or whirlwind of disobedience unto the Tribunal of justice; so send thy soule in a gale of sighes, to the Throne of grace, then all thy sinnes will be as chaff before the wind, Christs merit scatter∣ing them. The penitent contrite heart hath godly sorrow for sin, andPsal. 126. 5. spirituall joy for that sorrow: they that sow in teares, shall reape in joy. God sees the teares
of his Saints as he did Hezekiahs, and albeit he gives them tearesIsa. 38. 5. Psal. 80. 5. Psal. 56. 8. Bernard. Psal. 104. 15. to drink yet he puts them into his bottle, and they are vinum Angelorum, the wine of the An∣gels: for as wine maketh glad the heart of man; so repentant teares, distilling from the lim∣beck of a sorrowful faithful heart, make the very Angels and glo∣rious Saints chant forth An∣themes of joy to the prayse of the Redeemer; for joy shall be inLuke. 15 7. heaven over one sinner that re∣penteth, more then over nine∣ty and nine just persons, which need no repentance. O then, I beseech you friends by the com∣ing of our Lord Jesus Christ, as we have brought heavinesse to the Courts of happinesse, by our trangression; so let us strive to send melodie and rejoycing thi∣ther by our Convesion: then when the most High uttereth his
voice in the thundering Dialect of his indignation, we shall have peace; when obdurate trans∣gressors are plagued like the Egyptians, we shall be like the Israelites in Goshen. And why?Exod. 26. because true repentance is an Exception to the Generall Rule of Gods justice: in a word, it is Omnipotent, overcoming him who overcomes all things. A faithfull prayer issuing forth at the sally-port of the mouth from an humble penitent soul, routes all Gods judgements mu∣stred up in fearefull hardnesse a∣gainst it: When God besiegedIonah 3. Nineveh with his fearful menaces, threatning a fiery storme of de∣struction: then the poor destress∣edviolentiae sunt in preci∣bus lachrymae. Aug. Ninevites cast themselves down at the foot-stoole of his grace, threw away all other wea∣pons, as unuseful, besides pray∣ers and teares: with the power
whereof they raised the siedge, & by their repentance they made God repent, as I may say, and albeit he could not endure their sinning, yet he seems to suffer in their repenting, his compassion working in him a kinde of passion. Which makes my soul breath forth this ElogieAug. Conses. l. 6. Deus a quo exire mori: in quem redire reviscere, et in quo habita∣re vivere Aug. in. Soliloqu. Psal. 90. 1. in praise of my God, O vera sum∣ma suaevitas: omni suavitate dulci∣or! O true incomparable sweet∣nesse, sweeter then sweetnesse it selfe! To goe out from God is to die: to returne to him is torevive, and to dwel in him is to live for ever. Which certainly made David rejoyce to say, Lord thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations. O how safe and happy is his condition who hath the Lord for his habitation? he cannot be banished, heaven is his inheritance and free-hold, yea his Countrey: he cannot be se∣questred,
for he is a member o the high Court of Parliament i Heaven, where none but obedi¦ent subjects, maintaining th prerogative Royall of the King of Kings have any interest: h1 Tim. 6. 6. cannot be plundred, he stil keep his wealth, the riches of grace godlinesse is to him great gain he cannot be imprisoned, fo Gods presence turnes the prison into a palace: to speak a volume in a word; he that hath not the Lord hath nothing; and he that hath the Lord hath al things; heGen. 30. 27. cannot but prosper, he must be blessed if Laban was blessed for Jacobs sake: Obed-Edom because the Arke continued in his house; without all controversie, he must be transcendently blessed2 Sam. 6. 11. with whom God delights to dwel. Good cause hath he o sing with the sweet singer of Israel, who thus resolved with himself; I will abide, in thy Tabernacle for e∣ver:
I wil trust in the eovert of thyPsal. 61. 4. ings. As the sparrow fled into the bosome of Xenocrates the Phi∣losopher from the tallons of the Hawk: so let us fly with the wings of holy devotion to the bosome of our God, and there we shall have all safety and shel∣ter from the cruel tallons of the Prince of the aires fury. O then, let us love this gratious God with all our heart, and withMat. 22. 37. all our soule, and with all our mind. The manner of loving God, is without measure no SynecdocheModus dili∣gendi Deum est sine modo. Bern. Tract. de Dilect. Dei. partis will serve in loves Rheto∣ricke: no gradus remissus in this fire, which like the Vestal fire a∣mong the Romans, or rather like the sacrificing fire on the Altar a∣mong the Jews, must never be ex∣tinguished. The motions of our souls in love toward God, must not be like violent motions in Philosophie, swift in the begin∣ning,
& slow in the end: but like the motion of the spheres they must be uniform & continual so, there will be motion and musick both. A man in this respect must be as S. John is stiled totus, amati∣vus, wholly possest with love: as the soule is tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte, whole in the whole, and whole in every part, so it must be whole in the love of God: all the faculties of the soul as lines of the same circumference, must meet in the love of God as the centre. 1. We must love the Lord with all our heart wisely, resist∣ing the devill that he may fleeIam. 4. 7. from us. Satan is like the Croco∣dile if we persue, he flies, but if we flie, he pursues: we must therefore fight manfully under the banner of Jesus Christ, cast∣ing off the works of darknesse,Rom. 13. 12. and putting on the armour of light. As without holinesse no
man shall see the Lord, so with∣out it, no man shall scare the de∣vil: the load-stone looseth his vertue besmeared with garlick, and we our efficacie polluted with hainous trangressions: as I have read of Godfrey of Bullein, who being demanded by the infidels how he had his hands tant doctas ad praeliandum, so well in∣structed to fight, he answered. quia manus semper habui puras ab impuris contactibus peccati, be∣cause I never defiled my hands with any notorious sins. Though the worst of men may be trium∣phant Conquerers in other wars, as is apparent in these evil dayes: yet the best men onely are victo∣rious in this holy warre, against the devil. They that undertak, in a sinful bravado to swear down fortresses, blow away armies with a powerfull breath, and kill the enemie before they see him,
are no warriours here, for like the Captaines in Nahum, theyNahum. 3. 17. camp in the hedges in the cold day; but when the Sun ariseth (in the heat of service) they flee away, and their place is not known where they are. 2. We must love the Lord with all our soul sweetly mortifying all fleshly lusts, which warre a∣gainst1 Pet. 2. 11. the soule, under the com∣mand of that black Generall the Devil. First, Fury as on the for∣lorne hope, fights like a mad∣man: Adultery like treacherous Joab doth kisse to kill: Glutrony2 Sam. 20. 9. may stand for a corporall, Drun∣keness is the master-gunner who sets all on fire: avarice is a pioner stil digging in the earth to make the shortest cut to hell: Idlenesse is a gentleman of the Companie: Hypocrisie is the ensigne; but Pride must be the Captaine or Colonell else all the rankes are
broken. Now we must enter in∣to Covenant to appose this car∣nall Army with Spirituall wea∣pons; me thinks God speaks to a soul, as that noble Roman did to his sonne, found in Catilines con∣spiracie:Fulvius. in Plutarch. Non Catilinae te genui, sed patriae: I begot thee not for that Traitor Catiline, but for thy Countrey: So God gave us not a being that we should side with that Arch-traitor Satan, but that we should valiantly fight for the maintenance of his glorious prerogative, and the rights and priviledges of our Countrey which is above. In this war all must fight, women must be spi∣rituall Amozones, no neutrality can here be admitted, he that is not for God, doth declare againstEphes. 6. 13. him. Wherefore let us put on the whole armour of God, and fight his battels continually without any truce or intermis∣sion
then as blessed Triumph∣ant conquerors we shal eat of the tree of life, which is in the midstRev. 2. 7. 11. 17. of the Paradise of God: we shall not be hurt of the second death: we shall eate of the hidden Man∣na: nay more, heare what Ora∣tionRev. 3. 21. our Captaine Jesus Christ makes unto us, saying, To him that overcometh will I grant to sitDonabit cer∣tanti victoriā; qui certandi dedit audaciā. Aug. with me on my Throne, even as I al∣so overcame, and am set with my Father on his throne. 2. We must love the Lord with all our mind constantly, over∣coming al crosses and troubles of the world. We are born to trouble as the sparks flie upward. Man after heJob. 5. 7. hath been embarked nine months in a living vessell, at last he ar∣rives into this world, Lord of the Land, yet weeps at the pos∣session: labour and sorrow are the twinnes of sinne borne at a birth, and mans life is an Her∣mophrodite
consisting of both, labour was Adams, and sorrow Eves, one of these for them both if not both these for either one. Seeing then that we are borne to troubles, let us beare them un∣dauntedly in our greatest afflicti∣ons: let us watch, stand fast in the faith, quit our selves like men and be strong. For afflicti∣ons are but bitter arrows shot1 Cor. 16. 13. from a loving hand, and if God doth not set us as a mark for thē,. Beat. Doro∣theus. Doct. 3 it is to be feared he hath not set a mark on us for his own. Calamitas virtutis occasio est, saith Seneca, Tribulation moves Gods mercie towards the soul, as winds do raise rain to refresh the earth. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, saith David. Psal. 119. 71. The Poets faine two Temples, the one of joy, and the other of sorrow; but so built that we can∣not go into that of joy, but
through that of sorrow. We mus passe through a wildernesse oActs 14. 22. tribulation, before we can ar∣rive at the Canaan of felicity. IHeb. 12. 7, 8. ye endure chastening, God deal∣eth with you as with sons: for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye beDurate & vos∣met rebus servate secun∣dis. Virgil. l. 1. Aeneid. without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye ba∣stards and not sons, saith the great Doctor of the Gentiles. Read but the 11. Chapter of the Second Epistle to the Carinthi∣ans, and there ye may behold a world of misery delineated in Saint Paul as in a Mappe: there ye may read his misery to be methodicall, and his torment accurate: yet, that which is anothers either grief or fear,Rom. 5. 3. was his glory. We glory in tribulations saith he, for I reck∣onRom. 8. 18. that the sufferings of this pre∣sent time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. As in the same fire gold glistersSint sub uno igne. Rutilat aurum, palea fumat, &c. Ita una eadē{que} vis irruens bonos pro∣bat, purificat, eliquat: malos damnat, &c. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 8. and straw or chaff smoaks: so in the same furnace of affliction, to use the Prophets words, Isa. 48. 10. Gods children are tryed, mel∣ted and refined; but the repro∣bates are consumed, spoil'd and utterly destroyed. The same fire which had no power over Shadrach, Meshach & Abednego, slew those men that took them up; the same Den of Lions was a slaughter-house to Daniels Persecutors, but an Asy∣lumDan. 3. 22. Dan. 6. to himself: so the same tri∣bulation is a haven to the Godly, but a gulph of destruction to theTantum inter∣est non qua∣li, sed qualis quis{que} patia∣tur. Aug. ibid. wicked: so that in this we must consider the quality of the pati∣ent, not of the disease. Furthermore, as affliction it self is to the wicked a living death, and a terrestrial hell: so
their unacquaintednesse with i most commonly proves a snar and ruine to them: as we read of Saint Ambrose Bishop of Mil∣laine,Marullus. lib. 5. c. 3 who being invited to a rich mans house, and hearing him boast of a continual prosperitie without any intermixture of ad∣versitie, he with his retinue in∣stantly departs, saying, ideo se¦inde sugere, ne un à  homine pre∣peiuis prosperitatibus uso statim periret, least he should be so un∣happy as to perish with that wretched happy man. This re∣verend Father had not gone far, but looking backe he beheld the rich mans house, and all that he had, swallowed up, as Korah Dathan and Abiram with theNumb. 16. earth. Therefore forget not the exhorta∣tionHeb. 12. 5, 6. which speaketh to you as chil∣dren, my son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loveth, he chasten∣eth,nihil infelici∣us eo cui ni∣hil unquam e∣venit adver∣si: Demetri∣us in Sen. Heb. 11. 25. Psal. 119. 97. Isa. 26. 16. and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. Surely there is no∣thing more unhappy then him to whom no unhappinesse doth ever happen. And O thrice happy is that Christian, whose affliction is so sanctified unto him, that he will choose (as Moses did) rather to suffer affliction with the people of God then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. And blessed is that soul which can sweetly breath forth with David, saying, Before I was afflicted; I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. How happy should I be if I could say with the Prophet con∣cerning the Inhabitants of this Land; Lord, in trouble have they visited thee: they powred out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them: But alas, horresco referens, our
hearts Pharoah like are hardened by Gods Judgements which roar not so loud to our terror, as we are silent in our repentance; which makes God complain, I have sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt: yourAmos. 4. 10. young men have I slain with the sword, and I have taken away your horses, & I have made the stinke of your camps to come up unto your nostrils, yet have ye not returned unto me faith the Lord. Again I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickednesse, saying, what have I done? every one turned toIer. 8. 6. 7. 12. his course, as the horse rusheth into the battel. Yea the Storke in the heavens knoweth her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their comming; but my people know not the judge∣ment
of the Lord. Were they ashamed when they had com∣mited abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they fail among them them that fall in the day of their visitation, they shall be cast down, saith the Lord. Me thinks. I hear the Lord utter his voice concerning this land, saying, the Rulers take coun∣cell together against the Lord, and against his Anointed: they sitPsal. 2. Psal. 90. 20. 21. Quale est Do∣minantis arbi∣trium talis li∣ber tatis aspe∣ctus. Cassio∣dor l. 3. Epist. on the throne of iniquity, and frame mischiefe by a law. They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the innocent blood. Againe, this people hath are∣volting and rebellious heart, they are revolted and gone. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea they overpasse the deeds of the wick∣ed: they judge not the cause; the
cause of the Fatherlesse, yet they prosper. But how long? The just JudgeIer. 5. 23. 28. of heaven and earth is bending his bow, and making his arrowes ready against the persecuters, he hath bent his bow, like an ene∣mie,Lam. 2. 4. and called as 'twere a Coun∣cell of war, upon the propound∣ing this Question: Shall I not vi∣sit for these things; saith theIer. 5. 29. Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Wo to the Rebellious Chil∣dren,Isa. 30. 1. saith the Lord, that take councell, but not of me; and that cover with a covering but not of my spirit, that they may adde sinne to sinne. Verily we maske a fowle face under a fair vizard; and put Gods stampe upon our AdulterousIas. 5. 8. Caine: costruing Gods mean∣ing by our own, and expound∣ing Gods will by our own work,
as if Gods wayes were as our wayes, and his thoughts as our thoughts. Alas, we seeme to be religious, not for Gods glory but (as we fondly conceive) for our own advantage; making no other use of pietie, then as it may serve a tricke of pollicie: so that truth is fallen in the street, and equitie cannot enter: yea truthIsa. 59. 14. 15. faileth, and he that departeth from evill maketh himself a prey. There is a great shew of new lights, yet we wait for true light, but behold obscurity, for bright∣nesse, but we walke in darke∣nesse.Isa. 59. 9. And as if we loved darke∣nesse better then light, we hate to be reproved, and yet will not be reformed: like those beasts in Plinie, which have fell in Au∣re, the hearing of truth galls us, and if any shall come unto us with a vae vobis, as our Israels
troubler, we will fetch him up with a Coram nobis; just, Ahabs humour to Elijah, and Agamem∣nons in Homer to Chalchas.1 Kings 21. 20 If learned and reverend Di∣vines will not eate up the sinnesHose. 4. 8. of the people, and the sins of the Rulers which are the Rulers oPsal. 14. 4. sinnes, they themselves shall be eaten up as it were bread. InSalvian. de guber. Dei. l. 5. hoc seclus res devoluta est, ut nis quis malus fuerit salvus esse non po∣test: he that will not swim with the stream of raigning impietie, is threatened to be drowned in the raging Sea of unparallel'd cruelty. This is the birth-day of1 Sam. 4. 21. Jchabod: the Churches magni∣ficat is turned or tuned to mise∣rere; so that blessed is the man that hath his nunc dimittis to the Church triumphant; so miserable is the Estate of our Church mili∣tant. O tempora, O mores! all the sinnes of former ages are rallied
up in this, and keep their Ran∣dezvous in our Land, which was once the envie of other nations, but is now become their reproch: and the inhabitants thereof anMicah. 6. 16. hissing, according to that of the Wise-man, saying, Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sinne is aProv. 14. 34. reproach to any people. Then certainely it must be so to us, for many monsters of sin which our Fore-fathers never dremed off, are visible amongst us; la∣bouring as 'twere to fright mer∣cie from us: and with the Gada∣renes to drive Christ Jesus our of our Coast. As if we were able not onely to contend with but also overcome the Almighty. We hang our bloodie colours of defiance against him, sending him a challendge to shew him∣selfe the Lord of Hosts as well as the God of peace: for as Abner2 Sam. 2. 14▪ called fighting a sport, saying un∣to
Joab, let the young men arise and play before us: so to fight against the Lord with the weapons of unrighteousnesse is our pastime and delight, as if there were no God to revenge, nor hell to tor∣ment,Luke 18. 2. like the unjust Judge in Luke, we feare not God, neither regard man.Animas mor∣tuas multi in corpore vivo habent. Aug. Alas, we have dead souls in living bodies: neither Gods mercie that sweet language of his love, could woe us to repent∣ance;Isa. 26. 10. nor can his judgements as a fierce Lion deterre us fromO mentes a∣mentes, per∣didistis utili∣tatem calami∣tatis. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 33. running in the broad way of wickednesse: insomuch that as Augustine complained of the Ro∣mans, reason is sequestred from our minds, and it is not so much our error, as our fury, which makes us loose the profit of our calamity: Ah, the trumpet is blowneAmor. 3. in the Citie, and the people are not afrayd: the Lion roareth, and yet
we tremble not: so dead are we in sinnes and trespasses. In this overflowing of our ini∣quityQuòd vivitis Dei est, qui vobis parcen∣do admonet, ut corrigami∣ni paenitendo. Aug. ibid. if we do not all perish as the old world did by deluge, it is not because we are lesse sinful, but because God is more mercy∣full. It is his mercie that we live, and he spares us onely to admo∣nish us how we should improve his patience, and long-suffering by our repentance. But God may justly complaine of us saying, IIsa. 65. 2, 3. have spread out my hands all the day unto a Rebellious People, which walketh in a way that is not good, after their owne thoughts: a people that provoketh me to anger conti∣nually to my face. As Cyprian once complainedInter Popu∣lum frequente strage mori∣entem nemo considerat se esse morta∣lem. Cyprian. of the plague of pestilence in Carthage, saying, that among a people continually slaine by the destroying Angel no man con∣sidereth himself to be mortall:
So we of this kingdome plagued with warre, pestilence and fa∣mine turne not unto him that smiteth us, neither do we seeke the Lord of Hosts, as if we would make the Prophet a lyerIsa. 9. 13. who saith, when thy judgements are in the earth, the inhabitantsIsa. 26. 9. of the world will learne righte∣ousnesse. Surely God hath a controver∣sie with the inhabitants of this Land, because by swearing, andHose. 4. lying, and killing and stealing, and committing adultery, they breake out, and blood toucheth blood; Therefore shall the land mourne. When rebellion against Heaven blows the trumpet, and beats up the drum, desolation commonly begins the march: destruction hangs over our heads as the sword over the head of Damocles, but by a horse haire, a twine thread, I feare 'twill sud∣denly
fall upon us: according to that of the Apostle, When they1 Thas. 5. 3. say peace and safety: then sudden destruction cometh upon them as travaile upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. We have grieved Gods spirit by our multiplyed transgressions, so that we may sighe out this la∣mentation, The joy of our heart is ceased our dance is turned in∣to mourning, the Crown is fal∣len from our head. Woe untoLam. 5. 15, 16. us that we have sinned. Consider this therefore all ye that forget God, stand in aweRom. 6. 33. and sin not. The nature of sin is deadly, the least sin hath in it the stinge of death; and I may say every sin is great be∣cause it is against the greatest. It may seem at first a Zoar, but at last it may prove a Sodome, draw∣ing a hell from heaven upon it.
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the Nations that forget, God. When the sentence is passed there is no reprieve to be expect∣ed;Psal. 9. 17. Nequaquam misericordia parcentis li∣berat, quos se∣mel justitia judicantis damnat. Greg. lib. 9. Moral. tears of blood cannot ob∣taine pardon: there is no hope of mercie in the place of Justice; nor of life in the Region of death, Here in the world is the Sunne shineth on the just and unjust both, but in the darke∣some dungeon of eternall death it is not so; darknesse and sor∣row there barre out all light and solace. In hell there is a towfold pu∣nishment 1. Paena sensus, the pu∣nishment of sense, which is so great, that the heart of man can∣not conceive it, nor the tongue utter it: the fire burnes, but not consumes; the worme gnaws, but not devoures; and as the joyes on earth were torments compa∣red with the unspeakable joyes
of heaven? so the greatest tor∣ments in this world are very joyes in respect of the paines of hell in this lake that burneth with fire and brimstone theRev. 20. 10. damned are tormented day and night for ever and ever; death there alwayes begins and never ends. 2. Paenadamni, the punishment of losse, which is the greatest punishment of all, sinne at once opens the gates of hell, and shuts the door of heaven: the damned wretches feeling the horrible weight of Gods wrath then weepe, gnash their teeth, and roar in the bitternesse of their souls, for the losse of his favour; then by the Logick of Op∣posites they find there is a heaven by their being cast into hell: O fearfull Topicks when they are taught pugno contracto, with the fist of Gods fury. Oh it is most
lamentable to read sweet mercy lost by the bloody characters of an enraged justice, and to mea∣sure the blessed estate of the glo∣rified Saints by the want of that happinesse, not by the fruition: it is another hell in hell to know the love of Jesus Christ as a Sa∣viour, by his severity as a Judge only. O how much would heAquinas. Maluert Saguntini se suá{que} omnia igne consu∣mere, quàm aut faederati populi amici∣tiam desere∣tere, &c. Liv. Bell. lib. 1. that now lies frying in hell re∣joice, if he might have but the least moment of time wherein he might get Gods favour? It is lamentable to hear, much more to read the woefull Tra∣gedie of Saguntus, a City of Spaine destroyed by Hannabal, saith Saint Augustine: but I may rather say, that it is most terrible to hear the story of hell, but infi∣nitely wretched to feele the fu∣ry of that unquenchable fire, by reason of an immortall death and a deadly life, ever dying and
yet never dead. What DavidPsal. 55. 15. therefore wished unto his foes, I will wish unto my best friends, e∣ven that they may go down quick into hell, by holy meditation, to prevent their casting into it by condemnation: with an Ite Im∣parati ad paratum, go ye cursed souls which were unprepared for heaven, to hell, a place pre∣pared for the Devil and his An∣gels; ye have sinned without re∣pentance, and therefore ye must be damned without remedy.Omnis anima aut Christi sponsa, aut Diaboli adul∣tera est. Aug. in Gen. If the soul be Satans Adulteress, and not Christ's Spouse, then hell must be her inheritance, whose worke was sinne, and companion Satan: let us there∣fore labour to espouse our souls to Jesus Christ, who will here decorateus with grace; and here∣after when he bring us home to his Palace, he will cloath us with robes of glory, and put a
Crown of pure gold upon ou heads in the kingdome of his Fa∣ther. Where God shall wipe a∣way all teares from our eyes, andRev. 7. 17. we shall have happiness without any heavinesse, light without a∣ny darkness, and all this without any end. Let us now commune with our own hearts, and consi∣der, As there is a Pallace of glo∣ry so there is a dungeon of eter∣nall miserie, both receptacles for the souls of men: the way to the one, is pleasant, but the jour∣neys-end is most painefull; the way to the other is paineful, but the journeys-end is most plea∣sant; the voiage is tempestuous, but the arrivall is beyond al ex∣pression joyfull: as it is written Eye hath not seen, nor eare heard,1 Cor. 2. 9. neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. O then, let not us sell this ever∣lasting
kingdome of glory for a cup of cold comfort, a draught of deadly poison, as Lysimachus sold his kingdome for a cup of cold water: but as it is Satans heaven, even in hell it selfe to bring wretched men into utter darknesse, counting himselfe happy when he can make others like himselfe most unhappy: So let it be our heaven on earth to fight against this cursed enemie, under the banner of the Lord Je∣sus; till we have beat down all his strong holds, and utterly sub∣dued him under our feet, inso∣muchRom. 6. 14. that sinne shall have no more dominion over us. Now, we must fight against this enemy in the Spring, even in youth: we must labour to walke in the paths of holinesse, whilst we are able to run in the wayes of wickednesse: we must serve our best Master in our best
daies, least we offer up the best of our service unto the worst, and the worst of our service un∣to the best: if Satan hath had our Magnificat all our daies, God wil scarce accept of our Nun Di∣mittis at the last gaspe: if our soules are dedicated at first to Sa∣tan as his Synagogue, it is to be feared, they will never be conse∣crated to God as his Sanctuary. Grace will hardly be courted by the old man, which was reject∣ed by the young: and he shall scarce winne her in sicknesse or on the death-bead, who did not woo her in perfect health: if God come in youth and find no fruit, beware the fig-rrees curse, Never fruit grow on thee hereafter.Mat. 21. 19. Manna is to be gathered in the morning; and grace to be em∣braced in youth. As Solomon (whose heart was the Throne of wisedome, and whose tongue
was made up of harmonie) ad∣viseth us, saying, Remember nowEccles. 12. 1 thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth, while the evil dayes come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thouFrangas citius quam corrigas quae in malum induruerunt Quintilian. shalt say, I have no pleasure in them. It is il graffing upon an old stock; and to put the Nectar of vertue into the old stincking Cask of vice, is as impertinent as to put new wine into old botles: there∣fore while we are young men, let us cast off the old man with his works, and put on the new man, the Lord Jesus Christ: who of1 Cor. 1. 30. God is made unto us wisdome, and righteousnesse, and sanctifi∣cation, and redemption. Would we then embosome our selves in Christ, do we desire to behold a gracious mercie-seat in the midst of a just tribunal, let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may1 Pet. 5. 5, 6. exalt us in due time; casting all
our care upon him, for he careth for us. He forgetteh not the cryPsal. 9. 12. of the humble, it climbes the batlements of Olympus and wre∣stles with God till it obtaines a blessing, it pierceth the clouds of the air and by the strength of Christs out-stretched arme, it dispells the clouds of Gods dis∣pleasure, and causeh the light of his countenance to shine up∣on us, miserable sinners. Now therefore I beseech you that are my dear friends and old ac∣quaintance,Ubi nullus metus, ibi nulla religio. Psal. 2. 11. to set Gods mercie & his justice evermore before your eyes; the one to keepe you from presumption, and the o∣ther from despair: serve the LordMal. 3. 14. with fear, and rejoyce with trem∣bling. Say not within your selves, it is vain to serve God: and what profit is it, that we keep his or∣dinance, and that we walk mourn∣fully before the Lord of Hostes?
O what greater deformity isQuid inde∣centius, quam curvum recto corpore gere∣re animum? Bern. in Cant. Ser. 14. A praefinibus arcendus est hostis. Sen. there then to have such crooked souls in upright bodies? But I hope better things of you, shew your valour therefore by dri∣ving the enemie back in the fron∣tiears; deal with your sinnes as the Pygmies deal with the Cranes, crack them in the shel: sin is as the Sea, if it once make but a small breach, it threatens a great deluge: & that which first seems but a peccadillo, may at last with∣out deception of sight, be seen in a multiplying glase. Non est securum inter serpentes dormire:Hieron. it is not safe to sleepe among ser∣pents,Peccatum dulce in fau∣cibus, tormen∣mentum in∣visceribus. Aug. nor slumber in transgres∣sions: for they which run the hazard, commonly like men stung with Aspes, they hasten to death, not feeling their dy∣ing, but are dead, before they thought themselves to have been sick. Sin is indeed a poisonous
pill sugred and candied over; it is sweet in the mouth, butPeccati dolor et maximus et aeternus est. Cicero. Attic. sowre in the maw: pleasent to the sense, but destructive to the soul: the taking of it is delicious, but the operation deadly: for ifRom. 8. 13. ye live after the flesh ye shal die, but if ye through the spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Though wickednesseJob. 20. 12. 13. 14. (saith Job) be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his ton∣gue, though he spareit, & forsake it not, but keep it still within his mouth: yet his meate in his bowells is turned, it is the gall of Aspes in the midst of him. He forsakes his own mercie. LayJonah. 2. 8. Iam. 5. 9. your hands therefore upon your hearts, behold, the Judge stand∣eth before the door; Jesus Christ is ready to descend in a Throne of clouds to judge the world: and if ye have not your Quietus est in the soul, before death with
a cold hand presents one to you in the body, eternally miserable must ye be. When the righteous shall at the great day, and gene∣rall Assizes come out of their graves, as Miners out of their pits, laden with gold and glory, ye like wretched Malefactors, shal come out of the dungeon, see him whom ye have pierced, and receive your just condemnation from him: ye shall for a momentRom. 1. 7. behold the light, to make your everlasting darknesse the more grievous to you. Therefore now while it is call∣ed to day harden not your hearts; procrastinate not your repent∣ance,Hose. 13. 14. least it be hid from your eyes: he that promiseth to him that repenteth pardon doth not promise to him that sins repent∣ance. Presume not, ye which have an houre to day, know not whether ye shall have life to
marrow: Wherefore brethren give diligence to make your cal∣and election sure: for if ye do2 Pet. 1. 10. these things ye shall never fall. Draw neere to God with aHeb. 10. 22. true heart, in full assurance of faith, having your hearts sprin∣kled from an evill conscience, and your bodies washed with pure water. Your Loyalty to the King commands you much, but your love to God will com∣mandQui sequntus es Davidem peccantem, se∣quaris Davi∣dem paeniten∣tem. Ambr. you more: and indeed, ye cannot well honour the one, unlesse ye feare the other. And as for my part, I must speak to you as Saint Ambrose did to Theodosius excusing a sin because David did the like; if any of you have followed me sinning, I be∣seech you to follow me repent∣ing: and let your passing an act of oblivion on my ill example, put you in remembrance of my precept: for as David to Bathsheba,
and Paul to the Galatians, so I to you. As the Lord liveth, that1 Kings 1. 29. hath redeemed my soule out of all distresse wherein I trust I hadGal. 4. 19. the pangs of a new birth) I tra∣vaile in birth againe till Christ be formed in you. Now, to conclude, if any shall say Physician heale thy selfLuke 4. 23. or if with my former sinnes I am upbraided as Saint Augustine wasIn vita Aug. by the Donatists, give me leave to answere with that Reverend Father, saying, Looke how much they blame my former faults, by so much the more I commend and praise my Physician, whoIer. 30. 13. hath restored health unto me, and healed me of my wounds, because they called me an Out∣cast. Therefore having good2 Thes. 2. 16. hope through grace I will sing unto the Lord as long I live: IPsal. 104. 33, 34. will sing praise to my God while I have my being. My meditation of
him shall be sweet; I will be glad in the Lord. I will labour to lightenDuo suut tibi necessaria, conscientia & fama: consti∣encia propter rem: fama propter pro∣ximum. Ambr. Epist. ad Constantin. in my life, and thunder in my doctrine; that by the one I might beate downe vice; by the other approve and improve ver∣tue. Two things will I hold ne∣cessary for me, towit, a good con∣science, & a good name, the one, to edifie my neighbours, and the other to comfort my self: in both will I seeke Gods glory, in nei∣ther mine own praise. I desireSic vivendum est, tanquam in conspectu ivamus: sic cogitandum, tanquam ali∣quis pectus intimum pro∣spicere possit. Sen. lib. de Moribus. so to live as if mine enemies were still beholding me. I will not as if I were borne under the Planet Mercurie (through Gods grace that worketh in me) be good with the good, and bad with the bad: but labour by a pure con∣versation to confirme the good, and convert the bad, or else eschew them, for I may have a bad acquiantance, but I will ne∣ver have an incorrigible compa∣nion.
I will be afraid of sinning, not as a servant, but as a sonne: I will more feare the displeasure of my God as a loving Father, then his dreadfull menaces as a severe Judge. I will (by Gods assistance)Heb. 10. 13. hold fast the profession of our holy saith without wavering: and if any prevailing power shall vote in opposition to it, I will pray for their conversion, but not act with them to mine own con∣fusion. I had rather suffer for the Gospel, then let the Gospel suffer for me. God may give mine enemies leave to make no conscience of my Ship-wracke, but I trust he will never give me1 Tim. 1. 19. leave to make Ship-wracke of my conscience. The testimonie whereof, is that I resolve to feareProv. 24. 21. God and the King, and not meddle with them that are given to change. My soul longeth for
the consolation of Israel in the restoring the beauty of holinesseRevel. 9. in the sanctuary, which is pollu∣ted with Hereticks and Schis∣maticks that cloud the glory of our Church as locusts coming out of the smoke of the bottom∣lesse pit. As Solomon saith, theProv. 30. 27. locusts have no King: So these locusts will have no mortal King on earth; but the King over them is the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, whose name in the Hebrew is Abaddon, but in the Greeke Apol∣lyon.Rev. 9. 11. Be not thou of their councell O my soul, neither enter into their path, but avoid it, passe not by it, turne from it, and passe away.Prov. 4. 15. My ambition shall be to im∣brace truth, and my studie to learne Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge as in a Divine celestialCol. 2. 3. Academie. I will looke on other learning as the trimming, but on
this alone as the vesture of my soul: other arts and sciences areVae tibi Ari∣stoteles lauda∣ris ubi non es, &c. cruci∣aris ubi es. Aug. called liberales, but they cannot liberare me ab inferno, free me from hell: therefore that know∣ledge shall be to me the most pre∣cious which is the most gracious and saving. I care not by humane learning to be as a Meteor ad∣vanced above the height of an ordinarie capacity: so I may by learning Christ, be as a Starre fixed in the Orbe of grace, above the beggarly Elements of natu∣rall abilities. Neither do I speake against humane learning (which I esteeme) in the positive, but on∣ly in the comparative. When I mention the Sublime Raptures of a soul which is Christs Pupill, the Sunne of naturall light and humane understanding must suf∣fer a grand Eclipse. I will ever account him the best scholler who is the best
Christian; preferring an Abce∣darian in Gods O Economicks, before a profound Sophie in the worlds Politicks. And concerning outward e∣state, I deem that the best which God declares by his dispensati∣ons so to be: if heaven be entail∣ed to my soul, I am rich enough for had I all things in the world without hope of that, I were ve∣ry poor. Whilst I am in the world, I will take heed that the world come not into me: I will esteeme it as my servant, not my master; as my road, not my home; as a wildernesse, not a Ca∣naan: the pleasures thereof shall be my Vacation, not my Terme. God alone shall be the delight of my soule, who is the soul of my delight: and so do I desire to fi∣nish my course in the Church Militant, that the High Priest, Jesus Christ, may give me a bles∣sed
induction into the Church Triumphant. In confidence whereof, One thing have I desiredPsal. 27. 4. of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies of my life, to be∣hold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. I had ra∣therPsal. 84. 10. be a door-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednesse: For I have put offCant. 5. 3. my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I de∣file them? Gloria in excelsis Deo. FINIS.
