C3920E 551.a.32.[120] R232608 99888979 196110
THese most miraculous Neck-laces being so well known, and ap∣proved of both in City and Country, the Virtues of the same being so large, thought fit as in duty I was bound to my fellow Christians to Revive this worthy Annodyne, from the ashes, which hath been advantageous to all Mankind, which hath used it, which occasions me now to expose it to the publick sale, and now are made twice bet¦ter then ever, both in virtue and quality; being not much bigger in weight then a Nutmeg, absolutely easeth all Children in Breeding and Cutting of Teeth without pain: And also Children that have so worn them, have been stronger at nine Months, then them of twelve, which can be affirmed by thousands both in the City of London, and Countrys adjacent, besides the great decrease of Children in the Bills of Mor∣tality, in a manner not a tenth part of what formerly dyed in Breed∣ing and Cutting of Teeth, since these was used; and are to be sold for the publick good for five shillings each Neck-lace; with a Pill also gi∣ven with it, which being given to the Child, as the Bill, which wraps the Neck-lace in can fully satisfie, that there is not one grain of Hen∣bane in it; and it helps and relieves all Children that are troubled with windy Gripes, and acquaints you how to use it; which was never known before, by any but my self: And also there is a Catalogue of many Children of Honourable and worthy Parents, and other sufficient House-keepers, who have had their Children in great extremity, which by wearing of this worthy Annodyne have found recovery of a sud∣den, when there were little hopes of life, which is daily seen where they are used. The Bills going with the Neck-laces, gives further satisfaction of several Distempers, prevented in a miraculous manner, to the admira∣tion of their Parents, by wearing of them: and the best time to put them about a Child's neck, is when they be not past a month old, and to prevent Distempers at any time: And it is observed, that none have been troubled with the Kings-Evil, or Falling-sickness, which have so worn them according to these Directions, and are to be sold at several places here mentioned. There is also Lozenges to be sold for eight shillings a pound which absolutely digests all Catarrhs, and helps any Cold or Coughs, or hoars∣ness, be they never so ill; and relieves the Stomach, and heals any soarness of the Lungs, and abates pains of the Head, which proceeds from Wind. These Lozenges are to be sold, viz. where you find two OO's at the beginning of their Name. OO. Dr. Stubbers, at the Chirurgion's-Arms in Ratcliff High-way. OO. Mr. French, Chandler, near Old-gravel-Lane. Mr. Webster, Haberdasher, at the Plough over against Ball-Alley, in Lom∣bard street. Mr. Steere, at the Cherry-tree in Leaden-Hall-street. OO. Mrs. Hooks, Chandler, at Wapping-Wall.
OO. Mr. Livingstone, Fruiterer, at the South Entrance to the R. Excha. OO. Mr. Jackson, Fruiterer, in Swithins-Alley near the Royal Exchange. Mr. Barns at the Black-Boy, Coat-seller near Pater-Noster-row, Cheap. Mr. Kyble-White, at the Oxford-Arms, Milliner, in Cheap side. OO Mr. Simon Rumney Silver-smith, next door to the 3 Planes, Wood-street Mr. Whitehead at the Black-Boy in Cannon street, over against London-stone. OO. Mr. Waller at the 3 Pattins, the corner shop at St. Dunstan's Church, and also at the 3 Pattins at Turn-stile-Alley. OO Mrs. Vanlosdicke next door to the Cross-Keys in King-street, Westminster. OO Mr. Marriot at the Kings Head in Hercules Pillars Alley, Fleet street. OO Mrs. Farrabasco next door to the Rum Tavern at Charing-Cross. OO Mr. Richards's Coffee-House in Fleet-street. Mrs. Myles a Seamster, at Holbourn Bars near to the Middle-Row end. OO Mr. Robert Stones Powder-maker at the Red-Bull and Griffin without Temple-Bar, Strand. OO Mr. Millwards shop, at Westminster Palace-Gate. OO Mr. Taylor at the Golden Ball naer the Watch-house, Charing cross. OO Mrs. Pope perfumer at the Pope's-Head, the first shop at the South-Entrance of the New Exchange in the Strand. Mr. Searson at the Maiden-head and Castle in Piekadillee. Mrs. Gyles an Attiring Woman at the Queens-Head at the North-En∣trance of Exeter Exchange, Strand. Mr. Smith at the Golden-pattin over against the Kings-Bench, Southwark. Mrs. Bates in Green-Dragon Court, Chandler, in Southwark. Mrs. Hooks Milliner, at White-hall-Gate. OO Mr. Benjamin Hammon at the 3 Pattins in St. Thomas's, Southwark. Mrs. Bainam Coat-seller at the sign of the Childs-Coat, Strand. Mr. Gyles at the Black-Raven, back-side of St. Clements Church, near the May-pole. Mr. Halsey at the sign of one Flower-de-luce, near the Middle-Exchange. Mrs. Collard at the 3 Golden Balls, Cheesmonger at the Rules Gate in Southwark. Mr. Becham at the Black-Moors head near the George-Inn-Gate, Southwark. Mr. Randal at the 3 Pidgeons, back-side of St. Clements, Shere-grinder. Mr. Oxspring at the Hand and Shears in Shoomaker-row, Black-fryers. Mr. Richard Pawley Grocer at the 3 Cups in Golden-Lane. Mr. Leonard Fowler Glover under Algate-Church. Mr. Barne Glass-seller over against Cripple-Gate. Mr. Norcott Bookseller, at St. Peters Alley end in Cornhill, and at the Marriner and Anchor upon Fish-street Hill, near London Bridge. Mr. Thomas Parker a Grocer at Py-Corner, Smith-field. Mr. Richard Hodgkinson Ironmonger in Derby. And Mr. Widdoson Ironmonger in Derby, where all Retailers may be furnished Mr. John Booth at Wirksworth. Mr. Tho. Motterams at Bakewell. Mrs. Gibbs at the sign of the Hand and Glove in the Minories. Mr. Henry Brown Barber at Longrow in Nottingham. Mr. Henry Ward at Chesterfield.
