C4201IA 190.g.12[150] R211236 R229636 99888402 201720
Certaine QUERIES concerning the danger of taking the late forced Engagement: Sent from the Generall Assembly of Divines of the Kirk of Scotland, to their Presbyterian Brethren the Mnisters of LONDON. IT was ordered by the Parliament October 11 1649. that many men of quality, especially such as are imployed in any Office of Trust or Eminencie in the Land, should take this fol∣lowing Engagement. I doe declare and promise, that I will be true and faithfull to the Common-wealth of England, as the same as now established without a King, and House of Lords. It is thought that this Engagement ought not to be taken as being neither profitable, honourable nor honest, as appeares by these following Reasons. 1. The Parliament since it had power oppressed the Peo∣ple with unheard of Assessments, and unsupportable Excise. 2. There can be no expectation of any end thereof, as themselves intimate in their late Declaration against the Le∣vellers; for they say what is gotten by the Sword, must be kept thereby. 3. Under an endlesse Parliament we are all Slaves, and it is impossible to be otherwise, sitting the Legislative power; for all mens lives, and estates depends on their Votes; so that the Arbitrary power which they blamed the King for, they usurpe themselves. 4. To make our slavery more absolute, we are over-awed with the power of an Army, which we maintaine at our own charges to tyrannize all the Kingdome over. 5. The settling of our new Common-wealth, engages us in Warre with Forraigne Nations. 6. It hindreth Commerce and Trading with them, and is like to doe so more, and more. 7. It exposes our Seamen and Merchants to the danger of Pyrats, who under pertence of having Commissions from the King, they robbe all they meet with, to the undoing of many Families. 8. The Parliament all this time hath not, and doth inti∣mate not obscurely that they will not settle any Church-Go∣vernment, whereby a great gap is openned to licentious pro∣phanesse, illegall marriages, and many other mischiefes and disorders. 9. They doe apparently connive at, or rather countenance all Opinions, whereby Blasphemies, Schisme, Errours, and Heresies abound, and the true Religion is in great danger to be lost. 10. None of all these inconveniences were under Monar∣chy, at least, not in such an height. 11. The King and Lords have as just right to their places, as Generall Cromwell hath to his Doublet, (that was his owne expression) and therefore it were unjust to deprive them thereof, now to assist such Injustice, and usurpation, and to engage for the maintenance of Usurpers is to render a mans selfe accessary to others mens sinnes. 12. This Engagement is contrary to our former Oathes of Allegeance, Supremacie, Obedience, Protestation, Cove∣nant, &c. 13. It exposes us (without Repentance) to Gods Wrath, and fearfull Judgements, and to everlasting Damnation of Body and Soule. 14. To reject this Engagement, and re-establish the King, would be beneficiall. For First, It would put us into our former Condition, and Free∣dome. Secondly, It would take away our Oppressions, Assessments, and Excise. Thirdly, Wee should be freed from the slavery of the Army. Forthly, Peace would be setled at home, and abroad, which otherwise is never like to be. Fifthly, By that meanes Trading would be secured, and Pyracie would cease. Sixthly, The Church would be setled, and Religion pre∣served. Seventhly, Errours, and damnable Heresies, Prophanesse, and irreligious courses would be either avoyded, or puni∣shed Eightly, Men might thereby please God, and doe their duties to their King, keepe a good Conscience, love one ano∣ther, observe their former Oathes, and escape Gods Wrath and Vengeance. 15. To take this Engagement would encourage the Par∣liament, in their present proceedings, which otherwise perad∣venture would comply with the King, whereby our (other∣wise everlasting) miseries might be redrest. 16. To signe this Engagement (for such as are contrary minded) through hope, or feare, or any by-end is to wrong their King, betray their Countrey, beguile the Parmiament, damne their owne Soules, and Bodies, mocke GOD, and the World. 17. It is not lawfull to take any Oath, or Engagement without the Authority of Parliament. That was the ground this Parliament so insisted on against the Oath that was com∣posed by the last Convocation, to be imposed upon the Cler∣gy; but this Epitome of the Commons House is no Parlia∣ment, which is thus proved by these six following Rea∣sons, viz. First, A part of a part is not the whole. Secondly, No Parliament can last (by Law,) after the death of the King that called it. Thirdly, The King and the two Houses of Parliament makes one Body politique, which is therefore actually dis∣solved upon want of any of those three; as King, Lords, and Commons. Fourthly, There can be no Parliament but in reference to parleying with the King: but that cannot be now there is no King. Fifthly, The Parliament sits onely by Vertue of the Writ of Summons, but that is voyded at the Kings decease, as ex∣perience confirmes. Sixtly, The House of Lords is an essentiall part of the Par∣liament, and now that being taken away, the Parliament can∣not remaine. By these; and many such like Reasons it appeares, that this is no Parliament; and therefore it cannot autho∣rize any to take this Engagement: where upon it followes that no man ought to engage; and that this Engagement cannot by any Conscientious man be sub∣scribed thereunto. FINIS.
