F2526 [ocm]19319002 205502
A SHORT APPENDIX TO THE LIFE OF EDMUND STANTON, D. D. WHEREIN Some Passages are further Cleared, which were not so fully held forth by the former Authors. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1673.
A Short Appendix to the Life of EDMƲND STANTON. SIR, If divers occasions had not inter∣vened, you had sooner seen this short accompt of your Book: which yet, I think, will be large enough to let you see some∣what more than your Authors did intend: whose design, if it were the same with other Writers of pious Fables, to set out their sub∣ject, in whatsoever he saith or doth, as holy and heroick; I deny not but they have done their part: But if they intend it, or you take it for an History, I must first desire to be satisfied in some few scruples, before I can allow it to be such. And first, The time of his Birth, though there seems to be some mistake in it, is not a matter of such moment, as that I should have looked after it, if it had not met me in another search: Your Author places it in 1600. But E. S. when he was admittedPage 1. Scholar of C. C. C. Octob. 4. 1615. affirmed that he was not fourteen years old till the 20. of that Month; and therefore was not sworn till the 10. of November following: At
which time he took this usual Oath. That he would inviolably keep all the College Statutes, according to the plain and litteral sense and meaning, as far as concerned himself; and as far as in him lay, cause them to be kept by others. That he would not admit, obey, or use any or∣ders, injunctions, changes, or expositions contrary thereunto; but oppose and hinder them by what means he could. That he would not enter into any conspiracy or agreement against the Statutes or the State of the College, or against the President, Vice-Pre∣sident,☞ or any Fellow or Schollar thereof; or permit others to do so, as far as in him lay; or yield any assent, assistance, or advice to any such, either in publick or in private. That he would not procure any dispensation of whatsoever kind, or name, or authority, against this Oath, or the Statutes, or any clause in either of them, directly or indirectly; or consent☞ to, or use any such, though procured without his knowledge or desire. Yet two years after, when he was ad∣mitted Probationer, Mar. 22. 1616. 17. he affirmed that he was sixteen the 20. of Octob. before. But when your Author ascri∣besPag. 2. this early advancement before 18. of his Seniors, to his plying his Study, and the ap∣plause
gotten by it, his following Parenthesis confutes himself, acknowledging it due to his Country, not to his deserts: Which therefore J. M. mentions more warily, on∣lyPage 67 as a thing seldom known in that house. But why did not he, or J. B. inform R. M. ofPage 61 his mistake? For both of them must know it to be such, if they be the men whom those Letters suggest to most I meet with. At this time, as also after another two years, when he was admitted actual Fellow, he took the same Oath in each of those par∣ticulars: And together with these, he must as oft have taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which he repeted likewise at his admittance to the several Degrees of Bache∣lor and Master of Arts, together with Sub∣scription to the Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship established in the Church of Eng∣land; as also at his several Ordinations (which your Authors silently pass by with the Oath of Canonical Obedience at his Institutions:) And lastly, when he took the Degree of Do∣ctor, which your Author introduces with such a Story, as it seems by the Marginal note, he would have especially remarked. In the year 1635. it pleased the AuthorityPage 14 of the Nation to permit sports and pastimes unto the people on the Lords day.] Over against these
words we find this note [for three years and a half.] Which if it have any fantastick refe∣rence (to say no worse) to the three days and half mentioned, Revel. 11. 9, 11. so as to end his reckoning with the beginning of the Long Parliament; sure your Author will be found little better at interpreting Prophecies, than he is in telling Stories. For that De∣claration (besides that it was but a renewing of a former of King James dated May 24. 1618.) was published Octob. 18. (not 1635. but) 1633. being the ninth of King Charles, and so, five whole years before the Long Parliament began, Nov. 3. 1640. And E. S. took the Degree of Doctor (what? on pur∣pose to spoil this pretty parallel?) at the Act in July 1634. which your Author saith was during his suspension.Page 14. Now for his performance there, no or∣dinary matter will serve the turn; for that might well have been allowed him, when he had such a friend at his back, as the then Professor is known to have been to the men of his Metal. But if he had such wonderfulPage 14. applause in both, why did your Author change the course, and make him an Opponent in thePag. 15. Vespers? was it to make it a little probable, that E. S. might then non plus Doctor some∣body? for then it was, Jul. 12. that E. S. held this question negatively.
An Deus Author peccati ex Reformatorum placitis statuatur? Shewing himself such an Herculean ChampionPage 64. for Calvin, as made his adversaries fingers Itch, and his good friends hiss, to which yourP. 14. 15. Author unluckily subjoyns, that one call'd out for a Candle that the Doctor (somebody) might see his arguments; for what need the Doctor look for arguments, if E. S. were the Opponent? But in Comitiis on Munday following, Jul. 14. there was another Question dispu∣ted, wherein this new Champion was more concerned in his own behalf to have shewed his skill, if it were so wonderful as your Au∣thor would perswade us: An Sanctificationi Diei Dominicae repug∣nant quae siunt corporis recreandi gratia? This being held Negatively by the Respon∣dent,T. L. who, I think, is yet living, and E. S. being then one of the Opponents, it is a wonder, that when this darling Doctrine lay at stake, he would not venture one of his Herculean arguments to bring it fairly off, and justifie his own direct disobedience to the Authority of the Nation, both Civil andPag. 14. Ecclesiastical, to both which, beside other Bonds, he was obliged by solemn Oath. For, is not obedience to Superiors simply necessary, unless in this one case, when they
command something that is simply contrary to the Law of God? And is not the trans∣gressing of a Solemn Oath in any other case a solemn Perjury? Now let them instance in any particular of that Declaration, which is as plain a breach of the Fourth Command∣ment, as his Disobedience was of the Third and Fift. But supposing this observation of the Lords day to be a consequent from the fourth Commandment; yet how cometh it to bePag. 26. 29, 32. such a special Evidence for Heaven above all the the other Nine? for we find none of them worth mentioning among these Evidences: Or what ground is there for that pretty Ob∣servation, that it is one of the first things a con∣vertedPag. 42. porson makes Conscience of? In all the New Testament (which I thought had been the Standard for such Marks and Evidences) there is not one word of Command, no nor of Commendation of it; but many reproofs of that Pharisaical Hypocrisie, that sets up this pretense of strictness in Sanctifying the Sabbath, against the common offices of cha∣rity and humanity. VVhat follows of the Assembly of Divines,Pag. 15. and the part of E. S. amongst them, is but a further instance of his large Conscience in point of Obedience and of Oaths: For this
Assembly, (as also their Covenant, and their Directory, both passed over in wary silence by your Author) being expresly forbidden by the King, it lies at the door of E. S. and his friends, to shew some Command of Gods ex∣presly contrary to the Kings. In the Year 1648. there were Visitors ap∣pointedPag. 16. for the Ʋniversity of Oxford, who dis∣charged Dr. Newlin from his Headship in C. C. C. and no man was thought so fit to suc∣ceed in that place as Dr. Stanton.] YourPag. 69. Authors handle this business very gently, well considering that it would be never the sweeter for much stirring. Had they thought fit to trust their devout Readers with the whole truth. It would have then appeared a little too plain, by Whom these Visitors were appointed, (that is, by a piece of a Par∣liament, with a Commission forged in the Kings Name, under a Counterfeit Seal, the making of which was High Treason;) and Why they discharged Dr. Newlin, (for no other misdemeanour, but refusing to betray the Rights of the College, which he was sworn to defend; and in particular, to sub∣mit to no other Visitor there but the Bishop of Winchester:) So that even the Inhabitants of the good Town of Kingston might have dis∣cerned the true reason, why no man was
thought so fit to succeed as Dr. S. If D. N. be so stubborn that he will not break three or four Oaths for the good of the Cause, they must have one that will; and who so fit as he, that had given some publick proof of his abilities that way? When E. S. gave the Fidler money toP. 50, 51. forbear his swearing, no Christian but would have thought it a commendation for him, in any mans mouth besides his own: V. p. 12, 15, 23, 24, 29. But when the same E. S. could be hired by an headship wrongfully taken from the honest owner, to a deliberate and continued breach of so many solemn Oaths; which was the better Christian, the Fidler or the Puritan?Pag. 15. (as you know who may call E. S.) Some particulars of those Oaths you may see be∣fore; against which, and the whole current of the Statutes, it was for him to accept the headship, or even to assent to any of those proceedings against the true President, Fellows, and Scholars. Such being his entrance, it is no great matter what his Government, and Conver∣sation, and the success of both was: yet be it left to the suffrage of his Contemporaries there, both Citizens and Gown-men, whe∣ther E. S. and his Disciples were held anyP. 18. 78. thing wiser or honester than their neighbors.
And so I meddle not with the truth, but on∣ly note the prettiness of one remark, where∣withPag. 69. Pag. 18. J. M. begins the blessed regiment of E. S. there, that though the House, before his time, had been much troubled with divisions; he, by his moderation, and Christian pru∣dence, kept them all of a piece.] This calls to mind the Roman way of making Peace, which the old Britain observes in Tacitus,Tacit. in Vit. Agr. Ʋbi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant; so that it seems, the invention is not only new, to make a general ruine, and call it a thorow Reformation; to turn out a whole College, that they might not be troubled with divisions; and bring in a new brood, that they might be all of a piece: And then, it requires no great prudence to keep them so, or moderation, for like to take contentment in their like. The on∣lyPag. 78. pity is, that for the compleating of their joy, E. S. and J. A. lived not to see the Re∣lation of each others Life published. In the year 1660. being discharged fromPag. 18. the College—] Your Author treads as wari∣ly in leading E. S. out of the College, as he did in bringing him in. Had he but added the reason of his removal, that the time was now come, when Providence began to vindi∣cate it self from the blasphemies of those that made their good success in wickedness,
an evidence of their Saintship; and conse∣quently, usurpers were forced to let go what they had wrongfully with-held from the right owners; among whom E. S. had a share in the same dispensation that made so many sad hearts: it would the better havePag. 19. appeared, whether his leaving Oxford were so much-what like Paul's departure from Ephe∣sus,Pag. 19. Act. 19. 9. taking his last leave.—] Had Paul thrust Tyrannus out of his School, and kept posses∣sion against him for some years, till Caesar had recovered strength to restore the right owner? Or could E. S. say at parting, I have coveted no mans silver, or gold, or ap∣parel?Act. 20. 33, 34. Or, did his dear Friends, and Scholars, see his face no more (and that in Oxford) afterV. 38. Pag. 19. this sad parting? But your Author hath a special faculty at comparisons, and none so fit as the great A∣postleP. 21. p. 7. 27. Rom. 15. 19. P. 20. 21. Rom. 15. 19. Ver. 20. Pag. 20. to match with E. S. at least in point of preaching, and the power of the Spirit.] But does he think, that twenty Parishes about Rickmersworth, may be set against as many Provinces, from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum? Or, was not Christ named in those parts before, till E. S. preached the Gos∣pel of the Kingdom in so many new Pulpits? After Paul and Apollos, nay, and ChristP. 38. 22. Pag. 55. himself, it must be no disparagement for the
famous Doctor John Reynolds, yes, and JohnPag. 16. Pag. 64. Calvin too, to be paired with E. S. though Few, I think, beside your Authors, can see any such great likeness between him and them, but that he had the luck to leap into the place of the one, and the opinion of the other. If now a man should take as large a liber∣ty in Satyre, as these Romantick Writers have done in Panegyrick, what variety of matter might be met with almost in every page? But because that way of proceeding might be more likely to please the profane, than to humble the hypocrite; I shall only ask these two questions: Whether it be consistent with Saintship, to live in open and notorious Perjury and Rob∣bery, (for twelve years together; and, for ought appears by these Authors, for eleven more;) without any publick testi∣mony of Repentance for such publick scandals? Whether restitution of goods wrongfully got∣ten, be not a necessary ingredient in repentance? If your Author were in earnest in hisPag. 57. Prayer, that God would use his Narrative for the doing some good in the World; he, know∣ing so well, that many are infected with the vi∣cesIbid. of good men, should have taken care to prevent these questions; which will not now
be solved by their one general answer, that all this is but railing. Let them first shew, in what particular it is false. If this be ma∣culasPag. 61. Pag. 62. conspergere nigras, I. B. may do well to lay aside his Anagrams and Acrosticks, till he hath washed off these little spots; which had they been found in one of the wicked, all the water that runs under Kingston-Bridge, would not have done. But great is the Pri∣viledge of the Saints. Had they thus painted the Sepulcher of aMat. 23. V. 27, 28. Luke 11. 44. Pag. 23. false Prophet, only in kindness to the dead, without designe to intrap the living, E. S. might have slept, for me, in as much silence as litle Bovingden hath stood, till these Poets must needs make them both famous. But since we cannot now be rid of a pelting Non-conformist, but presently we must have a brazen Legend to out-face the World,Epis. Ded. Pag. 11. Pag. 56. that he is one of the fairest Copies that this age hath produced; (as if Non-conformity were of such virtue, as presently to transform e∣very Goose into a Swan:) they must give us leave to take notice, what a fair age we live in; and what good works we are like toPag. 56. have, when such are set before us for patterns of them, whose grace and godliness is distinctPag. 57. from Moral virtue and righteousness: When both the Champions and the Chaplanes of the
Good Old Cause, must be represented to the VVorld for Saints, men that have Life of Sir H. Vane Tit. resisted unto blood, who Speeches and Prayers of some of the late Kings Jud∣ges, 1660. Tit. being dead, yet speak; such as H. Vane, Harison, and the Tribe of Regi∣cides (as many as have yet had their wages paid) not forgetting Ibid. p. 58 Hugh Peters among the rest: (A man, by the way, not unknown to E. S. by the good token of a Diner, and a Speech in the College-Hall. Your Author may reply, that these are no fit Yoke-fellows for E. S. who was no Actor in those bloodier parts of the Tragedy. Be it so, (though some will say, he was a Complier with those Actors, and fitter company for Peters, than for Paul,) I urge it no further, than to let you see, that every one is not a Saint, that leaves some or other of the Gang behind him, impudent enough to out-face Law and Justice, and by some patcht Memoires, to dress up a Malefactor in the disguise of a Martyr. This may serve the turn with their own party, prepared to believe, that all is gold which they say gli∣sters: But surely, the rest of the World, andEpis. Ded. Pag. 11. Pag. 52. all Posterity, will hardly be perswaded, that these demure Christian Conferences, Occasio∣nal Discourses, Legacies and Letters, Speechesv. ut supra and Prayers, can make amends for Perjury and Rebellion, Robbery and Murther: Nay,
change their nature, and make them virtues in the Saints, which in the wicked were the worst of Villanies. The mention of these things may sound a little harsh to you, that know these men but by their own relation, for herein lies their only strength and policy, (borrowed from their elder Brethren of the Romish Conven∣ticle) to possess their Proselites with some prejudice against whatever Book, Discourse, or Person, that may discover their hypocrisie. If the truth be so plain, that it cannot be denied, or evaded, it is enough to say, it sa∣vours of a profane spirit, to rip up the failings of the Godly: But is it not more profane, to set up those for Saints, and patterns of Godliness, that have lived in such open sins, without any testimony or token of repen∣tance? With private matters I meddle not, much less with hearsays, or surmises, which are easily raised, or amplified, and hardly disproved: These few things I insist on, are so publick, that by an easy inquiry you may satisfie your self of the truth, or convince me of the falshood. The only favour I de∣sire in the trial, is, that you do not presup∣pose your Authors to be infallible. FINIS.
