L2886o [ocm]31354856 205909
By the Mayor. arms of London To the Alderman of the Ward of WHEREAS I lately Recommended to your Care the strict Execution of the Laws for the due Obser∣vation of the LORD's-DAY; Wherein, if You and the rest of my Brethren the Aldermen shall do your parts within your respective Wards, I question not but it will have the desired effect, and pre∣vent (at least) the open Profanation of that Day, I therefore again press you to employ your Care in that particular. But because there are also Notoriously in practice within this City other great Vices and Disorders, very dishonourable to Almighty GOD, and scandalous to the Cities Government, (such as Drunkenness, Common Swearing and Cursing, Tipling and Gaming;) I have thought fit, by the Advice of my Brethren the Alder∣men, to recommend to you likewise the suppressing of those Enormities (as far as in You lies) within Your Ward. And in regard there is grown to much in use a most Dissolute and Infamous Practice, for Men and Women in the Evening to wander about the Streets and Impudently sollicit others to Wickedness; Your Care is earnestly desired, That the several Constables of Your Ward may frequently in the Evening Walk the Streets within their Precincts, and be Industrious to prevent that Lewd and Shameful Practice, and Apprehend all Persons they shall observe to Misbehave themselves in that kind, or shall have just cause to suspect, and bring them before Me or some other Justice of the Peace, to be sent to Bridewell, bound to the Good Behaviour, or otherwise dealt with according to Law. And for the other Misdemeanors before-mentioned, That the Constables and other Officers may the better under∣stand their Duties, and the Penalties by Law appointed to be inflicted on Offenders may be the better known, I have caused a short Abstract to be made thereof out of the Laws, and to be here set down; That is to say. Drunkenness.Every Person that shall be Drunk, and thereof Convicted by View of a Justice of Peace, or one Witnesses Oath, or the parties Confession, shall forfeit Five Shillings, to be paid within a Week to the Churchwardens of the Parish for the use of the Poor, or else to be levied by Distress, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace; If the party be not able, He is to be committed to the Stocks for six Hours: And for the second Offence, He's to be bound to the Good Behaviour. Every Constable or other, neglecting his Duty, in correcting the Offender or levying the Penalty, to forfeit Ten Shillings. Swearing and Cursing.The Person guilty thereof in the hearing of a Justice of Peace, or proved by Two Witnesses or the parties Con∣fession, shall for every Offence pay Twelve Pence to the Poor, to be levied by Distress, as before. For want of Distress, the Offender (if above 12 Years old) to sit in the Stocks Three Hours; If under Twelve, to be Whipped by Warrant of the Justice. Tipling.No Person is to continue Tipling in any Tavern or other Victualling-House (other than Labouring and Handicrafts∣men upon the usual Working-days for one hour at Dinner-time, and unless for urgent occasions to be allowed by two Justices of the Peace) on pain of Forfeiting Three Shillings Four Pence, and Ten Shillings by the Victualler or House∣keeper, that shall permit such Tipling in his House: The party being convicted thereof by View of a Justice of Peace or One Witnesses Oath, or the parties own Confession; the same to be levied by Distress, by a Constable or the Church∣wardens of the Parish where the Offence is committed, and to go to the Poor of the said Parish. Gaming.All Persons keeping Common Gaming-Houses and Gamesters commonly resorting thereunto, are to find Sureties or be committed. For the suppressing of all which Disorders and Punishment of the Offenders, You are strictly to Injoyn all the Constables and Churchwardens within your Ward, That they carefully and constantly perform their Duties therein: And that You often Remind them thereof; and such as you shall find Remiss, that You take Care they may undergo the Penalties to be inflicted in that behalf. Hereof fail not, as You tender the Weal and Prosperity of this City. Given the 19th Day of November, 1689. Wagstaffe. Printed by SAMƲEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honourable City of LONDON, 1689.
