P1462cA [ocm]64551546 207960
To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, And to the Right Honourable the Lords and others of His Majesties Most Honourable Privy-Councel. The further Complaints of James Percy Sheweth, That the Petitioner hath taken out of the Clarks hand all the long and te∣dious and Double Petitions; And now Pre∣sents but one, really to lessen trouble; But hath Printed three Petitions as followeth, to setforth the New matter, and to make the Path plain to speedy Justice. To Groan under the Heavy Burthen of Opression 12. years (is hard,) all that reads weigh it as if it were your own Case: And pray that God may preserve all your Fa∣milies from the like trouble. 25th. April 1682. Sent Mr. John Percy his Son to Wind∣sor to present the first Petition to the Kings most Excellent Ma∣jesty: The second Petition is to be presented to the Right Honour∣able Councel Board, the next Councel day: The third Petition was presented the 21st. of April, 1682. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of James Percy, HUMBLY SHEWETH, THat Your Petitioner humbly beggs Your Majesty's Pardon, for his bold and rash speaking at Council-Board the 21. instant 1682. but that which induced him so to do was, to see that the Deputy Earl Marshal should call to the Council-Board; Sir Henry, St. George, and did not call Your Peti∣tioner in also: who could have given as good an account of the Percies Pedi∣gree up to Sir Ingleram Percy, as the Heralds Books makes down to his Great Grandfather Sir Inglerem Percy; Had the Depuy Earl Marshal called a Chap∣ter, they should have found it so, for Sir William Dugdale to incline to Francis Percy defended from a younger Son, and neglected your Petitioner, who is truely descended from the elder Son: while mine Enemies endeavour to mis∣inform Your Majesty, and Mr. Gee Reigns Deputy Earl of Northumberland, the Petitioner must Print to undeceive the World. Therefore Your Petitioner most humbly and earnestly Prays Your most Excel∣lent Majesty, will be graciously pleased to cause his Petition that shall be Presented to Your Sacred Majesty in Council to be read, and that a speedy Order may be had thereupon according to the Prayer, And Your Petitioner as in Duty bound shall ever Pray, James Percy. To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty in Councel. Te humble Petition of James Percy, Son of Henry Percy of Hor∣on, Son of Henry Percy of Pavenham, Eldest Son of Sir Ingelram Percy, who was 3d. Son of Henry Percy 5th. Earl of Northumber∣land: Descended of that Line, that is clear from those Attain∣ders and Conspiracies, in the days of King Henry the VIII. Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the I. of ever Blessed Memory; By which descent he is the next surviving Heir-Male of he Body of Henry Percy 5th. Earl of Northumberland, and Co∣n and next Heir-Male in the whole Blood to Jocelin Percy, late nd 11th. Earl of Northumberland Deceased, &c. And hath so poved his Pedegree at several Tryals. Humbly Sheweth, THat the 21st. of April 1682. The Deputy Earl-Marshal told Your Petitioner at the Councel Chamber, that he had called to the Councel Board Sir Henry St. George, and he declared, That they had satisfied the Petitioner with their Books and Records: Making out the Percy's Pedegree, down to Sir Ingelram Percy. That Your Petitioner acknowledged Sir Henry St. George gave a true ac∣compt, but James Percy should have been called in also, who could have proved himself up, To be the Son of Henry Percy of Horton, Son of Henry Percy of Pavenham, Eldest Son of Sir Ingelram Percy, 3d. Son of Henry Per∣cy, 5th. Earl of Northumberland: who was Great Great Grandfather, Sir Ingelram Great Grandfather, Henry Percy of Pavenham Grandfather, and Henry of Hornton Father of the Clayment James Percy, according to the a∣bove Pedegree. That the Deputy Earl Marshal ought to have called a Chapter, and to have examined the Pedegree down-wards and up-wards, and acccor∣ding to proof; so to have joyned and fixed the Pedegree together, and then made his report. Herein had the Earl-Marshal discharged his Office according to Justice. Therefore the Petitioner appeals to this Right Honourable Board, and most Humbly and Earnestly Prays for speedy Justice, for he is cre∣dibly informed, That Sir William Dugdale hath Signed Francis Percy's Pedegree, and neglected James Percy's: Notwithstanding he apply'd himself first, to Sir William Dugdale King at Arms, with the Percy's Pedegree, and told him, that it was done by Sir Ed∣ward Walkers directions, had he lived, he would have Signed and Confirmed the Pedegree, but the next morning it was finished he died: The Petitioner prays, that this Petition may be read, and that a short day may be set for a Hearing, and an Order to Summon his Witnesses, who in seven or eight days, will be brought together to appear again, (and notice given to the other side.) The not ob∣teyning a Chapter, hath much Disheartned the Witnesses; Delays oft prejudice as much as if Justice was denyed. Ʋpon a fir hearing, if the Petitioner doth not prove the above Pedegree, then Record him for an Impostor, and Punish him accordingly. And Your Petitioner as in Duty bound shall ever Pray, James Percy To His Royal Highness, Prince JAMES, Duke of York and Albany. The Humble Petition of James Percy. SHEWETH, THat his Printed Petition is prepared for the King's most Excellent Ma∣jesty, and His Right Honourable Privy Council, to be before them, that they may see as well as hear when the Petitions are reading. That the Petitioner ever was and is resolved by Gods assistance, to continue a faithful Loyal Subject, and shall instruct and incourage his Sons to train up their Children in the same Principles, so to continue to their lives end; For had the Petitioner as many lives as hairs on his Head, and ten times the Estate that did belong to the Percies; he would freely Sacrifice them all for the Glory of God: the Preservation of the King's Person, for the good of the Three Kingdoms; and for the propagating of Loyalty, Justice and Peace. Therefore Your distressed Petitioner from the depth of his Soul, humbly and earnestly Prays and Beseeches Your Royal Highness to intercede, with the King's most Excellent Majesty, that his Petition at Council-Board may be Read, and that an Order may be had thereon, according to the Prayer. And Your Petitioner as in Duty bound shall ever Pray, &c. James Percy. HIS Royal Highness the Duke of York's answer, was, by his Secretary, That he did not concern himself with business in England, neither did he sit in Councel, nor was he to stay long in England; which the Petitioner took for a Gracious Answer, because there was no delay: Yet some Gentle∣men present, Scoff'd and Laugh▪d alloud, whereat the Petitioner replyed, A true Percy is not affraid to Fight, nor ashamed to Claim his Right. And now some Men look another way when they meet Me, since my first Petition was presented to the Duke of York; therefore I have Printed this last Petition, that the Scoffers and Clouded Men shall see, that a True Heir Male, will not easily be Bounc'd or Byassed out of his Birth Right: Neither am I so Proud of the Blood of Emperours, and the Royal Blood of England Runing in m Veins; But that above all, I value the Blood of a Crucified Christ, which my Faith consists upon; and the Blood of King Charles the first, hath confirmed my Principles, and God hath Mark'd me in the Womb with a Crescent, the very Badge of the Family of the Percies of Northumberland; All which truths Confirmed my belief, and hath Armed me with Courage, Resolution, and Patience, so as I can cordially pray for them all, and remain a faithful Loyal Subject. James Percy.
