P2211a c.112.f.9[62] R231449 99888655 195866
An Advertisement of Concern to the City and Nati THese are to signifie, that the famous and most approved Lozenges, made by John Piercy, Gent. whose ability and skill is so well known, for these 27. years and upwards, in this Kingdom and City, for making of Lozenges he being the first Operator of them; that some persons of late having ta∣ken a prejudice against him, by reason of their reception, have taken on them to make Lozenges, and undervaluing them of Mr. Piercy, knowing the said Mr. Percy's Lozenges to be highly approved of, as well by the Queen Dowagers most Ex∣cellent Majesty, as by other great and eminent Persons of this Nation: These are there∣fore to signifie the distinction between the right, and those that be counterfeit, that those of Mr. Percy's have the Queen-Mothers Majesty's Coat of Arms fixed on each paper, Mr. Piercy, being a sworn Servant to her Majesty; each paper cōntaining a Quarter of a pound. The price is 2 s 6 d. Directions for the taking the so much approved Lozenges. TAke the quantity of a small Nutmeg at Night going to bed, and in the Morning, when you rise, and after Dinner to help digestion, letting them dissolve in your mouth, so that You may cat a quarter of a pound in six or seven dayes. The Cures are, Consumptions, Coughs of all sorts, Catarrhs, Asthmaes, Tissick, and all other Diseases incident to the Lungs, Colds new and old, Hoarsness, shortness of Breath, and stuffings of the Stomach; also a soveraign Antidote against the Plague, and all other contagious Diseases, are made by Mr. John Piercy, (the first Original of them) living in the Postern next doore to the black horse Inne near More-gate: And for more convenience, of such as live remote, quantities of them are left with these Persons following, Viz. Mr. Robert Pierson at the Half moon within Ludgate; Mr. Thomas Piercy at the Hartichoke in Vere-street near New-Mar∣ket: Major Nathanael Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill: Mrs. Anne Michael within Westminster-hall: Mr. Edmund Boldsworth at the sign of the Kings Arms and Civet Cat, at Temple bar, Persumer: Mr. Henry Clark in Bishops-Gate-street at the sign of the Ball, right over against the Sugar-loafe: Mr. John Williams at the sign of the Globe and Crown in St. Pauls Church-yard. In the Country with Mr. Robert Plummer in Cook-Row in Saint Edmunds Bury: Mr. Davis in Oxon, Book-Seller: Mr. Thomas Thomas, and Mr. Michael Thomas, Book sellers in Bristol, Mrs. Edith Williams Book-seller in Lincoln: Mr. William No∣l Book seller in Norwich.
