P2252A_VARIANT 99831921 207413
A PINDARIQUE ODE, DESCRIBING THE EXCELLENCY OF TRUE VIRTUE, WITH REFLEXIONS ON THE Satyr against Virtue. —Semita certe Tranquillae per VIRTUTEM patet unica Vitae. Juven. Sat. 10. London, Printed in the Year 1679.
A PINDARIQUE ODE, Describing the Excellency of True VIR∣TƲE; with Reflections on the SATYR Against VIRTUE. (1.) SO Vast is VIRTUES Empire, that its Power Commands a Tribute from the Worst of things; Ev'n from the Shades of Conquer'd VICE there springs A greater Light to ev'ry Soul, That can controul Those Raging PASSIONS which dark Souls devour. (2) A VIRTUOUS man slays Ev'ry Day In his own Breast, A Lion much more fierce than that which SAMSON slew; And from this Lion slain, there comes forth Sweetness too: When he shall pass his Days, and climb Beyond the Bounds of Time, Up to ETERNITY;
Then Full his Joy shall be, And never shall decay: His Toilsome Fights shall end in Everlasting Rest. (3) The The Stagirite be damn'd, &c. Sat, against Virtue, Stanza 1. Stagirite had but a Glimpse o'th' Light, Which shines in VIRTUES Glorious Face. His Notions were like Twinkling Stars i'th' Night; But those are Sun-Beams which proceed from Grace, Ev'n from the sence of His Almighty LOVE, Who for us here was Griev'd and Slain, though still He had An Heart most Glad, And Endless Life above. Those Christians who for Him Meekly gave up their Breath Were not When Christian Fools were obstinately good, Nor yet their Gospel-Freedom understood, Tame easie Fops, &c. 4. Tame Fops, but Bravely they did Triumph over Death, That King of Terrors, who Makes all the World to Bow; Whose Scepter all men dread, but they alone Whom he's forc'd to Transport to an Eternal CROWN. (4) Great SOCRATES, who as that Justin Martyr. Father says, In part our SAVIOUR knew, Deserv'd Immortal Praise; The mad Athenians murder'd him, but could not him subdue, The Day he took the Fatal Draught, how did his mighty Soul Reign and Controul,
As Slaves, and Vassals, all th' Athenian Potentates; His Bright Discourse quite chang'd the hue o'th' Black And Dreadful Fates; His Friends look'd sad and pale as Death, but He Who was to die still talk'd of Immortalitie. 'Tis clear he never was a That Sniveling Puritan, who in spight of all the Mode, Would be unfashionably good &c. 4. Sniv'ling Puritan, Amongst that stubborn Sect ther's not a man Will ever plead his Cause, Who ; Quidnam vero Leges dixerint; O Socrates, nonne inter nos & te illud convenit, ut Judiciis stares, quae constitueret, stabiliretque Civitas? Plato in Critone. rather chose to die than break his Countreys Laws. (5.) Those Heathen Gods thou nam'st, Whose Vices thou proclaim'st, Made VIRTUE in those Dayes Deserve the greater Praise, That press'd with such Temptations, she her drooping Head could raise. How brave a Soul then had our SOCRATES! Who, 'mongst those Men, whose Gods were Patrons of all Vice Intemperance and Avarice, Of Theft, and ev'ry foul Distemper of the Soul, Declar'd that man's best Part no Earthly thing can please: That th' Heav'n-Born Mind Can never be at rest, till it shall find A BEAUTY, which can ne'r be seen by Mortal Eyes:
That then the Soul lives best, when she From Commerce with the Flesh is Free: That th' Wicked can't a Good man Hurt by all that they Can ever Do, or Say; Whatever Storms About him rise, he sees a Pleasant Day. (6) There are no Sweets in Vice, unless it be More pleasant to turn Scabs to Wounds by scratching eagerly; Than from all Itch and Scabs to have our Bodies free. Ah, VIRTUE, that thy Sweet Embrace were better known! Who would not less esteem a Crown, Than the Enjoyment of thy Beauteous Face, In which shines Ev'ry Grace True, and Substantial! Other Beauties are But the least Shadows of what's TRULY FAIR. O, whilst thy While my plump Veins are fill'd with Lust and Blood, &c. Stanza 5. Veins are plump, and full of Blood, Strive to be Eminently good; As high as Heaven be thy Aims! Ah see! Oppressed VIRTUE claims Thy best Endeavours to support her Cause, And to restore some Reverence to her Despised Laws; Let thy Youth's Fire Make thee aspire To all thats truly Great, and see Thou never be Deceiv'd with those Proud, Stately Fops, who Earthly things admire.
(7.) All Quiet sure, and Peace of Mind, Within the Bounds of VIRTUE is confin'd: Without her all that Mortals can attain Is Misery and Pain, Or th' empty shew of Joyes: Her Quiet calm and Peace of Mind In Wine, and better Company we find, Find it with Pleasure too combin'd In mighty Wine, where we our Senses steep, Stanza 6. And lull our Care and Consciences asleep. Wine does but make men Mad, and Company makes Noise: But all this Noise cann't drown the voice of Conscience, Which after some Suspence, Like Thunder through the Clouds, breaks forth with grea∣ter force, Through the Condens'd Black Vapors of the Mind: And straight bold Sinners find Great cause of sharp Remorse By those bright Sparks of mighty Truth, which like to Lightning flie; And do not chear Souls fix'd in Sin, but only Terrifie. (8) That great Triumvirate in Sin Have in these evil Days great Rivals of their Fame, Men Glory in their Shame, And from the greatest Crimes they hope the greatest Praise to win. 'Tis counted Brave to Kill the Just, In Vindication of the Basest Lust. Some Swear, and Drink, and Whore, And some that blame them, Lie, and Cheat, and never will Restore
Ill-gotten Goods: Hypocrisie Contends to be Esteem'd th' Exemplar of true Puritie. Some strive t'effect the Murder of their KING, Whom God Protects maugre their Spight, And secret Might, And all the Hidden Aid, that HELLS Dark Powers can bring. But, Ah dear VIRTUE, whither art thou gone? Where is that Genius, which thought thee alone Sufficient to make up True Happiness Without the Aid of Wealth, or Honours Gawdy Dress? Return, Return; and make this Land to see, Which is so given up to Sport and Luxury, And to the Hellish Art of studied Villany, That there is no True Joy but in the LOVE of Thee. (9) O that we could be so sincerely Good, As to erase the Impress of all Ills Which our First Parent stampt on his Posterity. O that our Wills Which their own Satisfaction ever have withstood, Might now be wholly bent on the INFINITY Of that which our Immense Desires can Satisfie. That all the VVorld may see VVe are Heav'ns Progeny; VVhilst our Enlarged Spirits rise So high, as to Despise All things but what we may attain In larger measures by sad Poverty and Pain. But hold, my Muse! what I was shewing, none Can comprehend, but they that have it of their own. "Thy high-flown Thoughts by VIRTUOUS Actions shew; "They Like what's Good, that can't Judge what is True. FINIS.
