759 778.k.15.[13] R231672 778.k.15.[12] R231667 99888715 203944
blazon or coat of arms, and representations of couching (cataract removal) and various surgical instruments and aparatus DVM SPIRO SPIRO Post Nubila Phoebus. Nibil absque Deo. THESE are to give Notice, That William Read, Oculist, and Chirurgical Operator, being invited by some Persons of considerable Quality, (who hath been well satisfied of several Eminent Cures he hath lately performed in the Uni∣versity of Oxford, and this last Summer at Windsor) hath encouraged them to send for him, to perform some considerable Cures here in Town, as Couching of Cataracts, and Curing of Cancers, which he fre∣quently performs without Cutting, and likewise all Sorophulous Hu∣mours, or King's Evil, &c. as many Hundreds in England, Scotland, and Ireland, can sufficiently demonstrate: He hath been thrice in the University and City of Oxford, where he hath restored Thirty Blind People to their Sight by Couching, who continue to see very well, which is an Operation many pretend to, but few perform. He hath a Testimonial from the ncellor, for several considerable Cures he hath performed in the aforesaid University of Oxford, as upon your further perusal of this Bill you will find, which is a Confirmation that he is none of those many Circumforaneous Pretenders that infest this Kingdom: He gives his Advice freely, and cures all those that are really Poor, of Blindness, Cancers, Wens, Hare-lips, or Wry-Necks, Gratis, and all others according to their Ability, if they come or send to his Lodgings while he stays in this Town, which will be for some part of this Winter. He hath excellent and approved Remedies to preserve and strengthen the Sight in Young or Old, and to restore Hearing, if Curable. He likewise infallibly cures all Pains in the Head, that very often occasion the Gutta Serena, or Black Cataract, which are never cured, but means may be used in time that may prevent those Obstructions in the Optick Nerves that occasion them. You may have faithful Advice of him whether your Distempers are curable or not. Out of the many Cures he hath lately Performed, he will only mention these Few, Couch'd by him at Oxford in 1689. And at his Second Coming in 1693. viz. Mrs. Souch. Mrs. Hall. Mrs. Bishop. Mrs. Sherlock. Mrs. Sawyer. Mrs. Simms. Mrs. Kerby. Mrs. Day. Mrs. Faulkner. Mrs. Bostel. Thomas Altock. Thomas Cliff. Margaret Gole. And many poor People Gratis: All Restored to their Sight. Captain Cook of Cirencester restor'd by him to his perfect Sight, although almost Fourscore Years of Age; and many more in the same Countrey. Hannah Ayres, and Alice Ayres, both of the Parish of Denton, near Alisbury, in Buckinghamshire, were Restored to their Sight by him, although Blind from their Cradles. Madam Strickland of the same Town, who was Blind, was likewise Restor'd to her Sight by Couch∣ing; Perform'd in the Year 1693/4. Windsor, April 1694. He Couch'd Mr. Reeves, a Gentleman of considerable Quality, and Restor'd him to his perfect Sight, although Fourscore Years of Age: And several Others at the same Time and Place. He also Perform'd a very considerable Cure, by Cutting out a Cancer, which weigh'd Ten Pounds, from the Breast of Mrs. Cary, Wife to Mr. Ralph Cary, who was Servant to King Charles the Second, and now Liveth at the Blew-Posts in Windsor: This was Perform'd, and the Breast preserv'd in its proper Shape, by the Application of his much Approved Styptick-Water, which no Man in Christendome truly Prepares but himself, although Counterfeited by several Ignorant Pre∣tenders that know nothing of the Preparation of it. Windsor, May 10. 1694. In the Presence of several Persons of Quality, He Cut and Cured Mrs. Mary Glover, the Minister's Daugh∣ter of Burnham, of a Wry-Neck, contracted down to her Shoulder. And a Monstrous Double Hair-Lip, for Thomas Goddard of the same Parish. May 16th 1694. He Couch'd the Daughter of Mr. John Hanson, Register of Eaton-Colledge, near Windsor, who was Born Blind, and brought her to see very well in a few Minutes. July 14th, 1694. He cut off a Mortified Legg from Mrs. Ann Crook, at Windsor, which was perform'd in half a Minute without the loss of an Ounce of Blood after the Styptick-Water was applied; In the Presence of his GRACE, the Duke of Northumberland. A Cataract Couched by him for the Daughter of Mr. Johnson at Grundon in Northampton-shire, who was Born Blind, and Restored to her perfect Sight; and 20 more in the same Countrey, in 1687. John Davenore, near Rippon in York-shire, although Born Blind, was Couched by him, and rstored to his perfect Sight: And near 100 more in the North of England, in the Year 1687, and 1688. Mrs. Joice Wildah of Bath, was cured by him in 1693; of a Tympany and Dropsey, when her Belly was as Big as a Woman's with Two Chil∣dren, and he made a perfect Cure of it in 6 Weeks, without Tapping. A Throat Rupture of a great bigness was Cured by him for a Per∣son of considerable Quality in this City. John Moo of Ogborne, near Marlberough in Wiltshire, had a large Wen Cut off by him from his Belly, which weigh'd 24 Pound, and he perfectly Cured him. Mrs. Whiting near Market-Laventon, he Cur'd in the Year 1693. of a dangerous Cancerated Breast, without Cutting. She was Re∣commended to him by the Right Honourable, the Earl of Abingdon, when left off by All Others. He Cut off a very large Cancerated Breast from the Body of Eli∣zabeth Hopkins of Oxford, in 1689. and perfectly Cured her: For that, and many other considerable Cures, he hath a Testimonial from the Vice-Chancellor. A French Gentleman belonging to Collonel Cornwal, had his Skull Trepann'd which was very dangerously Fractur'd by a Fall from a Horse, and was Cur'd by him at Bath, in May 1693. He Cur'd the Wife of John Web of Wooten-Basset in Wilt-shire, of a Dead Palsie, and Convulsion in the Nerves, after being 11 Years Bed-Ridden, and Restor'd her to the perfect Use of her Limbs. A Wry-Neck contracted down to the Shoulder, Cut and Cured by him in 3 Days, for the Daughter of Mrs. Cooper at Frome in Somerset-shire. A large Deformity of a Double Hair-Lip, Cut and Cured by him in 5 Days, for the Son of Mr. John Tower, a Merchant at Watchet in Somerset-shire. A Gentlewoman near Guilford in Surrey, was Cur'd by him of a very dangerous Leprosie. And a Child of Mr. John Bartles, the Ox∣ford-Carier, of the same Distemper, and both remain in perfect health. A Polipus in both Nostrils, which is an excrescence of Flesh that proceeds from the Brain, was Extracted from Mr. Smith at Barn∣stable in Devon shire, in the Year 1692. And Cured by him in Three Days. He is to be spoken with at Mr. Agutters a Musical Instrument-Maker, at the Sign of the Crown, over-against YORK-Buildings in the Strand, from 8 in the Morning till 6 in the Evening, where you will see a Bill of Operations hang at the Door.
