M732A 297426964 208142
MAHOMETS TOMBE A the Grand Signior B the Crim Tartar C the Emperour of Ger: D the Pope: I: Chantry. seu
THE SECOND PART OF THE New Survey OF THE TƲRKISH EMPIRE, Containing I. The Extent of its Dominion, when, how, and by whom conquered. II. An Account of the Tartars. III. The Life of Mahomet the Impostor. IV. Their Militia. V. Their Government Civil and Eccle∣siastick. VI. The Continuation of their History. Being now an Absolute and Com∣pleat Discovery of what is worth Knowledge, or is any way satisfactory to Curiosity, in that Mighty Nation. LONDON, Printed by J. Best for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery-lane. 1664.
Imprimatur. VVill. Morice. Jan. 9. 1663.
To the Right Honou∣rable Thomas Lord Arundel of War∣dour, and Count of the sacred Empire. May it please your Lordship, THere is due to the glory of your Il∣lustrious Family a more ample and sufficient Discourse of the sub∣ject
I have resumed, and I must therefore humbly crave your pardon, that I presume to confine the extended re∣nown of your Name through∣out the Turkish Empire, to this abridgement of its Great∣ness. Your valorous and victori∣ous Ancestor left the Impres∣sion of English Courage and Honour indelibly visible on the walls of Strigonium, which Town his noble atchieve∣ment did in effect restore to to the German Caesar, whose sentiments of so great a ser∣vice have not onely worthi∣ly ranked you (by successi∣on) with the most Noble Counts of the most sacred Empire, but signalized that merit with an English Baro∣ny,
conferred as a further reward thereof by our late Soveraign King James of bles∣sed memory. Be your Lordship favoura∣bly pleased to permit there∣fore your Titles to be inscri∣bed to this Treatise, as by the matter thereof you have been entituled, to your Ho∣nours, and that with more splendid Remarques then the greatest Dignities in Europe can pretend to. And I no way doubt but that your great Name will prove as benign and propitious to this design as it hath been disastrous and formidable to the Turks. Wishing your Lordship all Prosperity, answerable to
your own particular Vertue, which hath been no less sig∣nally famous in the late Royal Service, I humbly beg leave to subscribe my self My Lord, Your most humble and obedient Servant, Henry Marsh.
To the Reader. HAving lately publish∣ed the First Part of a New Survey of Tur∣ky, when for Expedi∣tion, by reason such a Treatise was every day expected; I could not possibly di∣gest all that concerns so spacious and mighty an Empire into so small a Vo∣lume; I have now by the favoura∣ble encouragement of the formers ac∣ceptation perfected and compleated the Discourse, which I presume and doubt not will give ample satisfacti∣on to the most curious and inquisitive Reader. There were some things in the former only mentioned, some things misrepresented, some things wholly o∣mitted; but the perusal of this will rectifie all, whereby the equal Reader
will perceive that it was not ordina∣ry nor common labour to contrive the Essentials of so great a State, so much distant from our knowledge, to every easie apprehension, and yet to have kept a decent reverence and respect to its Greatness. ADVERTISEMENT. Because of a vulgar and most ob∣vious error concerning Mahomets Tomb, it is prefixed in the peice be∣fore the Title, that it may be percei∣ved, it is not suspended by vertue of a Loadstone in the Roof of the Temple, but is placed by the side thereof as Monuments with us usually are; As Dr. Heylin, Mr. Sandys, Sir Henry Blunt, Sir Walter Raleigh, and o∣thers do agree. ERRATA. PAge 21. Line 20. for 1642. read 1462. page 54. the mention of the Isle of Rhodes ought to be referred to page 97.
THE SECOND PART OF THE NEW SURVEY OF THE Turkish Empire. CHAP. I. The Extent and Dominion of this Empire. The Pre∣face.TƲrky owes so much to its barbarous power and greatness that it is al∣most bankrupt in its re∣nown and glory, while the Chri∣stian world debar'd of any free and
unjealousied converse, or wanting the advantage thereof by the rudeness, ignorance, and vast de∣populations of the espective Pro∣vinces of this spacious Monarchy do conclude and gaze upon it as a Monster, spreading and winding his pernicious bulk upon the face of Europe, more by a brute impulse and sudden violent effort, then by the conduct and directions of true reason and policy, which by a just and exact disquisition of their atcheivements and conquests,Our Mis∣takes con∣cerning Turkish Govern∣ment. will be found of the best extraction from the truest refined wisdom, and to relish of that pure and ge∣nuine intellect, which in the free∣born world is reported and credited to have descended upon, and blest this Tract and Regions, however our vicious and depraved sense, perplexed with the Matchivilian In∣trigues of Government, doth falsly conceive of it as exotick simplicity, and of their Prowess as the forced result of their Savage
and ferally Rapinous dispositi∣on. Our purpose therefore is in de∣scribing of the dimensions of this large and ample Territory, to ob∣serve the manner and means of their augmentation, and Coalition into this entire and grand consi∣stency, with a Chronology of each Provinces reduction to the Ottoman Scepter from under the Government of their former and natural Princes. The present Politiques, and Civil and Ecclesi∣astical, Martial and Judiciary Administration of this Potent and most extensive Soverainty, its Magnificence, Pomp and Splen∣dor, not interfering with what hath been said before, but in a distinct and orderly method, for perfect and plenary information of the Reader. Nor will it therefore be necessary to pry into those lurking holes and abdite retreats of their despicable and unobserved Ancestry, since
the disparagement of their Origi∣nals is rather the glory of their adult and mature estate and gran∣deur, and concerns not their story or present condition, besides that it hath already been briefly, but satisfactorily mentioned in the former part. The con∣enient cite of he Em∣ire.Considering this Dominion in general, there is nothing can be faulted in it which is requisite to the support of its grandeur. For its Scituation it is placed most con∣veniently for an universal or fifth Monarchy, being devided equally into Europe and Asia, the very Center of the Earth, whereby he may be ready on all occasions to stretch his Conquest either way, and be quick and ready at hand with recruits and supplies to carry on a war in either quarter. His Imperial City of Constantinople being the extremest limit of both Regions, officiously attended and served by two Seas, the Euxine and the Mediterranean, which combine
their waters by the walls of the Magnificent Seraglia, and do joyn in Homage to this mighty Lord and Ruler. His con∣stant po¦cy in m¦king waHe hath also large Territories in Affrick, and the Red Sea under his command in part, so that of the habitable world he hath the biggest and fairest proportion, and by that means may when his Am∣bition shall incite him extend his Arms and Dominions further, in any of these quarters, provided the Conquest be worth the pur∣chase, and his affairs at Home or the opposite Regions will afford him opportunity, for it is to be noted the Grand Signior never makes War in two places together, nor long in one place, either fear∣ing the contagions of his Enemies manners should spread among his own people, which he carefully avoids, as the bane of his Tyranny, or else suspecting that his own deficiencies in the Art Military, or some other inconveniencies of his
Souldiery may be notified to the Adversary by any continuance in their Country, just like a Lyon and a Dragon fighting by insults or results, taking and leaving as he pleaseth, so that most of his de∣sign and force seems to lye in the invasion and intrusive manage thereof; The French fury, and Turkish incursion being equally terrible and as as soon abated, un∣less extraordinary Fortune and other concurrent advantages hold them longer in breath and pro∣secution, which is much to be feared in this present juncture, and the condition of Hungary, from whence and the Europaean parts adjacent we will begin this Survey of this mighty Empire. clavonia escribed.We will enter into that part which is nearest to us, and leads in∣to the body of his Dominions, Scla∣vonia, divided now into six Provin∣ces, bounded on the East with Ser∣via, Macedonia and Epirus, from which they are parted by the river
Drinus, and a line drawn from thence unto the Adriatick; on the West with Carniola in Germany and Histria in the Seigniory of Venice, from which last they are divided by the River Arsia; on the North with Hungary; and on the South the Adriatick Sea, containing in length eight hundred Italian miles, (the breadth being 325) those Provinces are, Windisland, Croatia, Bosnia, Dalmatia, Libur∣nia or the County of Zara, and Sclavnian Isles. Bosnia de∣scribed.Of this Territory Bosnia is wholly the Turks, it was united as a Kingdom unto Hungary, and under the Homage thereof a King∣dom by it self in 1420, as is re∣ported; but as it was a Kingdom of a latter date, so was it of as short continuance, for in the year 1464. Mahomet the Great having taken Constantinople, and almost all the rest of Greece, suddenly surprised and seized it, together with Stephen the last King there∣of,
he most barbarously command∣ed him to be flead alive (whereby he terrified all other Pretenders) and then converted it to a Pro∣vince of his Empire; thereafter, and yet governed by one of the principallest of his Bashaws. DALMATIA; In this Province, though the Venetians have a share, yet it is a very inconsiderable one, yet it stretches all North along the Adriatick Sea or Gulf of Ve∣nice, (whereto they pretend a sole dominion and Jurisdiction) for they pay for the customs of all trade and merchandize, a certain stipend yearly to the Turk, with which engine it is thought they have for so many ages held play with him being ever in danger of a rup∣ture and war, but much against their wills and inclinations;The Grnd eignior rotector f the tate of agusa. upon the same account the Great Turk is Protector of the little Common∣wealth of Ragusa, very rich for∣merly by their Traffick upon the
adjoyning Sea; without this pro∣tection they had long ere now fal∣len into the hands of the Veneti∣ans, as on the other side they are preserved by the State of Venice from being a prey to their Pro∣tector. So that it is the very paral∣lel of the State of Geneva lying betwixt the Duke of Savoy, the French and Spaniard. This Ragu∣sa, is the Maritime descent into Turkie. Bosnia de∣scribed.The ISLES (some of which be∣long to Ragusa) as Curzola or Corcyra,X Zara and the rest have been often ransacked and pillaged by the Turks, but never posses∣sed by them, as not caring for such remote and dangerous Tenures, being placed in a boysterous and destructive Sea. County of Zara.In the County of ZARA the Turk hath a good part, as he hath firm footing in Windischland, the parts whereof lying much to Hun∣gary on the North and East, do groan under the Bondage of the
Turkish Garrisons, some whereof are also placed in Croatia, where the Turk in 1592. took Whitiz the Metropolis, though fortified strongly both by Art and Nature in the form of an sland by the ri∣ver Ʋna, when contrary to the Articles of surrender, he put all the Souldiers immediately to the sword. Now for better elucidati∣on of the Turks part in the whole we will sum it up in this partiti∣on: The whole apportio∣ned.The Venetians possess the great∣est part of the Islands, and all the Sea coasts from the River Arisia to the Bay of Cattharo (the City and Commonwealth of Ragusa only excepted; the House of Au∣stria, as Kings of Hungary, the Inland parts of Windischland and Croatia; and the Turks who set footing herein the reign of Maho∣met the Great, the whole King∣dom of Bosnia, the patronage of Ragusia, some Towns in Windisch∣land and Cratia, and all the resi∣due
of Dalmatia, from the Bay of Cattaro to Albania, so that he hath the better half of this Region of Sclavonia. Hungary:In HƲNGARY it self, by the Victories of Solyman the Magnifi∣cent, who (upon the death of Lewis the Second, King of Hunga∣ry, that lost unfortunately the Battel of Mohatz, and was drowned in his flight) was called in by John Sepusio Vayvod of Transilva∣nia, chosen King by election of the States of Hungary, against the he∣reditary claim of Ferdinand Arch Duke of Astria, &c. such advan∣tage was made in the dissention be∣twixt the two rival Kings, that upon the death of John Sepusio in 1540. that under color of Patronage to Stephen Johns Orphan whom he took into his own tuition, and af∣terwards deprived (having delibe∣rated to put him to death) he seized Buda the Capital City, with other Towns, and from that time his
successors, but especially himself, have never omitted any occasions or advantages of the Christian quarrels to enlarge their domini∣ons in this Kingdom, which same design this successeful present Em∣peror hath so far prosecuted, that there remains not to the Emperor above four places of Note and strength in that Kingdom, which are Raab, Comorra, Toskay and Presburgh, the last confining upon Austria it self, while the whole Country, Towns and Villages, even beyond the limits of that Realm are subjected to, and lye open to this barbarous enemy. The pre∣sent con∣dition thereof.So that most men conclude, Actum est de Hungaria, and give it over as a Province of the Turkish Empire, to which it was in as for∣ward a condition after the battel of Keresture in 1578. when Mahomet the third took in Agria, and making advantage of the Luthe∣ran innovation in Germany, which then divided the Princes thereof,
Battel of Keresture had swallowed the Conquest, but was so near an utter overthrow himself, being forced to forsake the field in a most disorderly frightful fight, in which with hast he lost his Turbant, that had not the Christians out of greediness of Plunder and Spoil, left the pursuit scarce begun, to rifle the Camp, which gave the Turks time and courage to rally again, Maho∣met had hardly recovered Con∣stantinople: But by reason of this disastrous covetousness the fortune of the battel was quite changed, with such a diversity, that as Dr. Heylin elegantly observeth, the Conquerours were beaten out of the field, and the vanquished ran away with the victory. Belgrade.Among other possessions of the Turks in Hungary, before we depart thence, Belgrade anciently called Taurunum, or Alba Greca, once the possession of the Despots of Servia, by whom it was consigned to Sigismond King of Hungary, as
the best able to maintain it, de∣serves our observation: it is seated upon the confluence of the Savus and Danow, by the former of which it is hemmed in on the North and on the East by the latter, it was heretofore the great Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks, who were often times worsted and defeated before it (especially Amu∣rath the Second and Mahomet the Great) but at last taken to the shame of Christendom for not succouring the beseiged in time, by Solyman the Magnificent in the year 1552. not to mention some other principal places besides these named, as Gran or Strigonium, at the taking whereof by the Em∣peror Rodolph, in the year 1595. . Arun∣el of Wardour. Sir Thomas Arundel of Wardour for forcing the water Tower, and bringing thence a Turkish Banner, was made a Count of the Empire, and after Lord Wardour of Arundel by King James, Alba Regalis, Quinque Ecclesio, Zigeth, Temes∣war,
Pest Colocza an Arch-bishops see, &c. and now Newhausel and Novigrad. Dacia.In DACIA, the Eastern bound of Hungary, he is absolute Lord and Master. In this Region are contained the Provinces of Transyl∣vania, Moldavia, Valachia, Rascia, Servia and Bulgaria, the four first in old Ducia North of the Danow, the two last in the new on the South side thereof. Transilva¦nia.Transylvania bounded on the East with Moldavia, on the West with Ʋpper Hungary, on the North with Russia Nigra, on the South with Rascia and Valachia, hath its name from the great Woods lying between it and Hungary. This peo∣ple is divided into seven Cantons, keeping their own laws, fatally and insensibly betrayed to the Turkish yoak, by John Sepusio the Son of Stephen, Vayvod of Transilvania (which was the title in use before Sigismund Battori, who stiled him∣self
Prince) who as aforesaid called in Solyman: his Infant Son Stephen was afterwards by him made Vay∣vod of Transilvania, a fine recom∣pence for his Fathers kindness for the Turk: since which time the Grand Signor clayms the Investi∣ture of the Provinces hereof, and a yearly Tribute, besides their initiating Bribes and Presents: The re∣olt of ranslva∣ia. many revolts have been attempted, but none so signal as first, that of Sigismond Battori, who defeated several Turkish Armies, and shook off the Turkish yoke with scorn and indignation, but his suc∣cessors have been forced to accept of it again, and their Subjects con∣tented to pay the Tribute, for which they enjoy their National Laws and Liberties of Religion. Secondly that of Ragotzi in 1659. and 1660. who was likewise very successeful against the forces of this present Sultan, but he being woun∣ded in his last conflict with them, was carried to Varadin, where he
ended his life, much honoured and lamented by his Subjects. Ragotzi dieth. Va∣radin which is one of the strongest peices of this Country, but Gar∣rison'd by Hungarians, was soon af∣ter taken by the Visier Bassa, and the prosecution of the war into Hungary from this Pique hence undertaken, as from a neer view of those troubles and dangers which threatened the Empire of Germany on the other side. The present Prince of this Country Michael Apaffi, is wholly at the Devotion of the Turk, and is re∣ciprocally caressed by them, but how long the kindness will last, the German war will soon determine: the Transilvanians are most part of them Calvinists. Moldavia described.MOLDAVIA is bounded on the East with the Sea, on the West with Transylvania, on the North with the River Niester and Podolia a part of Poland, and on the South with Walachia, it is a
fruitful Country, but very thin of people, by reason of those depopulations made by Turks, Tartars, and Cossacks, never∣theless it supplies Constantinople with five hundred Ships laden yearly wish provision for Constan∣tinople, it is in diameter every way three hundred miles, they beleive with the Greek Church, and are tolerated therein like other Cristi∣ans in the same condition. Their Vayvod is a Tributary and Benefi∣ciary of the Grand Seignior, and is placed and displaced as he plea∣seth, but he that gives most com∣monly now adays is honoured with the Dignity. The eminentest of their Princes substituted in this manner have been John the Vay∣vod about 1570. who gave a terri∣ble overthrow to the Turks assisted by Peter the Vayvod of Valachia, who had bought, and now fought for the possession of the Vayvod-ship, but was at last perfideously murthered by the
Turks 1574. The vari∣ous at∣tempts of the Molda∣vians to recover their Li∣berty. when Moldavia sub∣mitted to them, but was again wrested from them forcibly by Aaron the Vayvode, confederate with Sigismond Prince of Transilva∣nia, whom themselves had placed, who being also again devested, and betrayed by Roswan one of his disloyal and ambitious Subjects, Moldavid sheltred it self under to the tuition of the Polanders, who have since placed some Vay∣vods, but to their perpetual loss and trouble, and then of Rodol∣phus the Emperor, but at last again it reverted to the Turk, who raged there in the year 1622. when young Osman was Emperour, since which time the Vayvods have lived with good correspondence with the Port, and now attend this expe∣dition of the Grand Seignor into Germany; but though they are ab∣solute Vassals, yet is not their Country quite conquered, or so much as marched over or through∣ly traversed by those Infidels.
Valachia described.VALACHIA is the next Pro∣vince, once one and the same with Moldaevia, but by a modern di∣stinction defined and divided from it by the name of Transalpina, a ridge of Mountains crossing both Countries; they follow the Greek Church, and obey the Patriarch of Constantinople, whom those Christian parts of the world ac∣knowledge as supreme: but as their Neighbours are ignorant of all letters, and so the fitter for the Mahumetan Impositions. It is in length five hundred, in breadth a hundred and twenty miles, and very plentiful of all things, the Store-house with the other adjacent Provinces of penu∣rious Asia, and gives credit and reputation as it borrows its ferti∣lity, to the River Ister, which in its confines, and by the confluence of other Rivers into the Danow, is here so called. The people hereof were governed by Vayvods
of their own, till the Turks inva∣sion made them seek for the King of Hungaries protection, to whose often and very great discomfitures they have been highly instrumen∣tal, but with various fortune, from the time of Bajazet the first, who vanquished their Prince, and was himself caged by Tamberlane, un∣till this last age. Mahomets Policy. It afterwards was resigned into the several vicine Princes, as the necessity and occasion of war ad∣vised, still stubborn against the Turkish yoke, while the prevail∣ing fortune thereof made all the Territory about them to undergoe it; yet with a great deal less of slavery then the rest; For Maho∣met the great in the year 1642. very unsuccessfully undertaking the entire conquest of this Coun∣try, wherein he found more Rocks, Mountains, and precipices then humane defence, prudently declining any further attempt, by the more destructive mines of
Empire, hurled the state thereof in to a Convulsive and distracted Ruine, by the intestine Divisions of the two Brothers, Wladus the Prince, and Dracula his younger brother, whose interest he set up and assisted to their common de∣struction. By which means and his Auxili∣arys residence there. He was not to be disputed with longer, and thereupon was acknowledged the Lord of the Principality under certain limitations and restrictions to his supreme power, which the neerness of a continual ayd from the Christian world adjoyning thereunto induced him to allow. We have spoken of Michael the Noble Vayvod thereof in 1659. who had in all probobility by his singular valour and generosity freed this warlike Nation from their dependance on this Tyrant, and should mention the like bra∣very of their late Vayvod in con∣junction with Regotski, but the
urgent Fate of the Empire would not not have those petit struglings to bear any part in her general calamity; yea, hath suffered those puny and indifferent limbs of Christianity to be monstrously turned into Arms against her, and to assist the barbarous violences that now oppress and ravage the Austrian Dominions, Moldavia a very ex∣pensive conquest. yet have the Turks got nothing in this conquest but a safe Retreat, which hath cost them five times the money they will ever make of it, were it not that there assurances of our divisi∣ons will one day quit their ex∣pence, as otherwise, which God for his mercy vouchsafe, it is now and may prove to be able to pay his score, if once he turns his back to the face of a competent and couragious Christian Army. Rascia. RASCIA is bounded on the East with Valachia, on the West with Hungaria, on the North with Transilvania, on the South with
the River Danow, and on the East divided from Valaohia, by the Ri∣ver Aluta. The people hereof are so wretched that they have lost their very name, not a Gentleman surviving this depression, they have been linked into the Government of their Neighbours, but now scarce know any body but their Tyrannical Masters, to whom they do excellent service, when this natural courage which like Brutes they retain, is emulously provoked by other more barbarous Nati∣ons.Unjust & indiscreet ambition deserved¦ly punish∣ed. By their union with Servia they tasted of the same fortune, and were subjugated by the glori∣ous Amurath the second, at the time that those Despots (who had unjustly vanquished this people) were captivated themselves. Fate shewing herein, how desperate a folly it is for Princes or (to descend to) private men, to undertake any unjust, though advantageous de∣sign upon another, while there is a Superior Enemy thereby invi∣ted
to the umpirage of the quarrel. These Rascians do yet so retain their primitive hatred against the Turks, that upon all occasions they have been ready to wreak themselves, but to very little pur∣pose, more then to show their more noble extract and ancestry. The three Provinces mentioned before Rascia, do and have enjoy∣ed more liberty then any people under the Turkish Dominions, be∣cause first the Turk hath not Co∣lonies to plant them, being not so numerous as his Armys speak him for all his Polygamy, and secondly because their often overthrows (as they have infeebled their Na∣tives, and in their long resistance desolated the Country, so that a man cannot find an Inn or Har∣bour in a days riding) have dis∣heartn'd an expedition on purpose, Mahomet the Great, who first at∣tempted them, saying in great an∣ger that he came not to fight with Beasts, or which was more unequal
against Nature it self, who had by so many abrupt or uncouth ways hindred the progress of his most industrious and eager Ambition, which his successors notwithstan∣ding from that kind of precarious Soverainty have improved into an awful submission, and address to the Port with two hundred thou∣sand Chequins yearly, which makes some 45. thousand pound sterling besides the Fees and Presents of the respective Princes. But what their condition is now like to be, the event of this present enter∣prise will best declare, but as now they are not fit for, or else not worth his fury, onely miserable Rascia, not honoured with a Go∣vernour, suffers all extremity. And so we must pass the Danow to its Southern shore, the two King∣domes, or despotical Provinces of SERVIA and BƲLGA∣RIA.
Servia sur∣veyed.SERVIA is bounded on the East with Bulgaria, on the West with Bosnia, on the North with the Danubius, on the South with Albania and part of Macedon, a rich and fruitful country for grain and gain, concealed in the reposi∣tories of several mines of Gold and Silver, and therefore much peopled by the Turks after their general Excision and Massacre (in a manner) of the Christian Inhabi∣tants by Amurath in the year 1367. Mahomet the great seizeth it. when he took Nissa their Capital City, and Key of the Country, in revenge of their Despots assisting the Hungarians in the siege of Adrianople, but after the death of Lazarus the last Despot, Mahomet the Great not satisfied with a Tribute which Amurath had impo∣sed, dispossessed his three Orphans Peter, John, and Martyn (who fled to the Hungarian protection) in title of Lazarus s two other brothers who craved his assistance,
and thereby with dread and Ter∣ror destroyed most of the Natives, by empaling, gaunching, fleaing, and all other devices of Torture, so that he quickly tamed their cou∣rage, and made them the second province of the Eastern, or Greek Europe, that acknowledged and humbled it self to his Conquest and Dominion, in the year 1460. Bulgaria discribed. BƲLGARIA is bounded on the East with the Euxine Sea, West with Servia, on the North with the Ri∣ver Danow, which is here called Ister, and on the South with Thrace. It was governed by Kings till Amu∣rath the first reduced it by his Arms, (and the abject submission of Sas∣menos the last Prince, who hum∣bled himself in a winding sheet before that Tyrant in 1369.) after by Bajazet his Son, not con∣tent therewith, made a Province under the absolute Government of the Turks; who in Nicopolis,
Sophia and Silistria have three San∣jacks, or Major Generals under the command of the Beglerbeg, or Viceroy of Greece. It is a mountainous and woody Country, the Plains thereof being thick Planted with tall Tree, so that it furnisheth Constantinople with fewel, and is a good defence against any sudden irruptions into the more inward part of Romania; famous for the many Battels fought herein by Trajan the Em∣peror, who built Nicopolis, inter∣preted The City of Victory, in me∣mory of his Conquest of Dacia, and by modern Potentates, Sigis∣mond Emperor and Bajazet the first which was fatal to the Christians, and Michael the brave Vayvod of Valachia against Mahomet the third as calamitous and destructive to the Turks. Not to mention the plains of Cossova, where Miles Co∣belitz, a private Souldier rising from among the dead, slew Amu∣rath the first: and for that three
days incounter betwixt Huniades and Amurath the second, both of them with the adversest fortune that Christians ever fought with; which is to this day alledged as an argument against any Invasion up∣on the Mahumetan Territory, how fondly, the encroachments of that enemy so many miles upon Chri∣stian ground doth sadly evince. And so we have finished the survey of Dacia, sometimes pos∣sessed by the Romans, afterwards by the Seythians, then by the Greek Emperors, and lastly swallowed by the Turks, who keep it so fet∣tered, that it will hardly know another Master. Mount Haemus.Our next aspect tends towards Grecia; but in our way thither we must pass over Mount Haemus, so high and open to the weather, that it is said of it, that for eight months in the year it is always cold, for the other four winter. There are but two passes, and those thought so impregnable by
their abruptness, that with little desence they are the invincible secu∣rity of the Turkish Dominion on the other side, as Huniades in his expedition to the seige of Hadrianople sadly experimented; but our Survey shall have leave and license to descend. Graecia. GRECIA thus entertains our sight, which from the glorious and most noble structure of Empire, in the third universal Monarchy, a bridged afterwards by civil Fate, and the unwilling disrespect of time, into the Empire of the East, is crept into most petty and despi∣sed Cantons of this barbarous Sig∣niory, cut out and partitioned un∣der the commands of several infe∣riors, but most cruel Governors, all subjected to the Beglerbeg of Romania, so called by us, but by them Rum Ili. In the present Latitude & extent thereof it is bounded on the East with the Propontick, Hellespont, and
Aegean Seas, on the West with the Adriatick, on the North with Mount Haemus, which parteth it from Bulgaria, Servia, and part of Illy∣rium, on the South with the Sea Jonian, so that it is in a manner a Peninsula or Demy Island, environ'd on three sides by the sea, and on the fourth with the rest of Europe. To give precedency to Christia∣nity in the brief description of this Region, it will be satisfactory to give a little account of the Greek Church, (before-hand) in this part. The Patriarch of Constantinople, who was reckoned the last in order & dignity, is now notwithstanding the principal & chief of all, in point of latitude and power, which hath engrossed the most concerning af∣fairs of the Church to it self, for he presides over all Greece, Russia, Dacia, Sclavonia, part of Poland, and all the Islands in the Adratique adjacent Seas, which extent of jurisdiction confined at first within Thrace, was acquired
by the reputation of the Imperial City for his See, and the diligence and piety of their Bishops in con∣versing and supplying the Russes and other Nations with Pastors and Ministers in such parts, which being conquered by the Turk, were forsaken by their Clergy, but such is the poor and despised condition thereof, that there is little power of Christian Religi∣on. And though it be enlarged in the outward Members it is much impaired at home, by the Tyranny of the Turks (who educate their Children in Mahumetanisme) on the one hand, and the Temp∣tations of preferment unto Apostacy in the other, yet there are twenty Churches of them in Constantinople, and at Salonica, formerly Thessalonica thirty, which freely enjoy the profession of their faith. To return to Greece thus Tur∣kified, it will be an unnecessary insignificant labour to trouble the
Reader with those several names, and particular numerous Govern∣ments thereof in former ages, when it produced the most martial and learned men, whose Ghosts would wish for annihilation at sight of the disgrace and ignominy of this their wretched posterity, we pass over the particular Dominions of old Sicyon, of Eli, Messenia, Sparta, Athens, now called Seli∣na (and is but an ordinary Bur∣rough taken by Mahomet the great in 1440. when some beauty of it remained,) and in a general man∣ner, since all limits of them are confounded in this barbarous sub∣jection under the Grand Signior, and speak of those more noted places thereof, as they now pass under the name of Romania and are, Governed by one Viceroy as their supreme commander, ter∣med Beglerbeg, of whom before a little; The next temporal Digni∣ty in this Empire to the Prime or Grand Visier, as commanding
the strength and flower thereof, as to its Martial and military Pu∣issance. The de∣scriPtion of Roma∣nia. TƲRKEY ROMANIA. And now that we have for brevities sake run over the Western Provin∣ces of this mighty, rich, and dread∣ful Potentate, we will in some sort relate to the pleasure of the Rea∣der, many the particulars of those good and ancient regions which at this day this Saraeenical Nation termeth by the name of Romania, so called, either for the many Roman Colonies planted there, or for the former name of Constanti∣nople called Nova Roma. This Romania at this day is the most populous and delecta∣blest part of the Turkish Em∣pire, and containeth the Pro∣vinces of Thrace, with it's Cherso∣nese, vulgarly the straight of Calli∣polis, Macedon, Epire now Alba∣nia, Achaia now Livadia, Plopo∣nesus now Morea, and the Island of the Archipelago.
The Vi∣cissitudes of the Grecian Govern∣ment. Until the coming of Cyrus King of Persia these Provinces remain∣ed in freedom, but of all others he first gave them the yoke of subjection. After him Xerxes the Son of Darius, with the succed∣ing Princes of Persia did no less afflict them. When their turn was past, Philip King of Macedon acted his part, and united them under his own Dominion, until the days of Perseus, whom the Romans subdued and subjected. But the Roman Empire being di∣vided into the East and West, the Graecians began their Empire un∣der Constantine the Great, and Ruled honourably many ages, until the discent, first of the Goths, secondly of the Bulgares, thirdly of the Saracens, and lastly of the Turks, who slew their Emperor; and seized on the Em∣pire. Who at this day (except some relicks remaining under the Venetian Dominions,) possess the greatest part thereof, as well
upon the continent as in the Islands. The Con∣dition of the Greeks Those that are under the Venetian jurisdiction (saith Bellonius) little differ, especially in Religion, from those that are tri∣butary to the Turk: for both sorts being mingled, those that are subject to the Turks, live like Turks; and those that live under the Venetians, do as do the Ve∣netians. So unspeakable is the rudeness of either, that through all their Cities you shall not find a School to instruct their youth. Promiscuously all speak the Greek tongue corrupted from the ancient, but some better then others. The Burghers, subject to the Italians, speak Italian as well as Greek, but the Villageois alto∣gether Greek. And so the Graeci∣ans, which are subject to the Turk, in Cities speak Turkish and Greek, the Villageois onely Greek, and in places of traffique they bor∣row one from another, according as their business is with those
whom they Negotiate. And as they differ in language, so do they in attire. Those that serve the Venetians go apparelled like Venetians, those that live under the Turk, like Turks. Both the Islanders and those that live on the continent as well in Europe as Asia, although subject to Turky, keep their ancient Christian faith. Long also they rejected the prima∣cy of the Latine Church, and elected to themselves patriarchs, whom they acknowledge for their chief pastors, and appointed them several sees. Whom not onely the Grecians thus obey, but like∣wise all those Provinces which fol∣low the Greek Church, as Circassia, Walachia, Bulgaria, Moscovia, Russia, the better part of Polonia, Mangrelia, Bosnia, Albania, Sclavonia, some part of Tartary, Sirtia, Croatia, and generally all the Provinces of the Euxin Sea. In number they are four, viz. the Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch. The Gree Patriarchs Of these, the Patriarch of Constantinople is the Primat, sit∣teth in Constantinople, and chiefly moderateth over the Caloieri (so are the Greek Priests termed) which reside in Mount Athos, and generally over all Christians, pro∣fessing the ritts of the Greek Church throughout Europe; and for the Monasteries of Mount Athos, and all other, dispersed over Europe, he payeth the Turk yearly 12000. ducats. The Patriarch of Alexan∣dria moderateth in Aegypt and Ara∣bia, and his dwelling places in Memphis and Cair, are not much inferior to his of Constantinople. The Patriarch of Jerusalem, absolutely moderateth in Judea, and over all professors of the Greek Religion throughout Siria. And must of necessity every year on the 15. of August, say Mass in the Monastery scituated upon Mount Libanus.
The Patriarch of Antioch presi∣deth in the Monasteries and the Greek Churches, which are in Beritus, Tripolis, Haleb, and other places of Asia. And in these places, as in all other, the Turk permitteth the Christians to use their consciences freely, so they perform their due and accu∣stomed tributes. To proceed, Thrace d∣scribed. THRACE hath on the East the Euxine Sea, the Thracian Bosphorus, Propontis, and Helles∣pont: on the North the Mount Haemus, upon the West the higher Mista, and part of Macedon, on the South the Archipelago. It is a most Noble Province, cold, plain and admirably populous, stored with grain, pulse and excellent wine, towards the Sea-side: but towards the up-land (lying more subject to cold) it is not so fertile nor wooddy. In it stands many goodly Cities Philipopolis, Nicopolis, So∣phia,
Hadrianopolis, the former Regal Seat of the Turkish Kings, taken by Amurath the first, and beautified with a famous Seraglia. The Town is seated very plea∣santly, and was built by Ha∣drian the Emperour, whose name it retayns, it is now the usual retreat of this Grand Signior, and where at present he abides for its vicinity to his affayrs in Hun∣gary. Pera by others called Galata, once peopled by the Genoese, as the Mart and Factory of that State taken by Mahomet in 1653. but still replenished with Christian Merchants and Artificers.Descripti∣on of the famous City of Constanti∣nople. But above all other Constantinopo∣lis, by Heaven erected to he the head of an Empire; as the onely seat which Romans, Greeks, and now the Turks, have chosen and reputed to be most commodi∣ously seated, not for the Go∣vernment onely of the Empire, but (as was before generally men∣tioned) of the whole world.
Constinople described.By its first Founders name it was called Byzantium, and after many various turns of Fortune betwixt the Persian and Spartans, it setled at last under the Roman Empire, by the Conquest of Seve∣rus, who sacked it after three years siege, for their partaking with Niger his Competitor, but yet such Majesty remained in the very ruines, that Herodian reports, not without favour and pity there∣of, Mirabantur homines utrum eorum qui primi Extruxerunt vel eorum qui deinceps sunt demo∣liti vires essent potiores; it was wondred at, whether the strength of the Founders, or the De∣stroyers was greatest. From this Rubbish it was reared and reedified by Constantine the Great, and finished May 11. 331. and en∣dowed with the Priviledges of Rome, and called for that reason Nova Roma for some short times, but in memory of its raiser, after∣wards Constantinople.
It continued in this state under the Eastern Empire 1100. years and upwards, till an unfortunate Constantine sirnamed Palaeologus, lost it to Mahomet the Great, A. D. 1453. by the base covetousness of the Citizens, who would not for their own defence supply the Em∣peror with money. It is eighteen miles in compass, by which com∣putation it is one third part bigger then London and the Suburbs, it is said to contain seven hundred thousand souls, and would be much more populous were it not for the plague, whose Triennial mischief destroyeth multitudes, it is fortified toward the Land with three strong and high walls, the one higher then the other, but towards the sea with one onely built with many Turrets, which strongly flanker it. It yeilds a pleasant prospect a far off, by reason of the many Groves and Gardens within it, but is meanly built, the Houses but two sto∣ries
high, some of course Stone, the rest of Timber, rough and ungarnished; there are in it 8000. Mosques or Churches, which are the beauty of the City, the chief of them, and worthy of remarque is that of St. Sophia, which in elegancy, though not in bulk exceeds all the Fabricks of the World, the sides and floor flagged with Marble, with a stately Porch at the entrance: add hereunto the Sepulchral Mosques of the Turkish Sultans, which are very sumptuous, to∣gether with the Seraglio, built all of white Marble, round in form, and crowned at the top with shining golden Spires: not to omit the Mosque of Solyman the magnificent, one of the present wonders of the world. But Constantinople which is seated upon seven Hills and Mountains, as well as Rome, is better furnished with a Port and Haven, so conve∣nient and advantageous to ship∣ping,
and so commodiously seated upon the Thracian Bosphorus, that Ships of all burdens, and with all winds may come close to the walls, the water is so deep. As to the Seraglio it standeth on one of the seven Hills in the Northeast quarter of the City, like a Delta two Angles of it aspect the Sea, which affords it a most pleasant spe∣culation, the other is joyned by a wall to the City, towards which it hath one gate onely; the other gates are never opened but for the private pleasures of the Grand Seignior, or his displeasure to be executed by the death of some of his Officers and Bashaws; it con∣tains three Courts, one within another, the first is open to all persons, in the second sits the Divan or Courts of Justice, into which no man comes on Horse∣back, the third is the Mansion and privacy of the Grand Signor and his women, it is three miles in circuit, in which are contained
many delightful Groves of Cy∣presses, intermixed with Plains, delicate Gardens, Artificial Foun∣tains, Banquetting Turrets, and Prospect Rooms, with a most magnificent audience Chamber for Ambassadors, floored with embroydered Velvet seamed with Pearl and other Jewels. I have the longer insisted on this place, be∣cause as the mistress of the World she draws all eyes upon her, and therefore it is fit to dress her in those Ornaments which she usu∣ally wears, and do become her greatness. Callipolis, is another famous portion thereof, seated on the Northern promontory of Cherso∣nese, the first City of note posses∣sed by the Turks in Europe, taken in the reign of Orchanes in 1358. from whence they easily spread their conquest over the adjacent Provinces, it is the most convenient passage between Europe and Asia, by reason of the safe harbour and good anchorage.
Macedon described. Next followeth MACEDON, bounded on the East with the Aegae¦an Sea, on the West with Albania, on the North with Mysia superiour, and on the South with Epyrus, and Achaia, is is now principally divided into Thessaly (a sweet and delectable Country) Macedon spe∣cially so called, and Migdonia by the Turks called Iamboli. It is a fertile region inclosed with Hills, and neer the Jonian Sea, plain and woody. That it was once the Empress of the East, it is well known, but at this day it is Turkish, and without any famous Cities, save in a peice of Albania.Mount Athos. In it is nothing so memorable as the Mount Athos, or holy mount. It is seventy five miles in compass, three days journey long, and half a days journey broad, resembling the shape of a man lying with his face upward, whose highest cone, always covered with Snow, is seen thirty miles of at Sea. It is ex∣ceeeding fertile in Grass, Fruit,
Oyl, and wine. Priviledge of Greek Priests.Long ago it was dedicated in honour of St. Basil to the Greek Caloieri, and endowed with priviledges, which at this day it enjoyeth by the Turks good favour; that is to say, that no man neither Grecian nor Turk may inhabit in this place except he be a Priest. So that their num∣ber in these days are about six thousand, dispersed into twenty four Monasteries, auncient and warlike, built for fear of Theeves and Pyrats, although there be no such great cause. In these Mona∣steries are many reliques, which cause great concourse of people, and they are stately built, and richly adorned. This was made a Roman Province in the year of the world 3798. after the Capti∣vity of their last King Perseus, and was upon the division of that Empire to East and West, consig∣ned to the Eastern, to which it continued subjected till Amurath rent it from that Dominion by
taking Thessalonica, it is now go∣verned by a Sanjack, who is bound to maintain 100 horse, and to finde 400 more upon an Expedi∣tion. Epirus.Epire, now Albania, was once a very famous Province, bounded on the East with that part of Greece called Aetolia, on the West with the Adriatick, on the North with Thessaly, Macedon and part of Albania, and on the South with the Jonian Sea; as witnesseth P. Aemilius, it had in it seventy Ci∣ties, now destroyed, and turned into ruines, and Villages meanly inhabited. For the most part it is woody and barren, but near the Sea fertile and adorned with very beautiful havens. This Country was formerly fa∣mous for Olimpias the Mother of Alxander the Great and Pyrrhus that great Captain among the Ro∣mans, but modernly as much re∣nowned for the unexemplary va∣lour and conduct of Scanderbeg or
Scanderbegs renown. Lord Alexander, who proved a scourge to the Turks in the reigns of Amurath the second, and Ma∣homet the first, his bones after his death taken up, were worn by this rude enemy about them, as an omen or pledge of success and victory whomsoever they engaged with. Achaia, mentioned for its name in Scripture, is a very goodly re∣gion, as may be gathered by the goodly Cities, which therein once flourished (viz.) Delphos, Thebs, Athens, Megara and many more, now destroyed. So is Peloponesus; termed by Pliny the Bulwark of Greece. It yeildeth all things that man can desire either for life or pleasure and although the ancient Cities be now defaced, yet is for quantity the best peopled part of Greece. It is now under the Turk, and counted the best Sangackship in Turky, as bound to bring at the command of the Beglerbeg of Greece 1000
horsemen under his own pay. It is worth yearly fourteen thousand ducats. Dardanels. And so we pass to the Isles of the adjoyning Aegean Sea, which are many in number, saluting first the Dardanels or the two Block∣houses, where all vessels passing out of the Hellespont into this Sea (which extends forty miles in length) are staid three days for slaves and other prohibited mer∣chandizes, or until information of any such may come from Con∣stantinople, they are exceedingly well walled, fortified and provi∣ded, they receive the customs, and are the principal strength of that City, as to the Mediterranean (as it is defended with the two black Towers (the Prison for the Ba∣shaws and great persons) at the mouth of the Euxine, where it joyns with the Thracian Bospho∣rus, the one of which is scited a∣bove Constantinople on Europe side, and the other on the Asian shore.
The Ae∣geaan I∣sslaups.These Aegaean Islands are thus named Samothrace, Thassus, Im∣brus, Lemnos, famous for the late contest in 1660 between the Turks and Venetians about it, Euboea cir∣cuiting a hundred and fifty miles in which stands the famous City known by the Gulf of Negropont, taken from the Venetians (to whom with other things it fell in the divi∣sion of the Eastern Empire unto the Latins) by Mahomet the Great in 1471. with the loss of forty thousand men. Salamis, Aegina, the Cyclades, in number fifty three, called now the Isles of the Arches, encompassing Delos and the Sporades. Candia descrbed.Next we should veiw the Isles of the Cretan Sea, but they being in∣considerable we will mention only Candia, in form extending East and West, in length two hundred and seventy, and in breadth fifty miles, placed in the midst of this
Sea, the Natives speak the Greek Language, and before the Turks put foot there, were governed by Latine Bishops of the Church of Rome, to which the Venetians, then the Lords of it, do adhere. It hath been attempted by Selymus the second in 1571. when he conquered Cyprus, but in vain, yet Ibrahim the father of this Sultan, gained footing there some few years ago, and this is like when he shall be at leisure, unless the Ve∣netians improve his absence in Hungaria, to carry it all; for of late he hath been very successful there against all the power they can make, and is at present pos∣sessed of the better half, so that he must be reckoned as more inte∣rested then the Venetian. The Jo∣nian Isles as pertaining to their Seigniory, we are not obliged to mention here, though they stood in great danger of changing their Master.
Rhodes. From hence as we descend to the bottom of the straights appears the Island of Rhodes, (which we must observe in our way to the Isle of Cyprus, and so to Egypt) famous in former times for the potent residence of the Knights of the order of St. John of Jeru∣salem, who deserted by the Chri∣stian Princes were forced to yeild it in the Grand mastership of Ville∣rius, to Solyman the Magnificent, not more to the scandal then detri∣ment of Christianity, but this is so notorious that I must not enlarger my self. Cyprus.Cyprus is situated in the Syrian, and Cilician Seas, extended in length from East to West two hundred miles, in breadth sixty, the whole Compass reckoned five hundred and fifty, and di∣stant from Cilicia, in Asia minor some sixty miles, it is a rich and fertile Kingdom, and hath in it twelve eminent Cities, but the most famous are those two of
Nicosia and Famagusta, the last whereof was gallantly maintained by Signor Bragadino Governour of the Island, for the Venetians: The bar∣barous conquest of Cyprus. who being in despair of releif, yeilded the Town, and consequently the Kingdom upon honourable. Ati∣cles to Mustapha, Selymusses Ge∣neral, but was barbarously fleaed alive, and all persons of quality murdered besides, onely a beau∣tiful Lady reserved for the lust of the Grand Signior, (with some other Prisoners) in their voyage to Constantinople blew her self, Ship and company into the Ayr, and worthily preserved and transmit∣ted her honour to after ages invi∣olate. And so we pass to Syria. SYRIA is bounded on the South with Pa∣lestina, and some parts of Arabia, on the West with the Mediterrane∣an Sea, on the East with the Ri∣ver Euphrates, by which parted from Mesopotamia, on the North with Cilicia and Armnia minor,
from which it is separated by the mountain Taurus. Phaenicia described. In the Survey of this spacious Country, the Reader is desired to limit his sight to the grand di∣vision thereof into its several Pro∣vinces, wherein we must transito∣rily observe those Eminent Cities which are in the knowledge and dis∣course of Europe; The first Pro∣vince is Phaenicia, bounded on the East and South with Palestine, on the North with Syria, on the West with the Mediterranean Sea. It is famous for the noble Cities (for their atcheivements and Merchan∣dises) of Tyre and Sydon, Berytus and Ptolemays, the last place of the Holy War Conquest: they were reduced to the Turkish Do∣mion in 1489. but that place which now most concerns us, is Tripoli, bravely and fertilely seated, once a Christian Marquisate (but in name so allied to that barbarous den of Theives in Africa, mischeivous to trade, that I cannot but forestal its
scite) and is upon that account the Metropolis of Phaenicia: secondly Syria Propria, bounded and adjoyn∣ing Northward to Phenicia, famous to our acquaintance, for Laodicea, as is mentioned in the Revelations of Saint John;Antioch. and Antioch, the place where Christians were first so called, but now hath no name it self either Turkish or Christian to be called by, being sunck into most obscure and ignote Rubbish. It was finally lost from the Christi∣ans is 1381. when it came to Saladine, the Victorious Sultan of Egypt and Damascus.Aleppo. Thirdly Comagena bordering upon Euphra∣tes towards the East, with which it is watered, in it Aleppo scituated in midst betwixt Tripolis, Beritus, and Alexandretta, the three prime ports of Turkey, and on the fur∣ther side it adjoyns to the Persi∣an Territories; it hath been of long time a factory of the English Nation, governed by a Consul who maintain thence correspondence
with the East Indies, several goods comming overland upon Camels.Aleppo. The English are here well belo∣ved, and our Tutelar or National Saint George, whose Sepulchre is fayned here, is had in great ve∣neration; It overlooks by its situ∣ation upon a Hill six Villages, to be seen no where else in these depo∣pulated uncultivated places of this Empire, and is governed by a Bashaw, which Dignity hath of late years been troublesome to the Turkish State, as was mentioned in the former part; It was taken in by Selymus the fist, of which more presently. Fourthly Palmyrene a Country never con∣quered in the Holy-Land expedi∣tion, as the other parts were. Fifthly, Coelosyria bounded on the West with Palaestine, whither we are next to pass, and on the South-East, with Arabia Deserta, and on the North with Palmyrene, remarquable for the famous City of Damascus, and the Imperial
and regal Seat of many Kings, who have been celebrated as well in Divine as humane writ. Damascus. A most fruitful delightful place, even to surfeit, being stored with wine to superfluity, for which reason, as is excellently observed, the vile Impostor Mahomet would not be perswaded to come to it, lest being inescated with its pleasures he should forget the business he came about, but his Successors were not so abstemious, it being the seat of one of his Caliphs, while Babylon or Bagdat was reedified. Here are many ingenuous workmen in most Arts, and hence come our Damask Satins and Linnens, wrought with curious Branches. It is now the Seat of one of the principal Turkish Bashaws, and who is had in great estimation and beloved by the Grand Seig∣nor; It was held in modern times by the Mamalukes, who piece∣meal recovered Syria from the Tar∣ters, who under Tamberlane ter∣rible
sacked this City; but in the year 1516. when the victorius Se∣limus the first discomfited Campson Gaurus the Egyptian Sultan in the fields of Aleppo, this City fearing the Spoyl and ruine there∣of then very opulent by trade, set open their Gates, as did all the other Cities by their example. By means whereof the Turks became Lords of all this Country with out any more blows, as they were next year of Egypt also, by their victory over Tomombeius, in whom perished the Name and, Empire of the Mamalukes. Mount Hermon. In our way to Palestine on the Holy Land, we must pass over Mount Hermon, a ledge of Hills, which beginning Eastward run di∣rectly South, by which Palestine is bounded on the East, and parted from Coelosyria and Arabia Deser∣ta, on the West with the Medi∣terranean Sea, and some part of Phaenicia; On the North it is divided with the Hill Anti-Liba∣nus
from Syria, and on the South with part of Arabia Petraea; a most fertile Land even to admi∣ration, flowing with milk and Hony, as it is elegantly expressed in the eight of Deuteronomy; by its former division it was can∣toned into six Provinces. 1. Berea, 2. Itrea, 3. Galilee, 4. Samaria, 5. Judea, and 6. Idumea, but made one Province of the Roman Empire, as it is now of the Turkish, the chief Cities were Coesarea, Samaria, and Hierusalem, of which a little must needs be spo∣ken. For to speak nothing of ancient times, in the 73. year after Christ, Jerusalem was taken and destroyed by Titus, with the slaughter and captivity of infinite thousands. In the year 136. it was restored by Aelius Adrianus, new-named Aelia, and given in possession to the Jews. In the time of Con∣stantine and Helena his Mother, it fell into the hands of the Chri∣stians,
and so continued untill the days of our Henry the fourth, at which time it was again ta∣ken by the Sultan of the Sara∣zens, and the Christians clean ba∣nished. Holy land. In the year 1097. in a general Councel for the delivery of the Holy Land, the Crossed Knights were instituted throughout Chri∣stendom, and Godfrey of Bul∣loygne chosen General of three hundred thousand footmen, and one hundred thousand horse. These Knights did many famous acts; recovered the Land, instituted a Monarchy, and though sometime with loss, continued some defence thereof, until the year of our Lord 1517. and then was it over∣come by the Turkish Armys, of the aforesaid victorious Selymus, who at this day retain it in misera∣ble servitude under a certain Tri∣bute or imposition upon such Christians as are permitted to live here.
There are now therefore two or more Monasteries, or Religious Houses, where Fryars do abide, and make a good commodity of shewing the Sepulchre of Christ, and other Monuments unto such Christian Pilgrimes as do use super∣stitiously to go in Pilgrimage to the Holy Land. And so it resteth peopled with men of divers Nations and Sects; as Saracens, Arabians, Turks, Hebrews, and Christians: whereof some follow the Latine Church, some the Greek: as the Grecians, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, Nestorians, Jacobites, Nubians, Marodits, Abessines, Indians, and Egyptians, every one having their peculiar Bishops, whom they obey. But to particularize a little further. GALILIE upon the North is invironned with the steep hills of Libanus and Antilibanus, upon the West with Phenicia, upon the East with Caelosyria, and upon the
South with Samaria, and Arabia the desert. The soil is most fruit∣ful, yeilding all sorts of trees, and divided by Jordan: upon whose banks stand very many Towns and Villages, and so w ll watered either with mountain Torrents, or springs, that no part thereof lyeth unmanured. Nazareth.The Country is the more fa∣mous, for that in it, standeth (amongst the rude mountains) the small Village of Nazareth, the place of our Lords conception: And at this day, there is a small Chappel Archt and built under ground, whereinto a man must descend by stayrs: Here (some say) the Angel appeared unto Mary, and foretold her that she should conceive and bring forth our Lord. The Inhabitants are Arabians, short and thick men, rudely ap∣parelled, and weaponed with Bows, Swords and Daggers. In this Region likewise standeth the
Mount Thabor, whose North part is inaccessible, and whereon our Lord was transfigured, according to the blessed Evangelist. Samaria.SAMARIA lyeth in a most delicate plot of Palestine, but in bigness not comparable to Iudea or Galilie. The soyl is partly Moun∣tanous, partly champian, plea∣sant, fruitful, and very well watered with fresh and sweet water. The City is now ruinated: but as for pleasure and delight it was inferior to no other. It is scitu∣ated upon the side of a Hill, the eighth part of a mile from whence, a man may behold the ruines of a great Temple: whereupon (as men say) Christ sate, when he asked water of the Samaritan wo∣man. But these are uncertainties, not to say fallacies. Judea.JƲDEA, far excelleth any part of the residue of Palestine, and at this day enjoyeth it's ancient fertility. The tribe of Juda so named it,
and in it, as in the rest of Pale∣stina were very many worthy Ci∣ties, Jerusalem. whereof Jerusalem was the chief seat of their Princes, the possession of the Patriarches, Pro∣phets, and Apostles: the original place of our faith, and the glory of the Christian world. By the Barbarians, at this day it is called Godz, or Chutz: It standeth on an eminent place, as whereunto a man must always ascend. Saint Jeroms opinion was, that it stood not onely in the heart of Judaea, but in the very center of the world, as having Asia on the East, Europe on the West, upon the South Lybia and Africa, and upon the North, Scythia, Armenia, Persia, with the residue of the Pontique Nations. What the glory hereof hath been, may be conjectured out of Tacitus, who reporteth, that in the beginning of the Siege, it contained two hundred thousand souls. At this day it numbreth
not above five thousand inhabi∣tants, although many Pilgrims daily resort thither in a good conscience, and for devotions sake. The Se∣pulchre of Christ. It was once strongly and fairly walled, but now weakly, and therein it sheweth nothing so fa∣mous as the Sepulchre of our Sa∣viour Christ, whose Temple in∣circleth the whole Mount of Calvary, scituated upon a plain plot of ground, high, round, and open at the top, from whence it receiveth light: but the Sepul∣chre it self is covered with an archt Chappel cut out of the main Mar∣ble, and left unto the custody of the Latine Christians. Whosoever is desirous to see this Sepulchre, must pay nine Crowns to the Turk: so that this tribute is yearly worth unto him, a very considerable revevennue. One hundred and eight foot di∣stant from this Tomb, is the Mount (called the Mount Calvarie) where∣on
our Saviour Christ was cruci∣fied by the treacherous Jews. In this place are many other religious Reliques. And the Pilgrims which come thither, are always lodged according to his own profession; the Latines with the Franciscans, without the City, by Mount Syon: the Graecians are lodged with the Caloirean Greeks, dwelling within the City by the Sepulchre: And so every other Nation, Abessines, Georgians, Armenians, Nestorians, and Maronites, who all have their proper and peculiar Chappels. Those Franciscans, which follow the Latine Church, and are for the most part Italians, were wont to create the Knights of the Sepul∣cher, and to give testimonial unto Pilgrims of their being there. Without this City is the valley of Jehosaphet, and therein the Tombs of the blessed Lady and Saint Anne. The territory adjoy∣ning is exceeding fruitful in Vines, Apples, Almonds, Figs and Oyl:
the mountains are no less stored with trees, wild beasts and spiceries. Besides Jerusalem, here stand∣eth Bethlem, now destroyed, and shewing nothing worth looking on, save a great and stately Mona∣stery of the Franciscans, within which is the place where Christ was born. Rama is now likewise ruinated; the Arches and Cisterns which are now remaining, by the witness of Bellonius his own eye, are greater then those of Alexan∣dria, but not so thick. Gaza is now a Turkish Sangiack∣ship: the soyl about fertile, and the inhabitants Grecians, Turks, and Arabians. Idumea.IDƲMEA. I oly writ, this Region is called Edom, and by other Authors Nabathea. Toward the Sea and Judea the soil is fertile, but toward Arabia desert and bar∣ren. Some say its inexpugnable for its deserts and want of water: yet is it stored therewith but hidden, and known to none but the Na∣tives.
Of old they were a turbu∣lent, unquiet, and seditious peo∣ple, and so at this day they are like to their villanous and roguish Neighbours the Arabians. For further satisfaction of the Reader, be he pleased to refer him∣self to Doctor Fullers Holy Land, or Sir Walter Raleigh, who have amply discoursed on this Subject, by whose copious and pleasant stile and luxurious description, the Ruines and present indigence and penury of this once flourishing and abundant Region are only to be al∣leviated. And so we pass forward. Egypt. AEGYPT is best to be known as to its bounds, by its threefold defi∣nition and division. First, Egypt properly so called, extends it self North upon the Mediterranean sea, and part of Idumea to Lybia or Marmarica. Secondly, Lybia or Marmarica lying betwixt Egypt properly so called, and Cyrene or Pentapolis, so called for the five
cheif Cities thereof, 1300 miles long and 200 broad, reaches from Lybia to the Greater Syrty, The king∣doms of Tunis and Algeir. where it is bounded with the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, which Kingdom with the other of Algeir, by the Ottoman Family's intermedling with the quarrelling Princes thereof, though Mahumetans also, came at length to acknowledge no other Master but themselves, the last King of Tunis named Mahomet, put in by Don John of Austria whose succour he craved, being subdued by the Turks, and carri∣ed prisoner to Constantinople in the reign of Selymus the second, about which time the Kingdom of Algeir in length 300 miles, but in breadth not considerable, was likewise re∣duced upon the same score by the famous Barbarossa. Not to men∣tion here some of the Isles of Bar∣bary which are subject to the Grand Seignior, as Zerby, infamous for the loss of 15000 Christians by slaughter at the taking, and af∣terwards
by famine at the sur∣prize and retaking of it by Pial Bassa in 1559. I am constrained to mention these parts of Affrick here, for want of convenient re∣duction (in this brief Compendium) to their proper place. Aegypt was vassalled to the Mamalukes, who seized it from the Eastern Emperors some 300 years before Selimus the second, that ambitious and martial Sultan wrested it from them in the fields of Aleppo, and extinguished the name and Empire as aforesaid: When Cyrene followed the same fortune, and submitted to the Turkish yoke. In this Province we must remarque Tripolis, assign∣ed by Charls the fift to the Knights of John of Jerusalem in lieu of Rhodes, but wrested from them by Sinan Bassa in 1577. since which it is become a den of Pirates, as was mentioned before in the Syri∣an Tripolis. In Egypt, passing over Pelusium
and the famous Damiata, we will confine our view to Grand Cairo, once called Memphis, the Metropo∣lis of Egypt, which of all antient Cities hath lost little or nothing by the injury of time. Grand Cairo de∣scribed at large. Grand Cairo was wrested from the Mamalukes, and their Sultan Tomombeus, by Selymus the first in the year of the Incarnation, 1517. after four bloody days spent be∣fore he could entirely possess him∣self of the City; It is nobly scited, and is between thirty and forty English Miles in compass, devi∣ded into seven Burghs, built after the Egyptian manner, high, and of large rough stone, part also of Brick, the streets are narrow, of late there are new buildings made of the Turkish Fashion as the former decay, poor, low much of Wood and Timber, ex∣cept some modern stately palaces of both Nations. There are in it as are reckoned five and thirty thousand Moschets,
four and twenty thousand noted streets, besides lanes and turnings, some of those streets are two miles in length, some not half a mile, all of them every night are lockt up with a Door or Gate at each end, and Guarded by a Musketier, to prevent Tumults, Fire, or other outrages. Its Go∣vernment.Without the City on horse∣back there watch every night to prevent any attempts of the Arabs, four Sanjacks, with each a thou∣sand Horse-men under his com∣mand, so that in all, as it is easily computable by the indi∣vidual, Guardians of the streets there watch every night no less then twenty eight thousand per∣sons. The Castle is the place where the Bashaw resides, who is always one of the most avaricious and ravenous Viziers, sent thither on purpose to squeeze and oppress the Egyptians, and is frequently made a Spunge, to refund his wealth
with his life) into the Grand Seig∣niors Exchequer, in which act the slavish Egyptians can discern nothing but his justice, and are satisfied with it as their revenge. This Castle is founded upon a Rocky ascent on the East side of the City, nor well repayred nor quite decayed; at the foot of this ascent is a place half a Mile long, wherein they ride the great horse, and by that a little House and Garden, (wherein the old Bashaws of this place, when disauthorised till the coming of a new one, are kept until they are strangled or restored to the Grand Signors favour. The fa∣mous R∣ver Nile.Things of remarque and note herein, are first the River Nile running along the South of the Town to the West, making as it leaves it, a little dainty Island, whose fertile and wonderful inun∣dation begins constantly about the middle of June, and increaseth to between eighty and a hundred days, then it abates, and by the
end of November comes within its narrowest banks, about a quarter of a mile broad: by rea∣son of this flood they have four Harvests in a year, the ground ad∣jacent to this River being before a white Sand, without a sprig of any green thing but two weeds (which carried to Venice makes the finest Chrystal Glass) becomes a fat black mould, and bears Flax and Rice, with Sugar-Canes in abundance. Not to omit the num∣ber of Crocodiles that infest this River, nor the Nilscope in the Isle, where stands a Pillar with several marks, declaring the height of the Flood all over Egypt. The Py∣ramids. The next are the Pyramids so much famed in history, and the granaries or store∣houses which Joseph built, three of which Pyramids stand twelve miles South-west of the City on the other side of the River, and are yet almost entire, their form is quadrangular, lessening by equal degrees from a quarter of a
mile flat at bottom to a square at top a little more then 4. yards an∣gular; there are sixteen or eighteen other Pyramids some twelve miles to the Southward, but ruined ex∣treamly. It rains not here but once in three or four years, so that bodies buried in that sand, will keep without putrefaction, by rea∣son no moysture is near them but what is in themselves. Cairo Sub∣ject to plagues, yet popu∣lous. Plagues are here very rife in Winter, by one whereof eighteen hundred thousand persns died in six months, yet was the City pre∣sently as populous as before, and continues so thronged that persons of quality have one going before their Mules to make way for them, by bidding people make room, this is caused by the con∣fluent multitude of the Arabs, and Indians too, that flock to the pleasures and plenty of this place. There are a great many Christians also, Venetians, Dutch, Genoese, and some English, the
ayr sometimes in summer is like any sweet perfume, and almost suf∣focates the Spirits, caused by the wind that brings the odours of the Arabian Spices in a full Flavour. The san∣dy playns about it. There is also a sort of rare Horses, but of tender hoofs, yet fit for that sandy and soft ground, which will run four days and Nights together with∣out eating or drinking, and some Egyptians with a little pro∣vant, and less sleep, their body being wound about with a Lin∣nen, will ride them so upon busi∣ness, to which this is the only con∣venience, over those sandy deserts, where there is neither House or Inhabitants, but the Theiving Murderous Arabs. For the directi∣on of the way over those Vasti∣tudes, the wind blowing the Sand, and losing the track of any bea∣ten way, and sometimes burying the Travellers in Sheats of it, unless they be wary, are pillars of
brick, set up a mile distant from one another. The re∣venue of Egypt. The Revenue that the Grand Signor receives from Aegypt amounts to eight hundred thou∣sand pound sterling, a third part whereof comes onely clear to the Exchequer at Constantinople, all ariseth out of certain farms of the Land belonging to the Crown, let out to the Egyptians, the least farm pays two hundred pound a year. But the Bashaw hath other wayes to make profit to himself, nor is any invention of op∣pression thought envious or dan∣gerous; for the Egyptians natu∣rally effeminate, and having suf∣fered under a lasting Tyranny, from slavery to slavery, are in no likelihood of endeavouring a revolt: the Grand Signor hath of them no more then fourteen thou∣sand enrolled in his pay, and that for show onely. The other two parts of the Revenue are disposed thus, the one to furnish the Ex∣pence
of the Caravan and Pilgri∣mage to Mecha, whither the Grand Seignor sends presents yearly, especially a green velvet Pall, for Mahomets Coffin, and the other third part of the revenue towards defraying the charges of the Government, viz. all Offi∣cers and publique services, besides that of the Timariots, who do theirs for their Tenure, and enjoy almost a half of that Kingdom. It is a rare felicity for any Bashaw of this place to escape with life, fortunes, and liberty, yet there are few of the Visiers, who do not ambitiously affect this ominous government. Alexan∣ria. The Nile descends from Cairo in a length of 360. miles to Ca∣nopus, now called Rosetta, where it embogues it self into the Sea: from whence by Land to Alexan∣dria, the Port where goods are landed for Cairo, famous for its founder Alexander the Great, and for the Monument and Tomb of
red Marble of its beautifier, Pompey the great, likewise, and for its new Castle built since by the Turks, being their onely Empo∣rium or scale of Trade in E∣gypt. The de∣scription of Arabia. ARABIA TRIPLEX. The three Arabias, are likewise parcel of this Empire, which is a marvel∣lous great country, included be∣tween two huge bosomes of the Sea, in manner of a Peninsula, viz. upon the West and East with the Arabian and Persian gulfs, upon the South with the Ocean, and up∣on the North with Syria and Eu∣phrates. The Inhabitants are indifferently called Arabians, Saracens, or Moors: Those are the true Arabians which live out of Cities in Tents, dis∣persed over Syria, Egypt, and Afrike, these give themselves to feed Cattel, and droves of Ca∣mels. Those which inhabit Cities, are called Moors, and were once
of such puissance, that they not onely subdued Syria, Persia, and Trogladitica, but likewise Egypt, a great part of Africk, and almost all Spain, with the Island of Sicily, and the Kingdom of Naples. Two hundred years they kept possession of these peeces, but of some part of Spain seven hun∣dred, even until the days of our Fathers. And further, this accursed generation at this day is not onely spread over all the Southern coast of Asia: viz. Persia, East-India, and the Islands of the Indian Sea, but likewise advanced with great prosperity unto divers wealthy Kingdoms, famous Cities, and worthy Mart-towns, over all the South Coast of Africk: under this people the Turks were first called into Asia to bear Arms, and from whence issued out the swarm of this Locust Mahomet. The Divi∣sion is as followeth, first The di∣ision of ARABIA DESERTA. This is a vast Country, full of Deserts,
yet well inhabited with populous and warlike multitudes, especially toward Euphrates, and the moun∣tains of Arabia Felix, whether Merchants resort. The residue towards the West is sandy, by which if a man be to travel, he must have the stars for his guide, company for his safeguard, and provision for his diet, for other∣wise he shall lose his way, or sur∣render his goods to the Theevish Arabs, or starve in the Desert for want of food. ARABIA PETREA. Towards Syria this is somewhat fertile, but smally commended for that pro∣perty by the Auncients: For in∣deed it is exceeding barren, and wanteth necessary sustenance, wood and fresh water. The memorable things herein are the Mountains at Synay and Oreb, upon the former whereof, is at this day builded a Monastery of Christians, following the Greek
Church, and the onely receptacle or Inn for wayfaring Christians: other place of releif is there none. ARABIA FELIX is a very large province, better manured and wa∣tered then the other. It is adorned with noble Cities, and full of Vil∣lages, especially toward the Sea side, where are many excellent places of trade. The residue except the Sand, is made manu∣rable, either for feeding of Cattle or Camels, in which places live infinite swarms of divers Nati∣ons, by Grazing and Husban∣dry. s Histo∣y.Arabia Petrea and Deserta, were subdued by the Turks upon their first Conquest of Persia, in the rise of their greatness, but recovered by the Mamalukes, whose fortune they followed to the fatal period made by Selymus the first, when in his expedition to Egypt they more annoyed him by falling in his
Rear, and terrified him in their night alarums, then all the Forces of their Mamaluke Masters in the field; which deciding the Title to Egypt included soon after the Do∣minion of those Countrys, the Chiefs thereof being gained by money and promise of prefer∣ment, who yet nevertheless con∣tinue their petty Soveraignties, and rob and steal upon their own account, making no distinction betwixt Turk and Christian. As for Arabia Faelix it continu∣ed unconquered, till the Turks and Portugals quarrelled about it in 1538. when Solyman Bassa sent with a Fleet into the red Sea to main∣tain the Trade thereof, and to re∣press the Persians, assisted by the said Portugals, instead of taking in, Diu, most basely surprized Aden, one of the chiefest Ports, when under colour of a friendly invitati∣on, he had got the King thereof on board, where he hanged him, as he did the like to Zibel (and the
King thereof) the Port of Mecca; nevertheless the Turks have but little command here, especially in the more inland pats, and to∣wards the Persian Gulf, where a Turk is generally hated and ab∣horred. Assiria described.ASSYRIA is bounded on the East with Media, West with Mesopo∣tamia, South with Susiana, and North with part of Turcomania, by the last name of it as allu∣ding to its great Original, called by the Turks Arzyrum, and though formerly the terrible name of a mighty Empire, and the first of the four, is now a mean Province of the Grand Seigniors Dominion: inivie. in it was once seated the famous City of Nineve mentioned in Scripture, but the name and me∣mory of it is now lost, only it is supposed that Mosul seated on the Tygris, and inhabited with a number of Nestorian Christians is risen out of its ruines. The Bassa of Arzyrum, the chief and
strongest place in this Province, hath ten thousand Timariots un∣der his Command to defend this Country, and to be ready for any other service. MESOPOTAMIA is bounded on the South with Arabia Deserta, from which it is parted with the bending of Euphrates, on the East with the River Tygris & Assyria, on the West with Syria, on the North with Mount Taurus, and Arme∣nia Major, it is memorable for very little of modern note, the people prone to slavery, and ac∣cept of any Master that can win and wear them. CHALDEA bounded on the East with Susiana a Province of Persia, on the West with Arabia De∣serta, on the North with Meso∣potamia, and on the South with the Persian Bay, and the rest of the Deserta. As to the account hereof we shall confine our view to Baby∣lon,
Babylon described. enlarged by Nebuchadnezzer, once accounted one of the worlds nine wonders, but since dwindled into oblivion, but recovered by the name first of Seleucia, and now of Bagdat: it was taken from the Persians by Solyman the Magnifi∣cent, and recovered from them un∣der Sophy Abbas in 1625. and re∣taken from them by the noble and glorious Sultan Morat in 1640. when he intended to bury the name of the Janizaries in the rubbish of it, but left his own bones there like another Alexander: but the same vicissitude hath again restored it to this present Sophy; the people of those Regions as washinted be∣fore, being patient and regardless of any power or Government what∣soever, as sure to suffer no worse, nor having ever experienced better. urcoma∣ia. TURCOMANIA (of which some thing more largely for the quality of the place) is bounded on the North with part of Tartary, upon the West with the Euxine Sea, Cap∣padocia
and Armenia Minor, on the East with Media and the Caspian Sea, and on the South with Me∣sopotamia and Assyria, it is called Turcomania from the Turks, who from hence made their first fortu∣nate expedition and irruption to the conquest of Persia, and spread themselves afterwards into other Regions. The Inhabitants are now generally Christians, pri∣viledged by Mahomet the Great, and speak a language of their own, yet are their manners ve∣ry barbarous, given much to Tillage, and very industrious; they are of late well seen in Ma∣nufactures, especially in rich Ta∣pestries, Grograins, and watered and unwatered Chamlets, with which they Traffick in all places of Turkey. Armenia Major.The chief Provinces of this Ter∣ritory, are Armenia Major, con∣quered by Selymus the first in 1515. after the fatal Calderan field, the day whereof was cal∣led
by the Turks Dooms-day, against Hismael the Persian Sophy,The Chal∣dean fields whose Predecessor Ʋssan Cassan took it from a Christian Prince thereof; and fully setled by Amurath the third, by the strong Garrison of Van. 2. Colchis, reduced by Ʋluzales the famous Turkish Sea Captain, sent into the Euxine Sea by Amurath in 1579. and made subject to a Beglerbeg. 3. Iberia with the rest, formerly feudatory to the Grecian, as before to the Roman Empire, by the same Amurath (who pursued his Father Solymans design) was partly united to his Scepter, but the Georgian Princes by the neer ayd of the Persians have yet a part. 4. Albania con∣quered by the Great Cham of Tartary, but since blended with the other Georgians into Turkish slavery. This Turcomania, though it were the first place of the Turks ex∣traction, yet it was the last of their conquest, bsides that it is
strangely Christian, and is the last Province that is assured and setled under their Dominion. Georgia described.GEORGIA, by the Barbarians tearmed Gurgistan, comprehendeth part of the ancient Iberia, with part of the great Armeny, and peradventure Atrapatia. Upon the West lyeth Mengrelia, upon the North Zuiria (once Albania) up∣on the East the middle Atropatia (now Sirvan) upon the South that part of the greater Armenia, which now is called Turcoma∣nia. For the greater part it is cove∣red with Mountains, Woods, and Thickets, and in that regard inconquerable, for the difficul∣ties of the Mountanous passages. It is notwithstanding fertile, and adorned with many large places and villages, from whence arise many famous Rivers, as Cirus and Araxis, springing from the Mountain Taurus, and running thorough the whole Province, un∣til
at last, it disgorge it self into the Caspian Sea. The Inhabitants are tearmed Georgians, of St. George, whom they advow their patron and advocate. For they are Christi∣ans according to the Greek Church, with some small diffe∣rence. They are very populous and warlike, strong of body, and valorous in fight, even until our times maintaining their liberty in the midst of the Mahumetans, sometimes following the fortunes of the Turks, sometimes of the Persians. But at this day, they have not onely lost their wonted liberty, but also many Fortresses and Cities, as Teflis, Lori, Clisca, Gori, and Tomanis, and withal some of them have imbraced the Turkish infidelity. The City f Tauris.I must here insert the noble City of Tauris in Media, within that Province belonging to the Persian, being the utmost extent of the Turkish Dominion Eastward, and
the bound thereof, whither being arrived we will return back to Constantinople by the way of Asia Minor, called Natolia, and after this spacious perambulation, sit down and compute in an intire sum, the whole extent of this Dominion, for the reader happily may be tyred with so tedious a journey. Asia Mi∣nor. NATOLIA. That which the Turks at this day term Natolia or Turcia Major, once Asia Minor, comprehendeth the Provinces of Pontus, Bithinia, Asia it self, Li∣cia, Galacia, Pamphilia, Cappa∣docia, Cilicia, and Armenia the less; and in these Provinces of antient times florished the States and Kingdoms of the Troyans, of Methridates, of Cressus, of An∣tigonus, of the Paphlagonians, of the Galathians, of the Capadoci∣ans and Phrigians; All which at this day are not sufficient to satis∣fie the single ambition of the Turkish Tyranny. The Inhabi∣tants for the most part are Ma∣humetans,
and naturally Turks, of simpler nature then the Turks of Europe, and nothing so cruel as the Renegado Christians. The con∣dition of the peo∣ple. Yet are there many Christians among them in many of these Regions, following the Rites of the Greek Church. Among these Turks there is no acknowledgment of Superiority, Blood or Nobili∣ty, but all are equal slaves to the Grand Signior, over whom he appointeth Beglerbegs and Sanjacks. They are either a kind of idle or lofty people, for they are smally industrious, and were it not for their slaves, their grounds would generally lye un∣manured. Its Can∣tons. Pontus and Bithynia are now united under one name, and called Bursia. Here once raigned the Great King Methridates; and here stood the Famous Ci∣ties of Chalcedon, Nichomedia, Apamia, Prusia Nice, and Hera∣clea Ponti.
Asia propria, now Sabrum, is a particular Province of Asia minor, and containeth in it many famous Provinces, as Phrygia major, and minor, Caria, Mysia, &c. in Phry∣gia minor stood that noble City of Troy, famous at this day (saith Bel∣lonius) an eye witness, for it is very ruines of walls, gates, cir∣circuit and marble sepulchres, found upon the way without the walls. Pamphylia now Caramania, is one of the seven Sangiack-ships, with 8000 ducats of yearly reve∣nue, In this Country, as also in Cilicia, are woven those fine cloaths which we call Chamblets, watered and unwatered. They are made of the hair of Goats, so fine and white as no silk can surpass them in those two properties. The Em∣pire of Trapezond. Cappadocia now Amasia, is a goodly Country, and the seat of the Turks eldest Son. In it are many goodly Cities, as Trapezond once the seat of the Commeni, Em∣perors
of Trapezond, whose name and progeny, Mahumet the second utterly extinguished. Cilicia, now part of Carama∣nia, is a good Country; the Inha∣bitants are given to pasturing of Goats for lucre of their fleece, of which they make their Chamblets; but otherwise neither given to fish∣ing, Navigation nor Husbandry. At the foot of mount Taurus (saith Bellonius) are divers small Villages, and excellent pastures a∣bout them, which for the fertility thereof should seem to be one of the Turks Races; for from thence he culleth out every year 600 horse of service, which they high∣ly esteem, and name Carama∣ni. Armenia minor, is a better soil, and more populous then Cappa∣docia, round about incircled with tall, huge, broken and woody mountains. These Provinces are of Natolia, governed by a Beg∣lerbeg, the cheif next to him of Ro∣mania,
but his forces are not estee∣med so much for their service as the Europeans. The whole is bounded on the East with the River Euphrates, by which it is parted from Asia the Greater, on the West with the Thracian Bosphorus and Hellespont, by which divided from Europe, on the North with the Euxine Sea, and on the South by the Rhodian, Ly∣dian, and Pamphilion Seas, so that it is almost a demy Island or Penin∣sula. The Island Rhodes. To omit for brevity sake thr Provinces of the Isles, among which are reckoned as chief, Sa∣mos, Lesbos, Tenedos, and prin∣cipally Rhodes, an Island an hun∣dred and forty miles in compass, the City whereof, taken by Soly∣man the magnificent on Christmass day 1522. is reputed one of the most impregnable Fortresses the Turks possess, as is Famagusta in Cyprus. It is now inhabited by Turks and Jews which were banisht out of Spain.
As to the story of Anatolia, it chiefly depends upon the ruines of the two Empires of Constantinople and Trabezond, and the Kingdom of Caramania, subdued by Bajazet the second, since which time every parcel thereof became united to the Ottoman Dominions. It was once the most flourishing part of the world, but hath lost since some few Centuries, no less then 4000. Cities, partly by earth-quakes, which are frequent here, and partly by the sloth and natural laziness of the Turks, who busie themselves in nothing but their lust and luxu∣ry, so that little Trade is stirring here. But their Horse bred here retain their native excellency, and are reputed the best, the Europe∣an Horse-men are likewise so estee∣med. And in these two consist the chief power and strength of the Turk. So that we have sen under the Empire of the Turk i com¦hended the better part of
antient threefold division of the earth, which we will recapitu∣late and repeat for the Readers memory. The sum of the Turkish dominions He holdeth in Europe the whole Sea coast, which from the borders of Epidaurus, stretches it self to the mouth of Tanais: whatsoever lyeth between Buda and Constantinople, and from the Euxine Sea to the banks of Savus, is his. In that perambulation is contained the greater part of Hun∣gary all Bosnia, Servia, Bulga∣ria, Macedon, Epire, Greece, Pelloponese, Thrace, and the Ar∣chipelago with the Islands. He hol∣deth in Asia and Africk, all that is between Velez de la Gomera and Alexandria in Aegypt, between Bugla and Guargula, between Alexandria and the City Siene; and from the City Suez as far as Swachen. The hugeness of this territory may be imagined by the circuit of some of the parcels: Palus Meotis (wholly his) spreadeth it self a thousand miles into the
land; two thousand and seven hundred miles do hardly incom∣pass the Euxine Sea. The coast of the Mediterranean Sea (as much as is subject to him) contain∣eth in circuit eight thousand miles. Egypt wholly his, is esteemed three thousand and two hundred miles; so far from Der∣bent upon the Caspian Sea to Aden upon the Red Sea; and from Balsara upon the Persian Gulf to Tremessen in Barbary, is accounted little less then four thousand miles. In the Sea, he is Lord of the most noble Islands of Ciprus, Eubea, Rhodes, Samos, Chio, Lesbos, and many other in the Archipelago, of which before.
CHAP. II. Tartaria Surveyed, with its Hi∣story. HAving thus surveyed the Turkish Dominions, it will be an acceptable endeavour I presume to give the Reader a little disco∣very of the Tartar and his Domi∣nions, which are linked and joyn∣ed by Religion and other com∣pacts to the Grand Seigniors, be∣cause this Nation hath been as yet much unknown to us. TARTARIA is bounded on the East, with China, the Oriental Ocean, and the streights of Anian (if such streights there be) by which parted from America, on the West with Russia, and Podolia, a Province of the Realm of Poland; on the North with the main Scy∣thick or Frozen Ocean; and on the South with part of China, from
which separated by a mighty wall; the River Oxus parting it from Bactria and Margiana, two Persi∣an Provinces; the Caspian Sea, which separates it from Media, and Hyrcania; the Caucasian moun∣tains interposing betwixt it and Turcomania; and the Euxine, which divideth it from Anatolia and Thrace. So called from the Tar∣tars, a puissant and mighty people, now possessed hereof. Tartaria briefly described.It containeth all those great and spacious Provinces, which the An∣cients called Seres, Scythia extra Imaum, Scythia intra Imaum, Saca, Sogdiana, the greatest part of Sar∣matia Asiatica, and part of Sar∣matia Europaea; extending it self the whole length of Asia, from the River Tanais, to the Eastern Ocean; taking in Taurica Cherso∣nesus, and some other parts of Eu∣rope also. So that if we measure it by miles, it is said to contain 5400 from East to West, and 3600 from North to South; a greater
quantity of ground then the Turk∣ish Empire, but of less fertility and account. The smal duration of the Tar¦tars con∣quests. This extent in easier term stret∣ched from the uttermost bounds of Asia to Armenia, and from Ben∣gala to Volga, yea their incursions peirced even to Nilus and Danu∣bius. The Macedonian and Roman Empires were never so large. But because they were rather Runna∣gates then men of War, wanting politick Government and Military Discipline, sometime ruling one Province, sometime another, they rather wrought spoil and terror to the conquered Natons, then fear of bondage and subjection, and at last seated themselves beyond the mountain Caucasus. After it became divided into many Princi∣palities, yet so that the title and majesty of the Empire remained al∣ways to the great Cham, who took the original of this name from the great Chingis, the founder of this Empire.
Tartari∣ans boun∣ded and Crim Tar∣tar histo∣ified. But leaving the great Cham of these Tartars, the Successors of Tamerlane, to remoter affairs, sup∣posed by very learned men to be but an imaginary Titulado, and the shadow of the shadow of spi∣rits, as they call their Emperor; our purpose obligeth us onely to an account of the Crim or Prae∣copense Tartar, so called from Prae∣copia, a cheif town thereof. This Tartary is bounded on the East with the River Danais, now Don, on the West with the River Nieper once called Borysthenes, by which it is parted from Podolia, on the North with part of Russia, and on the South with some part of the Euxine sea, by which lie the Circas∣sians, a sort of warlike Christians, who sell their children to Maho∣metans for to make Souldiers of them, such as were the Mamalukes, such now some of the Janizaries, and the Persian standing Ar∣my. These Tartars are good Souldi∣ers
for the most part (as their fre∣quent irruptions into Europe do sadly manifest) especially at Bow and Arrows, which they use as dextrously as the Parthians; of late years they have been trained up to the Harquebuze, and the handling of a Scimetar. Their Discipline of the Tartari∣ans. They are not to be vanquished but by death, as resolute against capti∣vity, the misery whereof they know from their own cruelties, yet at home are they more civil to Christians then abroad, for they have some honourable thoughts of our Saviour, more then other Mahometans, which hath invited many Greeks and Armenians to co∣habit with them. As to their modern History, and for what relates to our purpose, we must retrospect to the raign of Mahomet the first, the Turkish Emperour when they grew at last of so great power, by con∣quering the Asiatick Tartars, which lay neerest to them, that
Mahomet the Great thought fit to keep them down before grown too strong for him:The poli∣cy of Ma∣homet the great. and there∣fore under colour of taking in the City of Capha, then possessed by the Genoese, made himself Ma∣ster of the greatest part of the Taurican Chersonese, and the port of Tanais; thereby commanding both Moeotis and the Euxine Sea. In the time of Selymus the first, who had Married the Daugh∣ter of this Crim-Tartar (for so they called him) and was aided by him with an Army of fifteen thousand men against his father; the Turks and these Tartarians grew into a League. The chief conditions of it were, that the Tartar should aid the Turk upon all occasions, with sixty thousand Horse, that they should not make war with any of their Neigh∣bours, (except the Muscovite) without leave of the Turk; that they shall pay yearly to the Grand
Signiour in the way of Tribute, three hundred Christians; that the new Cham, upon the death or deposition of his Predecessor, shall receive from the Great Turk a Royal Banner, in token of his Confirmation in that estate, that in reward of these services, the Crim Tartar shall have yearly from the Grand Seignior, five thousand five hundred Ducats, in the way of pension; and succeed finally in the Turkish Empire, if the male issue of the house of Ot∣toman should chance to fail. The con¦dition be¦tween the Turk an the Tar∣tar in point of succession Ac∣cording unto this agreement the Tartars have been aiding to the Turks from time to time, against the Persians, Polanders, Hunga∣rians, Moldavians, and indeed whom not; and that with great and puissant Armies, the Great Cham sometimes arming 150000. of his own Subjects (leaving but one man in an house to attend their Cattel;) and someti d∣ding five thousand Circussians and
others of the Asian Tartars. The Turks dealing with them.Nothing so punctual is the Turk, on his part to perform the con∣tract; who not content to have the Tartar for his friend, or at the worst his Homager, hath of late times attempted to make him his slave or vassal. For Amurath the third, quarrelling, Mahomet the Crim-Tartar for a design to inter∣cept Osman Bassa, in his way from Persia to Constantinople, authorized the same Osman to war upon him: by whom the poor Crim and his two Sons, betrayed by some of his own Councellors (corrupted with Turkish gold) were strangled with a Bowstring; Islan a brother of the Crims, first sworn a Vassal to the Turk, put into the place, and over him a Turkish Beglerbeg or Bassa, to command in cheif, What hopes he hath of succ eding in the Turkish Empire, if the house of Ot∣toman should fail, hath been alrea∣dy taken into consideration, in
our discourse upon that subject. His Reve¦nue.What the Revenue of this Prince is, it is hard to say: his subjects have little money, and live most upon the bartery of their Cattel. But besides what he hath in lands or Customes, and the 5500 Ducats yearly from the Turk, he hath the tenth of all the spoils which are got in the Wars, and a Checkine for ev∣ry captive, for some, two or three, (whosoever taketh them) accord∣ing unto their estates. As for his powers what he can do in horse we have seen already; and as for foot, Ammunition, and other necessary, he is supplyed with them by the Turk, (who doth sometime espouse his quarrels;) by whose assistance they have brought the Moscovites to some ex∣tremities.
CHAP. III. Of the Life and Imposture of Mahomet. LIttle reason hath the world to admire at the impiety of men how execrable soever, when it shall be fully informed of the most blasphemous designs of this vile and leud Deceiver, who by his prosperous and thriving delusions and abominations, hath given encouragement to succeeding and very modern times to practice and imitate his wicked example. Such a Miscellany of absurdities in mo∣ral and religious concernments could indeed hardly have been imagined to have found any re∣ception among rational creatures; but such was the force of his bold Atheism, and his boasted familiari∣ty with the Deity, and the plea∣sing insinuations of his sensual and material Paradise, how in∣congruously
soever confounded in his Institutions, besides the fine novelty thereof to a Pagan peo∣ple, that without very much ado this Impostor quickly planted his opinions so strong, that they have taken such root and spread so uni∣versally, that one whole half of the habitable world to this day ad∣heres to his doctrine. Mahome extractiMost Writers accord that Ma∣homet, which name in the Arabick signifies Indignation or Fury, was the son of Adalla a Merchant in Mecca, a City in Arabia Faelix but Jathrib an obscure Village there, is named for his extracti∣on. His mother Hemina a Jew, and himself in Anno Dom. 571. born Posthumus, though others say he was deprived of both his Parents at two years old, when a poor woman that laboured for her living bred him up, others say it was his Uncle; at sixteen years of age he became a Merchants Bondman, his name Abdalmutalif,
his Master, pleased with his wit and dexterity, made him his Factor: He dead, Mahomet being then twenty five years old, married his Mistris, and until the thirty eighth year of his age he industri∣ously followed his trade of mer∣chandize, avoiding no personal travel (as well in the Kingdoms of Egypt, Syria and Persia, as elsewhere) where profit might arise. Being then satisfied with wealth, and given to ease, he be∣gan to think on higher things, whereof in his travels he had not been negligent, having been curi∣ous to understand the Religion of the Jews and Christians; which compared with the Idolatry wherein he was originally trained thirty years did work in him assurance that Paganism was the way of ignorance, but to whether of those to incline, he stood doubt∣ful. At last falling in company with two Christian Artificers in∣habitants in Mecca, by conversa∣tion
with them (who read the Old and New Testament unto him, for himself was unlettered) he pre∣ferred Christianism, and seemed of opinion that thereby onely a man might attain unto salvation, and accordingly he framed his life, which bred admiration in them that knew him, and gave him a greater reputation then he did expect. M homet aspire to the name of a Pro∣phet. But this hasty spring was quick∣ly blasted; for the Devil, taking advantage by this his esteem, en∣flamed his heart with pride, which wrought in him a desire to be taken for a Prophet, thinking all other attributes of Religion and sanctity to be but vile and base: To aspire unto that opinion he embraced a solitary life, retyring to a Cave in the Mountains, where he lived free from the ordinary conversation of men; repaired seldom to his own home, and his speeches (mixt with gravity and holiness teaching good life, and beating down Idolatry) moved, not onely such as saw him
to admire, but the rest also (that heard by other mens ears) held him to be a Saint. Mahomet troubled with the Falling sickness. To increase this opi∣nion of sanctimony, of the falling sickness (wherewith he was afflict∣ed) he made good use; for he gave it out (when he fell into his fits incident to that disease) that he conferred with the Angel Gabriel, by whom the pleasure of God was revealed unto him, and that his trance proceeded through the weakness of his earthly Carcase, that was astonished at the Divine presence of the Heavenly Ambas∣sadour. To pass by the vulgar story of his pedigree. Grown now famous, he thought it necessary to divulge into the world some works in writing, whereby his name might encrease; His best help was a Jew Scribe, who for want of a better Scholar he en∣tertained; but shortly after, his Master the Devil (the Church of Christ then labouring with the sickness of many Heresies) pro∣cured
the acquaintance of a Chri∣stian called Sergius born in Alex∣andria, The Monk Srgius his Coadjutor by profession a Monk, and by infection a Nestorian, witty, eloquent and learned, who (having mist of some Ecclesiastical prefer∣ment which in his opinion he had deserved) full of despight and re∣venge, in a devillish discontent, (having fled out of Syria into the hous of Mahomets Master) sought as well to raise a scandal upon the Christian Religion, as upon the professors thereof, the readiest way to kindle this fire, he found to be Mahomet; who (as is already said) had won some ex∣traordinary opinion of sanctity. After some conference between them, the Jew for insufficiency was discharged. His dam∣nable ad∣vice. Sergius being fully in∣formed how Mahomet had hither∣to proceeded, made him to un∣derstand how weakly and grosly he had erred in fundamental points necessary for the advancement of a new Religion; and cunningly
shewed him, not only the means how to smooth his past errors without scandal, but to compose a new Treatise, collected out of the Old and New Testament, united into some common principles with devised additions of his own, to bring Christans, Jews, and Gentiles under one profession, that should give credit to his Doctrine, and humour the hearers which being divulged amongst the Idolatrous people (who were easily caught) spread the poyson it contained o∣ver all the Arabies, but the wiser sort fearing (as they had cause) that the setling of a new Religion, might also draw with it a new form of Government; opposed them∣selves against it, calling Mahomet an Imposter, reproving his hypocrisie, and taxing his sensuality and drunkenness (of both which he was guilty) and sent to apprehend him; whereof Mahomet from some of his friends in Mecca having notice left his Cave and fled to the De∣sarts,
Sergius in the mean time sounding in the ears of the people his parts and piety (the sixteenth of July 622. The He∣gyra. from which flight the Turks begin their computati∣on of Hegyrathi) unto whom di∣vers Novelists resorted; as also such as the Estates had banished for approving his late coyned trash: This swarm of Wasps be∣ing stirred, nothing but revenge could ease their hearts; Mahomet willingly taking the advantage there offered, enlarged his thoughts holding it now less difficil for him to gain a Kingdom, then the title of a Prophet, which he had ob∣tained. To make a smooth way to his enterprize, by underhand means, he exaspered the heady Novelists (whereof there were many of wealth and estimation) to be sen∣sible of their banishment, and to re∣pair their wrongs by force; him∣self r accounted unto them Revela∣tions, which assured him that God
was displeased with the Meccans, for the rigorous prosecuting of him and his Sectaries; that God willed to chastise their Tyranny; of victory he was assured: and whosoever of them dyed in that Holy War, his soul should pre∣sently ascend to Heaven: with these and such like motives,Mahomet takes Me∣dina. the giddy people encouraged and seduced, elected Mahomet to be their chief, who (ordayning Offi∣cers and Captains, and receiving an Oath of fidelity as well from them as from their troops) marched to the City of Medina, and though repulsed at first, (yet after a field fight with the said enemy, at a place called Bedez, often mentio∣ned in the Alcoron, where he had the Victory) took it by force, the cause of his quarrel being pre∣tended against the Jews Syna∣gogue, which he converted into a Temple for his own abhominati∣ons: This first good fortune wrought the effect he desired, for
instantly by his Army he was salu∣ted Calipha; which interpreted, is King, and because his creation happened upon a Friday, that day was ordained by him to be their Sabboth. Takes Mecca. His next conquest was the City of Mecca, where he triumphed in the blood of his Neighbour Citi∣zens, which was not spared; and proclaimed death to all those that did not embrace his Doctrine. Opposed by the Nobles of Arabia. The Princes and great men in Arabia (opposite unto him) as∣sembled all their forces; Mahomet being too weak, was overthrown, wounded, and fled to Mecca; yet in the end (he war continu∣ing) he prevailed, and reduced the three Arabies under his sub∣jection. Grown great and glori∣ous with his Victories, (at that time the Emperor of Constan∣tinople and King of Persia being men of weak and tame Spirits,) and assisted with the Saracens, who had been deceived and abu∣sed
of their pay by Heraclius the Emperour, as also by Julian the Apostate, (fr Mahomets appea∣rance was signalized with the con∣temporary raign of that miscre∣ant) His con∣quests. he invaded their Domini∣ons, and with a conquering sword triumphed over Syria, the City of Jerusalem, the Kingdom of Meso∣potamia and Persia, the great City of Babylon, with other Eastern Provinces; of all which, as of the Arabies, he stiled himself King. And re∣tirement. Being now grown elder by his in∣ordinate life, in the state of his body then in years, which exceeded not sixty seven, full of glory, as well in regard of his large Em∣pire, as in opinion of sanctity, in being esteemed a Prophet, and weary with war, with a fained holiness, he retired to Mecca, the Metropolis of his new Empire (under which mask he intended to take his ease) sequestred him∣self from publique affairs, com∣mitting the government of his
estates to the Lieutenants, and within three years following, which was in Anno Dom. 631. the sixtieth year of his Age, and the tenth of his reign he died; but others say in the seventieth of his age, and the twenty third of his impostures, and that he died frantick:Mahomet dies. Upon his death-bed he commended unto his principal Commanders, the care and use of his fantastical Law, assuring them that it was agreeable to the Will of God, and that so long as they and their po∣sterity should hold and maintain it, they should flourish. His dead body being kept four days in expectation of a resurrection, which he promised to perform in three, grown full of stench and putrefaction, was carried by his successors, who pretended to be his Caliphs or Vicar Generals, to Medina, where it yet continues, but not drawn up to the roof of the Chappel by a Load-stone, as is vulgarly fabled.
Mahomet pretends discent from A∣braham. This false Prophet and usurping Prince, pretended paternally to discend from the Patiarch Abra∣ham by his eldest Son Ismael, and to avoid the infamy of an unlaw∣ful bed, he affirmed that Ismael was the Son of Sara, not of the Bondwoman Agar, whereupon the Arabians (which is the undoubted name of that people) are by some writers (of Ismael) called Isma∣lites, and by others (of Agar) Agarens; And (of Sara) Sara∣zens, but in this latter time they are distinguished by the name of Arabians, Moors, and Mahome∣tans, the first is proper onely to those which inhabit in Arabia: the Moors are the Progeny of such Arabians as after their Conquests seated themselvs in that part of Affrica: the Mahometans is the general name of all Nations that profess Mahomet, as Turks, Tartars, Persians, &c. Of the successors of Mahomet until the year of our Lord 673.
the writers vary in opinion, both in name and number of the Ca∣liphs, and in the years of their reigns: the reason that begat their errors proceeded from the dissen∣tion that happened (about the succession) amongst Mahomets Kinsmen, evermore Anti-Caliphs starting up with pretended Titles in opposition to him that had the Diadem; whereof some were mur∣thered and others deposed, so as the writers either out of igno∣rance (not able to discern the truth, or wilfully partial) have erred. Notwithstanding their civil tumults they kept Mahomets Domi∣nions, and inherited his fortunes, for every of them added somwhat to his Monarchie, whereby they became fearful to the world, and potent in Asia, Affrica, and Eu∣rope. The fourth Caliph (agreed upon by Historiographers) was called Aozman or Azman, Husband to Mahomets Daughter, who per∣ceiving
(that in this upstart Reli∣gion) Schisms and diversities of opinions began to rise, by the help of his Wifes Mother recovered Mahomets papers wherein his Law was written, which with some additions of his own he caused to be digested into one volume, con∣taining four books, divided into 124. Chapters, and called it the Al∣coran; that is to say, the Collecti∣on of Precepts: the Original where∣of they feign to be written in a Table which is kept in Heaven, and the Copy of it brought to Maho∣met by the Angel Gabriel by his mis∣take, say the Persians, but for Ma∣homets vertue, approved by God.The e∣steem of the Al∣choran. A Book so highly reverenced by the Mahometans, that they write upon the Cover of it, let none touch this but he that is clean; Comman∣ding expresly upon pain of death, that that book, and that onely, should be received as Canonical, through his Dominions. The whole body of it is but an Expo∣sition
and gloss on these eight Commandements. 1. Every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and one onely God, and Mahomet is his Pro∣phet.Ther opinion concer∣ning Christ. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God; Moses the Messenger of God; and Christ the Breath of God, whom they deny to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, affirming that the Virgin Mary grew with Child of him by smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her breasts. They deny the mystery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ; whose Religion was not (say they) taken away, but mended by Mahomet. And he who in his pilgrimage to Mecca, doth not comming or go∣ing, visit the Sepulchre of Christ, is reputed not to have merited, or bettered himself any thing by his journey. 2. Every man must marry to in∣crease the Sectaries of Mahomet. Four Wives he alloweth to every
man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the Hus∣band setteth no difference, either in affection or apparel, but that his Wives onely can enjoy his Sab∣baths benevolence. The women are not admitted in the time of their lives to come into their Churches; nor after death to Paradise. 3. Every one must give of his wealth to the poor. Hence you shall have some buy slaves, and then manumit them; buy birds and then let them fly. They use com∣monly to free Prisoners, release Bond-slaves, build canes or lodg∣ings in the ways for the relief of Passengers, repair bridges, and mend High-ways. 4. Evey one must make his prayers five times a day. When they pray they turn their bodies toward Mecca, but their faces sometimes one way, sometimes another way, beleiving that Mahomet shall come behind them, being at their devotions. And those which
canno come, must when they hear the voice of the Cryars, fall down in the place where they are, do their devotions, and kiss the ground thrice. 5. Every man must keep a Lent one moneth in a year. This Lent is called Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given unto Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. This fast is onely intended in the day time, the law giving leave to frolick it in the night, as they best please, so they abstain from Wine and Swines flesh. Turks un∣natural to their Pa∣rents.6. Be obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is the most neglected of any in all the Alcoran: never any children being so unnatural as the Turkish. 7. Thou shalt not kill. And this they keep inviolated among themselves, but the poor Chri∣stians are sure to feel the smart of their fury. And as if by this law the actual shedding of blood onely were prohibited, they have inven∣ted
punishments for their offen∣ders, worse then death it self. 8. Do unto others, as thou woldst be done unto thy self.The Turks Paradise. To those that keep these Laws he promiseth Pa∣radise, a place of all delights, adorned with flowery fields, wa∣tered with Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with trees of Gold; under whose cool shade they shall spend their time with amorous Virgins, whose mansion shall no be far distant. The men shall ne∣ver exceed the age of thirty, nor the women of fifteen; and those to have their virginities renewed as fast as lost. He taught too, that at the end of the world, all men that pro∣fessed any such Religion, should go into Paradise; the Jews under the Banner of Moses; the Chri∣stians under the Banner of Christ; and the Saracens under the Banner of Mahomet. They compel no man therefore to abjure the faith
in which he was born, but com∣mend and approve secretly such as they find zealous and constant in their own Religion; yet hold it an especial honour to have daily new Proselytes, they incite them by hope of freedom and preferment, which with many are motives too much prevailing. Their absurd conceits of dooms¦day The opinions which they hold concerning the end of the world, are very ridiculous; as that at the winding of a horn, not all flesh onely, but the Angels themselves shall dye, that the earth with an Earthquake shall be kneeded to∣gether like a lump of Dough; that a second blast of the same horn shall after forty days restore all again; that Cain shall be Cap∣tain or Ring-leader of the dam∣ned, who shall have the counte∣nance of Dogs and swine; that they shall pass over the bridge of Justice, laden with their sins in satchels; that the great sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser in∣to
Purgatory onely; with a thou∣sand of the like fopperies, which it is needless to add here, conside∣ring that the Alcoran it self is now extant in English, and every one that lists may read it. I need not engage further in an account of his Doctrine, and pre∣tended successors. But having shown you the Original and Au∣thor of this Dominion, and how gained, and by what art enlarged into that bulk, and by force wrested from other Princes, (Mahomet pre∣tending for his injurious invasions, the directions of God, who seeing his Law delivered by Moses and Christ to have been despised, because of the weak assertion thereof, would have them planted now by the Sword) we will next see by what means they are yet kept and maintained, and are like to be in∣creased, namely by power, and the same militaty Maximes. Imperi∣um iisdem Artibus facile retinetur quibus acquiritur.
CHAP. IV. Of their Militia. The In∣fantry. THeir Infantry consists of two sorts, First, such as are levyed upon particular Cities, more or less according to the nature of the Ex∣pedition, and proportionable to their abilities, from whence many Christians are frequently sent, both Turks and Christians well cloathed and armed, and exercised a moneth before they march without the Cities where they are raised: The second the Janizaries, who make 50000, which are Christian Chil∣dren taken from the Northern parts of Europe, and entred into the Grand Seigniors books, and bred in the Seraglio and other pla∣ces as common servants till twen∣ty two years old, and then are mustered and disciplined for ser∣vice
(but now Turks are listed a∣mong them very frequently) these are the flower of the Army, and are never disbanded, but when old, are put into Garrison. Their Cavalry. The horse consist of the Spahioglans, whose just number is 32000, and are the constant guard of the Em∣perors person at home and abroad; and the Timariots, who hold lands by serving the Sultan in his Wars, and according to the value of their Timarr or Farm sending three, four or six horses, but not all for service, their total number with the Tartar, whose aid of 60000 horse is always to be in a readiness may be 300000. of which number the Kingdom of Algeir affords 40000 that of Tunis 30000. Tri∣poli 10000. we may not reckon proportionably, so with the other Provinces, because Horse are here in abundance. When a War is proclaimed, and a general Rendezvous appointed, the several Bassa's and Gover∣ours
of Provinces draw their for∣ces together, sommoning the Ti∣mariots to do their service afore∣said, but many of them with some Janizaries and Voluntiers have leave to march before to the said Rendezvous.The Tur disciplin in marc¦ing. When these Ba∣shaws begin their march, publick proclamation is made to hang all such Janizaries as shall be found behinde those Forces upon their march; when they are rendezvou∣zed, and upon the Expedition, the Bashaws do not go all in company, but setting forth about an hour one after another, draw out their Troops without confusion, not in any strict order of Rank and File, as near no enemy. Yet though there is not the di∣scipline of posture, their Officers commands are in all other things carefully obeyed; tis a wonder to see such a multitude, as common∣ly they march with, so clear of con∣fusion, violence, want, sickness or any other disorder, there being
always plenty of good Bisket, Rice and Mutton carried with the Army. The Bashaws and great Com∣manders have with them three or fourscore Camels, besides six or sevenscore Carts to carry the Bag∣gage, and when the General takes horse, he hath five or six Coaches covered with cloath of Gold or rich Tapestry to carry his wives, some have with them twelve or sixteen, the least ten who when they enter the Coach, there are men placed on both sides holding up a row of Tapestry to cover them from being seen by the peo∣ple, although they were mufled af∣ter the Turkish manner that no∣thing but their eyes appeared. e Turks domy. Be∣sides these women, each Bashaw hath as many or rather more pa∣thick Boys which they use for So∣domy, whom they prefer as the greater satisfaction before their Wives, which are used mostly to dress their meat, to wash, and
for to honest their unnatural lust. The Boys are generally of four∣teen, ten or nine years old, and are usually clad in velvet or scarlet with gilt Scymetars, and bravely mounted with sumptuous furni∣ture, to each of them a Souldier is appointed, who walks by his bridle for his safety. When the Prime Vizier departs upon any expedition out of Con∣stantinople, he wears in his Turbant a long broach Feather, which none but the Grand Signior usually wears besides himself, upon this onely occasion; He is accompanied on his way with all the Grandees of the Court, who present him with Gifts, as doth the Sultan him∣self in vests and such like commo∣dities, to bestow upon merit or other occasions for his Magnifi∣cence. Their Military musick. The martial musick they have is none of the best, but will serve sufficiently to confound the senses, and deafen the ears to any
other clamour, being a kind of hoarse Kettle Drum, which with some brass dishes and wind Instru∣ments, carried by fellows on Horse-back, ride a little before every great Commander, and noyse along the journey. The great rendezvouz when he march∣eth against Christendom is always appointed in that fatal playn, of Thessaly famous for the battels of Pharsalia, between Pompey and Caesar, and Philippi between Augustus, and Cassius, and Brutus, heir rms. As for their armes which hath been touched before something more particularly is to be said of them. They differ from those of the Eu∣ropeans very much, yet their Harquebuze is something like our Caliver, their Scymetar a crooked flat backsword, good at Sea upon Boording, or among Ropes, but in field fight is much inferiour to the Rapier; but constant use (for it hath been always the Eastern weapon) gives them advantages,
more then we can ward. They use likewise an Iron Mace, either for stroke or hurle, and in this they have a peculiar excel∣lence, being brought up in it from their youth. Bows and Arrows. Bows and Arrows are no less skilfully then frequent∣ly used, with which they do most mischief, though the Arrows be no bigger then Childrens, but the strength of their Bows doth the Execution. Besides these they car∣ry other, almost all sorts of wea∣pons with them, as they do the like when they travail, first their Girdle is charged with three or four pistols, then on either side a knife as long as a mans arm, like a skean but not so broad, with a∣nother for ordinary uses, tuckt to his coat, a Harquebuze on his Shoulder, on his thigh a Sy∣mitar, on the one side of the Sad∣dle Pummel a Petronel, on the other a strange Sword, the blade being hollow and foursquare, by that either an Ax or an Hungarian
Mace, or both, and at his back Bows and Arrows, so that he looks like a Porcupine, with weapons in every part of his body. The great ordinance each Souldier carries in his pocket in peices to the field or Leagure, where it is cast. Their Quarters. As to their Quarters, which are always in the fields and the open Ayr, but what their Tents some∣times defend, all these arms are fastned to their Bridles, which are embellished with brass guilt bosses, and that is tied about the tree, or otherwise made sure to the ground, where he rests, that being cared for, he spreads a Blanket, where∣on he first eats and then sleeps in his cloaths, with his Saddle for his Pillow; Armour they have not had long, but now they begin to use it frequently, the agility and celerity of men and horses in offen∣ding, equalling the defensive part. To 3. Horsemen a Wagon is allow∣ed to carry their other necessaries. When they approach an enemies
Country, they march in Rank and file with wonderful exact order and silence, whereby commands are readily heard and obeyed; there being severe punishment for them that by disorderly and licencious behaviour, disturbe their com∣panies. Their provision on their march. And for the bettter secu∣rity of this discipline, and to pre∣vent stragling, they are always provided of Bisket, dry flesh, and store of rice, with a sort of course butter, so as in the greatest deso∣late places and Countries, they have plenty of necessaries, which brings them in heart to the encounter. Their Battel. When they are neer an engage∣ment, the horse (which is one of their chief Military politiques) encompass all their Infantry, ex∣cept the Janizaries (whose cou∣rage and bravery they confide in) in the rear, in form of a half Moon or Crescent, which figure they esteem propitious. Those Horse have order not to meddle with the enemy, but onely to drive and ne∣cessitate
Their manner of fighting. the foot upon the Ene∣my till they have pierced through their Battaliaes if possible, and if they chance to recoyl, to hold them to the slaughter, till they have wearied and dulled the enemies Swords, and then the Janizaries and they together fall with fresh fury and vigour upon them, and this serves for all the advan∣tages of Military Policy and quick∣ens his multitudes, through despe∣ration, to high and gallant services. Their Seiges and Leagures. In matter of siege and Leagures, they are not altogether so expedite and understanding as the Europe∣ans, and what ever they have at∣tained to in matter of raising or ruining Fortifications, hath been taught them by Fugitives and Re∣negadoes; the use of the Cannon they have learned very well, but yet it is not so familiar to them, for not many Matrosses are to be found in their Country, the Per∣sian their next neighbour to this day standing six or eight yards off
when he gives fire to those pieces. Their bold ap∣proaches. Their number serves them for shelter and defence, for as soon as they have raised a battery, and made a kind of brest work, with some Mounts in it to overlook the place besieged, they make their approaches in spight of the bul∣let, and strive to fill up the Trenches with their bodies, if they cannot do it with other matter, and when once a breach is made, is is either a Souldiers death there in honour, or a Dogs in the Camp for an Offi∣cer to retreat, or give over the assault while Commanded. Yet they can use Galleries, as they do mines and other devices of conquest, but neither with that art or success as the Christians, but that is equalled with their dili∣gence and undefatigable work∣ing, and obstinate resolution of carrying the Town at last. And their patient suffering of all extremities upon such a bent is al∣most incredible, and the like they
do in defence of their own. The Turk always Master of the field. But the Turk puts not himself to much charge of Garrisons, un∣less Frontiers and maritime Towns, (which are not yet so strictly guarded and maintained as with us) for he supposeth himself Master of the field, and that up∣on any sudden rupture he is able to march with a sufficient Army to their relief (the places being provided for such a competent time) besides, after the conquest of a Country, he divides it as was partly said before, into so many Timars or Farms, for which the several possessors are bound always to be in a readi∣ness, with two, three or six horses according to the value of the said lands, who do so awe the Coun∣try, (the Nobility and better sort being either transplanted and de∣stroyed, and some Rusticks onely left to till & manure the ground,) that seldom happens any revolt meerly by them, the Morlacks ex∣cepted,
whose poverty suited not with their Lordly Greatness, nor was able to maintain it among so many natural wants and indigen∣cies. Their Naval force. As to their Naval force it con∣sists of three Fleets, the one (like our Newcastle Traders) sails the Euxine and Mediterranean seas, either toward the Moscovite, Circasse or Cossack, and thence bringing slaves, with honey, wood and wax, &c. returns to Con∣stantinople about August, and thence sails to Alexandria to bar∣ter those commodities for Flax, Sugar, Tapestry, Sherbets (made of several dry preserved fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches, Citrons, &c.) Corn, Rice and other Egyptian traffick, and returns with Tribute (guarded with a Fleet for fear of the Malta and Florentine Galleys which lye in weight for the strag∣lers) in January back to Constan∣tinople,Of late for fear of the said Galleys, it comes by Land in Caravans. which is as the Nursery of his Seamen. The second is his fleet
of War, built and equipped in the Streights, and made only for fight. The third, the Barbary men of War, which exercise Piracy o∣ver all Christendom. The Py∣rats of Al∣gers, &c. This last is his cheifest strength, though not so much and so soon at command as the other; for they have long pretended an in∣dependance on the Grand Seigni∣or, when appealed to from those they have robbed, which he like∣wise dissembles, so that sometimes they prefer their own designs be∣fore his quarrel; but generally they comply with his Orders. Notwithstanding to give the world to believe that they are ex∣empt from the Turkish jurisdicti∣on, and to be reputed free Pirats, for fear of restoring their prizes, they will not come to Anchor un∣der the reach of any of the Forts or Castles belonging to the grand Signior, but if they have occasi∣on to stay for a wind or other convenience, ride at anchor for a
while out of danger of any shot; which personates the exemption very finely. The Turk∣ish store of Sea∣men. They are notwithstanding ill supplied with Seamen, for besides Renegadoes they have very few skilful Saylors; these Renegadoes in the Barbary Fleet have taught them to sail into the North-wester∣most parts of Europe, they having sometimes landed in Cornwal by night, and carried away some cap∣tives out of their Beds; they have frequently infested Spain in the same manner, and now they have proceeded so far that they roave as far as Newfoundland, and have taken prizes there, and in one of the Ships a very handsome English woman going for Virginia, who was presented by the Captain to the Grand Seignior and is by re∣port at present in his Seraglia, and one of the Sultanaes. The Seamen are generally very civil and courteous, as they are obedient and diligent, and not ir∣religious
and prophane, as too many of our Mariners are, and rough and quarrelsome besids, their Terms of Navigation are altogether Italian, from whose commerce they borrowed it, them∣selves having formerly few or no Ports to the Sea. Their ves∣sels. Their own Ships called Caramu∣zaels are most part great Ships, with Poop and Fore-castle very high, and will carry seven or eight hun∣dred passengers, but like Portugal Galleons are slow of sayl, not fit for service in fight, and are soon overset by any sudden tempest, or stormy weather. Holland prizes.The best Ships therefore they have are such as they have taken from the Hollander, who to save their lives and liberty, which the Turks promise upon a present surrender, will part with their Ships and Goods, which turns to the unspeakable prejudice of other Christians trading in the Levant, especially the Venetians, who have often times encountred the Turks
at Sea within these few years. An Eng∣lish ex∣ploit. This makes the Pyrats of Al∣giers, Salley, and Tripoli to have such a contemptuous opinion of that Nation, and always apt to flinch from such terms of peace as are every foot agreed on between them; but with us they care not how little they quarrel, for that they seldome get any thing by the bargain, but frequently come by the worst, a single Merchant man having spoyled two of their best men of war, and slain almost all their men, with their Captain Bashaw of Rhodes, about which a great difference was like to have arisen in the year 1634. by a com∣plaint made against the English at the Port. It were to be wished therefore that the Turk were no more formi∣dable at Land then he is like to be at Sea, of which the Venetians have continued Masters, and by their annual espousal have wedded it to their Fortune and Glory,
which hath in several triumphs a∣dorned that mayden and little re∣publique, against the huge and bulky mightiness of this Em∣pire. The Turk∣ish Arse∣nals for shipping. The Turkish Arsenals for ship∣ping are four; the first is at Pera, and contained thirty three docks or mansions for so many Gallies: The second is at Callipolis, and contained twenty, both under the charge of the high Admiral and his Servitors: The third, is at Suez upon the red Sea, containing twen∣ty five mansions, and the fourth and last, at Balsaro in the Persian Gulfe, consisting of fifteen Gallies, and these two last under the charges of the Beglerbegs of Bal∣saro and Cairo; but of late years there are double the number built at Pera and in Callipolis.
CHAP. V. Of their Government Civil and Ecclesiastick. THE Court is commonly stiled by them Capy, viz. the port, wherein are many great Officers, partly spoken of before, and whose services are onely destinated to uses within the Seraglio (too large to be here described further then what was mentioned in the De∣scription of Constantinople;) and they are for the most part Eunuchs, with their table of under Eunuchs. But without the Seraglio are also diverse honourable offices for the Government of the Empire, the chief whereof is their Mufti or Pope, who onely hath plenary power to interpret their Law and Alcoran. In the second Rank, are their Caldeleschers, viz. Chief Ju∣stices, and they have the hearing and deciding of all temporal suits
between party and party. The great Officers of the Em∣pire. In An∣cient times they were but two, one in Rum Ili or Europe, the other in Natolia: but Selimus the third, added a third equal in authority to the other two, over the Provinces of Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and part of Armenia. These chief Judges have jurisdiction over all inferior Justices, or Caddies in particular Provinces, and by them are nomi∣nated, but confirmed by the Grand Seignior himself. After the Cadeleschers, followeth the Viceroy Bassaes (counsellours of estate) whose number is uncertain; in old time three or four, but of late twelve. The President of these the Turks term Vizeroy Azem, and in truth, is a personage of great dignity, and authority in mana∣ging the affairs of the State, as the man with whom the Grand Seignior doth onely communicate his weightiest intentions, and se∣cretest deliberations. In the next place appear the Beg∣lerbegs
(masters del Campo) Major Ge∣nerals. the chief whereof is he that is tear∣med of Romania or Grecia: The second is the Beglerbeg of Ana∣talia or Asia. The third is the Denizi Beglerbeg, that is to say, the Lord high Admiral. And these three Beglerbegs have equal place and authority with the former Bassaes in the Divano, or place of publique audience. Before the last war of Persia, this Empire was under-Governed by forty Beglerbegs, who like∣wise had under them two hundred and seventy Sanjacks (but since those times this number, hath been much augmented) viz. in Europe resided seven, in Affrick four, in Asia 29. His yearly revenue, without coun∣ting his Timars, by them he hath 30000 horse always in pay (which are farms held as by Knights ser∣vice, and remove the wonder his Revenue is so little) is estimated at fifteen Millions of Duckats.
The Di∣van. As to the Capy or Port, by which is insinuated the safety and Harbour of such as address them∣selves to the Grand Signior, the remarkable thing besides the Em∣perors places of pleasure which are hinted in the other part is the Di∣van or places of Judicature, where the Visiers, and the two Cadiles∣chers sit four days in every week. A nota∣ble story of Sultan Morat. Their decisions are speedy and most just, for that the Grand Seigni∣or hath a place private to him∣self to inspect their Deportment; and it is very certain that the late Sultan Morat being there one day, and hearing judgement given a∣gainst a Coyner, to lose his right hand, which is the onely punish∣ment for that fact, by a waft of his hand out of the window, un∣seen to any but the Executioner, gave a sign for cutting of the Fel∣lows Head, as judging him to de∣serve death, which the Executio∣ner performing, to the amaze∣ment of the Divan, they sentenced
him to the same infliction (for sen∣tence and Execution are done at one and the same time) which the fellow preparing for, and refusing to give any account or reason of his Action, as relying upon the Emperors intervention, was by his own mouth, out of the same Pri∣vacy absolved and acquitted of the fact, as done by his Command. The Em∣perours publick appear∣ance eve¦ry Friday revents Inutice. Besides, by the Emperors publick appearance every Friday, when he goes in great State on Horse-back to the Temple of St. Sophia, attended by no less then 20000. men, such is the Majesty, and consequently the awful dread of this Prince (though to their joy∣ful acclamations he will answer by bestowing his blessings chearfully upon the people, and shows him∣self ready to receive all manner of complaints from all manner of per∣sons, insomuch that none of his attendants dare deny the receipt of any paper from the meanest wretch, nor the greatest of his
Officers hope for any favour upon any true information of their op∣pression and injustice) I say by this means justice is kept most part uncorrupted, and the Grand Seignior upon the account of his impartial severity towards his Mi∣nisters, though he squezeth to him∣self by their death or exile the juyce of their oppression, is most infinitely beloved and admired by his sub∣jects, being by his state, magnifi∣cence, and justice, conceived by them to have something more then humane in his nature. The Turks Trials.As to their common Trials, (which is by way of viva voce, and the Oaths of Witnesses) though of late the attestation of a Musselman or Turkish beleiver is often taken for an authentick proof against a Stranger, yet in their ordinary trials between one another, they do proceed with more caution, and upon surer grounds, (for even the Religious orders of which there are four,
and are presumed for the honour of their Religion not to be tainti∣ble with any crime are given most excessively to subornation and perjury) extracting ground and just presumptions for sentence from private examinations and questi∣ons, so artificially put, as no pre∣meditated combination can evade, Turks re¦verence Oaths more the Christian yet generally the Turk bears a more awful reverence to Oaths then Christians, nor are they found to alloy it with the poyso∣nous mixtures of equivocation, though the Jews that live among them are very prone to forswear and abuse that sacred name they pretend to have in so much vene∣ration, and for this reason and other wicked subtilties of that people, they will not suffer them to turn Turks, (which they would readily do, because of the same common principle of Circumci∣sion) unless they will first turn Christians, which goes against the grain, and keeps numbers of them
from being converts to Maho∣met. The Muf∣ti. But to proceed, from all Judges both extrordinary and ordinary at the Port, and in the several Villages of the Provinces (for a Justice or Caddie is appointed for every Town) there lies an appeal to the Mufti or Muhumetan chief Bishop (who is next to be consi∣dered in the Government) to whom all controversies difficulties or per∣verted judgment are submitted for his final sentence, and even the grand Seignior himself doth and must refer himself, but his Oracle is sounded before, and must not utter one word more or less then is directed to him, and shall fit the convenience of State, for as it hath been excellently observed, the Turk hath the Mufti and Mecca both in his own Dominions, and is not forced in some untoward occurrences to apply himself to forrain dispensations. And some∣times the Grand Signior makes
not nice to remove this Arch-Cler∣gyman, as well as other of his Tribe, if they once interfere with the State, yet without any tumult or Faction, or scarce any blemish to the persons of the men, who shall be reputed Saints, and so Calendaried, even if put to death, such is the radical opinion of their unstained sanctity and inte∣grity. As to the Bashaws and Begler∣begs, and their honours for life, their posterity being reckoned for no more then common Turks, unless their own worth shall raise them, by which all potent combination of families is preven∣ted, having spoken something more liberally of it in the former Part, we must omit it here. The nu¦ber of h Christia Vassals. In the time of Selimus, were reckoned one million and thirty three thousand Christian souls to live within his Dominions, not accounting those that enjoyed freedom of conscience by privi∣ledge,
nor those that then were subject to the Egyptian Sultan, whom the said Selimus vanquish∣ed, but now they are in far greater numbers. f Jews ewise. The Jews likewise live disper∣sed over his whole Dominions, in such infinite numbers, that scarce no town nor Village, but is very populously replenished with their Families, speaking diverse Lan∣guages, and using the trade of Marchandize in ample and rich fashion. Thus to my power have I laid out the portraiture of this mighty, tyranical, irreligious and bloudy Empire, which as it began by the sword, and is propagated by the sword, so let all Christians henceforth pray, that by the sword it may fall, and at last vanish into nothing, as of nothing (to speak of) it took Originall.
CHAP. VI. The Continuation of the Turks Hi∣story. The Vi∣siers de∣sign on Presburg NEwhausel being reduced, which was supposed, and vainly hoped, would have disap∣pointed the Turks Progress, and success for this year, being de∣clined so far as the depth of win∣ter, the Grand Visier undertook some farther conquest, and with his Army, leaving a sufficient Gar∣rison, and other numbers to repair and better fortifie the Fort, by bringing the River Niutre round about it, marched towards Pres∣burg, the Capital City or Metro∣polis of lower Hungary, and with his approach gave out rumours of his resolution to attaque it, re∣lying on his first fortune, and
those popular insinuations he had spread abroad of his reality, justice and tenderness to such pla∣ces as should come in to his Masters protection, with which thriving artifice he had already gained up∣on the credulity of most of the Pesants and indefensible places. Besides the honour of the place, as the repository of the Crown of Hungary (which the Hungarians most religiously reverence, as placing the safety and glory of their Nation therein, and which being seized, would have intituled the winner and wearer to the King∣dom) the convenience thereof as freeing his way to Vienna, on one part; and to Commorra, Raab, or Newhausel on the other, and con∣trarily incomodating any attempt upon the Island of Schut, by its Neighbourly correspondence and assistance in case of danger, where at present the General Count Se∣rini was enquartered, was a great motive and incitement to an at∣tempt
against it. Contents himself with sub¦mission o places a¦jacent. But such had been the vigilance and care of Count Strozzi a famous and experienced Souldier, in providing and fur∣nishing the City, wherein the hope of the Kingdom was con∣cerned, and his courage, and all other excellent qualities of a Go∣vernour, so known and beleived by this discreet Vizier, that con∣tenting himself with the submission of Modern, St. George, Posing and other places that lay open and ex∣posed to his power, and the bra∣very and gallant designment of so high an enterprise, which the unim∣peded conduct of the affair, he re∣treated honorably: and as if he had proceeded so far meerly upon a plot and design to surprize some places by his sudden return, he presently invested Niutra, a place neer New∣hausel, and as well fortified, and more respected, because of its Ec∣clesiastical concernment, as being a Bishops see, and by terrifying menaces and preparations for a
storm, soon wrought upon the de∣fendants to a surrender, who by the Articles thereof were con∣veyed to Presburg. Nuntia yeilded. The speedy and lucky event of this rendition, was effectual to his practices upon other places, for upon the same score Tyrnaw and some other Towns thereabouts opened their Gates and submitted to him, upon his common Terms of Religion and Liberty, Bafled  Schinta. which success invited him to the Siege of Schinta, a very strong and con∣siderable Fortress, and a Magazine of a great and the best quantity of the Emperors Artillery, but by the fidelity and valour of the Go∣vernour and his men, was repulsed thence, and glad to abandon the enterprize, for that October was more then half spent, and the climate did much incommodate his Asian and African Souldiery. Therefore to provide them of warmer Winter Quarters, to keep them well and in health against
the Spring, Retires t Winter quarters he repassed his great Guns with some of his Army over his Ship bridge to Gran or Strigoni∣um, rumouring that when he had disposed of those unuseful peices in the depth of winter, he would return himself with his Europeans and prosecute the War, but in fine, he passed over his whole Ar∣my, being followed in his rear, in expectation of advantage by General Serini, who having par∣ted with General Montecuculi, (conjoyned in attendance of the Newhausel design upon the Island of Schut) did at last cut off some 600. Janizaries with 200. other Besonio's, or Baggage people, en∣gaged in the defence thereof, which they resolutely maintained, by barricadoing themselves among the Wagons, so that Serini's Hussars were forced to alight and follow them a foot into their advanta∣ges, and there couragiously slew them; (This was some expiation of that defeat given to Count Forgatz
very neer the same place) as a fortnight before his brother and he had defeated two great parties, but not with so great success. This hap∣pened about the last of October, and so those parts of this side the Danow, conceived some joyful hopes of a respit till the coming of the Spring. But the Vizier by those other after accessions had so strongly fixt himself, by leaving a Garri∣son of 4000. men in Newhausel, and 1500 in Niutre, besides a body of 10000. men to be ready to assist them upon all occasions, that the Christians are still kept to their Arms to attend their motion, and guard themselves. paffis in∣¦igue ith the urk dis∣vered. And to increase the danger, Apaffi the Prince of Transilvania, whom they looked upon as under a constraint of com∣pliance with the Turks, and a se∣cret well-wisher to the Christian cause, discovered himself a decla∣red and profest enemy, being in∣veagled with an investiture of
those places taken this Campagnia, and upon the total Conquest, with the Crown of Hungary: for as soon as they were rid of the Infidels, he with his half Christians, Valachi∣ans, Moldavians, intermixed with Tartars, and his own plundering Transilvanians, undertook the Lieutenant-ship of the Winter War, those Nations being better able, as inured to the climate, to undergo the extremities of the weather. Apaffi ma∣nages the Winter war. Apaffi's first design was upon the Berg Towns, or Mine Hills, whence the Hungarian Gold is fought, which as soon as he had parted with the Grand Visier, then re∣treating to Belgrade, he attempted, and this the easier, for that there was no resistance in readiness to oppose him, the forces that were raised by the Counts of Cochary and Tekelly in the upper Hunga∣ry, for the most part (for that the lower was already joyned with Serini, or awed by the Turks)
were a little before, (maugre the enemies design of impeding them) already arrived to the gross of the Army; which also for want of ne∣cessaries for Man and Horse, and voured by the Turks as now dis∣persed into Quarters. is design pon the ine owns.The two first obstacles of his design upon the Mine Towns, and which barred his entrance, were the two Towns of Levents and Novigrad, reputed one of the prime places of upper Hun∣gary; ventz ilded. Levents was also well ap∣pointed, having in it a Castle manned with couragious Souldi∣ers, and firmed with thick walls, flankers and Turrets, that accord∣ingly gave the enemy a rude and unwelcom entertainment, but their numbers being not to be wearied and no relief to be expected by the besieged, it was yeilded by a∣greement, and the Articles ac∣cording to the modern policy of the Turks punctually observed. From thence Apaffi marched to
Novigrad lately yeil∣ded. Novigrad, lying further in upper Hungary, which after a stout but short resistance, not without sus∣picion that the Governour was of Apaffi's party (more obvious now by his retreat into the Enemies Country, and the neutrality or rather assistance of the whole Pro∣vince, as to the generality, to∣wards Apaffi) was rendred like∣wise, and the Garrison dismist, but not into Christian quarters, being set to work, and enjoyned to be in readiness to assist their late Besiegers. The enemy encroaching thus up∣on the Mine Towns, some Regi∣ments which could be best got to∣gether were sent to enforce them, and to hinder them from setling their Winter quarters in those places, which were nevertheless much despaired of, for that Apaf∣fi with his aids threatned Cassovia the Metropolis of upper Hungary with a present siege, as he did in effect beleagure Fillek, some ten
miles distant, prejudging that the Christians, if once able to take the field, would carry the War into these Quarters, of which therefore they would betimes possess them∣selves,Seizeth some of the Mine Towns. and therefore notwithstand∣ing the prevention aforesaid, they soon after seised on Shomnitz, Cremnitz and other Towns of the Mines; and by threatning Letters and summons terrified the people thereabouts to an acquiescence and submission under their com∣mand: They faced likewise To∣kay (the strongst Hold of all) with parties; but neither their courage, multitudes, practices or hopes, served them to the adventure of a siege. Nevertheless to countenance such resolutions, they spread ru∣mours abroad as if the Grand Vi∣sier would presently return, and orders were indeed to that pur∣pose dispatcht to the Magistrates of Frystad to make ready two Bridges over the Waegh, so broad
as that whole Squadrons might pass over there a breast, another irruption into Moravia. Count Ho∣henlo Ge∣neral of the Aux∣iliaries. This news caused Count Serini, who till then continued in the Isle of Schut, observing the designs of them at Newhausel, to put him∣self into motion, which presen∣ted him with some considerable booties, (but inconsiderable par∣ties,) designed for Constantino∣ple; and that was all he was able to do; the Auxiliaries of the Em∣pire amounting in all not to above 8000. men under command of the Count of Hohenlo, (whose An∣cestors were famous in the low Country war) by their surfeits upon the fruits of the Country, which are in great abundance in the Hereditary Dominions, being so diseased that they were in no condition or capacity for any field service; to increase these Auxili∣aries the Sweeds were neer upon their arrival from Bremen, with 700. Horse well mounted, but
now like to have met with some danger at Erford, as the Hessen Darmstad Ayds perished with a greater misfortune upon the Danu∣bius in their passage to Vienna. The Em∣peor to Regens∣burgh or Ratisbone. Neither were the Frontive Gar∣risons better conditioned by want of many necessaries, even Raab and Comorra, where the Officers that surrendred Newhausel had been newly acquitted, so that amidst so many exigencies and streights every thing was feared to excess; The Emperor himself was at this time departing from Vienna to the Diet he had summoned at Regens∣pu g, to consider with the Princes of Germany of some quick expe∣dient to redress those evils, leaving the Archduke Charls Joseph to go∣vern in his absence, who to add affliction to misery is since deceased, (as our latest intelligence) and the direct line of the imperial Family totally extinguished, a matter of no small moment to some designs in the world, especially since the
Pope and the French are now so neer a rupture, yet to alleviate the present distress, providence was pleased to bestow on the vigi∣lance and conduct of Count Seri∣ni, a very remarkable success. Count S¦rini give a great defeat to the Turk The Forces of Apaffi intermingled with Tartars, and some Turks, pursuing their design of another invasion into Moravia; having also an eye upon the Island of Schut, had pri∣vately laid a Bridge over the River Mur, and had passed two thousand Horse already over it; of which Serini having good and timely no∣tice by a discharge of a Cannon, he rise from his post, and with his Troops so fiercely charged them, that betwixt surprised and dismayed, and fairly worsted, they betook themselves back to the Bridge, where rancountring with numbers of their fellows passing over in great hast to them, they could neither go forward nor backward, but were forced to take the River, which spared none, there
escaped very few of those 2000. this was done in the morning, Novemb. 27. when Serini brought two field peices and 300. of his Foot to face the Enemy, who stood on the other side the water and managed a revengeful Skirmish all the day long, and then retreated towards Canisia, from whence they are dreaded to reinforce this their first attempt, being excee∣dingly inraged at this disgraceful disappointment. ffairs of he Diet. There is mention made in the Diet, of Mars. Turenne to succeed in the supreme command in Hungary, by means of an invitation, and re∣quest to the French King; but what the result of that and other things that concern this Subject to be consulted in that Grand Assembly may prove, we must refer to ano∣ther continuation if God permit.
JƲst now is arrived a cetain re∣port, out of Transyvania and Valachia, That there is a very great feud and rupture happened between the Turks and Tartars, b the grounds of it uncertainly deliverd Some are of opinion, that the Turk, quartering so near him this winter, and seeing him partly engaged with the Pole (which he pretends to stomack) and partly imbodied with himself, designed a surprial of this Empire, and to unite the whole force thereof with his own, which the Reader may be induced to believe from a former precedent mentioned in this Treatise: others affirn that the Tartar disappointed of his pay, and having endured all the miseries of the Campagnie, abridged likewise of the best part of his spoils, did revengefully and in great indignation begin the quarrel. However it was caused, most certainly such a different is risen among them, that much blood
hath been liberally spent between them, no les then a 1000 Janizaries at one time with their supplements far greater in number having been cut off in an encounter by the Tartars, and a very far invasion made into the Turks Country, with fire and sword. Not to mention other troubles in Asia, which may by the blesing of God and his pity of distracted Chri∣stendom, give this insolent Enemy a timely diversion. FINIS.
