12461 S118301 99853508 18892
TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Sir Henrie Brooke Cobham Knight. RIght Wor∣shipful, for∣asmuch as the historie of Guicchi∣ardine hath wonne sufficient credite in mens opinions to coūtenance it selfe against the enuious: I hope my boldnes may much the better bee excused, presu∣ming to publish in print this treatise containing all the no∣table and materiall things in that Hystorie: whosoeuer hee
was that hath bestowed his trauaile to reduce so great a volume into so small and ne∣cessarie a Booke (though his name be suppressed) hee may merit, no doubt, his due com∣mendation: I thought it a ne∣cessarie office for me to make shew of my good disposition, in due consideration towards you whom I haue knowne of along time to be exercised in forraine affaires, and imploied in matters of some weight for her Maiesties seruice and the estate: Hauing thereon ad∣dicted my selfe to thinke you meete to receyue this little
Booke into your protection, which most affectionatly I re∣commend vnto you, with my prayers vnto the eternall God for your worships health and long life. From my house in the new rents in Saint Nicho∣las shambles, this seuenth of December. 1591. Your Worships most humbly at commaund, T. P.
A briefe collection or Epito∣mie of all the notable and material things contained in the hystorie of Guicchiardine: being verie necessarie for Parliament, councell, treatises, and nego∣tiations. LOdouike Sforce, tutor and vncle to Iohn Galeas, duke of Millaine, fearing least Ferdinand king of Naples should make war vpon him, departed from the league lately made betweene him, the king, & the Florentines against the Veneti∣ans: and closely procureth Charles the viii. king of France to come to Italie to conquer the kingdome of Naples, as due to the house of Aniow: for that Pope Vrbin the fourth, gaue Naples and Cicill, being the olde fee of the Church, vnto Charles Earle of Pro∣uince, and Aniow, brother vnto Saint Lewis. Ferdinand was verie secure, as com∣monly
men are in their woorst desti∣nie, knowing his strength both by sea and land, and knowing withall that there was no great matter in his enemie: but he remembred not the weakenesse and parcialities in Italie, and that France was not since Charle∣mans time so great in circuite, nor flourishing in souldiers. Howbeit he treated with Lodouike for amitie (who secretly promised him) meaning no∣thing lesse, and with Alexander the sixt (lately chosen Pope by open symonie, and by the meanes of Cardinall As∣canio Sforce, in despite of the Cardi∣nall of Saint Peters ad Vincula) who before was secretly confederated with Lodouike, and yet promised Ferdinand that he would defend Naples, and Fer∣dinand should defend the Church. Ferdinand further made peace with Maximilian king of Romans, lately chosen Emperour: Lodouike on the other side, to winne the Emperour from him, gaue in mariage to the Em∣perour Marie Blanche sister of Iohn
Galeas, with promise of foure hundred thousand ducats, whereupon the Em∣perour more esteeming the mony, then his new brother in law, gaue the inue∣stiture of ye duchie of Millain vnto Lo∣douike: pretending that since the death of Philip Viscont Mary there had bene no lawfull duke thereof. The French king hereupon sent Pe∣ron de la Bascha, embassadour to the Pope, the Florentines, and the Veneti∣ans: where albeit he receiued onely comforts in generalitie, (for that the warres were put off till the next yeare) yet Ferdinand seeing all things now like to come to naught, fel into pensiue∣nesse, and so into an Apoplexie, & died, whose sonne Alfonso succeeded, and en∣tred league with Pope Alexander, as his father did. But discouering the trecheries of Lodouike, he sent away his ambassadour, he sequestred the re∣uenues of the duchie of Barrie, and by all meanes endeuoured also to alienate from him the citie of Geane: yea (that which the deuil himself would scarcely
haue done) he sent to the Turke Baiazet Ottoman, assuring him that Charles the French king after the conquest of Italie, had a meaning to set vppon Greece, and therefore he should helpe in this common case. He sent his ne∣phew forthwith to surprise Geane: but Lois duke of Orleance preuented him. Now began Italie to thinke of her weakenes, & the Pope commanded the king not to enter: Peter de Medices and ye Florentines (who were euer French heretofore) declared them selues a∣gainst the king: the Venecians were content to stande neuter. Lodouike vpon better aduice, began to feare that the conquering Naples, would also swallow vp Millaine, and therefore be∣gan now to cast how to make an accord as soone as ye king were past the Alpes: hoping to make Alphonso tributarie to France, and thereby to assure his owne estate. Now began prodigious sights to be seene: as in Puglia, three Sunnes enuironed with cloudes, and horrible thundering. In Arezzo armies
of men and horses, in the aire, with drummes and trumpets, and diuerse Images sweating. The Colonoys ioine with the French, Lodouike accompanieth them, Peter de Medices becommeth his friend, and the Pisans, the Pope, the Venecians, and Lodouike in greater feare then euer tofore: for that Charles passed like a thunder through Italie, with great successe. Charles entereth Rome, kis∣seth the Popes feete, and ioyneth with him in league defensiue: the Cardinall of Valence, sonne to the Pope, is ap∣pointed three monethes to followe the king toward Naples. The Neapolitans shew that they neither loued Ferdinand the father, nor Alfonso the sonne, which brought him in great perplexitie, and so much the more, for that the spirite of Ferdi∣nand (as it was thought) appeared to his chiefe surgeon, willing him to tell Alfonso, that it was in vain for him to resist the French king, it was determi∣ned their race should faile in respect of
diuerse their great sinnes, and especi∣ally for the thing that they resolued in Saint Leonards Church in Chiaie, which was to put a number of the novi∣litie to death. Hereupon Alfonso tor∣mented in conscience, priuily stole a∣way into Sicilia, with foure gallies, whereby the French king with great ease got this noble kingdome: as the Romane who said, Veni, vidi, vici. How¦beit, Ferdinand sonne of Alfonso tooke on him the title of the king, and de∣fence of the kingdome. But within short space hee was driuen to flie into Iskia. At this time the noble captaine Iean Iaques de Trinulce of Capua. gaue himselfe to the king, and offered to bring Ferdinand to some good com∣position: whereof the king willingly accepted: so that hee woulde forgo Naples, in respect whereof, he offe∣red to giue him other estates in Fraunce. This was the fruite of discorde and ambition in the manie little estates of Italie, whereof none
was able to defende it selfe seueral∣ly, and ioyntly might haue done grea∣ter things. The second Booke. THe Pisans desire to cast off the yoke of the Florentines, and submit themselues to the French: the Floren∣tines prepare to warre vpon them, and in the meane time fall at diffe∣rence among them selues for the forme of their owne gouernement: touching the which Soderin and Ves∣pucci made two excellent Orations, one for Democratie, the other for Ari∣stocratie, the which had preuailed, had not the authoritie of Frier Sauinorola carried it away, who like a Prophet in the middest of their quietnesse fore∣tolde them all the miseries of Italie by strangers to come. The Pope is suspected to haue poiso∣ned Gemin Ottoman, being corrupted
thereunto by the Turke, for feare hee shoulde aide the French king against him, after his conquest of Italie, Lodo∣uike Sforce and the Venetians, seeing the incredible successe of king Charles, feared now bondage to themselues, and began to league together, bringing thereunto the Pope, the king of Ro∣manes, and the king of Spaine. The Florentines were also dealt withall, but what for feare, and what for loth∣nesse to leese the traffike of Fraunce they helde backe. Notwithstanding yt the king heard of this league, yet he caused himselfe to be crowned before hee woulde depart from Naples, and treated verie earnest amitie with the Pope, who made to him faire semblant and promise, and yet he so little trusted the king, that at his returne from Naples by Rome, the Pope forsooke Rome, and went secret∣ly to Orbieta, and from thence to Pe∣rugia, and so to Ancona, to haue com∣moditie of the sea, if neede shoulde re∣quire. The king in the mean time pas∣sed
by Siena, and Pisa, and the confede∣rates had a meaning to stop his passage into France: but their hearts fayled them at the first. After assembling an armie neere the riuer Taro, vnder the conduct of the marques of Mantua, they fought a long battell, where the bastard of Burbon was slaine, and the king almost taken prisoner, had he not bene well horsed: and yet in the ende the Frenchmen had the honour of the field, at which time it was noted that the souldiers of Lodouike would not fight, as though he had bene in as much danger of the Venetians, as of the Frenchmens victorie. The insolent gouernement of the Frenchmen (who can better win then keepe) became odious, and consequent∣ly Ferdinand in hope to recouer Na∣ples. But at the first incounter, his horse was slaine vnder him, and himself had beene vndoubtedly slaine, had not an olde page of his, brother to the duke of Termini, horsed him vpon his owne horse, and suffred himselfe to be slaine
for him, a rare example in our time. Within a while after the Nea∣politans of themselues receyued Fer∣dinand, and the Frenchmen retyre to the Castell. Nouaria and other places are besie∣ged by the king, and the Bailie of Di∣uion, who being willed by the king to send for ten thousand Switchers, there came twentie thousand at the composi∣tion of Nouaria: and a peace begin∣ginneth to be treated betweene the king and Lodouike: touching the which, Monsieur de la Tremouille, and the prince of Orange, made two con∣trarie Orations, and the duke of Orle∣ance gainesayd the peace so earnest∣ly, that he gaue the prince of O∣range the lie. Howbeit the king and the greater part being inclined to peace, and desirous to returne into France, the king departed suddenly to Thurin, for that the Swissers mur∣mured, threatning to take him pri∣soner for lacke of pay: for that Lewis the eleuenth, was woont euer
to pay them for three moneths: where∣vnto the king was faine to yeelde, though he were escaped himselfe out of their daungers, for that they had taken prisoners the Bailie of Diui∣on, and other Captaines. At the time that the Frenchmen helde Naples, the horrible disease of the pockes, a thing then vncurable, began in most pitifull vlcers and cankers. The third Booke. THis vnwise and sudden re∣turne of king Charles, put all Italie in hope to be at rest from any more such plagues, and a∣mong the rest Lodouike thinking that he had so farre offended the king, as it was but follie to keepe that peace, which he neuer meant further then for the holding of Nouaria, and for his own safetie, searched forthwith some honest colour to slippe from the king, and
to set some other states at oddes with him, which hee did with such successe, that he termed himselfe, The sonne of Fortune. And yet within a while after, hearing of the kings full resolution to returne againe into Italie, he was marueilously perplexed, insomuch that once againe he practised capitulations with the king: wherein he would haue accorded euery article, sauing that they could neuer trust one another by rea∣son of the great iniuries secretly passed and yet certainly knowne. Ferdinand in the meane time with all diligence bestirreth himselfe, taketh Nuceria, treateth with the Venetians, who accept of his friendship (and take Pisa into protection) ioyneth with the Marques of Mantua, and fought with Mont Pensier, and his Switchers at Nuceria, and by reason of the slacknes of king Charles, who neither kept ap∣pointment in comming himselfe, nor sending succours, preuayled greatly in the kingdome of Naples. But alas so destinie would, he died in the middest of
his hope and glorie without children (according to the vision) being the first king of that Realme, within three yeeres: whom his vncle Don Frede∣ricke succeeded. Lodouike seeing the French kings returne into Italy begin to wax cold, he became verie iollie, and thinking to serue his turne with the king of Romanes, as he had done by the king of France, that is to say, to terrifie the great estates, and in the meane time to gaine the smaller, he perswaded with sixe hundred thousand ducats Maximi∣lian to come into Italie. Maximilian on the other side meant as subtilly, as he secretly, purposing to win the king∣dome of Naples for Iohn heire to the king of Spaine, his sonne in law: which Lodouike perceyuing, was sore astonished, and yet in the end wan him to Fredericke. The Venetians became now iea∣lous of Maximilian, and Lodouike, and therefore sent Hannibal Bentiuole to Pisa, and so much the rather, for that
they being troubled by Peter of Medi∣ces, and otherwise, and forsaken in their need by the Frenchmen, were dealt withall by Lodouike, to submit them∣selues to Maximilian. The Pope thinking himselfe now to haue opportunitie to occupie the estates of the Vrsins, the chiefe of them being detained at Naples, declared Vir∣ginio, and the rest rebels, for taking solde of the French, and so ioyning with the Colonoys, assayled them on all sides, to the displeasure of the Ve∣netians, who meant to gaine that fami∣lie: but that in these daungerous times, opportunitie serued not to fall out with the Pope. Lodouike albeit that he professed himselfe altogether to the Venetians, extolling Iohn Ga∣leas, the first duke of Millaine, who made them executors of his testament, and acknowledging that to their great charge thei had defended his estate: yet his teeth so watred at Pisa, which they had gotten, yt he caused the Pope & the Emperor to perswade, that it was ne∣cessarie
to restore Pisa, to Florence, for feare of giuing cause of the French kings returne: thinking vpon the re∣stitution to get it himselfe: but the Ve∣netian ambassador impugned it with greater reasons. At this time Aluiano assisted by the Guelphes, sacked the houses of the Gibellins, and slue Liii. of the chiefe in the Popes territorie, who nothing hel∣ped the matter: but see the plague of God, his yonger sonne the Cardinal of Valence slue his elder brother duke of Candie, as he rode alone one night in the citie of Rome, for that he thought him to haue greater fauour of their si∣ster Lucrece than himselfe: in whom as it is thought, the father had as good part as either of them both. The French king made peace with Spain & ye Switchers, & ment to return into Italy: but pleasures, and the Car∣dinall of S. Malo detained him. In the meane time he dieth, and Lewis the xii. duke of Orleans succeedeth. At the same time Sauinorola was by the Pope put to death.
The fourth Booke. LEwes the twelfth entitu∣led himselfe king of Hie∣rusalem, Naples, and Si∣cill, and duke of Millaine, entending to conquer the dukedome. Lodouike Sforce being yet more iea∣lous of the Venetians, then of him, ay∣deth the Florentines to recouer Pisa: the Pope on the other side secretly bent to fauour the French king, thin∣king thereby vnawares of the rest to gaine many things, and in the end the kingdome of Naples, practising in the meane time with Fredericke, to marry his daughter to his sonne the Cardi∣nall of Valence, wherein Lodouike al∣so played a part, shewing him what a strengthening it should be to him, and what a weakning to the French king: but Fredericke trusting neither of both, vtterly refused, which bredde much trouble and practise.
The Florentines offer accord to the Venetians, but it will not be receyued: For still they defend Pisa. The Cardi∣nall of Valence before the Pope and his Cardinals, renounceth his Cardi∣nals hat: and prepareth to go into France, where he was from Cardinal of Valence made duke of Valence, a citie in Daulphinoys by the French king, for that the Pope had promised him to diuorce the French Queene for sterilitie, which he performed. Hauing this new souldier, the king made peace with all his neighbours, and bendeth towards Italie, and requireth Pisa to be left in his hands. The Venetians are in great doubt, whether they may ioyne with the king, or no. Grimanni and Treuisan make excellent orations to that purpose: in the ende they ioyne, and that in such a secrete and straight league, as Lodouike could not sounde in a great while after: but when hee vnderstood it, he was greatly astoni∣shed at it, and to draw the Venetians againe from the French, he practised a
reconcilement betwene the Florētines & them. In the end neither they nor the Pope, nor the Swissers, nor Maximiliā, (who he thought would neuer haue ioi∣ned league without comprehending him) would succour him: but all fay∣led him in the middest of his comming. Then hee bent himselfe to the fortify∣ing of his owne, but putting such go∣uernours in trust, as had more fauour then vertue (a common fault in prin∣ces) he lost one towne after another, and was driuen to forsake Millaine himselfe, and to fortifie the castell: but the Towne within yeelded to the French, which newes being brought to the king at Lyons, himselfe passed the mounts in person, and came to Mil∣laine, where he compounded with al the states of Italie, except Fredericke. In this meane space the newe duke Va∣lentinois, who troubled Romagna, and the vicars thereof, ioyned with the French. And Baiazet Ottoman as∣sayled such places as the Venetians held in Greece, and with sixe hundred
horse pilled the countrey of Friuly. And after him the duke Valentinoys tooke the Countrey, and a most valiant ladie of the place prisoner, and fea∣ring her valew, sent her prisoner to Rome. The French king after the ta∣king of the Duchie of Millaine, and that he had made truce with the king of Romanes, he returned into France, leauing sufficient force in Italie, ma∣king the cardinal of Amboyse his lieu∣tenant, and Monsieur Tremouille, Captaine. Lodouike immediately recouered Como, and the Gibellins thereupon in Millaine reuolted from the French (and Trinulcio and the Frenchmen secretely stole away) hee tooke also Vigenene and Nouaria, but there was he betraid by the Swissers: & yet were they contented that he and his brothers Galeas de S. Seuerin la fracase, & Antonie Maria should steale away in the habite of Swissers: but they were all discried, and hee caried away in∣to France, and the cardinal Ascagnio who scaped, was deliuered to the
king by the Venetians, contrarie to the olde dignitie of that state. Lodouike was brought to Lyons, whom the king would not vouchsafe to fee, notwith∣standing his late greatnesse and excel∣lent wit: but was committed there to close prison, where after ten yeares hee miserably ended his life. The Cardi∣nall Ascagnio was imprisoned in the great tower at Burdeaux, where the king himselfe that sent him thither, was himselfe prisoner two yeares. The fift Booke. THis conquest of Millaine by the French, made Maximilian be∣thinke himselfe what a shame it was to him to leese such a fee of the Empire, and to suffer Lodouike thus to be caried away, who had put himselfe into his protection, whereup∣pon hee declared himselfe against the French king, and the Venetians, per∣swading the electours and states of
Germanie in time to resist their ambi∣tion and violence. The French king proceedeth fur∣ther to succour the Florentines against Pisa, taketh Bolognia into his protec∣tion, and putteth garrison into Pietre Sancte: but findeth such euill successe in his forces against Pisa, that he great¦ly stormeth at it, and offereth further power, which the Florentines in di∣spaire refuse: finally, though he were angrie with the Pope, in that he fay∣led him at Millaine: yet by the wor∣king of the duke Valentinois, Caesar Borgeas, he now accordeth with him. The duke in the meane time taketh Pesara and Rimini, and besiegeth Fa∣uentia: but was so mightily resisted by the inhabitants, not inured to warre, that considering his forces and excel∣lent captaines, he was almost mad, and sware the next spring, either to winne, or to die. The French king by meanes of the Archduke (for whose young sonne Charles being then but three yeres old,
he offered his daughter Claude of the same age) made a truce with Maximi∣lian, who most dishonourably made no mention of the king of Naples: not∣withstanding that he had receiued for∣tie thousand ducats, and a bond for a pension to that end. The French king thus being sure of the Germains, and making no doubt to obtaine the inuestiture of Millaine, by the helpe of the Archduke, turned all his thoughtes vnto Naples, and fearing least the kings of Spaine should oppose themselues, and that the Pope and the Venetians should be iea∣lous of his greatnesse, he now began to think it the surest way to deuide it with Ferdinand king of Spaine, who also pretended a certaine right to it: so that the one not to be hindered in the whole, the other to haue part of that hee had long desired, they resolued at one time to set vppon it. The French king hauing Naples, Terra de lauaro, and Abruzzo, the Spanish king Puglia, and Calabria, but this should be kept secret
vntill such time as the French armie were come to Rome. The duke Valentinoys besiegeth a∣gaine Fauentia, & so forceth it that they yeeld vpon condition that their young duke Astor, a faire prince of xviii. yeres, might inioy his libertie and reuenue: but this incarnate deuill sent him to Rome, where after he had bene abused by a worse deuill then himselfe, in such sort as may not be expressed, he and a bastard brother of his were secretely murthered. The duke passeth on and plagueth Florence, and from thence to Bolognia: but there the French king commaundeth him to stay, for that hee had taken the Bentiuols & that state into his protection. He then returneth to Florēce, & there falleth to capitulation, after surprising certaine places of the lord of Plombin, he returneth to Rome, and ioyneth with the French king. Frederick being thus assailed by these two mighty kings, being more inward∣ly angrie with the king of Spaine his friend, then with the French king
his enemie capitulated with ye French, and went himselfe into France, where he had the dukedome of Aniow, and thirtie thousand ducats pension. At the same time Gonsaluo for the Spanish king tooke Calabria, and Ferdinands eldest sonne by composition: and con∣trarie to his oath sent him into Spain. The French king finding his pro∣speritie to be enuied of the Venetians, desired to keepe league with Maximi∣lian, and to warre vpon them: but the disagreeing of the French and Spa∣nish captaines in the kingdome of Na∣ples, (for that the borders were not well abutted in the diuision) diuerted the French king to the Spanish wars: where finding himselfe the stronger, he protested warre against Gonsaluo, if forthwith he gaue not vp his Captain∣ship, and to that end sent two thousand Switzers, and entertained the prin∣ces of Salern, and Bisignan. The duke Valentinois taketh Vr∣bin and after Camerin, and repaireth to the king, who was come to Vrbin,
and so to Ast, where finding great grace, he put all the states of Italie in great feare, insomuch that secretly di∣uerse of them were driuen to confede∣rate agaynst him. In the which meane space Gindobaldo duke of Vrbin, by a secrete traine of the inhabitants reco∣uered his estate, and yet within a while after is driuen to flie to Venice. The Pope and his sonne plagued the familie of the Vrsins, the Pope poyso∣ned the Cardinall Vrsin, his son strang∣led Paule Vrsin. The French prosperity began now to decline in Naples, aswell by their negligence and insolencie, as by the warre: wherein Mōsieur de la Palisse, and diuerse others were taken priso∣ners. At the length certaine bragges in words falling out on both sides, it was agreed that there should be a com∣bat of thirteene Italians against thir∣teene Frenchmen, in which fight Albe∣mount an Italian being first ouer∣throwne, and after him Miale, with their swordes they killed the horses of
the Frenchmen, and so tooke them all prisoners sauing one: who was slaine after he had ouerthrowne Albemount. After this the Frenchmens hearts fayled, and peace grewe to bee trea∣ted: which not withstanding Gonsaluo made still warre, taking no know∣ledge thereof, and tooke prisoner Mon∣sieur de Aubigny in the same place, wherewith in fewe yeares before, he discomfited Gonsaluo, and the forces of Ferdinand, being a most excellent captain, after that at Cirignole he gaue the French an other ouerthrow, where Monsieur de Nemours was slaine: fi∣nally he passed through Melfe, and tooke Naples. The sixt Booke. LEwis the French king hea∣ring of the losse of Naples, of his armies and captains, when hee least thought of warre: complained himselfe highly to
the Archduke, thinking that whiles he treated peace with his father in law ye king of Spaine, to be reuenged: the king & Queene of Spaine on the other side drewe the treatise long, both to appoynt themselues, and to disappoint the French king: in the ende being sore pressed by the Archduke, they be∣ganne to quarrell with the Archduke himselfe, saying that hee passed both his instructions and commission, in making such a dishonourable peace as they neuer meant to make, and much lesse to keepe: whereupon the French king prepareth to assaile Naples both by sea and land. But in the meane time Gonsaluo taketh the castell of Naples, and besiegeth Caiette. Euen as fortune began to faile the Frenchmen, so did the Pope & his son, gathering by his dealings with them of Bolognia & Tuscan, that there was no farther good to be done by him. And therefore being required to declare themselues for him, they answered in dark ambiguities like Apollos oracles,
for the father neuer did as he said, nor ye sonne neuer said that which he did. In the end vpon much treatie, the Pope was content the French armie should passe through the territories of the Church, and that he would not meddle with the Florentines, Sienois, nor Bo∣lognians, during the warres, which the French king nothing beleeued, if for∣tune frowned. But see the end of this Pope, as he went to suppe in a certaine Vineyard neare the Vatican, with A∣drian, Cardinall of Cornetta, he was suddenly brought forth dead, being all blacke blowne, and hideous to looke on: his sonne also was brought foorth for dead, who hauing brought two fla∣gons of impoisoned wine, to poyson the poore cardinal, by gods iudgement poi∣soned his father, & himselfe, & yet vsing foorthwith counterpoisons, knowing the baite, he saued his life: but lay long sicke, which quayled all his deuises, especially in choosing the Pope, which was Pius 3. too good a man to liue long in that place: so that he dying within
a few moneths, Iulius the seconde was chosen. In the meane time the duke Va∣lentinois is coursed by the Vrsins, dri∣uen to reconcile himselfe to the Colo∣nois, constrained to flie into the castle saint Angelo. Cesena and other places reuolt from him to the Church againe: the Venetians are also in hope hereby to get Romagna, and soone after they take Fauentia, wherof the Pope much complaineth. And in the meane time a∣resteth the duke Valentinois, and im∣prisoneth him in the Vatican. Thus his power that suddenly grewe great by crueltie, deceyt, and the Church, came as suddenly to nothing againe. The French king maketh warres toward Spain with small profit, wher∣vpon for those parts a truce is taken, & all the bent is to Naples. Aluiano and diuerse Vrsins ioyne with Gonsaluo, which greatly encourageth him. The Frenchmen are repulsed at Garillani, in some disorder, & returne to Caiette, which after Gonsaluo taketh partly by
force, partly by composition, and after is called by no other name, but the great captaine. At this time was there a peace made betweene the Venetians, and Baiazet Ottoman, who vnlike to his father, was giuen to studie and learning. At this time also the Portingales did make their maruaylous nauigation of East Indies, passing the equinoc∣tiall, leasing the vse of the Northwind and Loadsrone, bringing great spice∣ries and other riches: but the nauigati∣on of Spaniards vnder Christophoro Colombo a Geneuois, was farre more maruaylous, who sayling thir∣tie dayes westwarde, discouered cer∣taine Isles neuer knowne before: and after both hee and Vespuccius passing further, found firme lande, and diuerse ciuill nations, not hauing the vse of armes, but much golde and sil∣uer. &c. The duke Valentinoys about this time escaped out of prison to Naples, where Gonsaluo taketh him, and sen∣deth
him captiue into Spaine, and a truce is taken betweene the kings of Fraunce and Spaine. Fredericke be∣ing out of hope of recouering his king∣dome of Naples, died, and after him Queene Elizabeth of Spaine: where∣vpon some differences were like to a∣rise betweene the Archduke and the Spanish king, for the gouernement of Castilia. About this time it may not be forgot∣ten, that Cardinall Hippolite of Esca, being in loue with a yong damosel his kinswoman (who made more account of his bastard brother) asked her what was ye cause why she so greatly loued a bastard, and she answered his sweete and amiable eyes: whereupon one day as he rid on hunting, he caused his brother to dismount, and commaunded his footmen in his presence to plucke out his eyes, saying he liked no such companions in loue.
The seuenth Booke. PHillip the archduke began to entitle himselfe king of Castile, not being content that his father in law should gouerne, hauing no better interest then the appointment of his wife when she lay in extremitie. And the king of Romanes being hartned with the greatnes of his sonne, purposeth to en∣ter into Italie. The French king ha∣uing them al in ielousy (though he were verie angry with the Pope, for vsur∣ping vpon the spiritual liuings in Mil∣laine) yet least he should stand alone, he treateth with the Pope, making quarrell to Venice, for that he knew it a thing acceptable to him. Phillip prepareth by sea to inuade Spaine, and is by storme driuen into England, where he is honorably recei∣ued by Henrie the seuenth, and newly furnished for his voyage, vpon condi∣tion
that he should deliuer the duke of Suffolke whom he had prisoner in the castell of Namures. Phillip yeeldeth, and requireth that he might not be put to death, though he pretended right to the crowne, whereunto king Henry the seuenth condiscended, but Henrie the eight afterwarde strake off his heade. Phillip goeth forward, and by capitula∣tion obtaineth the kingdome of Castile, but dieth within a while after. The French king is desirous to bee reuenged vpon Venice: but first mar∣rieth his daughter Madame Claude vnto Francis of Angolesme afterward king. The Emperour treateth with the Venetians to passe through their territories to be crowned at Rome. The Pope enterprised the recouerie of Bolognia vnder the conduct of ye Mar∣ques of Mantua, the Bolognians re∣quire ayde of the French king, accor∣ding to their protection: but in fine the poore Bentiuoles in stead of a protec∣tion had a faire safe conduct of Mon∣sieur Chaumont, for which they
payed dearly, and lost the state to the Church. The Geneuoys rebell against the French king, and fell also at ciuil dis∣cord, the Gibelines fauouring the Ad∣ornes, and the Guelphes the Fregoses, euery man desiring to bring the go∣uernment to his friendes, Monsieur de Chaumont setteth vpon them, and ma∣keth them yeeld the towne to the dis∣cretion of the king, who there entered in person, and pardoned all, sauing threescore. Ferdinand king of Aragon, and the French king, appoynted a meeting at Sauona, and there they put themselues one in anothers power, as though there neuer had beene enmitie betweene them. Where supping together, none but the two kings and the Queene, the French king would needes haue Gonsaluo make the fourth, being in ad∣miration of his fame, his person, his maiestie in gesture and speech. After this tyme this great Captaine had neuer great occasion to exercise his
vertue. The ende of their great con∣ference was, that they two and the Emperour shoulde ioyne agaynst the Venetians. The Emperour on the other side held a decree at Constance, for the en∣countering of the French king in I∣talie, and to that end treated with the Pope, professing himselfe a protector of the Church, and an enemie of the French vsurpation in Italie, who mea∣ned (quoth he) to make the Cardinall of Amboyse Pope, and himselfe Em∣perour. This troubled the king, who was sure neither of the Pope, nor of the Venetians: and the Venetians were much perplexed, whether they shoulde ioyne with the king, or the Empe∣rour: to which poyntes Foskarin and Gritti made excellent orations. In fine they answered the Ambassadour of the Emperour who demaunded pas∣sage, that if he came armed, he shoulde haue no passage: if otherwise they shoulde doe him all honour possible.
He marcheth on notwithstanding, and gaineth something: but for want of good resolution looseth againe. The eight Booke. NOw do the Emperour and the Venetians fall to trea∣tise of league, which ma∣keth all Italie more afraid then euer before, which had beene al∣readie greatly tormented by the ambi∣tion of princes: and specially by the Venetians, who made their profite of euery peace, and euery warre, and e∣uen in this league with Caesar, they demeaned themselues so cunningly, that they nowe gaue cause both to the Emperour and the French king, to ioyne together against them, where∣upon the Pope fayled not to encourage them, insomuch that for the Emperour Madame Marguiret his daughter, go∣uernesse of Flanders, for the French king, the Cardinall of Amboyse, and
for Spaine. The Ambassador sware this league at Cambray. The Veneti∣ans mistrusting false measure, had their ambassadour there also to awaite what was done, but the Cardinall sware so many othes, that the French king his maister woulde keepe his league with Venice, and that his mee∣ting was to make peace betweene the Archduke, and the duke of Guelders, that hee made him and the Venetians verie secure. This league was helde verie se∣crete, but the Pope taking the aduaun∣tage thereof, demaunded of them Ri∣mini, and Fauentia, which they had ta∣ken from the Church, vttering that whereas the greatest princes in Chri∣stendome were ioyned agaynst them, he would also ioyne, if they denied him his demaund. The Senate was deepe∣ly amazed, and diuided in opinion tou∣ching the restitution, and in fine were resolued to restore, had not Treuisan, a man of high estate next the duke, most earnestly disswaded them, which they
repented: for the Pope ratified the treatise of Cambray, and so all Chri∣stendome in effect armed against them. And besides that they had these euill signes and presages, a shippe of theirs was drowned with tenne thousande ducats. The Castell of Bresse was striken with thunder, their tower of re∣cords suddenly fell downe, their Arse∣nall was burnt, twelue gallies, their salt peter, powder, and munition was consumed. The French king accompanied with the duke of Loraine and nobilitie of Fraunce passed the Alpes, and sent Monsieur de Chaumont afore to set vpon them. The Pope published a bull against them. The French armie ouerthroweth their battaile at Gniaradadde, taketh prisoner their chiefe Captaine Bar∣tholomeo Aluiano, who was woun∣ded in the eye, as for the other Cap∣taine, the Countie Petylian, he stir∣red not, nor would aduenture all vp∣on one day, the which if hee had done,
it is thought hee had ouercome: and yet his not venturing was not mis∣liked. These newes astonished almost vnto desperation the Venetians: and yet that noble and graue state, neyther fell to dissention among themselues, nor spake so much as a worde of reproch one to another, touching their coun∣sayles, that caused this successe: which was somuch the more lamentable, for that all the Countreys subiect vn∣to them, in this their miserie be∣ganne to sorsake them, in short, they thought it the onely way to trie by submission and intreatie, to diuide either the Pope or the Emperour from the French king, of whom they dispaired. The Pope gaue small com∣fort, and the Emperour lesse, without the French kings consent. Thus the one of them gained on the one side, and the other on the other side, and the Venetians are driuen to vtter extremitie: now the states of Italy, and especially the Pope, seeing ye imminent
daungers ouer their owne heades, be∣gan nowe to thinke what a faire threed they had spoonne, if the fall and ruine of Venice did bring into Italie two such mightie princes on their necks: where∣fore hee giueth audience to their sixe Ambassadours that most heauily and wofully demaunded pardon: giuing the Ambassadours of the confederates to vnderstand, that the Church ought not to shut her bosome to such as re∣turne. Now began Treuisan to stand to them, and shortly after they recouer Padua from the Emperour, they take the Marques of Mantua prisoner. Shortly after the French king ma∣king a league defensiue with the Pope, returneth into Fraunce. The Empe∣rour bendeth all his forces to recouer Padua: the Venetians for the defence thereof, send all the yong noble and gentlemens sonnes: with which poli∣cie the people tooke such comfort, that beyond expectation they so defend them selues, that the siege is raysed, and the Emperor returneth into Allemaigne,
with little profite. The Cardinall of Amboyse hoping thereby in time to be Pope, reconcileth the Emperour and the catholike king, wherein he did his maister small ser∣uice. The Countie Petilian dieth: the Pope absolueth the Venetians. The ninth Booke. The Pope not onely absolueth the Venetians, but doth as it were take them into protection, inten∣ding to reconcile them to the Emperour, and to set him against the French king, and finally to driue the Frenchmen out of Italie: but the Em∣perour woulde not heare of it without Verona were yeelded vnto him, where∣uppon the Pope practiseth with the Swissers by the meanes of the Bishop of Sion, who now were verie proude, for that they were so desired of all na∣tions, perswading themselues that all the victories of king Charles and king
Lewis came by them, and therefore pic∣ked quarrels with the king touching their pensions. The Pope in like sort picked quarrell to the duke of Fer∣rara for his dependancie on the French, being so much benefited and honoured by him. The Emperour & the French king on the other side smelling his drift, to touch as well the interest of the one, as the other of them, knitte them∣selues againe fast against Venice. And Monsieur de Chaumont for the king, and the prince of Henault for the Emperour ioyning together, draue backe the Venetian armie, and appro∣ching to Vincentia, the Vincentines being destitute of helpe, sent an Am∣bassadour to them, who made a verie pitifull oration, the which the prince of Henault answered with great vigor like a barbarous Dutchman. In fine they yeelded at their discretion, and Monsieur Chaumont treated for them, telling the prince of Henault that hee ought to haue more regard to the great∣nesse and glorie of Caesar, then to the
fault of the poore miserable men, who depended on others, greater then them∣selues. After this were taken Legnague, Montsilice and other places, & Mon∣sieur de Chaumont was commanded to returne to Millain, for certaine broiles there kindled closely by the Pope, at which time dieth the Cardinall of Am∣boyse, which greatly hindred ye french: for that ye king being apter to be direc∣ted, then to direct, neuer had the like confidence in any man. After his death, the Pope flatly requireth the king to giue ouer his protection of Ferrara, the king answereth yt he cannot do it with his honor, and so stomacke groweth be∣tweene them. The Pope in the meane time eggeth on the Swissers, who being angry that the king would not increase their pensions, were ready enough and discended toward Millain. The Vene∣tians in ye mean time, while Mōsieur de Chaumont was there occupied, recoue∣red most part of their towns, & besieged Verona: the marques of Mātua scaped
out of prison at Venice by the secrete meanes of Baiazet the great Turke, who had before shewed many friendly parts to the Marques. The Pope purposeth to set vpon Geane, and many other things that tooke no effect: the king on the other side, to anger him, meaneth to defende the duke of Ferrara, and still to continue friendship with the Emperour, so that the Pope was driuen to leaue his thoughts of getting other mens, and to thinke vpon defending his owne: for within a while after he was besieged by Monsieur de Chaumont in Bolog∣nia: but after a while he was content vpon great occasions to leaue the siege, which done, the Pope complained him∣selfe to all princes Christian of the French king. The Pope ceaseth not thus, but fal∣leth to warres still, besiegeth Miran∣dola, is there present in person, no lesse busie in bodie then in minde, riding and going to and fro like a captaine, and in the end winneth it: wherat the French
king is so angrie, that he sendeth in∣structions to Monsieur de Chaumont, not onely to defend Ferrara: but also by all meanes to plague the territories of the Church: the Pope in the meane time is content that Modena should be yeelded to the Emperiall, for feare it should fal into the hands of the French. And the noble captaine Monsieur de Chaumont dieth, and Trinulce is made a Marshall of Fraunce, and Caesar con∣trarie to his treatise with the French king, is content to hearken to peace. After the death of Monsieur de Chaumont, Gaston de Foix, a valiant yong Gentleman, and the kings sisters sonne began to haue charge. The Pope partly to gaine the fauor of princes, partly to be the stronger in the councell that was threatned, made eight Cardinals at a clap, and among the rest, the Archbishop of Yorke, there∣by to gaine the king of England, and the Bishop of Sion, by him to gaine the Swissers. Now began a generall peace to be
treated at Venice by the Bishop of Gurce: but the Pope brake it off, wher∣upon the French king commanded Tri∣nulcio to march on, who tooke Concor∣dia, and after Castelfranco and drew to∣wards Bolognia, they falling in great feare, the cardinall of Pauia runneth a∣way. The Bentiuoles return, the popes army flieth, the Pope fretteth, the Car∣dinal of Pauia draweth toward Rauen∣na to the Pope, and the duke of Vrbin hating him deadly, by the way drew his dagger, and in the middest of his gard slue him. After this the Empe∣rour and the French king do publish a councell to be holden at Pisa: the lucke whereof the Pope liked not, for that Popes had bene there deposed at coun∣cels holden in former times. The tenth Booke. ALl Christendome, and especi∣ally al Italie stood at the gaze, to see what the French king
would do after these victories: for now it lay in his power (as it seemed) to take Rome, and all the states of the Church: but he mooued either with deuotion or feare to bring all princes in his necke, commaunded Trinulcio to leaue Bolognia to the Bentiuoles, and to restore the rest to the Church, and so to retire to Millaine. The Pope nowe to breake the necke of the Pisan Councell, sum∣moned by the Emperour and the French king, spake his Cardinals fayre, for that fiue of them had gi∣uen consent to Pisa, and win∣ning backe some of them by fayre promises, published an vniuersall Councell to bee holden at Rome, and beganne to encline to a peace with the French king: but the Em∣perour dealt with the French king on the other side, to helpe him agaynst the Pope, and the Venetians: but what for his pouertie and inconstancie, the French king had no great deuotion therunto: the emperor notwithstanding
aduentureth, and is foyled with his French succors by the Venetians: and yet after he taketh Friuly, and within short space looseth it againe. The pope being newly recouered of a deadly sick∣nesse, beginneth to thinke againe of the chasing the French out of Italie: the French king on the other side begins to be wearie of fighting agaynst the Church: the Pope leagueth himselfe with the Venetians, and the Catho∣lique king, to deliuer Italy of straun∣gers, as he pretended. The time of the Councell of Pisa drawing on, and many French Cardi∣nals and captaines being there, by chance there fell out such a fray among the souldiours and seruants, in parting whereof, Monsieur de Chastillian, and Monsieur de Lautrech were wounded, that the Councell was adiourned to Millaine, where they found more diffi∣culties: for all the Cleargie abstained from diuine seruice, as though profane and execrable persons, and not Cardi∣nals had entred. This made ye French
king suspect the Emperour, and crie out of the Catholique king, who did all contrarie to the league at Cambray: and therefore meaning to deale as falsely as the best, he now resolued to set vpon Romagna, but in great doubt of the Swissers, who sent defiance by a trumpetter vnto Gaston de Foix his lieutenant in Millaine, the king sen∣deth great ayde out of Fraunce, and demaundeth helpe of Florence, which is not answered to his expectation, by reason of diuersitie of opinions. And that which was worse, knoweth they had herein displeased the king, they sent Guicchiardine the writer of this histo∣rie Ambassadour to the king of Arra∣gon, who shortly after ioyned with the Pope agaynst Bolognia, but Monsieur de Foix came with succours, and cau∣sed the armie to retire, and after that he wanne Brescia from the Venetians, and sacked it. In the midst of this good lucke, the French king suddenly was appalled: for that he heard that the king of Eng∣land
ment to warre vpon him, recey∣uing some ships out of Spaine to that purpose. Neuerthelesse Monsieur de Foix goeth on valiantly to Rauenna, to fight with the confederates where was fought the longest and noblest battell of all others, the Spaniards and Ita∣lians striuing against the Frenchmen and Almaines for the glory of their na∣tion. And albeit in opinion the French seemed to haue the better: yet monsieur de Foix not abiding that the Spanish footmen should retire in good order, set on them in great furie, and was slaine in the height of his glorie. Peter of Nauarre taken prisoner, Monsieur de Viuarets slaine before the eyes of his father, Monsieur Allegre, and the fa∣ther not long after the sonne. The ar∣mie notwithstanding entereth and sac∣keth Rauenna: the Pope is afrayde of the newes, his Cardinals perswade him to peace, but the king of Aragon to continue, the warres. Iulio de Medi∣ci a knight of the Rhodes, afterwarde Pope, recomforteth him also in such
sort, that he resolueth rather to for∣sake Rome, then to make peace, and so much the rather, for that monsieur de la Palissie was departed out of Ro∣magna. The Swissers in the meane time passe the Alpes by Trent, with leaue of the Emperour towardes Millaine, and there ioyneth with the Venetian ar∣mie, Cremona yeeldeth vnto them, and Bergamo, and approching to Mil∣laine, Triuulcio hauing no hope to de∣fend it for want of succor, secretly stole away into Piemont. Parma, Placentia, Bolognia, and almost all Romagna, returne to the Pope, and Geane reuol∣teth from the French, making Fregose the Captaine of the Venetian armie their duke, which dignitie his father once had before him. The eleuenth Booke. THe duke of Ferrara finding him∣selfe nowe euery way so weake and hard beset (vpon assurance
of safe conduct by the means of the am∣bassadour of Arragon, and Fabricio Colonna) came to Rome, and humbled himselfe to the Pope, as to remaine Fendatarie of the Church, the Pope would haue the dukedome it selfe, or nothing: the conditions being so hard, the duke craued pardon, and the bene∣fite of his safe conduct to returne home: the Pope denied, and forged other by matters to retaine him prisoner: but the Arragon Ambassadour, and Fabri∣cio, for that it stood them vpon in honor, came suddenly well accompanied the next morning to the gate of Latran, and deliuered him in despite of the Popes garde. The French king was driuen to let the Swissers for a time take their plea∣sure of Millaine: for that he was aduertised that the king of Englande according to a treatise before holden, had sent six thousand footmen to Fown∣taraby, ioyntly there to assayle the duchie of Gwien, and to ioyne with the Emperour, he had no hope, for that the
Bishop of Marseilles his Ambassadour assured him it was in vaine. After this quayling of the French affaires, the Pope, the Emperour, the king of Arra∣gon, the Venetians and Swissers, though they were confedered, had eue∣rie one their die vpon Millaine, but the Pope and the Swissers fearing the great princes, dealt earnestly that it might be allotted to Mazimilian the yong sonne of Lodouike Sforce to bring it from the French. The viceroy of Naples is sent with an armie against Florence, the Floren∣tines receiue againe the Medici, Prato is taken by the Spaniars. The castell of Geane is taken by the Geneuoys, the lanterne of Geane still remaineth French: Bressia yeeldeth to the Vice∣roy. Cremonia to the Venetians. The Bishop of Gurce at Rome, treateth for a common peace. The feare of the Englishmen at Fowntaraby, and the negligence of the French king in not succouring, caused the king of Nauarre, to forsake Na∣uarre
and flie to Bearn, among the mount Pyrenes, & without any charge or trauaile gat the kingdome of Na∣uarre to the king of Aragon, ex∣cept certaine fortresses: the King of Aragon for want of title, pretending that the right thereof was giuen him by the Pope, when he cursed the French King and his adherents. But the French King endeuoureth to reconcile himselfe both to the King of England and the Swissers: at the least he ho∣peth to winne the Venetians from the league, and so with newe forces to re∣couer Millaine. A better hope then all this was, that Pope Iulius the second nowe died in the middest of his pro∣speritie, and Iean Cardinall de Medi∣ci was chosen, named Leo the tenth: by which good accident he did the easi∣lier make peace with the Catholique King, and prepared for his purpose: for albeit he could not well compasse a peace with the King of Englande: yet for that the English were not well prouided of readie horsed, although
their value chiefly consisted in foote∣men (yet nowe by long peace and lacke of vse being driuen to hyre Al∣maines) hee thought manie things might be done before that warre came forwarde: wherefore he sent power to Triuulcio, who ioyning with Aluiano, Captaine of his newe confederates the Venetians, he setteth vpon the duchie of Millaine, and recouereth Geane: and after besiegeth Nouara, where be∣ing resisted by the Swissers, they re∣tired seuen miles of: but the Swissers to the ende that no succours or Na∣tion might take the glorie from them, like most valiaunt souldiours hauing neither horsemen nor artillarie, fol∣lowed Triuulcio, and Monsieur de la Tremouille, and fought a most braue battaile with them, gayned their ar∣tillarie, slue their men with it, and put their gendarmerie to flight, who beastlie demeaned themselues that day: notwithstanding it may not bee forgotten, that Robert de la March ha∣uing his two sonnes most daungerously
beset with Swissers, rushed like a Ti∣ger into the midst of them, and fought so terribly, that he amazed them, and deliuered his sons. Aluiano perceiuing the discomfiture of the French, retired to Verona and besieged it, but preuay∣led not. Padua is besieged by the Vice∣roy, and the yong duke of Millaine ta∣keth Pontuica, by the helpe of Antonie de Leua: and the Viceroy finding that he could not take Padua, spoyleth the Countrey euen almost vnto Venice, & within two miles of Vincentia, the Viceroy Prosper Celonna, & the Mar∣ques of Peskara gaue a great ouerthrow to the Venetians, and Aluiano by the cowardise of their footmen of Romaig∣na. At the length Caesar and the Ve∣netians compromitted their differen∣ces to the Pope: and the French king had now nothing left in Italie but the Lanterne of Geane, which also was battered by sea, and defended with sacks of wooll.
The twelfth Booke. THe king of England was nowe readie both by sea and lande to war vpon the French king, & had also hyred the Emperor Maxi∣milian with sixe score thousand ducats to enter al at one time into Burgundy, hoping also that his father in law the Catholique king woulde ioyne with him. The French king bestirred him to resist these great daungers, and some what to appall the courage of the Eng∣lish king, he allured into Fraunce the duke of Suffolke as a competitor of the crowne, but he being nothing dis∣maied therewith, in despite strake off the dukes brothers head, whom he held before in prison by the king of Castiles means, as you haue heard. The French king farther to trouble him, set Iames King of Scots the old enemie of Eng∣land & confederate of France to warre on that side the seas vppon him. The English King was long in preparing
his subiects being out of vse, the ma∣ner of fight being chaunged, the vse of their bowes being almost gone. Ne∣uerthelesse in Iuly being greatly fur∣nished, his armie camped neare Bul∣len, and from thence besieged Ter∣win: where at the first they answered not the renowne of their hardinesse, in that they gaue no hardie assault: but within a while after, they ouerthrew three hundred men of armes. The Marques of Rotelin, called duke of Longuile, Captaine Bayard, & Fayette were taken prisoners, and monsieur de la Palisse escaped hardly, wherewith the French king and all France were so amazed, that if the English King had followed this good fortune, it is thought the gappe was nowe open to take all Fraunce. Terwin was ray∣sed by the aduise of the Emperour, for that the Archduke Charles pretended right vnto it, and the Emperour de∣parted the campe for that hee thought the Englishmen to be rash, and with∣out discipline. King Henrie neuerthe∣lesse
passed towards Tornay, and tooke it, whereof the French were full glad, fearing his comming farther into Fraunce with his terrible armie of fourescore thousand, which perhaps hee had done, if he had had experience, or had beene truly aduertised of the dispo∣sition of France: but he returned into England, assuring the French that he would returne the next sommer. At this time by chaunce of fire, the richest part of all Venice was burnt, and the Pope endeth the differences betweene Caesar and them. The league was renued betweene the Spanish king and the French king, which greatly displeased the king of England, who sayde that this was the third time that his father in lawe had broken promise with him. The French king practised with the Pope, and the Pope with the Cardinal of Yorke to reconcile the French and English King, which tooke place, and the French king marieth ye lady Mary, the king of Englands sister. This was
vnpleasant both to the Emperour and the Spanish King, and not pleasant to the Pope who was the procurer of it, who albeit he loued with such cunning to gaine princes: yet he liked not that this league shoulde helpe the French King againe to Millaine. At this time King Emanuel of Por∣tingale presented the Pope with two monstrous Elephants out of India, and Lewis the xii. dieth, and Francis the first duke of Angolesme succeedeth, taking the title of the duke of Millaine, & ma∣king peace with the King of England and the Archduke: he meaneth to reco∣uer the dukedome. The Emperor, the King of Aragon, the duke of Millaine, the Swissers doe league against him: the King of England sendeth him word to Lyons, not to passe into Italie to trouble Christendome: the Swissers gard the foote & straights of the Alpes against him. But he like an industrious prince, by the counsaile of Triuulcio, leaueth the two ordinarie wayes of Mountsenis, & Mount Genewre, and
passeth by extreame toyle of Pioners nearer the sea by the Cortian Alpes, by the Marquisate of Saluzzo: and being passed before any man thought of him, Monsieur de la Palisse tooke Colonna a noble Captaine prisoner at Ville∣france as he sat at dinner, which great∣ly astonished all Italie, insomuch that the Pope vsed the duke of Sauoy, to excuse him to the King forthwith. The King taketh the Countreys of Alexandria and Tortona. The Swis∣sers are in diuersitie of opinions, whe∣ther they shall hearken to any league with the French, or farther withstand them. At length the Bishop of Si∣on with a very perswasiue oration en∣couraged them to ioyne in one opinion agaynst the French, and to fight with them neare vnto Marignian, where the first day both they and the King fought so long, as they could holde weapon in hand, and departed on both sides, as it were by agreement without sounde of trumpet. The next day they rashly and furi∣ously
set on the French, who kept them selues in good order, and caused Aluia∣no with his light horsemen to set on their backes, which greatly annoyed them. They fought notwithstanding most valiantly: but yet dispairing of victorie, for that the Venetian armie approched, they sounded the retraite: and albeit the artillarie beate them on the backes, yet did they keepe their ar∣ray towards Millaine, to the wonder of the French, and all that looked on: especially the King, who often escaped death and daunger, and Triuulcio, who sayde they were Giantes and not men, for that he neuer sawe the like battell. After this victorie all the duchie of Millaine returned to the King, except the Castels of Cremona and Millaine, and the duke and the King fall to com∣position, and Aluiano dieth, and the Pope and the King in louing sort talke together at Bolognia, and there renu∣ing a league with the Swissers, he returned into Fraunce.
Ferdinand king of Aragon, and king of Castile, in the right of his wife, the winner of Granado, conquerour of Na∣ples and Nauarre, died without heire male, and the great Captaine Gonsal∣uo died one moneth before, absent from the Court, in disgrace and malcon∣tent. The death of the king made the French king in hope to get Naples, thinking that the young Archduke Charles shoulde bee too much busied to keepe al his estates, but he was distour∣ned from that thought by the comming of the Emperour into Lombardie a∣gaynst him and the Venetians, who summoned Millaine, but was faine to recule, for that by delay he lost all o∣portunitie. The Venetians recouer Brescia, the Pope maketh his nephew Laurence de Medici duke of Vrbin. The King of France and Spaine make a peace at Noyan. The Venetians recouer Ve∣rona.
The xiii. Booke. BEsides ye peace of Noyon, the Kings of Spaine and Fraunce, and the Empe∣ror treat a peace at Cam∣bray, and now great quiet∣nesse was hoped in all Italie, sauing that Francesco Maria de la Rouere be∣ing folowed of many Spaniards, went about to recouer such his states as the Pope had taken from him, as Vrbin Fane, and others: driuing the Pope to complaine to the French and Spanish Kings, & enter league with ye French, for ayd agaynst all subiects and fenda∣taries of the Church. The chiefe Captaines of the Spa∣niards, that folowed Francesco Maria, namely Maldonat, and Swares, conspi∣red after certaine victories to betray Francesco Maria, and to deliuer him vp aliue to his enemie Laurence de Me∣dices, which treason Francesco Maria discouering, made such an excellent
oration to the Spaniards, that they iudged their owne Captaines worthie to passe the pikes, and so with their owne hands slue them. At this time Alfonso Cardinall of Siena, being the Popes creature, most vngratefully notwithstanding conspi∣red against him: and the Cardinals of Cornette, and Volaterra, confessed on their knees that he had imparted it to them. Alfonso the night following was secretly strangled in prison. The Pope finding himselfe no more gracious among his colledge of Cardi∣nals, created thirtie new Cardinals at a clappe, some for learning, some for friendship, and some for money, which nowe went low with him: and after a few conflicts with the duke of Vrbin at Ancona and Anguiare, he falleth to composition by meanes of Don Hu∣gues de Moncada the Viceroy, to his great charge, which the poore Floren∣tines were driuen to defray. Italy now being at quiet, the Pope began to treat with Christen princes
against Selim the Turke: who seeing his father Baiazat to be olde, partly by Ianissaries, and partly by poyson dispat∣ched his elder brother Achomat, and af∣ter his yonger brother Corcut, and all their race, & as the world supposed, had a meaning to do the like to his own son, the better to strengthen his owne domi∣nion for his time, which by his desperat hardnes was growne great, hauing o∣uerthrowne the mountains Aduliens, & ye Sophy of Persia, winning from him his chiefe citie Taurus: and then turned his warres vpon the Sowdan of Soria and Egypt, a most mightie prince of country, & by reason of the warlike dis∣cipline of the Mamelukes, & yet neuer o∣uerthrown but by this Selim, who high∣ly disdaining that his victories should not be aboue Caesar, & Alexander, nowe ment to bend toward Christendom, and first against Rhodes, & Hungary, being verie weake, for that the king was a child, & as some thought toward Italy, but this consult tooke so small effect, yt if God had not soone after taken away
Selim, who left Soliman very yong: all christendome no doubt had smarted for this vngodly negligence. Now was peace awhile on euery side, and the French & the English so farre leagued togither, that the only daughter of Hen∣rie is promised vpon condition to the Dolphin of France. This peace which is an enemie to great warriers, maketh Triuulcio now in his olde age to be in iealousie with the French king for the Gwelphian faction, Monsieur de Lau∣treck and other pursue him throughly, the king denieth him his countenance: & he dieth for sorrow in disgrace, accor∣ding as most great captaines do. The emperor Maximilian being now aged, treated with the electors & Pope, to choose the king of Romans, Charles of Austrich, king of Spain: the French king thinking him to be too great alre∣die, treated earnestly to the contrarie, & Maximilian dieth before any thing is done, so that the French and Spanish kings are nowe most earnest compe∣titours and countersutours for it.
The French King spareth neither speach, Ambassadors, perswasions, nor mony, and is abused with hope by some of the electours: but in fine Charles of Austrich is chosen, the which killeth the heart of the French king and his adhe∣rents in Italy, and now the kingdome of Naples, the restitution of Nauarre vnto Iohn, and the money accorded at Nayon, begin for despite to come in question, and into demaund. At this time the Pope abusing all the world with his indulgences, and by the Bishop of Arembald making a terrible exaction in diuerse parts of Germanie, to the vse of his sister Magdalen, gaue occasion to Martin Luther to preach a∣gainst him, and to renue the doctrine of Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage. The which was verie welcom to the woun∣ded mindes of all such as had felt the Popes abuses, and so much the rather, as that the Pope tooke no good course to resist it: but perseuered still in his enormities. This yeare did Charles the Empe∣peror
ariue in England, not as his fa∣ther Phillip did by necessitie, but of friendship, and so passed into Flanders, and to Aix, and there was crowned: in the meane time some broiles arose in Spaine, which were appeased by his officers. The xiiii. Booke. ITalie had at this time a little repose, but it could not long continue, by reason of the e∣mulation of these two great princes, Charles and Frauncis, who could not endure the greatnesse the one of the other, and especially for that pope Leo was horne madde to want Parma and Placentia, gotten by his predecessor pope Iuly, and to see that Ferrara should so long holde out against him, maugre his head: in respect whereof he treated amitie with the French King, and hy∣red sixe thousand Swissers, and in se∣cret they concluded to diuide the king∣dome of Naples. In the meane time
the French king taking the oportuni∣tie of sturres in Spaine, sent Monsieur Asperrot with a power, & easily without resistance recouered ye kingdom of Na∣uarre. And the Swissers refusing the a∣mitie of Caesar, ioyned with the French. The Pope notwithstanding his league, contracted with ye French king, ioineth also in league with the Empe∣ror to defend Florence & the Medici, & to recouer Millaine to Sforce, and Par∣ma and Placentia to the Church. At that very instant on S. Peters day at Millaine, there fell fire out of the ayre, which tooke certaine barrels of pow∣der, which ouerthrew a fayre Marble tower, and so shooke the castell and city of Millaine, as a greater portent neuer chaunced vnto them. The Pope had in solde the Marques of Mantua, and Prospero Colonna, and the king sent Monsieur Lautreck to de∣fend Millaine by the helpe of the Ve∣netians, whose Captaines were Theo∣dore Triuulcio, & Andrew Gritti: who after they had skirmished to and fro
with the other side, about the riuer of Paw: in the ende the Swissers hired by the Pope, sayd that they were con∣tent to defend the states of the Church, for which cause they were purposely hyred: but agaynst the French King they would not march. On the other side, the Swissers that were with the French king departed without any bid∣ding farewell, or any worde speaking. The popes army & the Emperors mar∣cheth on towards Millaine: and at the first assault, the Marques of Pescara Captain of the Spaniards maketh the Venetians to forsake the walles, and Triuulcio is taken and al Millaine, & al Pauia and Lody, & diuerse other places yeeld, crying out vpon the French, and reioycing to become imperiall. Now died pope Leo the tenth (which no doubt much weakned the Emperor, for that his money beganne and enter∣tayned the warre) in whose place was chosen Adrian the sixt a Flemming, by the fauour of Caesar agaynst all their minds, for that they thought a stranger
of that Countrie and education, not ve∣rie fit for Italie. The duke of Vrbin recouereth his estate, and with the helpe of Baillous a∣siegeth Siena. And ten thousand Swis∣sers of Lucerne contrarie to the minds of Surick & Suith, come ouer the mount Godard and Bernard into Lombardie, to helpe the French king to recouer Millaine: Prospero Colonna is as bu∣sie on the other side to defend it, and An∣tonio de Leua to defend Pauia. Mōsieur de Lautreck besiegeth it, which he ho∣peth in time to get by famine: but their industrie within deceyueth his hope. Wherupon Lautreck retireth towards Fraunce, and three thousand of his Swissers were slain at Bicoque by the emperiall armie. Lody also and Gene were taken by them. At Lucques at this time Poggio, and Totty, two men of noble familie, vnder colour of priuate enmitie, in the open palace slue the Gonfalonier of that ci∣tie: but afterward were chased by the citizens. Sagusanac Malateste vsurpeth vpon Rimini.
The xv. Booke. THe French King being euerie where at peace, his returne into Italy is suspected, and therfore Florence, Geane, Siena, and Lu∣ca, are taxed with great summes for the maintenance of a continuall armie to defend Naples and Millaine, and Don Charles de Lanoy is made Viceroy of Naples. The Pope taketh his iourney towards Rome, and Charles the Em∣perour into Spaine, and talketh with king Henrie of England by the way, & they two ioyntly sent Ambassadours to Venice, to perswade them to leaue the amitie of the French king, and to ioine with the Emperour. The king of Eng∣land moreouer sent an Herault to the French king, to protest warre against him, in case he would not make truce with the Emperour for three yeares, the which woulde not be granted: but the league betweene the Emperour and the Venetians succeded, and touching
the same, two excellent orations were made by Andrew Gritti, and George Cornare. While christian princes were thus vndermining and vexing one ano∣ther, Soliman Ottoman the Turke in person with infinite power besieged the Rhodes: the which though it were to the vttermost defended by the grand maister and the knights thereof, yet by the negligence of the pope & christian princes, they were faine to yeeld, and on Christmasse day the Turke in tri∣umph entered, and dedicated all the Churches to Mahomet. The French kings armie being now passing the Alpes, and himselfe readie in person to follow, he discouered that the discontented duke of Burbon, Con∣stable of Fraunce, was conspired with the Emperor & the King of England, and should marrie with Elenor the em∣perours sister, widow of Emanuel late king of Portingale, and that assoone as he was ouer the Alpes, the duke of Bur∣bon, and the King of England should set vpon Fraunce, and the duke should
be King of Prouence, and the King of England should haue the rest. These newes, though they appalled and stayed the Kings person, yet did it breake the attempt, and caused the duke to flie in a straunge weede, first into la Franche Conte, and after to Millaine. In the meane time, Pope Adrian dieth, and the Cardinal de Me∣dices is chosen, calling himselfe Cle∣ment the seuenth. The French armie being now pas∣sed the Alpes, Monsieur de Boniuet a French Captain taketh Loda, the rest of the French power being vnder the conduct of the Admirall before Mil∣laine, were not in great hope to take it, but making diuerse skirmishes, still came by the worst. And shortly after retyred from thence, in which meane space the noble Captain Prospero Co∣lonna died. The Pope refused to be of either side, whereof the French King is glad, & the Emperour verie angrie: for that he hel∣ped him to that dignitie. The Emperi∣als
passe the riuer of Thesin, and foyle the French in diuers places, insomuch that they begin to abandon the duchie of Millaine, but in warlike aray. The Marques of Pescara followeth with light horses, and Chabanes is slain, and captaine Bayard is taken prisoner, who died of his wounds: and the Admirall returneth into Fraunce. After which time the duke of Burbon counsailed the Emperour to turne the warres in∣to Fraunce, alledging that the desire the English king had to conquer that realme, would much helpe him. The King of England also much encoura∣ged the Emperour thereunto: but see∣ing the difficulties and charge for him∣selfe, and being disswaded by the ambi∣tious cardinall of Yorke (who was se∣cretly French) he moued little. The Emperor vpon this confidence maketh warre in Prouance: the duke of Burbon and Marques Pescara be∣ing Captaines. The duke would haue passed on into ye bowels of France: but the Marques & other captaines would
by no meanes from the seas, but lay in siege before Marsiles fortie daies with∣out profite. And for that before their comming they hoped that the king of England would so haue fired ye French king on his side, yt all his forces should haue bent that way, & that they should haue receiued money out of Englande, (which both they failed of) they thought it folly to go any farther, or to abide til the king with his whole power, and six thousand Swissers should come vpon them, and therefore with speede retur∣ned into Italy: wherewith the king be∣ing in heart, followed as fast, & al in one day the king came to Verceil, and the Marques of Pescara: albeit forthwith it was agreed by the Viceroy, and the rest, that Antonio de Leua, should de∣fend Pauia, and the other Millaine, which was sore infected with ye plague, that they durst scarcely furnish it, inso∣much that the maine armie of Fraunce being at hand, ere they could well pro∣uide, the captaine Alarcon was faine to leaue it: and the King tooke it, vsing al
clemencie, notwithstanding he knewe the French to be there hated. From thence he besiegeth Pauia, but could not take it: and sendeth Stuart duke of Al∣bany in Scotlant with a power to Na∣ples. The pope perswadeth them to peace. The duke of Ferrara being come into the French kings protection, helpeth him against Pauia, but it is succored by the Emperials. The pope & the French captaines perswade the king to desist, but he sayth he will either win or die. At the length on S. Mathias day, on which ye Emperor was borne, the Vice∣roy and the Marques of Pescara in well ordered battell ioyned with the King, who fought nobly, being hurt in the face, and in the hand, vntill his horse was slain vnder him, and after was ta∣ken by fiue common souldiours, that knew him not, but in the end he discoue∣red himselfe to the Viceroy, who recey∣ued him as prisoner to the Emperour. Antonie de Leua in the meane time throwing downe so much of the wall
of Pauia, as an hundreth horses abrest might come through, issued out, and set on their backe, spoiling and putting to flight all, sauing the rereward of the duke of Alanson, taking prisoner the king of Nauarre, the bastard of Sauoy, Montmorancie, and others, and manie of the Nobles and best captaines were there slaine. The xvi. Booke. ALl the Potentates of Italie were nowe greatly dismaied with this taking of ye king pri∣soner, fearing the greatnes of the Em∣perour, sepecially the Pope: and next him the Venetians, who treated a league with the Pope, offering to ioyne in these common dangers, & to leuy ten thousand Swissers, and a sufficient band of Italians, not doubting the for∣wardnesse of my Ladie Regent of France, to send ye duke of Albany with sufficient succors, and making sure ac∣count of ye duke of Ferrara. The viceroy
on the other side was carefull to con∣uey the kings person into some place of suretie, & to make all sure, to ioyne in amitie with the pope. The Pope bit at the baite immediatly & was full glad, and treated to bring in the Venetians also, but that would hardly be: for that they would not drop so much money as the Viceroy demaunded. The Pope sendeth the Bishop of Pistoia to visite & comfort the French king. The Emperour being in Spaine receyueth the newes of this victorie, & his confessour the Bishop of Oisme ma∣keth an eloquent oration, perswading him franckly and freely to deliuer the French king, and that to be the most profitable, honourable, and sure way: Fredericke duke of Alba spake to the contrarie with great vehemencie, say∣ing, that to let him go were dangerous, and to let him go most honorably, were nothing to the Frenchmen, who were insolent and light, and made no regard of honour: and therefore to make pro∣fite of him were the best way. In fine,
the Emperour sent vnto him his great chamberlaine Monsieur de Beaucain to Pisqueton to comfort him, & to tell him that these were his conditions: hee should depart with the soueraigntie of the dukedome of Burgundie to him: he should depart with Prouance to the duke of Burbon, with many other great things, both for him, and for the king of England. The French king answered constantly, that he would die in prison before he would diminish the crowne of Fraunce, for all other things, he would satisfie the Emperour with reason. In the meane time the Ladie Re∣gent of Fraunce employed all meanes possible, and especially the Cardinall of Yorke, to winne the king of Eng∣land, where all the feare was. The Emperour on the other side sol∣licited the King of Englande to ioyne with him to conquer Fraunce: but the King demaunded the whole kingdome in effect, if it were conquered, & some other such conditions, as gaue them
cause to breake off. The Imperials become insolent in Italie, the French king is conueyed into Spaine, & imprisoned at Madril, & the duke of Burbon is sent for (with∣out whom the Emperor will make no agreement) and being placed in the house of a great barron at the Empe∣rors request, he answered that he would obey, for that he and all was at his com∣maundement. But so soone as the duke were gone, he would set it on fire with his owne hands, least it should smell of the infection of a traitor. There is now a conspiracie against the Emperour in Italy, wherein the Marques of Pescara plaid a part at the first, and after accused the rest dishonou∣rably, and shortly after died. In the meane time the French king falleth extreamly sicke at Madril, insomuch that the Emperor in person would haue visited him, but his Chauncelor would not suffer him. Within a while after the Emperour espouseth the infant of Portingale: the French king recouereth
health, the Pope treateth for his deliue∣rance, touching the which the great Chancellor and the Viceroy make two excellent orations. After this shortly ensueth the treatise of Madril for the kings deliueraunce, wherin was yeelded Burgūdie, Chare∣lois, and so many other Countreys, as they that heard it, did thinke it would neuer be kept: for assurance hereof the king was affianced to the Emperours sister Elconor: and the Dolphin of Fraunce and the duke of Orleans, were brought in a boat to the midst of the ri∣uer that deuideth Spaine & Fraunce, and the king in another boate, and at one instant they chaunged boates, and the king hasted to land, and had a Tur∣kish horse readie, with whom he rid in post to Bayon, and there met with a messenger from the king of England, which greatly comforted him, vnto whom he confessed, that he acknowled∣ged the greatest cause of his deliuery to proceed from him, and therfore he was for euer the English kings.
The xvii. Booke. ALthough both the Emperour and the King, had sworne to the conditions set downe be∣tweene them for his deliuerie, and that the king farther sware to ratifie them, so soone as he came into a place of li∣bertie, Neuerthelesse as soone as hee came to Bayon, he answered the mes∣senger that attended the ratification, that he durst not performe such things as were preiudiciall to the crowne of France, vntill he had wonne the minds of his subiects vnto it. After that hee highly complained himselfe to all prin∣ces and estates of the Emperours se∣ueritie, as well touching the hard con∣ditions, as that hee would not once vouchsafe to see him during his impri∣sonment: that his ambition grewe so great, that he now meant to ruine the Pope, the Church, all Italy, and to bring all Christian princes into sub∣iection. With these perswasions he ho∣ped
to bring al Italy and other princes to ioyne with him, and consequently to bring the Emperour to such daunge∣rous warre, as he should of necessitie be driuen to release Burgundie, and other hard conditions for money. The Emperiall armie on the other side waxing euery day in Italy more and more insolent, & being extreamely chargeable to the Millanois, and Anto∣nio de Leua himselfe, hauing euerie day thirtie ducats, the people in tumul∣tuous sort tooke weapon in hand, and had driuen away both captaines and souldiours, had not the cunning of the captaine, and their owne disorder com∣pounded the matter. The Emperour sent the Viceroy of Naples into Fraunce, to accept the perfourmance of the conditions: where he was greatly welcomed, but nothing was performed. The Emperour was neare madde for anger, and so much the more, as that almost against all mens opinion, and contrarie to the intelli∣gence of ye Ladie Margueret Regent of
Flaunders, he would needs insert the article of Burgundie, which they assu∣red him would neuer be performed: but happily breed further broyle. In the meane time at Coignac there is treated a league betweene the pope, the French King, the Venetians, and the duke of Millaine, to be forthwith intimated to the Emperor, who had li∣bertie to enter into it within three mo∣neths: so that he deliuered the French kings children at a reasonable ransome to be rated by the King of Englande. After this treatie the Pope surpriseth ye letters of Antonio de Leua, touching the hard estate of the duke of Millaine, and the duke of Vrbin, generall of the Venetians armie, taketh Loda, and so passeth to Millaine: where after long batterie, they were faine to retire with some altercation betwene the duke and the lieutenant. The Spaniards in the meane time so plagued the Millanois, that one of them made a very lamentable oration to the duke of Burbon (who was there ariued)
and yet finding no remedie, but a cur∣teous answere: some hanged them∣selues, some threw themselues out at their windowes, and ended their mise∣ries with other deaths. The armie of the confederates once againe appro∣cheth towards Millaine, but not onely doth any good, but also the Castell it selfe by the duke is vpon conference with the duke of Burbon, yeelded to the Imperials. While christen princes were thus tearing out the bowels one of another, Soliman Ottoman Turke, entreth in∣to Hungarie, and putteth the whole Countrey, and consequently all Chri∣stendome in daunger, ouerthrowing Lewis the young King, and getteth a great part of that buckler of Christen∣dome. The Pope, notwithstanding encou∣rageth his confederates to set vppon Naples, and Peter of Nauarre is made generall: and all the confederates offer the Emperour to enter into the league, perfourming the conditions:
he answered, he could not with his ho∣nour, being a league made against him especially, and yet for a common quiet∣nesse, he would do it presently, if the messengers had sufficient commission: meaning in deed nothing lesse, but one∣ly to keepe the king of England from entering into it. Rome is surprised by the Colonois, and the Pope driuen to leaue the Em∣perour, and to deale with them: and the confederates by sea fight with the Emperials. The xviii. Booke. THe French King and the Vene∣tians had the Pope in great iea∣lousie, that hee woulde forsake their league, in that he made ma∣nie treatises with the Viceroy: and e∣uer cried out of the charges of the warre, and yet would not make money by creating of Cardinals, nor other∣wayes, as other Popes did: but to break ye treatise (if there were any such)
they vrged him, and bent themselues with him by sea against Naples. The popes Lieutenant was Monsieur Vau∣demont, who pretended right thereto by ancient title of king Rene: where after certaine exploites of no great waight, the Pope seeing no greater successe, and that the duke of Burbon by the perswasion of the duke of Ferra∣ra, drew towards Rome, and that the French promises were but winde, he fell to agree a truce for eight moneths with the Viceroy. The duke of Bur∣bon neuerthelesse would not accept of it, but marched on. The Viceroy him∣selfe in person went from Rome, to make him surcease, but all in vaine: for the dukes case being now somewhat desperate, he draweth to Rome, and either meaneth to get that noble bootie or to die: and therefore most valiantly giueth the assault himselfe before all men, and was slaine with a harque∣buze. His death enflameth the souldi∣ours, and especially the Lanceknights, who before were verie cold: insomuch
that within fewe houres they take the towne and sacke it, where they had in∣finite treasure. The palaces of the Cardinals were rifled, and the Cardinal of Siena, who himselfe & all his ancestors were Im∣periall, was yet driuen to compound with the Spaniards: & yet after (as in all such broyles no man is sure) he was taken prisoner by the Launceknights, and caried bareheaded with many buf∣fets to Borgo, where he paied a newe raunsome of fiue thousand ducats. In like maner were vsed all the Spanish and Dutch prelats: notwithstanding the hope of their Countrey-mens fa∣uour. The Pope driuen to keepe himselfe in the castell, vntill the plague wearied his enemies, and composition made with the Imperials. The Emperour being certified of the Popes distresse, and that the plague was entred into his castell of S. Angelo, made outward shew of dislike, but inwardly was very glad, and indeed he had caused him to
be caried into Spain, had it not beene for feare of the king of England: as for the French king, he cared not if the Pope had bene hanged, and all Italie fiered, so that he had againe his chil∣dren. The Cardinal of Yorke is now sent into France, to make a league with the French king more sure, and to offer the mariage of the Lady Marie either to the king, if he went not on with the em∣perours sister, or otherwise to the duke of Orleans. And for that the Cardinal was honourably accompanied with xii. hundred horses, & had three C. thousand crownes to lend the king towards his warres with the Emperour. The Car∣dinall of Loraine was first sent to re∣ceiue him, and after the king himself re∣ceiued him at Amiens. In fine, the king and he sent Gambare to the Pope, to make the Cardinall of Yorke his Vi∣car generall in Fraunce, England and Germanie, during his imprisonment: but secretly the French king withstood it by all meanes possible.
In this meane space, the French armie vnder the conduct of Monsieur de Lautreck take Bosco, and Genes by composition, after the Countrey of A∣lexandria, and then Pauia, where the souldiours sacked and pilled, and vsed crueltie eight dayes in memorie of the battell of Pauia, where the king was taken. The duke of Ferrara entereth in∣to the league with him, in respect wher∣of, Madame Rence, daughter of king Lewis the xii. is promised to his sonne Hercules, and after the Marques of Mantua entred into the same league. The treatise of peace seemed vaine betweene the Emperour and the king: for the Emperor sayd he could not trust the king that had once deceiued him. The Kings ambassadors replied, yt for asmuch as he tooke himselfe to be de∣ceyued, the King might the lesse trust him. In the ende the ambassadours of Fraunce and England denounced war agaynst him: and many hot speeches breeding hot choler, the Emperor cha∣lenging the combat of the French king
said, he was a false forsworn king. The French king on the other side gaue him the lie. The king of England embraceth the religion of Luther, and by the per∣swasion of the Cardinall of Yorke, de∣uorceth his wife Katherin of Arragon. Monsieur de Lautrech entreth the kingdome of Naples, and Andro Dore being at the sould of the king with his gallies, returneth to Geane, diuerse places yeeld vnto Lautreck, and by him Naples it selfe is besieged. The xix. Booke. MOnsieur de Lautreck finding the value of the defendants of Naples, to be great, pur∣posed to continue the siege, hoping that though vertue fayled not, yet want of money and victuall would make vertue yeeld to necessitie. In the meane time Phillippin Dore with his gallies and Geneuois, who were not a∣ble sea-men, did sinke diuerse shippes
Imperiall vpon the sea, sleaing ye vice∣roy Don Hugues di Moncada, & Fiera∣mosque, with diuers other, to the num∣ber of a thousand, & taking prisoners ye Marques of Guast, & Ascagnio Colōna, the prince of Salerne, and diues others. This conquest of the sea would not make Naples yeeld, for Phillippin Do∣re tooke such direction of Andro Dore to retire to Pozzouolo, that Naples was oft vittailed, & the Venetian fleet, after they had gotten Ottranto staied in hope to win the castell of Brundusium, so that ye defendants were encouraged, and the assailants for lacke of water and other necessaries fainted, and in the meane time Antonio de Leua per∣ceyuing that Pauia was negligentlie kept, assaulted it by night, and tooke it, and had the Captains prisoners before the souldiers were awares. The Pope continued his newtrality betweene the two princes, and so was neither trusted of the French king, nor of the Emperour, who the more suspec∣ted him, for that he had sent Cardinall
Campeius into England to diuorce his kinswoman Queene Katherin, daugh∣ter of Aragon. Now doth Andro Dore leaue ye sould of the king, and entreth sould with the emperor, vpon conditions: & the french army before Naples is full of diseases, Monsieur de Vaudemont almost dead, Monsieur de Lautreck very sicke, and shortly after dieth: so that the Marques of Saluzzo is driuen to capitulate with the prince of Orange, who is now vice∣roy. Monsieur de S. Poll gained cer∣taine townes in Lombardy for the French, & in ye meane time Andro Dore taketh Geane for ye emperials, through the grosse negligence of ye French king. Monsieur de S. Poll marcheth on stil through Lombardy, & comming within xii. miles of Pauia: Antonio de Leua, who had beene long sicke, causeth himselfe to be caryed in a chayre, and all his men to put on white shirtes, and stealeth without noyse one night to∣wardes the French, within two miles of Ladriane, & vnawares setteth
on Monsieur de S. Poll, who albeit he fought valiantly, trusting to his Lance-knights, yet they ranne away, and he remained prisoner with Castillon, Claude Rangin, and diuerse others, to Antonio de Leua. Now beginneth the Pope to treate a peace at Barcelone with the Empe∣rour, greatly to the Popes aduauntage, both for that he should forget iniuries past, & be no hinderance to the Empe∣rour, who ment personally to make a voyage into Italy. The like was trea∣ted betweene the French King and the Emperour at Cambray, a place desti∣nied to such great treatises, being there present the two ladie Regents, for the two princes, the Ambassadours of the confederates, and the duke of Suffolke, and the Bishop of London for the King of England. The French King being somewhat ashamed of this act, for certaine dayes kept himselfe close, and would not be seene of the am∣bassadours of his confederates: in the ende he gaue them sweet wordes, com∣forts,
and promises, excusing himselfe, that otherwise hee could not haue his children. The Emperour after this, comman∣deth the prince of Orange to assaile the Florentines, and himselfe in royal per∣son commeth to Geane, where the prin∣ces of Italy do salute him by their Am∣bassadours. The King and the Pope talked togi∣ther at Bolognia, the pope entring first, as the greater princes vse. The Turke left off besieging Vienna: the Empe∣rour is inclined to capitulate with the Venetians, and Francis Sforce, to whom he restored the dukedome of Millaine, and the Venetians to the Church that they held in Romagnia, and to the Em∣peror that which they held in Puglia. The xx. Booke. THese late leagues seemed nowe to establish peace each where, sauing only to the poore Floren∣tines, who often had helped o∣thers
to make their peace, and now the peace of others drew them to a daunge∣rous warre with the Emperour, who now sent against them foure thousand Lanceknights, and three thousande Spaniards and Italians vnder the prince of Orange: which maketh Pis∣cara and Prato yeeld of themselues to the Pope, and the souldiours of France being well payd, defended themselues valiantly. In the meane time the Pope cau∣seth the French king to send Monsieur de Cleremont to Florence, to excuse himselfe, for not comprehending them in the league vpon necessitie of recoue∣ring his children, wishing them to take such conditions as they could get in so hard a case, wherein himselfe would be a dealer for them. The Emperour meaning to go to Rome to be crowned, being letted with certaine importunate affaires of Ger∣manie, and chiefly to elect his brother Ferdinand, king of Romanes, was faine to be crowned at Bolognia, An∣no
1530, on his birth day of S. Mat∣thias, which was his fortunate day, and there the Pope and the duke of Ferrara compromitted all their differences vn∣to him. The Florentines being often skir∣mished withall, and often battered, though they valiantly defended (after the death of the prince of Orange, and departure af the Marques of Guast) were yet for verie hunger and diuersi∣tie of opinions, driuen to offer to Gon∣sague the Captaine of the Imperials, that Caesar himselfe and the Pope shoulde determine their conditions and gouernment, their life and libertie saued. Ferdinand is now chosen King of Romanes at a decree in Ausbourge, and there is treatise agaynst the Lu∣therians, of whom the great princes beganne to be afrayde: and at the in∣stant request of the Germaines, the Emperour summoned the Pope to call a Councell: the Pope vtterly misliked it, as preiudiciall to his Court, and
abuses, and yet dissembled it cun∣ningly. The French would neuer bee long quiet, but the King turneth to his olde emulation of the greatnesse of the Em∣perour, and perswadeth with the Pope and states of Italie to take heed of it. To the states of Germanie, he affir∣meth that the Emperour ment to make it a Monarchie. The King of Eng∣land he pricketh forwarde, in recoun∣ting vnto him how angrie the Empe∣rour was for the diuorce of his mothers sister: and last of all, that which euill beseemed the most Christian King, he stirreth vp the Turke, who indeede was alreadie iealous of his greatnesse, and hated him also in respect of his bro∣ther, with whom he was at oddes for Hungarie. The Emperour still calleth vpon the Councell, he desireth now to renue the league of Bolognia, and to compre∣hende in it all Italie, making contri∣bution for their common defence a∣gaynst the French. The Pope lyked
not to be of any side, remembring the daungers past so often as the sides were ouerthrowne, but being of that calling, he liked neutralitie better, as the su∣rest way. The Emperour returneth into Spaine, and the Pope and the French king talke at Marseilles of great mat∣ters, vnder pretence of dealing against the Turke, and the King of Englands diuorce. To ratifie their matters, Ka∣therin of Medices the Popes neece, was married to Henry the second sonne of Fraunce, whome nowe the Pope woulde faine make duke of Millaine forthwith: for he foreknewe (as it see∣med) that he should shortly die, in that he made his Ring, and all other habi∣liaments, and indeed died, in whose place was chosen Alexander Farnese, called Paule the third. The duke of Wittemberg, by ayde of the Lantgraue of Hesse, and the French Kings money, recouered the dukedome from Ferdinand, and great troubles were toward: but the matter
was compounded without the French kings consent, who in the meane time hoped to get Millaine. At this time also Barbarossa Bascha generall by sea to Soliman, passing to the conquest of Thunis, scoured the riuers of Calabria, and passed Caiette, and put all Italie in such a feare, as he might easily haue taken Rome, if he had come forward. FINIS.
