13466 99839841 4298
THE DEFENCE OF the Article: Christ descended into Hell. With Arguments obiected against the truth of the same doctrine: of one Alexander Humes. All which reasons are confuted, and the same doctrine cleerely defended. By Adam Hyll, D. of Diuinity. Magna est veritas & praeualet. AT LONDON Printed for William Ponsonbie. 1592.
To the right reuerend Father in God, Iohn by the grace of God Arch∣bishop of Caunterburye, Adam Hyll Mi∣nister of the woord of God, Wisheth grace, peace, and life euerlasting. DIuers causes (most reuerēd Father) haue moued me to present this tretise vnto your grace. The one be∣cause your grace hath been charged to de∣fend an error, main∣taining this doctrine that Christ in Soule descended into hell. The other, for that there is like to be as great strife a∣bout the true vnderstanding of this Article in England, as there was in Germany about the true meaning of (This is my body.) For the bet∣ter preuention whereof, I thought it my parte though the vnwoorthiest of all the Ministers of the Church of England, to set down in this short discourse, a plain demonstration of the truth, and a refutation of the contrary out of Gods Booke and godly Interpreters. The last reason that hath
moued me to evulgate these my labors is this: I see diuers Ministers whome for their learning and life, I do honor, very often to preach against the true interprutation of this branche of our Creed, wherby the Papist reioyceth, the Athe∣ist is hardned: and the common sort of people deuiding themselues as they affection. The Pre∣chers do vpon this occasion striue more bitter∣ly one against another, then either of both do a∣gainst our common aduersarye: and by this meanes turning our swords into our own bow∣els, we are a pray to our enemies, and a scorne to the world. If therefore this controuercie be not shortly by the prouidence of almighty God, and your grace his ministery, decided: there will grow among vs enuy, strife, sedition, and al man∣ner of euill workes. Sith then as there is but one God, so there is but one truth. My humble sute vnto your grace is, that if the doctrine contained in this booke be Apostolicall: It may be autho∣rized to proceede, and they that preach the con∣trary in this respect may haue their mouths stop∣ped: for if one builde and another destroy, how can our building prosper? if one gather and ano∣ther scatter, what profit will there be in our ga∣thering? sith it is more easie to destroy and scat∣ter, then to build or gather: Agathon said, Euery Gouerner must learne these 3. lessons, the one that they rule men, the other that they must rule by the laws, the 3. that they shal not rule foreuer. In that vnder her most excellent Maiestie you
rule men, you must vse continuall care and vigi∣lancy. In that you must rule by lawes, you may not for feare of superior or multitude? for loue of freends, for hatred of enemy, nor for desire of reward, leaue the lawes of your Countrie vnexe∣cuted. In that you shall not rule for euer, you are put in minde that you shall appeare one day be∣fore the God of order, being the Iudge of the quick and of the dead, who wil seuerely punish you for the disorders which are in the Church of England vnpunished, except you endeuour as much as you can to reforme thē. Some preach what they please, some do what they fancy, some liue as they list: and the most are impatient of vniformyty, for some weare surpleases, and they are called, Time seruers: some gownes, and they are like Citizens: some clokes, and they are like trauailers: some Coates and they are like fugi∣tiues. Nazianzene saith in his oration of mode∣ration to be vsed in diuine matters. Confusion hath engendred thunders in the aire, tremblings in the earth, shipwrackes in the Sea, warres and strifes in Cities and houses, sicknes in bodies and sinnes in the soule. So that by this learned mans iudgemēt, the air, the sea, the earth, euery house, Cittie, body and soule, is ouerthrown by confu∣sion. For the purest things as the aire is, it infect∣eth: the calmest things as the sea is, it troubleth: the strongest thinges as Citties are, it weakneth: the richest thinges as the house is, it impoueri∣sheth:
the vnitedst things as the bodye is, it ser∣ueth: the holyest things as the soule is, it profa∣neth. God the giuer of all good gifts, giue to our Church a beautifull order, that he may dwell a∣mong vs, least our puritye be turned to vnclean∣nes: our stedfastnes to tottering: our peace to warre: our strength to weaknes: our riches to po∣uerty: our vnion to ciuill discension: and our religion to Atheisme. For the head of this mon∣ster Confusion is the diuell, the hart is enuy, the eares are euill reporte, the eyes are trouble and vexation, the hands are vprore and sedition, the feete are woe and destruction. From the which God deliuer my sweete countrey, for his sonnes sake Christ Iesus. To whom with the holy ghost be all honor and glory for euer and euer. Amen. Your graces most bounden Orator. Adam Hyll.
Christ descended into Hell. THat Christ descended into hell, it is an article of our faith, and is to be beléeued as the rest of the articles are: for it is proued by many and manifest Scriptures, as it shal here∣after appeare. The first Scripture that proueth that christ went down into hell is the 16. Psal. 9. 10. & 11.Psal. 16. 9. 10. 11. verses, Wherfore my hart is glad & my tung reioyceth, and my flesh also shall rest in hope; for why thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, neither suffer thy holy one to see corruption: thou shalt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnes of ioye, and at thy right hand are pleasures for euermore. They that deny this place to proue the descending of Christ into hell, say that the woord Nephesh or soule, doth signifie the person of Christ, and Sheol the graue. But the place it selfe doth confute them, for as in the 11. verse he sheweth the resurrection of Christ and his ascension, so the 10. containeth his buriall and descending into hell, from whence he did arise. Some there be that deny that Nephesh the Hebrew word dothsignifie the soule sepera∣ted from the body, but they are reproued in the 1. of King, 171. King. 17. 21. 22. ver. 21. 22. where Elias thus praieth for his Hostesse childe: O Lord my God I pray thee let this childes soule come vnto him again, then the Lord heard the voice of Elias, and the soule of the childe came into him againe, and he reuiued: wher Npehesh signifieth thesoule seperated from the body. Carleil séeing this place to ouerthrow that which he goeth about busily toproue, saith that this childe was not
dead but in a swoune: but the Sonne of Sirach saith other∣wise, Sir. 48. 4. 5. O Elias how honourable art thou by thy wonderous deeds, who may make his boast to be like vnto thee? which hast raised vp the dead from death and by the woord of the most high out of theHeb. 11. 35 graue. and Paul saith Heb. 11. 35. Their women receued their dead raised to life. Both these say the childe was dead therfore it is vntrue that Carleil affirmeth in his booke fol. 144. that the childe was not dead, and as the wise man saith it was a wōderous déed, but it is no wonder to quicken one that is in a swoun, & as Nephesh in this place doth signi∣fiePro. 23. 14. the soule, so dooth it in many other places. Pro. 23. 14. Thou shalt smite him with the rod, and shalt deliuer his soule from hel. Farther yt Nephesh signifieth the Soule it is manifest by this, for ye interpreters called Septuaginta haue translated it  There were in times past many Here∣tiques, that did deny that Christ had a soule, of whom Ap∣pollinarisAthanas. de aduentu Christi. was one, against whom Athanasius thus wri∣teth in his book of the wholsome comming of Christ, neither his body was left in the graue, neither his soule was left in hell; for this the Prophet writeth, Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corrupti∣on. And a little after, for if the Godhead had béen seperated from the body, and death had shewed his force on him, how could the body depriued of the immortall God shew forth in∣corruption, or how could the woord finish his going downe to hell, or arise from hell? Epiphanius writing against theEpiphacon contra Da∣maer: haer: 77. Fulgent. ad Thrasym lib. 3. Cap. 6 Heretiques called Damaeritae, vseth the same proofe haer 77. Fulgentius ad Thrasymundum, in his 6. Chapter thus writeth concerning this matter, whose flesh neither the di∣uinity forsooke in death, neither did it leaue the soule in hell, as the Prophet saith, thou shalt not leaue my soule in Hell. And in his 8. Chapter alleadging the 2. of the Acts, & 16. Psalm he addeth these words, there blessed Peter being lightned indéede by the holy Ghost, and made according to the woord of the Lord the light of the world, did shew by the
manifest light of preaching how we should vnderstand this place, least any man in Christ should so vnderstand the true flesh, that he should deny the true soule. In this therfore the diuinity of Christ did shew his impossibilitie, because hée is present alwaies and in all places, and after an vnspeakable manner, and was as concerning his soule in hel without sor∣rowes, and as concerning his bodye laye in the Sepulchre without corruption: for hee neither was absent from his flesh, when he did not suffer his soule to be gréeued in Hell: neither did he leaue his soule in hell, when he kept his flesh in the graue without corruption. But most plaine of all o∣thersCiril de ve∣ra fide, ad Theodosi∣um Imper. cap. 13. To descend into hell is a miracu∣lous thing. is Ciril, who in his book of the true faith to Theodo∣sius the Emperour thus writeth, it is not lawfull to saye that the flesh coupled to the Godhead could be subiect to the corruption at any time, and yt diuine soule to be holden with∣in the gates of hell: for he was not left in hell as S. Peter saith. For we may not saye that that nature which cannot be subdued by death, that is the deitye of the onely begotten Sonne should returne from those dennes vnder earth, nei∣ther should this thing haue any miracle, vnlesse the Sonne of God by the efficacy and nature of the diuinity had tarri∣ed in hell fulfilling all things marueilouslye and aboue the reach of reason, and working in all things (for God is aboue measure, place, circumscription and magnitude) he himselfe is comprehended of none. This also is wonderfull that his body rose againe being corruptible by nature, and his soule being vnited to the Godhead by the vertue and power of the Godhead did appeare to the soules that were there. In these places Ciril, Fulgentius, and Athanasius doo proue yt Christ had a true body and a true soule, and to proue that he was a true man in respect both of body and soule, they alleadge this text of the 16 Psalm out of S. Peter. If then Nephosh doth not signifie the soule, the reasons of those learned Fathers were of no validitye. And for this cause in the interlineall glosse you shall read this interpretation, animam quam ha∣heo vt verus homo. My soule which I haue as a true man.
And thus M. Hutchinson in his most learned woork of the Image of God, vseth this Scripture against the Arrians, to proue that Christ had a true soule. As then Athanasius, Epiphanius, Fulgentius, and Hutchinson with all the rest of the auntient fathers doo vnderstand Nephesh heer to be the Soule, euen so doo I with them, séeing no reason why I should beléeue otherwise. Peter Martyr in the 1. Cor. 15.Petrus Mar tir in 1. Cor 15. teacheth vs a doubtfull place of Scripture must be interpre∣ted: First saith he, it must be conferred with the like places of Scripture: Secondly we must sée what the Fathers e∣specially of the Gréek Church, which day and night did ex∣ercise this book of God in their hands and conferred it with all the books they could, doo write of it. So haue I doone in handling this place: First I haue proued by the woord of God that Nephesh signifieth ye soule seperate from the body: Secondly by the Gréeke Fathers, who translated it Mat. 10. 24. which signifieth the soule. Mat. 10. 28. Feare ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soule: but feare him that hath power to cast both bodye and soule into hell, As Nephesh signifieth the soule, so Sheol doth in the 16. Psalme signifie Hell: this phrase of ScripturePsal. 86. 13. is in other Psalmes as in the 86. 13. For thy mercye is great towards me, and thou hast deliuered my SoulePsal. 9. 17. from the nethermost hell, and in the 9. Psalme verse. 17. The wicked shal be turned into hell, and al the peo∣ple that forget God. So in Deut. 32. 22. Iob. 21. 13. Psal. 30. 4. 54. 16, 138. 8. Esa. 5. 14. Ose. 13. 14. Habac. 2. 5. Mat. 11. 23. In these and many other places of Scripture it can not be denyed but Sheol signifieth hell, and so doth it in this place, as by Gods grace I wil proue. First Sheol com ming of Nephesh which is to ask, signifieth such a place as ne uer is satisfied, but alwaies asketh, and this is most properly hel, which albeit it hath receiued infinite soules, yetas it is in ye 5. of Esay, His mouth is alwaies open and gapeth for more. Secondly it is translated by the Septuaginta , which woord fignifieth in the Scriptures hell alwaies and
neuer the graue, as yon may sée Mat. 11. 23. Luke. 16. 23. Apoc. 1. 18. 6. 8. 20. 13. 14. And therefore to translate  a graue, which signifieth a place where nothing can be séene, is a forced and false translation, for sith the holye Ghost doth vse it alwaies for hell, I meruaile how any man dareth to translate it graue. Theophilact translateth itTheophi∣lact. in act. . thus, Non derelinques animam meam apud orcum, Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, vsing the woord orcus, which can not be aptlye applyed to the graue. Draconites thus, Non tu derelinques animam meam apud tartarum, Thou,Draconit in ps. 16. shalt not leaue my Soule in hell, vsing the woord tartarus which is a proper woord for hell, and not for the graue. Po∣meranus, Westmerus, Lucas Lossius on the 16. Psalme, and Vrbanus Rhegius in his catechisme, all which were singuler learned Ministers in the Churches of Germany, are of this iudgement also, and therefore it is vntrue that all the reformed Churches doo deny the presentiall descending of Christ into hell, as appeareth by these testimonies, and shall more largely and euidently appear by that which followeth. Aepinus superintendent of Hambrough, being called gene∣rallyAepinus in psal. 16. for his incomparable knowledge in holy write the Fa∣ther of diuinity, writing on the 16. Psalme, thus reproueth them that translate Sheol to be the graue: that the wicked Iewes the enemies of Christ and his religion, might ouer∣throwe the article of our faith concerning the resurrection of Christ and his descending into hell, and that they might take away the comfort which the church hath by Christs resur∣rection and his descending into hell, the Rabbins doo turn for soule, life: and for hel, the graue. Here we learne who first deuised this translation, that is the Rabbins the speciall e∣nemies of Christ and christian religion: why did they it? to take away the comfort which cōmeth to vs by Christs des∣cending into hell. Felinus a learned man in the tungs wri∣tingFelinus in Psal. 16. on the 16. Psalme vseth these woords, our faith hath that Christ went into hell indéed, and that he dyed and was buried, but neither his soule was left in hell, neither his body
was so detained in the graue, that it could corrupt. To con∣firme this truth when this place of this present Psalme is brought, as Peter and Paul brought it to proue the resur∣rection, the Iewes mocke vs and say that héer Dauid pray∣eth that he might be kept of the Lord, whom he had set be∣fore him to be worshipped and in whom only he hoped, that he might not goe downe into the sepulchre, By this learned mans iudgement also it appeareth, that the Iewes translate Sheol to be a graue for the ouerthrowe of Christs resurrecti∣on. But because the Iewes doo mock vs for this translation of Sheol into hell, we ought not to leaue it, but rather to cleaue more stedfastly vnto it. And for this cause the afore∣named Aepinus thus writeth on the 16. Psalme: some Di∣uines there are louing ouermuch Iewish fables, doo embrace this translation (of Sheol into a graue) and by their own foo∣lishnes confirme the dreames of the Iewes & encrease their error, and doo make the article of descending into hell suspec∣ted to the vnskilfull and weaker sort of people. This then is the opinion of this reuerend man, that whosoeuer vseth this translation, as he discourageth the ignorant and weak from beléeuing, so he encreseth the old errour of the hardned Iew. Further as the same Author noteth, it is more safe to tran∣slate hell for Sheol then graue. First because a soule can not be laide in a graue but a body: secondly because Peter and Paul haue so translated it, whose authoritye we ough t to reckon to be holy and inuiolable, and therfore we ought not easily to shrink away from it: thirdly because two great er∣rors doo follow it, the one that the soule may be buried, the other that we maintain the interpretation of the Rabbins. the enemies of the truth. Those learned men worthy of e∣ternall memory, which compiled the Centuries, proue that Peter and Paul did so translate Sheol Cent. 1. li. 2. cap. 4. De doctrina, de inferno seu loco damnatorum, inferni  ap∣pellationem Petrus & alij Apostoli vsurpant, allegantes dic∣tum psalmi, non derelinques animam meam in inferno: & postea non derelicta est in inferno: Peter and other ye Apo∣stles
doo translate  hell, alleadging the 16. Psalme Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, and afterwards he was not left in hell. Becon in the Sick mans salue Fol. 250. vseth these spéeches, Christ after the death of the body went down in his soule to hell, as it cléerely appéereth by the ScripturesFulgent ad Thrasy: li. 3. cap. 8. quoting the 16. Psalme and other places. Fulgentius in his 8. Chapter to Thrasimund thus witnesseth farther, it re∣mained for the full effecting of our redemption, that man as∣sumpted to God should descend thither, whither man being seperate from God by the desert of sinne had fallen, that is to hell, where the soule of the sinner was wont to be punished, and to the graue where the flesh of the sinner was wonte to be corrupted: and that so notwithstanding, as neither his flesh could corrupt in the graue, neither his Soule could be tormented in the sorrowes of hell: for his soule being free from sinne was not to be subiected to punishment, and his flesh being without sinne, corruption ought not to destroye it. Mark the reason of this learned Father: for because man sinning had deserued to be deuided, because he was willing by the gilt of transgression to be deuided from God (which can not be denyed) therfore it came to passe that the death of the sinner did produce sinfull flesh to be corrupted in ye graue, and did mancipate the soule to be tormented in hell: but that the sinner might be fréed by a frée gift, it came to passe that the sonne of God did suffer vniustlye of sinners the death of the body, which man being a sinner had suffered iustly of the iust God, and that his flesh should go downe so farre as slesh wrapt in sinne should come, and that the Soule of the Sa∣uiour should descend into hell where the soule of the sinner was to be tormented. Thus the holye Martirs in times past thought of this matter, and if they had liued in these daies to sée so great multitudes which professe the faith, to deny it after a sorte; no doubt they would haue writen more earnestly against them. But sith their woorkes be extant, I hope they that deny this manner of descending, wil answere their reasons, which in my iudgemēt were framed and pen∣ned
by the holye Ghost. Wherefore sith Athanasius, Epi∣phanius, Ciril, Aepinus, Pomeranus, Vrbanus Rhegius, Lucas Lossius, Beecon, Hutchinson and many others, some Gréek, some Latin, some olde, some new writers, but especiallye Peter and Paul themselues the pillers of the Church, haue thus translated Sheol to be hell, my resolution in this point is with Aepinus, let him that will hold this o∣pinion (that Sheol signifieth the graue) I like not of it, it is grounded vpon weak, doubtfull, vncertain & wrested proofes and coniectures: they that subscribe vnto it doo without iust and necessary proofes, rashly disagrée from the translation of our Psalter, from the plain woordes of the Apostles Créede, and from the consent of the olde Church, which alwaies be∣léeued that the bodye of Christ did thrée daies rest in the graue, and his soule did descend into hell. And this consent in this point of doctrine to be in the olde and pure Church doth M. Caluin on the 16. Psalme himselfe confesse, his woordesCal. in 16. Psalme. be these: I confesse (saith Caluin) that the olde Interpreters both Gréek and Latin haue drawen those woordes to ano∣ther meaning: that the soule of Christ was brought from hell, but it is better to tarry in the naturall simplicity of the wordes, that we be not mocked of the Iewes. For as much then as Caluin can not deny that all the olde Interpreters both Gréek and Latin haue consented in this pointe of doc∣trine, I meruaile that M, Caluin would draw it to a Iew∣ish interpretation. In the 10 of the Acts, ver. 43. Luke ma∣kethAct. 10. 43. this a strong argument to proue Christ to be the Saui∣our of the world, Because al the Prophets did witnes it. in like manner because all the Prophets and Interpreters in the pure Church haue concluded this doctrine to be true, I doubt not but this knot of vnity in verity was made by the God of peace and spirit of truth. Farther as Sheol signifieth the soule, and Sheol hell, so  or sanctum signifieth the body, as it may be proued out of the 1. of Luke. ver. 35. AndLuk. 1. 35. that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shal be cal∣led the Sonne of God And thus doth S. Augustine on August. in 16. Psalme
the 16. Psalme truelye vnderstand it; his enterpretation is this, neither shalt thou suffer my soule to be possessed in hell, neither shalt thou suffer my holy hody, whereby others areChrists bo∣dy is called holy one for 2. causes sanctified, to sée corruption. And the body of Christ is called holy for two causes, the one because sinne was neuer com∣mitted in it: the other because by it all others are sanctified. And this is made plaine also by the woord corruption, which can not haue relation but only to the body, for as a learned man saith, death is the seperation of the body from the soule, but corruption is a resolution of the members & other partes into the earth. So Iob vseth this woord in his 17. ChapterIob. 17. 14. ver. 14. I haue saide vnto corruption, thou art my Fa∣ther.Luther in Gen. ca. 21. Luther in the 2. Chapter of Genesis thus writeth: For this is singuler in Christ thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, neither shalt thou suffer thy holy one to sée corrupti∣on: for neither hell could holde his soule sleeping or resting, neither the graue his bodye, that it might corrupt as Mar∣tha said of Lazarus, Lord he stincketh, for he hath béen buri∣edAugust. in epist. 57. ad Dardan. foure dayes. The like hath S. Augustine in his 57. Epi∣stle ad Dardanum: that was spoken of his soule which came from hell so quickly, this of his body which could not corrupt by reason of his spéedy resurrection. Not vnlike hathErasm. in 2 Act. Erasmus on the 2. of the Acts, thus his body albeit it was laide in graue and was without life did not corrupt but God which can not lye, brought his soule from hell, and restored itAugust. in 85. Psalme. to the body. Wherfore thus I end with S. Augustine wri∣ting on the 85. Psalme: wherefore this is his voice in the Psalme not by any mans coniecture but by the exposition of the Apostle, thou shalt not leaue my soule in hel neither shalt thou suffer thy holy one to sée corruption. In this discourse by the woord of God and the auntient Fathers, I haue pro∣uedAbsurdities following the deniing of the des∣cendiug of Christ into hell. Nephesh to signifie ye soule seperate from the body, Sheol to signifie hell,  or sanctum to signifie the bodye, and why it is so vsed. Therefore they yt deny this place to proue the discending of Christ into hell, must néedes fall into these absurdeties. First that life or person must be in a graue, or
else a dead mans carkas must be accounted life or a person; both which are absurd in diuinity and philosophie. Secondly that the soule of man is in a graue and so buried, which pro∣ueth the Soule to be mortall. Thirdly that the Gréek word  is translated a graue which properly signifieth hell, and so occasion is giuen to the Atheists to think there is no hell: For  is compounded of the particle α & , be∣cause nothing in hell can be séene: and for this cause in the Euangelists Christ calieth hell vtter darknes. Fourthly we strengthen the error of the Iewes by following their in∣terpretation, which was deuised to take away the comfort of this article. Fiftly it maketh voide all the arguments of the Fathers against Arrius Appollinaris, and all other Here∣tiques, which denied Christ to haue a true soule. Lastlye it is an introduction to the error of the Saduces, which denye that there is any Angell, spirite, or any soule. For if there be any, then as Ciril noteth, it was necessarye that as he wasCiril. de ve∣ra fide ad Theodosin Imperato∣rem. ca. 12. in body and soule with them that then were liuing; so was it as necessary that his soule should be present among ye soules, to shew that he was a true man. The falsehoode of the ar∣gument of the aduersaries of this doctrine, is called fallatia compositionis, that is, when those thinges are ioyned toge∣ther, which ought to be sundered. For they that deny this place of the 16. Psalme to proue the descending of Christ in∣to hell, doo affirme animam & sanctum, soule and holy one, hell and corruption to be one, wheras they are diuers, as in parte I haue proued already, and shal (by Gods grace) proue more plainely out of the 2. chapter of the Acts, where Pe∣ter interpreteth this place in such wise, that credit must néeds be giuen vnto it of all Gods children. Peters Sermon is thus, Acts. 2. 29. 30. 31. Men and Brethren I may bold∣lyeAct. 2. 29. 30. 31. speake vnto you of the Patriarch Dauid, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remaineth till this day. Therefore seeing he was a Prophet and knew that God had sworne by an oathe, that of the fruite of his loynes he would raise vp Christ concerning the flesh
set him vpon his throne: hee knowing of this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soule was not left in hel, neither his flesh should see corruption: whichAugust. in Epist 75. ad Dardan. words S. Augustine in his 57. epistle ad Dardanum thus expoundeth: of the flesh of Christ that it was put into the Sepulchre the Gospell is manifest, but that his soule went down into hell, the doctrine of the Apostle proueth it: For blessed Peter doth proue this out of the Psalme where he sheweth it was foretolde of him, for why thou shalt notAugust in epist. 99. ad Enodi. leaue my Soule in Hell, neither shalt thou suffer thy holye one to sée corruption. And in his 99. Epistle ad Enodium, he hath these woords: quae ne quisquam aliter sapere auderet, in actibus Apostolorum Petrus exponit. Of which woords that any man should not be so bolde to thinke otherwise, Peter himself expoundeth them: that is Nephesh, . 1. soule, and Sheol  that is hell, and holy one, flesh.Rabbi Le∣baurish. Which interpretation who so dooth peruerte, no doubt hee peruerteth the meaning of the holy Ghost. Rabbi Lebau∣rish thus openeth this text: after that Peter declared that this could not be spoken of Dauid himself, for that his graue remained among them, and his body suffereth corruption; he addeth, for as much as Dauid was a prophet, and did know that God sware vnto him, that Christ should come of the fruit of his loynes touching the flesh; he spake euidently of the resurrection of Christ, because his soule should not be left in hell, nor his flesh sée corruption: you sée how S. Peter applyeth this sentence of the Prophet to set foorth Christ his resurrection, and in stead of this woord sanctum eius, his ho∣ly one, S. Peter hath carnem eius, his flesh, ver. 31. is not resurrection contrary to death? and what thing is death but the seperation of the body and the soule? and what other thing then can resurrection be, but a renuing and knitting to gether againe of the bodye and the soule. S. Peter applying this sentence to the resurrection of Christ, doth as it were point out with his finger to the places from whence these two partes seuered must be brought againe, namelye the soule from hel, for hel could not holde it, and the bodye from
the graue that it should not corrupt. Here it is opened that death is a seperation of the body and the soule, and that the resurrection is a knitting of both partes together: and be∣cause Christ was a true man, and had in him both a very body and a true soule. S. Peter sheweth that these two partes were not onely diuided, but also where they were du∣ring the time of their seperation, and that miraculously nei∣ther the flesh did corrupt in the graue, as all other mens doo; nor the soule was left in hell, as the sinners soules were. For albeit he was accounted amongst sinners, yet he was none. Therefore wonderfully he came from the graue & from hell: for as euery article of our faith is an vnsearchable misterie, so is this. It is miraculous that the world was made of no∣thing, that Christ was conceiued by the holy Ghoste, that hée was borne of a virgin, that hée should suffer and dye for the sinnes of the whole world, and that at his death ye sunne should be abashed, the earth tremble, the flints cleue asimder, and the valle of the Temple rent: so in his resurrection the rolling away of the stone, the appearing of the Angell, the arising of many of the dead, and especiallye the rising of Christ himselfe so mightily, naturally, spéedily, and happily, was most wonderfull: so his ascending into Heauen in a cloud was in like manner to be meruailed at, and likewise his comming into indgement shal be most wonderful: in like sorte his buriall and going downe to hell are wonderfullCiril. de ve∣ra fide ad Theod. things as Cirill noteth before, whose woords are these nei∣ther should this thing haue had any miracle, vnlesse ye sonne of God by the efficacy and nature of the diuinity had tarried in hell, fulfilling all things merueilously & aboue the reach of reason, in his treatise of ye right faith to Theodosius▪ S. Au∣gustine in his book of the essence of the diuinity thus saith,August de essentia di∣uinitatis. hée came from heauen into ye Uirgins wombe, from the vir∣gins wombe, as he was borne, he was laid in a maunger, af∣ter he had fulfilled all things, for the which being sent by his father he came, he was fastened vnto the wood of the crosse; but being taken downe from the crosse, according to the flesh hee was buried, but according to the Soule he descen∣ded
into hell; and the third day by the power of his diuinitye he raised his flesh out of the sepulchre, and the 40. daye after his resurrection he ascended into heauen the Apostles behol∣ding him. For my parte therefore I admit the counsaile of Ambrose, who willeth vs in matters of faith to beléeue the poore Fishermen Peter and his fellowes, rather then the subtile Sophisters, because then Peter affirmeth in the 2. chapter of the Acts, that neither his soule was left in hell, neither his flesh did sée corruption; it is therefore manifest that these two partes flesh and soule are not one, as I saide before. These 3. things then would I craue of the aduersa∣ries of this doctrine: the one where they finde in the woord of God the coniunction nec to be a coniunction that coupleth and interpreteth: secondly where they finde in the woord of God  for a graue: thirdlye that those thinges which are seperated by nec the coniunction, are one. Lylly in his Latin grammar handling the vse of coniunions, hath thus taught: some are coniunctions copulatiue, as et, ac, que, atque, quo∣que, etiam, item, itidem, cum, & tum, & tum doubled: hither pertaine they which are contrary to these, nec, neque, neu, neue, now if nec doo not couple: but as Lylly saith is cleare contrary, then it must néeds come to passe, that in ye 2. of the Acts, and 16. Psalme, soule and holy one are diuers things, and that héer is a plain demonstration not onely of ye sepera∣tion of both parts of ye humanity, but also of the knitting to∣gether of the same. In the 13. of the Acts ver. 27. It isAct. 13. 17. written that they Knew him not, albeit the wordes of the prophet were read euery day. So now albeit we often read these words, yet we doo not vnderstand thē, and the rea∣son is giuen after in the 14. verse: Beholde you despisers and wonder & vanish away, for I work a worke in your dayes, a work yt ye shal not beleeue, though a man would declare it. So albeit the Apostles proue manifestly the re∣surrection of the soule and body of Christ, yet will not they beléeue that read the Scriptures very often; but denye the descending of Christs soule, and so likewise his resurrection:
and by this meanes make of none effect those Scriptures, which proue there must be a two folde resurrection in vs, as there was in Christ, a resurrection of the soule and of theCol. 3. 1. body. In the 3. of the Colossians, ver. 1. S. Paul vseth these words: If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of the Father. Euen (as saith the Apostle) Christ his soule did arise aswel as his body, so must you haue the resurrection of your soule, aswell as the resurrection of your bodye. And thereupon diuers learned men interpreting this parcell of Scripture, haue noted that there is a two folde resurrection in vs, of soule & of body, and that our bodies shall neuer arise to glory, vnles our soules doo first arise from sinne to grace.Hugo Car∣dinalis in col. 3. And therefore this is a generall distinction in learned wri∣ters, when they open this text of Scripture, that there is a double resurrection, of our soules, and bodies: the resurrecti∣on of our soules is by the humble comming of Christ: of our bodies by his glorious comming. And this is made manifest also in diuers other such like places of Scripture. In the 6. chapter of the Romans ver. 5. S. Paul thus writeth, ForRom. 6. 5. if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, euen so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection. Where the Apostle thus exhorteth vs, that euen as ye death of Christ teacheth vs to seperate our selues both in body and soule from sinne; so the resurrection of Christ doth teach vs to arise from sinne both in soule and body. By these places of Scripture it is to be considered, that as Christ did arise both in soule and body, so must we: and therfore as Christs resur∣rection is not a full resurrection, vnlesse both partes did arise (for otherwise he did but arise in body as we doo) so these ex∣hortations grounded vpon that doctrine are to no purpose, vnlesse Christs soule did arise from hell, aswell as his bodye from the graue: and last of all there is no more miracle in the buriall of Christ, then in any other godly mans: which as I proued before ought to be in all the personall actions that Christ wrought for our saluation. Thus much of the
primitiue place in the 16. Psalme, as also of the deriuatiue place in the 2. of the Acts, wherby I hope I haue sufficient∣ly proued that Christs soule descended into hell. But yet for a farther proofe I thought it not vnfit to adde these that fol∣lowe:Phil. 2. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 13. 1 namelye in the 2. Chapter to the Phillippians, the 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. verses, Let the same minde be in you which was in Christ Iesus, who being in the forme of God, thought it no robberye to be equall with God, but hee made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke on him the forme of a seruant, and was made like vnto men, and was found in shape as a man, hee humbled himself and became obedient vnto the death, euen vnto the death of the crosse: wherefore God hath also highly exalted him, and giuen him a name aboue euery name, that at the name of Iesus euery knee shuld bow, both of things in heauen, things in earth, and things vnder the earth. In which place this I conceiue, yt Christs death was manifested in heauen, in earth, and in hell: and that the very damned spirits did confesse to the glory of God the Father, that Iesus Christ was Lord both of heauen and the Angels, of earth and of them that dwell therein, and of hell and the diuels. But some will say, how is it possible thatOb. the spirits which are damned should confesse Christ. To thisSol. I answere, there is the cōfession of our faith and of our sins, which is proper only to the elect: there is an other confessi∣on which is called the confession of experience, which is in the wicked and the damned. In the 5. of Marke the legionsMark. 5-7. of diuels thus cry in ye 7. ver. What haue I to do with thee Iesus the sonne of the most high God? Where we sée the diuel is constrained to confesse Jesus Christ, and yet dooth rysist him. And in the 8. of Mathew the 29. verse, the diuelsMat. 8. 29. cry, Iesus thou Sonne of God what haue we to do with thee? art thou come hither to torment vs before the time? By which scriptures we learne that the diuels by ex∣perience of the maiestie and authoritie of the Sonne of God doo confesse him to haue all power, and as ouer these, so ouer
all hellish spirits: & therfore did manifest his death by shew∣ing the presence of his soule in hell. So Father DamasceneDamas.interpreteth this place of Scripture, the soule of Christ dei∣fied, descended into hell; so that as to thē which are in earth, there arose the Sonne of righteousnes: so likewise to them which were vnder earth in darkenes and in the shadowe of death a light did appeare: and as in earth he preached peace, remission to the captiues, sight to the blinde, and was the cause of saluation to thē that did beléeue, and did vpbraid and reproue the vnbeléeuers of infidelitye: so did he vpbraide them that are in hell, that euery knée may be bowed vntoRob. Samu el Martir. him both in heauen, earth, and in hel. Robert Samuel Mar∣tir is of this iudgement, who giuing an account of his faith in the 2. volume of the monuments of Martirs, Fol. 1206. hath left this testimony: the same Christ went down to the hels, and truely rose again ye third day and ascended into the heauens that he might there still raigne, and haue dominion ouer al creatures: this then is one end of christs going down into hel, that ye infernall spirits might be subiected to him, andCol. 2. 14. 15. that they might confesse him to be the Sonne of God to their endles shaine, and euerlasting glory of God the father. The like proofe to this is in the Epistle to the Collossians 2 chapter, 14. and 15. verses, He hath taken away the hand writing of ordinances which was against vs, which was contrary to vs, he euen took it out of the way, and faste∣ned it to the crosse, and hath spoyled the principalityes and the powers, and he hath made a shew of them open∣ly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his own person. I translate  in himself, so doth Hierome, Erasmus, Ste∣phanus, Pellicanus, Pagninus, Iunius & Tremellius, and M. Foxe with many other learned men so translate it: yet I sée it otherwise translated in some Bibles now a daies, which gréeueth me, for it is a false translation, as euery lear∣ned man knoweth. For in the Gréek it is the Masculine genMuscul. der, and they translate it in Latin in ye feminine gender, whō Musculus a very good & learned man thus reproueth: there
be some saith he referre it to  and turne it in Illa, these are perswaded it is an incommodity, if it be saide that Christ did triumph ouer the principalities and powers; But if all these things be attributed to God the Father, that hée did them with Christ and in Christ, according to the order of all things going before, we may truely read héere, triumphing ouer them in his own person. And for this cause many lear∣ned men doo proue the descending of Christ into hell by thisEuseb. de re sur. Christi. place. Eusebius writing of the resurrection of our Sauiour, thus saith: we must know that in the selfe same houre wher∣in our Sauiour bowing his head gaue vp the ghoste, his bo∣dy being left in the graue, his soule with the dignitye went down to spoyle hell. Mollerus a learned Minister of Ger∣many,Mollet. in psal. 16. in his commentaries on the 16. Psalm, hath the like Christ would shew his victory ouer the diuels in a certaine sorte, and would strike perpetuall terrors into them, and take away from vs the feare of his tiranny. To this agrée∣ethMusc. in psal. 68. Musculus on the 68. Psalm: This God which was in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe in Christ, First des∣descended into the lower partes of the earth, then he led cap∣tiuity captiue, and not only we are deliuered from the cap∣tiuity of Satan, sinne and damnation: but also Christ tri∣umphing ouer them as tirants, hath ascended aboue all hea∣uens to fulfill all things. Uery aptly likewise doth Hemin∣giusHeming. expound this place: as by his death he conflicted with his enemy on the crosse, so by his glorious descending into hell, resurrection and ascention he triumphed, as it is Ephes. 4. leauing his crosse lift vp as a monument of his victorye. This then is an other end of Christs descending into hell, to triumph ouer the diuell, to strike perpetuall terrors into thē, and to deliuer vs from the feare of their tiranny. I end ther∣foreFulg. ad Thrasim. li. 3. cap. 8. with this worthy saying of Fulgentius to Thrasy∣munde in his 8. chapter, the true humanity of the sonne of God, neither was wholy in the sepulchre, neither wholy in hell; but in the Sepulchre he lay dead according to his true flesh, but in his soule he descended into hell. In his soule he
returned from hell to the slesh which lay in the sepulchre, but in respect of his diuinity, he neither is holden in place nor ly∣mited by bond: he was wholy in the graue with his flesh, wholy in hell with his soule; and by this meanes was fully euery where Christ, because God was not seperated from the humanity which he had assumpted, which was both in soule in hell, that from hell his soule might return a conque∣resse: and was with his flesh that by reason of his spéedy re∣surrection it might not be corrupted. Therefore the sonne of God took all man with all his infirmities without sinne for vs, and the same Christ was giuen wholy for vs: in respect of his flesh he was dead, but in respect of his soule he descen∣ded into Hell, It is not vnknowne therefore that Eusebius, Fulgentius, Mollerus, Musculus, Hemingius, with many others before by me named, being accompted lightes of the world in their time, haue confirmed this article of our faith, by this Scripture: which thing when we doo likewise, we are reckoned to be deceiuers. But God who knoweth our harts and intent, knoweth that both by praier and study we trauell to know the truth in this controuersie, and we are assured by his holy and eternall woord we stand therein. An other place we haue in Scripture to confirme our position, in the Epistle to the Ephes. 4. verse. 9. 10. Now in that heEph. 4. 9. 10 ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lowest partes of the earth? he that descended is e∣uen the same that ascended farre aboue all heauens, that he might fulfil all things. For the better vnderstanding of this place, you must note that in the Hebrew tung there are 7. names of Hell, Scheol, Auaddon, Bor Schachath, Bor Scheon, Tit Haijáuen, Thalmáueth, Erets Tachtiioth, Erets Tachtiioth then signifying the lowest partes of the earth, sith it is an appellation for hell, this place must néedes proue manifestly the descending of Christ into hell. For as ascend and descend are cōtrary, so are heauen and the lowest partes of the earth. I will therfore procéede (by Gods grace) in the expounding of this place, as I haue doon in the rest. First I
wil proue by conference of Scriptures, that the lowest partsPsal. 53. 9. of the earth signifieth hell. In the 63. Psalme and 9. verse, the Prophet thus writeth: Therfore they that seeke my soule to destroye it, shall goe into the lowest partes ofEzek, 31. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. the earth. And in Ezekiel 31. verse 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. the Prophet prophecying the destruction of the Assirians saith, They shall goe down into hell, which he calleth in ye chapter 3. times Ercts tachtiioth, that is the lower partes of ye earth. The like manner of spéech is in the praier of Manasses ver.Orat Ma∣nas. ver. 12. 12. O Lord condemn me not by reseruing euil for me, neither condemne me into the lower parts of the earth.Ambro, in epist. ad E∣phe. cap. 4. And so is this place vnderstood by Ambrose writing on the same place, in his exposition of the 4. chapter of the Ephesi∣ans: this man therefore comming downe from heauen into the earth, was borne a man: afterward he died and descen∣ded into hell, from whence rising the third day, he ascended into heauen before all mortall men aboue all heauens, that he might shew death to be vanquished to euery creature. SoAugust. in lib. 5. de trinitate. cap. 19. Chrisost. in cap. 4. ad Ephe. Athanasi. ibidem. doth Augustine interpret this place in his 15. booke of the Trinity and 19. chapter; and Chrisostom on the 4. chap∣ter of the Ephesians. And Athanasius expounding this par∣cell of Scripture, thus explaineth the Apostles meaning: in∣to what place did he descend? into hell truely, which he cal∣leth, according to the common opinion of men, the lowest partes of the earte. For as Chrisostome saith, he went to the partes of the earth, beyond which was nothing lower: and from thence he ascended into the heauens, then ye which nothing is higher. And in hell as he bound the diuell with the bandes of his iustice and power, that he should not heraf∣ter hurt any of his members: so from heauen he giueth his Saints giftes, that they may resist the diuell, and tread him vnder their féet. Those men of worthy memory which comCent. ia. li 2. ca. 4. Hiero in ca. 4. ad Ephe. posed the centuries doo auouch ye in fimae partes terrae, that is, the lowest partes of the earth do signifie hel, and proue it out of this text, Ephes. 4. And for this cause Hierome in this place thus hath concluded, and so doo I with Hierome: that
hell is vnder the earth no man doubteth, for he that descen∣ded in soule into hell, ascended with body and soule into hea∣nen. For as much then as the learned and godly Rabbins, the Fathers both Gréeke and Latin, haue consented that these woords doo signifie hell, and the circumstances of the text doo proue the same: it must néeds be confessed of all god∣ly men, that this place dooth proue this article of our faith strongly, and no refutation béerof can be made by any deuise of man. For as ascend and descend are contrary, so hell and heauen are contrary, and Christ did begin his triumph in hell, make shew of it in earth, and now hauing all power in heauen, earth and hell, is set down on the right hand of God not only as a valiant conquerour that hath made his ene∣mies his footstoole, but also as a terrible iudge that hath con∣demned ye diuels, and as a glorious King that ruleth all crea∣tures for euer. If any man will not beléeue S. Hierome that hell is beneath, let him consider these 2. Scriptures, the 86. Psal. ver. 13. and Pro. 15. ver. 24. For great is thyPsal. 6. 13. Pro. i. 24. mercy towards me, and thou hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost hell. The Hebrew phrase is Scheol Tachtiioth. The other place is; The way of life is on high to the prudent, to auoid from hell beneath. Now let vs examine the place of S. Peter, who in his first Epistle and 3. chapter, the 18. 19. and 20. verses saith,1. Pet. 3. 18. 19 20. It is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well dooing, then for ill dooing: for as much as Christ hath once suffered for sinnes, the iust for the vniust, to bring vs to God, and was killed as pertaining to the flesh, but was quickened in the spirite: in which spirit he also went and preached to the spirites that were in pri∣son: which sometime had been disobedient, when the long suffering of God was once looked for in the dayes of Noah, while the arke was a preparing, wherein a few, that is to say, 8. soules were saued by the water. For the better vnderstanding of this place. because the woord spi∣rite is diuerslye taken in the woord of God, I will first set
downe the diuerse acceptation of the woorde spirite, and af∣terward by many vncontrollable reasons out of the text, I will by Gods assistance confirme my assertion, that Christ in soule descended into hell. They that know not the signi∣fication of the woord spirite, are often deceiued, for somtimes1. Cor. 5. 3. it signifieth the wil and authority of a man, as in the 1. Cor. 5 ver. 3. I truly as absent in body, but present in spirit, &c.1. Ioh. 4. 5. Sometimes it is taken for doctors & Prophets, 1. Ioh. 4. 5. Proue the spirits whether they are of God or no? Some∣timesLuk 24. 37. for a Ghoast, Luke 24. 37. And they supposed that they had seene a Spirite. Sometime for winde or breath,Ioh. 3. 8. as Ioh. 3. 8. the winde bloweth where it will. Sometime for a voice or woord, 1. Cor. 84. 15. I wil pray with the spi∣rit,1 Cor. 14. 1 I will pray with the vnderstanding. Sometime for the2 Cor. 3. 17 life of the Lawe, 2. Cor. 3. 17. Now the Lord is the life. Sometimes it is taken for a kinde of deceipte, whereby any2 Thes. 2. . pretendeth to haue a spirite of reuelation. 2. Thes. 2. 2. Be ye not troubled neither by spirite, neither by word, norMiche. 2. 11 Psal. 104. 29 Pro. 25. 2. by letter. So is it taken in Micheas 2. 11. Sometimes it is taken for the animal life, Psalm. 104. 29. If thou take a∣way their spirite they dye. Sometime for wrath. Pro. 25. and last verse. A man that refraineth not his anger, is like a Cittie which is broken down and without wals, Som∣times for the gifts of the spirit, first for ioy in the holy ghost. Ephe. 5. 18. But be ye filled with the spirite. Secondly for spirituall vnderstanding. 1. Thes. 5. 23. I pray God that1 Thes. 5. 23 your whole spirite soule and body may be kept blame∣les vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. So it is vsed Ephe. 2. 22. Thirdly it is vsed for seruencye of zeale, se∣dulityEphe. 2. 22. 1 Tim. 4. 12 and constancy. 1. Timo. 4. 12. But be thou an en∣sample in word, in cōuersation, in loue, in spirit. Fourth∣ly it is taken for the true doctrine of the Gospell which wor∣keth effectually in our harts by the spirit. 2. Cor. 3. 6. which2. Cor. 36. hath made vs fit Ministers of the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. Where the letter signifieth the vtter preaching which toucheth not the hart. Fiftly for a spi∣rituall
life. Gal. 6. 8. He that soweth in the spirit, shall inGal. 6. 8. the spirit reap eternall life. Sixtly it is taken for prophecy. 1. Thes. 5. 19. quench not the spirit. Which he interpre∣teth1. The. 5. 19 in the verse following, despise not prophecying. It signi∣fieth sometime a thing of nothing. Esa. 26. 18. We haueEsa: 26. 18. conceiued, we haue borne in paine, as though we should haue brought forth winde. Sometime for euery creature that hath breath, Psal. 150. and last verse. Let euery thingPsal. 150. 6. that hath breath praise the Lord. Sometime it signifiethEphe. 4. 4. the diuine or immortal essence of ye soule, Eph. 4. 4. There isAct. 7 59. Ioh 4. 24. one spirite: & Acts 7. ver. 59. Stephen saith, Lord Iesus re∣ceiue my soul. Somtime it signifieth God, Ioh. 4. 24. God is a spirit. And so the woord spirit is common to the whole 3. persons. Sometimè it signifieth the holy Ghoste, the 3. per∣son in Trinity, wherunto is alwaies put the Gréeke article.Matth. 4. 5. Mark 1. 12. Luke 4. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Act. 8. 29. Mat. 4. 5. Mar. 1. 12. Luc. 4. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Act. 8. 29. Be∣cause then the word hath so many significations, we must proue by the circumstances of ye text, what is héer his proper meaning. They that say that by this place is meant Christs preaching in the spirit in ye time of Noah, are many waies cléerely confuted. First because that mortificatus and viuifi∣catus two contrary particles of one tense are attributed to Christ, so that Christ being dead was aliue, and that at one time, and in respect of his humanity. Secondlye he sheweth how he was dead, and how he was aliue, by putting to mor∣tificatus carne, he was killed in the flesh, and viuificatus spi∣ritu, he was quickned in the spirit or in the soule: for to sayAug. epist. 99. the Godhead was quickned is a grosse error. For as Au∣gustine saith in his 99. Epistle, it is very euident that the Lord killed as concerning the flesh went into hell. Thirdly in his soule while he was yet dead in the bodye, hée went downe into hell, the Gréek woord is  which woord must néeds be vnderstood of the soule of Christ, because it is a motion from vs to another place, and not of the Godhead, and therfore is vsed again in ye 22. verse,  he went into heauen: and thus proueth he the death of
Christ, in the 18. verse, the descending of Christ into hell in the 19. verse, his resurrection in the 21. verse, and his ascen∣ding into heauen in the last verse. Fourthly, the Scripture doth straightlye ioyne together the passion of Christ with this perfection and preaching, so that Christ went immedi∣atly after his passion to preach to the spirits. Neither dooth he deuide them, as though now he did suffer & preach long before: for the resurrection and ascension héer spoken of suc∣céeded this passion, so did this iourney and going into Hell. Fiftly the Scripture doth plainely attribute the preaching of Noah properly to the holy Ghoste, & not to ye second person,Gen. 6. 3. as it appeareth Gen. 6. 3. My spirit shall not alway striue with man. As all the scripture doth ascribe the doctrine and ministry of preaching to the 3. person, and that the 3. per∣son receiueth it of Christ, & doth speak by the mouth of holy Doctors, inspireth the scripture, and reproueth the world or comforteth. Sixtly if the woord spirit must be vnderstoode of God héere, of whom Christ is quickned as some would haue it, it must néedes also be vnderstood of the first person that he preached in hell, for the scripture attributeth the resurrection of Christ to the Father. Last of all that we heap not to ma∣nye thinges in an euident matter, the participle , which were disobedient, doth fignifie and plainely shew this inobedience to be long before this preaching: so also the woord  in times past and all the annotation of time fol∣lowing, determining & circumscribing the woord  that is, which were disobedient, dooth altogither seperate the time of their incredulitye from the time of this iourneye and preaching. For if the meaning of the ene∣mies of this doctrine were true, Peter would haue ioyned this annotation of time which the iourney and preaching of Christ: and would haue said being quickned in spirit, in the which in times past, when the patience of God was looked for, in the daies of Noah when the arke was a preparing, he went and preached to the spirites now holden in prison. But Peter ioyneth the time of disobedience not with the iourney
or preaching of Christ, but with the first incredulitye and preaching of Noah: and on the other side knitteth together the prison with this iourney and preaching: which if he would haue disioyned he would haue said to the spirits which are now in prison, but he simply said, he went and preached to the spirits in prison, that is, which thē were in prison, whē he went and preached vnto them. This also may be added, that it is to no purpose to make mention of a prison, or to name them the vnbeléeuing spirits or soules of ye olde world; for Noah preached not to spirits or soules only. but to whole and beléeuing men, & the woord  cannot be taken for men endewed with bodies, for Christ prouing his resurrecti∣on vseth these woords, Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands andLuk. 24. 39. my feet, for it is I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me haue. It was no néed also to shew where these vnbeléeuers are, or be holden, for this both maketh nothing to the matter, and also would be vnderstood he holding his peace: vnlesse it was the pur∣pose of the Apostle to shew that ye soule of Christ went down to this prison, that is to hell: and so sheweth first that death parted them, as in the 2. of the Acts. Secondly that the bo∣dyAct. 2. was in the graue, and the soule was in hell. Thirdly that it was not in hell idle, but did manifest his death to them which beléeued it to be but a fable, to reproue their increduli∣tie, and to captiue them that we should not feare them. Fourthlye he did rise againe triumphing ouer them in his owne person. Lastly he did ascend into heauen, and there sitteth Lord of heauen and of the Angels, of earth and of the inhabitantes, of hell, and of the very diuels. For the diuels are of him imprisoned and chayned, that they can doo no more then hee permitteth them. Farther where as some doo affirme, that there could be no preaching in hell, because there is no conuersion: to this I answere, that this preaching was not vocal but real, neither was there in this preaching edification, exhortation, or consolati∣on; but as it is saide before of Damascene, a redargution
or vpbrayding of those vnbeléeuing soules in this or the like manner: beholde ye vnfaithfull and broodes of the serpent, how in season and out of season my eight preacher of frée righteousues and other the Patriarkes haue often preached vnto you, that there should come a blessed séed of the woman according to ye promise made vnto Adam, that both should iustifie the beléeuers, deliuer and saue them from the corpo∣rall and spirituall deluge, and also that he should destroye the serpent with the vnbeléeuing séed for euer: but to you being incredulous that promise was a fable. But now beholde (O ye wretches) me to be exhibited of the true God, and by my passion, the head of Satan and his vnbeléeuing séede is bro∣ken, and the worlde is ouercome; and on the other side you shall be forced to know by liuely experience, that the faithful are saued. And to conclude, you now doo beholde me the con∣queronr of Satan and his members against your will, and to your great sorrow in soule, and shall sée me héereafter in the last iudgement both in body and soule. And this manner of spéech is vsed in the Scripture, that a verball preaching isHeb. 11. 4. put for the reall opperation of a thing: so Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered vnto God a better sacrifice then Ca∣in, by the which he obtained witnes that he was righte∣ous. God testifying of his gifts; by which faith he beingGen. 4. 4. dead yet speaketh. So Gen. 4. 4. God saith vnto Cain, the voice of thy brothers bloud cryeth vnto me out of the earth. Abels bloud is saide to cry, while truely by his example of true faith and of the doctrine of saluation, and of martirdome, yet dayly not verbally but really and effecttu∣ally by speaking he teacheth. Last of al, the word prison sig∣nifieth hell, as we may sée in the names of hell, Cent. 1. li, 2.Cent. 1. li. 2 ca 4. ca. 4. Now let vs sée the iudgement of the auntient and learned Fathers on this point, and especiallye of the GréekeAthanasius ad Epictet. Episcop. co∣rinth. Fathers. Athanasius woords to Epictetus Bishop of Co∣rinth, are cited by Epiphanius in the heresie of the Dime∣rites, haer. 77. The bodye of Christ was laide in the graue, when he went to preach to the spirits that were in Prison,
as Peter saith, & Athanasius in his book of the incarnationAthanas. de incarnat. verbi. of the world hath thus written. In the death of Christ, his body being carried into the graue, his soule went into hell, the places being far a sunder: and a little after he saieth, for death could not preuaile on his humaine soule to tye him there, neither corruption by tiranny inuading his bodye could shew his force on him to putrefaction, as thinges not wel séene vnto. For to think so of him were a wicked thing; and euen as Adam had a double punishment inflicted on him for his disobedience, the one was on his body, earth thou art and to earth thou shalt returne again: and so by this de∣crée the body of the Lord departed to the earth: the other on his soule, thou shalt dye the death: héerof it commeth to passe that man is diuided into two partes, and is condemned to departe to two places: and therefore it was necessarye that by the selfe same iudge which had made this decrée, that he by himselfe being vnder the colour of a condemned man, shewing himselfe vncondemned and sincere from sinnes, should frée from that sentence all beléeuers. The like hee hath in his tracte against Appollinarius of the wholesome comming of Christ, and in his Sermon against all heresies. You sée good Reader, how Athanasius a very auntient Fa∣ther in the Gréek Church, shewing the cause of Christs des∣cending into hell, proueth out of Gen. that as our body was punished by death for sinne, so was our soule: and for this cause both partes in Christ must descend, that our soule may be deliuered from hell, and our body rise to glory: ForFulgent ad Thrasim▪ li. 3. ca. 7. as Fulgentius writeth in his 3. book and 7. chapter to King Thrasimunde, he did know that God the suscepter of whole man, was wholy with his flesh in the graue, wholy with his soule in hell, wholy in the world, wholy in heauen, wholy in the vnity of the nature in the Father of whom he came; and wholy by the omnipotency of his diuinity in all ye creatures which he made. The Apostle kéeping this vnitye of person doth thus confirme the Church of Corinth in the faith of the truth. For first of all I haue deliuered you that which I
haue receiued, that Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried and rose againe the third day according to the Scriptures. He saith not that the body of Christ was dead, but Christ that he might kéep the vnity of the person of God and man; and that he might shew the substantial propriety of the deity and humanity. In ano∣ther place he sayth, for although he was crucified of infirmie, yet he liueth by the power of God. Héer we are taught that the whole humanity was assumpted into the Godhead, and that death albeit it did sunder the body and the soule, yet it it did not sunder the Godhead from either parte; and for this cause the Godhead being with the flesh in the graue, it conld not corrupt; and the same Godhead vnited to the soule, the soule could not he left in hell: but euen as his body was in graue to shew him to be true man, and it rose againe without corruption to shew him very God: so his soule was iu hel to shew himself a true man, & it came from hel to shewCiril. de ve∣ra fidead Theodosiū himself a true God, and a most glorious conquerour of al his enemies both in earth and in hell. The like hath Ciril in his treatise of the right faith to Theodosius, the soule of Christ being coupled to his Godhead descended into hel, & vsing the power of God did appeare to the soules that were there. And writing on Iohn in his 12. book and 36. chapter; and when the time was come that he should preach to the soules that were in hell (for he came to be Lord of the liuing and of the dead) he dyed for vs: and this proper passion of our nature he willingly took on him as concerning this flesh, albeit as God he is life naturally, that hell being spoyled he might be the first fruites of them that fléepe, and being made the firstOccume∣nius. begotten of the dead, as the Scripture calleth him, he might giue to our nature a returne to life. And of this iudgement is Oecumenius interpreting the Scripture, Christ dyed for the vniust, not only for them which were after him, but also for them that were before him, and therefore went down into hell. As the death of Christ was auaileable vnto thē that dyed before him, so the descension of Christ into hell was profitable to them that liued before Christ, as well as to those
that liued after him. Vigilius also in his 2. book and 3. chap∣ter,Viglius. li. 2 ca. 3. thus saith, the flesh of Christ was not in Paradice nor in hell, but lay in the graue without life, the soule for yt 3. dayes was in hell and not in the graue, and yet we say well that out Lord Iesus Christ lay in the sepulchre but in his onlye fleshe: and that our Lord Iesus Christ was not lefte in hell, but in his only soule: and albeit Christ is in all these and euerye one of these, yet it is but one Christ, whereof one parte of his humanity was so in the graue, and another in hell, that he notwithstanding is one & wholy euery where albeit he hath seuerally deuided himselfe by places, and ther∣fore we say the Lord lay in the graue but in only flesh, and the Lord went down to hell but in only soule. Alesius oneAlesius in Euang. Ioh. of the first reformed Ministers of Scotland, in his learned treatise vpon the Gospell of S, Iohn, thus writeth concer∣ning this controuersie; but this encourageth me that I haue a manifest place and text in Peter, that Christ prea∣ched in hell to them which in the dayes of Noah were vn∣beléeuers, that is, condemned in the nethermost hell: then he alleageth the place of Ephe. 4. before by me alleadged, and therupon thus concludeth, I expound therefore this arti∣cle simply: and againe, I meruaile what men meane, that they deny that Christ descended into hell. Alesius did won∣der that any man would deny this article, because it hath so many confirmations, and in euery confirmation, in such order as they are set in the Créed, are proued the death, des∣cending into hell, resurrection, and ascension of Christ toge∣ther. For in the 16 Psalme he beginneth with the death of Christ in the 10. verse, but in the last verse he speaketh of his resurrection and of his exaltation at the right hand ofThe cōsent of scripture▪ which proue the descending▪ into hell. Act. 2. Ephe. 4. God. So in the Act. 2. chap. First he speaketh of the death of Christ in the 29. verse. Secondly of his buriall in yt same verse; of his descending into hell in the 13. verse, of his resur∣rection in the 32. verse, and of his ascending and exaltation to glory and his giuing of the holy Ghost in the 33. verse, so in the 4. chapter of the Ephe▪ there is not onlye mention made of Christ descending into the lowest partes of ye earth,
but also it is saide in the 10. verse, that he ascended far aboue all heauens. And also in the 3. chap. of the Philippians, notPhillip. 2. only the Apostle declareth the humility of Christs death, but also setteth downe his presence in hell, and that euerye knée did bow vnto him, and euery tung did confesse him to be the Lord: and thus he sheweth, first who was highly exalted? he that hath made himselfe of no reputation: from whence he was exalted, from those that were vnder earth: where he was exalted, that is, farre aboue al heauens: and lastly, who exalted him? that is, God his Father. So in this place Pe∣ter proueth in the 18. verse the death of Christ, in the 19. verse the descending of Christ into hell, in the 20. verse the end of his descending, that is, to reproue them of ther disobe∣dience to the preaching of Noah: in the 21. ver. he speaketh of the resurrection of Christ, in the 22. verse he endeth the ascending vp into heauen vnto the right hand of God, that all Angels powers and might, might be subiect vnto him. In all these Scriptures the order of our Créed being kept, and all these thinges plainlye proued, very great cause of mar∣uell is giuen to Alesius and many learned men, why this ar∣ticle should be denyed which is confirmed by the scriptures, that the death, buriall, resurrection, and ascension of Christ are confirmed: and therefore those that deny these Scrip∣tures to proue the descending of Christ into hell, may aswell deny the resurrection of Christ, for the resurrction being the ioyning of both partes of the manhood of Christ together, cannot cléerely be proued vnlesse it be shewed from whence both partes seuered came, which is proued before to be thus, the soule of Christ from hell, and the body from the graue.Ob. Further where it is héere argued by some, why should Pe∣ter héere dispute of the spirits or soules detayned in hell, con∣sidering he exhorteth to suffer afflictions: I answere that heSol. might shew to the faithfull which then were persecuted ve∣ry often to death, that the soules doo not perish with the bo∣dies, as the soule of Christ did not perish, when he descended into hell: but as the soule of Christ did triumph ouer the di∣uell,
so shal the godly triumph ouer them that persecute them. But some will say, how did Christ triumph ouer the di∣uellOb. by descending into hell, sith it was the extreamest degrée of his humilitie. To this I reply, that euerye article of our1. Tim. 19. Sol. faith is a misterye, 1. Tim. 1. 9. Hauing the misterye of the faith in a pure conscience; And therfore in all the acti∣ons of Christs humility he shewed himselfe alwaies to be a glorious God, he was borne of a poore Uirgin in a small towne, in an Inne, yea and in a Stable, he was wrapte in cloutes and layde in a cratch; yet the Shepheards of ye féeld, the noble men of the East, the starre in the firmament, and the Angels from heauen did witnes in a merueilous sorte, that he was the sonne of God. The birdes as our Sauiour saith, haue nestes, the foxes holes, but the Sonne of man hath not where to lay his head: he was called a glutton, a drunkard, a Samaritane, a fréend of Publicanes & sinners, a man possessed with a diuell: his Disciples also were very poore: but yet he gaue sight to the blinde, hearing to ye deafe, spéech to the dumme, cleansed the Leapars, raysed the dead, commaunded the windes, the sea, yea and the very diuels, In like manner, when he was humbled to the death of the crosse, albeit he was in the state of dereliction and cryed my God my God why hast thou forsaken me: yet at that time the Sunne was abashed, the earth trembled, the vaile of the Temple was rent, the stones claue asunder, the dead arose yea, and vpon the crosse he forgiueth the théefe on the right hand: and euen as in his natiuity, in his life and death, he shewed himselfe to be both God and man, so in his descen∣ding into hell he proueth the same, and in this lowest degrée of his humility as he proueth himselfe a true man, for that his soule was among ye soules in hell, so by triumphing ouer thē he sheweth himself to be a true God. And for this cause it standeth well with the mistery of our faith, that his going down to hell is both the lowest degrée of his humilitye, to shew him to be a true man, and also the beginning of his endlesse triumph, to proue him a glorious God, in all places
and at all times, & ouer all persons for euer. Some curiusOb. body will say, what néeded he to manifest his death to thoseSol. in hel? it was néedful in respect of thē yt were in hel, in respect of vs that liue now, and in respect of thē yt haue preached in times past, and in respect of Christ himself. In respect of thē which were in hell, because that those which would not hear the vocal preaching of Noah, should sée Christ really present in soule, and so confesse that the destruction of their bodies in the deluge, and ye damnation of their soules in hell was iust. In respect of vs which liue now, because that whē we finde by Gods woord that he manifested his death in earth and hell, we should not remaine incredulous but beléeue in Christ, least hearing of the wondrous workes of the Sonne of God, which he hath wrought for vs. and for our saluation both in earth and hell, and despising the same, we féele by experience with the damned olde worlde, that Christ was in hell for our deliuerance from hell: and denying with the re∣probate Iewes this comfortable article of our faith, we be cast into those insufferable torments of extreme damnation, from which to deliuer vs Christ in a maruelous manner descended into hell. It was néednfull in respect of them which preached in times past, for sith Dauid and other pro∣phets haue foretolde of this going downe of our Sauiour, and that his soule should not be left in hell, it was I say most requisite that the Scripture should be fulfilled. It was néed∣full also in respect of Christ himselfe, for he came to subdue our enemies, therefore as Dauid trampled on the face of Goliah, so was it méet that Christ in soule should triumph ouer the diuell, that he might haue all power not onlye inOse. 15: 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55. heauen ouer Angels, or in earth ouer all the inhabitantes therof, but also in hell ouer the diuels. And for this cause as he hath saide, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victorye? so shall all his members say: and shall for this their wonderfull and glorious deliuerance from death, bell and the diuell, sing, reioyce, and giue thankes for euer. Moreouer, wheras diuers Scriptures are alleadged by Car∣leil,
Vrsinus and others, that Christ descended not into hell; I will answere them by Gods grace, and proue that it was not the meaning of the holy Ghoste to haue them al∣leadged to that purpose. The first Scripture is that which is written in Ioh. 19. ver. 30. It is finished, therfore Christ néeded not to goe down into hell: this is a false kinde of rea∣soning, á dicto secundum quid, ad simpliciter: for if all had béen finished then christ néeded not to haue dyed, nor to haue shed his bloud: for he was aliue when he spake these woords. Therefore these woords, It is finished, are to be referred to all the prophecyes that precéeded the death of Christ: that is, that all the prophecies of the Iewes and Gentiles which should conspire together against him, either of Iudas that should betray him, or of the Souldiours that should appre∣hend him, or of ye false witnesses which should belye him. or of the place where he should dye, or of the time when, or of the manner how, and of the Iudge vnder whome he should suffer, or of the transgressors with whom he should be cruci∣fied: al scriptures concerning al these things were fulfilled. And therfore in the 28. verse are these woords. After that Iesus did know that al things were fulfilled, and that the Scripture might be fulfilled, he saith I thirst. It is fini∣shed also, signifieth the woorke of our redemption was fini∣shed, and so Paul expoundeth it: by one sacrifice once offered he hath made perfect for euer those that are sanctified. Ther∣fore there néedeth no other sacrifice of the olde lawe, nor no other merite of any creature in heauen or in earth, there∣fore the Papists doo dishonour God, which doo say they dayly offer a sacrifice propitiatory: and doo ioyne to the merites of Christ the merits of all the Saintes, Mary, Peter, Paul, and many other: and in the end of the canon of their Masse, vse these woords, Quorum meritis praecibus{que} concedas, vt in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio, By whose me∣rites and praiers we pray thée graunt, that we may in all things be defended by the aide of thy protection. Farther itLuk. 4. 18. Act. 10. 38▪ is finished as concerning the labour and sorrow he tooke in
the world; for he was sent to preach the Gospell Luk. . 18. And therfore he went about doing good vnto al. Act. 10. 38. And when he saw Hierusalem which had killed all the Pro∣phets and would kill him also, he wept and sorrowed: all this labour and sorrowe was finished. It is finished, also is referred to ye time that Christ was appointed to be amongst men: It is finished, also is referred to the paines of the bo∣dy and the soule, which he suffered on the crosse, which both were finished. And last of all, it is finished, is referred to his obedience, for he obeyed as Bernard noteth gladly without spurning, simply without dissimulation, chéerefully without grudging, spéedily without tarrying, manfully without esti∣mation of himselfe, humbly without presuming, and perse∣nerantly in life and death without ceasing. Al these interpre∣tations I haue read and doo allow off: by which it is many∣fest, that whatsoeuer was to be doone at the death of Christ was finished. The high Priests had taken their counsel, Iu∣das had betraied him, the only sacrifice was offered: all la∣bour was ended, he was entring into rest, all sorrowe was turned into ioy, the time of his humilitye was at an end, he should shortly be exalted, the paines and sorrowes of bodye and soule were ended, therfore both of them must triumph o∣uer death and hell: he fulfilled euery iotte and title of the Lawe, and hath yéelded a pure, perfect and perpetuall obedi∣ence vnto God his Father both in life and in death, therfore euery knée both in heauen, earth and hell, must bow and o∣bey to him. S. Paul saith, Hèb. 9. 22. Without sheddingHeb▪ 9. 22. of bloud there is no forgiuenes of sinnes. If all had béen finished when Christ said it is finished, then there néeded no1. Ioh. 1. 7▪ shedding of bloud, which as Iohn saith, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. purgeth vs from all our sinnes Therfore this is my resolution with Ferus on this Psalme, there remained many thinges to beFerus in psal. fulfilled as yet: namelye his death, the opening of his side, his buriall, the destruction of hell, which also were foretolde in the Scriptures: but because they were now in the worke of consumation, therefore he saith it is finished. And a little
after, there remained also ye resurrection, ascension of Christ, and sending of the holy Ghoste, but these things pertayne to his victory, not to his sight, and they are rewardes for his fight, not labours. Moreouer as yée read in the birth of Christ, Mat. 1. 22. All this was done that the ScriptureMat. 1. 22. might be fulfilled: So likewise something was to be ful∣filled in his ascension, Ephe. 4. 10. He that descended isEphe. 4. 10. euen the same that ascended farre aboue all heauens, to fulfill all things. So some thinges are to be fulfilled in the generall iudgement, for Paul saith, 1. Cor. 15. 5. 4. then shal be brought to passe the saying that is written, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory? And therefore Fe∣rus well saith in the same place, that our saluation is finished spe non re, in hope not in déed. For Christ did saý all thinges were finished, in such sorte as the Lambe, is said to be flaine from the beginning of the worlde, not because he was then manifestly slaine, but because the killing of Christ was cast forward euen vnto Adam the first man, and was spread backward euen vnto the consummation of the worlde: and thus our saluation is finished not fullye in déede but in hope. This is to be proued by a plaine scripture, and so I will end; Ioh. 17. 4. Christ saith, I haue glorified thee on earth, IIoh. 17. 4. haue finished the worke which thou gauest me to doo. As in this Scripture the woord I haue finished, signifieth the woorke to be in finishing, so dooth it in 19. of Iohn. There is alledged also a place of out of the 2. of the Hebrews & 39. verse: For as much then as the Children were partakersHeb. 3. 39. of flesh and bloud, he also himself took parte with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is the diuell. Out of this place they thus argue: Christ by his death destroyed the diuell, there∣fore his descending into hell was néedlesse, In this argumēt is fallacia aidicto secundum quid ad simpliciter: for it is not meant that the diuell is already destroyed, but that he might be destroyed. For this we read Apoc. 12. 12. Woe to theApoc. 12. 12. inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the diuell is
come downe to you, which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time. And in the Epistle of IudeInde, 6, the 6. verse, The Angels which kept not their first estate but left their own habitation, he hath reserued iu euer∣lasting chaines vnto darkenes vnto the iudgement of the great day. Therefore S. Paul praieth, that we may tread down Satan vnder our feete. Rom. 16. 20. And inRom. 16. 20 an other place he saith, that he is a spirite which now wor∣kethEphe. 2. 2. 2 Tim. 2. 26 in the children of disobedience. Ephe. 22. in the 2. of Tim. 2. 26. he saith, The wicked are taken in the2. Cor. 2▪ 4▪ snare of the diuell, and holden at his will. In the 2. Cor. 2. 4. he affirmeth, That the God of this world hath blyn∣ded the eyes of the infidels▪ that the light of the glori∣ous Gospell of Christ which is the image of God should1. Pet. 5. 6. not shine vnto them. In the. 1. Pet. 5, 6. The diuell is a roaring Lyon, going about seeking whome hee may de∣uoure.Apoc. 12. ▪ 10. In the Reuelation 12. 9. 10. verse, the diuell is cal∣led a dragon, an olde Serpent, Satan, that is a tempter and an accuser. All which phrases shew, that albeit the di∣uell hath nothing to doo in Christ, yet he snareth, blindeth and deuoureth the wicked: he accuseth, slaundereth & temp∣tethOrig. the godly. Origen saith in the person of almighty God, if my seruant Iob had not béen holy and a worthy man and one that pleased me well, thou wouldest neuer haue enuy∣ed him: thou hast not enuyed Esau, nor Ismael, thou wilt not enuy Saul or Achitophel, or Doeg, or any of them which haue fulfilled thy peruerse wil: but thou hast from the beginning of the world enuyed all my seruants and Saints, as Abel, Ioseph, and now Iob himselfe, and al other calling on me sincerely. It is manifest therefore that the diuel raig∣neth in the wicked, and assaulteth alwaies the godly. Ther∣fore the vtter destruction of our euemies shal be in the gene∣rall iudgement, now they are destroyed in hope, then in déed, now they are destroyed in fieri, thē in facto esse. This is pro∣ued1 Cor. 15. 1 Petrus Mar▪ ibidem. by S. Paul 1. Cor. 15. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. Upon which place Peter Martir
sheweth who are our enemies, 1. the diuell, 2. sinne, 3. al the miseries of this life, 4. death: death is vanquished but not wholy taken away, and againe death is vnarmed but not extinguished. For albeit they are not felt, yet they are as a Serpent without poyson, and as a Bée without a sting: this he manifesteth by a prittie similitude. As poyson first infecteth the▪ vaines, 2, the bloud, 3. the members, and last of all the hart: so the Diuell and all our enemies are by little and little dayly subdued, but in the day of iudgement shall be vtterly conquered and cast downe for euer, so that euerye Saint shall sing: O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victorye? the Scriptures as Musculus noteth,Muscuius. writing on this place, sometime speaketh in the preterperfect tense, sometime in the present tense, sometime in the future tense: therfore Christ both hath abolished, dooth abolish, and will abolish death: he hath abolished death by dying for our sinnes, not that it should be no more, but that it should no more destroy the faithfull: he doth abolish it while he doth translate his Saints from death to life; and he will abolish death for euer in the end of the worlde. For then shall that saying be fulfilled, Apoc. 21. 4. There shall be no more death. As by all that hath béene spoken it is manifest; thatApoc. 21. 4. the death of Christ dooth not take away the iudgemēt wher∣in all our enemies shal be for euer and vtterly ouerthrowe; so it doth not take away his descending into hell, wherby he strake a terror into the diuell and all the hellish Spirites. Therefore as Bude saith, then shall there be no contention of death, which now is, and maketh vs to sigh for our defect, for the mutability of thinges, for the frailtye of mans flesh: temptations striue with vs daily, pleasures striue with vs dayly, and although we consent not yet are we troubled by resisting pleasures: the enemy dieth not but in the resurrec∣tion of the dead.  By all these reasons it is manifest, the Di∣uell is chayned but not cast out vtterly, that the gilt of sinne is taken away, but the matter remaineth: that as we haue many sorrowes in this life,so we haue greater comfortes,
that death albeit he is vnarmed, yet his neck is not broken, and so the destroying of death dooth no more take away the descending into hell, then it dooth the resurrection▪ ascenfion, and comming of Christ vnto iudgement: All which must néeds be in our Sauiour, to the vtter and euerlasting ouer∣throw of our enemies. An other Scripture which they al∣leadge is the saying of Christ to the théefe on the crosse, Luk. 22. 43. To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Héer∣uponLuc. 22. 43. they frame this argument, to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, therfore the soule of Christ and of the théefe went both that day to heauen. They that so conclude are deceiued in two things, the one is, in that they imagine this woord me, to signifie the soule of Christ, which signifieth the Godhead: the other in that they take this woord to daye, to signifie the space of 12. or 24. houres, which indéed signi∣fieth for euer: both these shal be strengthened by Gods grace with proofes. First the circumstances of the place doo proue these thinges most euidentlye. For what dooth the théefe aske? deliuerance from the gilte of sinne, from the cursse of the lawe, from the wrath of God, from the terrors of death from the tormentes of hell▪ and the tirannye of of the diuell. He asketh not only forgiuenes of his sinnes, but that he may be a new creature, that the righteousnes of God may be giuen him, that he may haue the adoption and liberty of Gods children, and so after his death glory, ho∣nour, peace and immortality, that is, familiarity with God; he asketh to be an heire with God, and a ioynt heire with Christ for euer. In one woord he asketh a kingdome pureMar. 2. 7. in righteousnes, perfect in peace, perpetual in ioy. Who can forgiue sinnes but God only? Mar. 2. 7. Who can giue this kingdome but God? and therfore these woords with me signifie the Godhead and not the soule of Christ, as some  haue it. And so all the Fathers that euer I read vnderstoodeHierome in Luc. 22. 43. it, and the new writers also. Hierome on these words wri∣teth thus, Christ brought the théefe from the crosse into Pa∣radise, least any man should think conuersion to be too late
at any time, he made the punishment of homicide, martyr dome, the truth being accounted among the wicked: he left th'one on the left hand, and tooke the other on the right hand, as he will doo in the day of iudgement. Where I note that Christ did on the crosse, as he will doo in the day of iudgmēt: that is, seperate the bad from the good, and cast the wicked into hell: which is the office of the Godhead, Psalm. 7. 11. God iudgeth the righteous, and him that contemneth GodPsal. 7. 11. euery day. And in the 2. Tim. 4. 8. From hence foorth is2. Tim. 4. 8. laide vp for me the crowne of righteousnes which the lord the righteous iudge shal giue me at that day, & not to me only. but to all them also that loue his appearing. Augustine hath ye like saying also vpon this place, the crosseAug. in Luc 22. 24. if you marke it was the iudgement seate, the Iudge was set on the middle, the one théefe which beléeued was deliuered, the other which blasphemed was condemned. To saue and condemne is the office of God, and therefore must néeds be vnderstoode of the Godhead. So saith Ambrose in his Ser∣monAmbro. of the holy théefe, he sawe him hanging on the crosse, and praieth to him as though he were sitting in heauen, he séeth him cōdemned and yet he praieth to him as to a king. So Ferus on the 27. of Mat. Thou shalt be with me whichFerus in Mat. 27. am euery where, which am all in all. To be with me ther∣fore is not spoken of the soule of Christ but of the Godhead. Damascene saith, to speake more expressely he was in theDamasc: Sepulcre according to his body, and in hell according to his soule; but as God he was both in Paradise with ye théefe, and in the throne with the Father aud the holy Ghost. And as with me signifieth the Godhead, so to day fignifieth for e∣uer. For (as Aristotle noteth in his Metaphisicks) in aeter∣nis non est tempus. In eternall thinges there is no time: for time is the measure of those things which are subiect to mo∣tion: now in hell all shall suffer, in earth all must labour, so in heauen all must rest. Apoc. 12. 13. Blessed are the deadApoc. 12. 13. which dye in the Lord, euen so saith. the Spirit: for they rest from their labours aud their woorks follow thē. For
where no mutation is, there is no time, and for this cause Apoc. 10. 6. it is said, And he sware by him that liuethApoc. 10. 6. for euermore, which created the heauens, & the things that therin are, and the earth and the things that therin are, and the Sea, and the thinges which therein are, that time should be no more. Therefore to day signifieth not a naturall or artificiall day (for if there be dayes in heauen, there be wéekes, moneths, yéeres, and all manner of chan∣ges, which is absurd) but to day signifieth for euer, as I will proue by many Scriptures. First in the 2. Psal. 7. verse,Psal. 2. 7. Thou art my Sonne this day haue I begotten thee. euen so Act. 13. 32. 33. verses, And we declare vnto you, thatAct. 13. 32. 33. touching the promise made vnto the Fathers, God hath fulfilled it in vs their children, in that he raised vp Iesus euen as it is written in the 2. Psalme, thou art my sonne this day haue I begotten thee. Héere the Apostle prouing Christ to be euerlasting alleadgeth these woordes, thou art my sonne this day haue I begotten thée. And in the epistle to the Heb. 1. 5. prouing Christ to be higher then the An∣gels,Heb. 15. and from euerlasting, he saith. For to which of the Angels said he, thou art my sonne, this day begat I thee? And most plainly Heb. 5. 6. Prouing that Christ liued forHeb. 5. 6. euer, but the Priests of the Leuiticall order dyed, he proueth the eternity of Christ thus: So likewise Christ tooke not to himselfe this honour to be made a high priest, but he that saide vnto him thou art my sonne this day begat I thee, gaue it him. He also in another place speaketh, Thou art an high Preest for euer after the order of Melchise∣dec. Héere the Apostle prouing Christ to be an euerlasting Préest, and to giue eternall redemption, vseth this woord to day, which signifieth for euer, as it is manifest in the 6. ver, By these reasons therfore it is proued, that with me, signifi∣eth with the Godhead, 1. By the petition of the théefe, for he asked the kingdome of heauen: 2. By that which was forgiuen him, his sinnes: 3. By that which was giuen him, that was glory: 4. By the place where it was giuen him,
that was paradise. 5. By the time for how long it was gi∣uen him that is for euer: Lastlye by the person that giueth it, that is Christ, who being euerlasting as I proued before, forgiueth infinite sinnes, giueth grace alwaies in his euer∣lasting kingdome and in all eternity for euer. And of this iudgement is S. Augustine, who answering the like ob∣iectionAug. of the aduersaryes of this doctrine in his time, this hath left in writing: there is an other meaning also much more frée from all ambiguities, if it be taken to be spoken not in respect that he is man, but in respect that he is God, to day thou shalt be with me in paradise: for the man Christ was in respect of his flesh in the graue that day, in respect of his soule in hell: and the same Christ was God euery where and at all times. The last place that is alleadged by ye gain∣sayers of this doctrine, is the last spéech which Christ vsedLuk. 23. 46. vpon the crosse. Luc. 23. 46. Into thy hands O Father I commend my spirite. Out of which place they thus con∣clude, that the soule of Christ was committed to his Father in heauen, therfore it went not to hell: which is a false con∣sequence. For they imagine héer that the hands of God sig∣nifieth heauen, which cānot be proued out of this place. For this scripture being a deriuatiue place out of the 31 Psalme and 5. verse, teacheth vs this: that as the soule of Dauid be∣ing the figure of Christ, did not immediatly after this prayer goe to heauen, but was guided by the hand and gouernment of the Lord in all maner of perils: so it dooth not follow that the soule of Christ being committed into the hands of the fa∣ther (for these woords are spoken in respect of the manhoode of Christ) should passe immediatly into heauen: but should so be guided by the Godhead, that it should passe through death and hell mightily without resistance, naturally with out as∣sistance, spéedily without tarying, and happily without any returning: But for the better vnderstanding of this place, you must note how many waies this woord, (the hand of the Lord) is taken in the holy book of God: that when we sée the diuers acceptation of the woord, we may take that sence
which most fitteth this Scripture. First the hand of God signifieth the Sonne of God, Psal. 144. 7. Send thy handPsal. 144. 7. Psal. 136. 6. from aboue: 2. For his power, Psal. 136. 6. In a mighty hand & out stretched arme: 3. The bountifulnes of God, Psal. 145. 16. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest withPsal. 145. 16 thy blessing euery liuing creature: 4. It signifieth conso∣lation. Ezek. 3. 22. The hand of the Lord was with meEzek. 3. 22. Psa. 118. 16 comforting me: Sometime it signifieth grace. Psal. 118. 16. The right hand of the Lord hath doone valiantly. Sometime it signifieth the gifte of prophecye, Ezek. 8. 1.Ezek. 8. 1. The hand of the Lord fel there vpon me. Sometimes it signifieth mercy. Psal. 37. 24, Though he fall he shal notPsal. 37. 24. be cast off, for the Lord putteth vnder his hand. Some∣time it signifieth the protection of the Lord. Psal, 31. 15. myPsal. 31. 15. times are in thy hand. Sometime it sigifieth the aide of theNehe. 2. 8. Psal. 74. 12. Lord, Nehe. 2. 8. And the king gaue me according to the good hand of my God vpon me. And in ye 74. Psal. ver. 11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand? Somtime it signifi∣ethIob. 19. 21. ye punishment of the Lord. Iob. 19. 21. Haue pittie on me, haue pittie on me, aye my freends, for the hand of God hath touched me. It signifieth also the creation, Psal.Psa. 102. 25 102. 25. The heauens are the workes of thy hands. LastPsal. 95. 4. of all it signifieth his gouernment, Psal. 95. 4. In his hands are al ye corners of the earth. Christ therfore commending his soule into the hands of the Father, teacheth vs when we are dying or in any affliction which is gréeuous, we must cō∣mit our soules to the power, consolation, mercy, protection, ayde, and gouerment of the Lord. For this being a deriua∣tiue place, is taken out of the 31. Psal. and 5. ver. Therfore as the soule of Dauid did not immediatly after goe to hea∣uen, so did not the soule of Christ. For if he went vp immedi∣atly, then Christ did ascend before he did descend, which is contrary to the Scriptures in many places. In the Ephe. 4.Ephe. 4. 9. 9. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lowest partes of the earth? But if the soule of Christ went into heauen before he was bury∣ed,
or descended into hell, as the gainsayers of the doctrine stoutly affirme, then he ascended before he descended, which is contrary to this Scripture: therefore good Reader marke these circumstances, 1. Who must descend: that is Christ. 2. Whether? into the lowest partes of the earth, which I haue proued before to be hell: for as ascend and descend are contrary, so is heauen and hell. 3. When must he descend? first before he ascend. And thus as many learned men beforeEras. in 4. ad Ephe. named haue vnderstoode this place, so dooth Erasmus writing on the fourth Chapter of the Ephe. certainlye this is the thing that the Palsmists by the inspiration of the holy ghost spake of so long agoe; for Christ hauing already conquered the hell, is ascended aliue againe into the high kingdome of his Father. And a little after he addeth, after most low hum∣bling followeth most high aduauncing; from the most high heauens, then the which nothing is higher, he deiected him∣selfe euen into the hell, the which nothing is lower. When Mare Magdalene came to Christ, Ioh. 20. 17. Christ saithIoh. 20. 17. to her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but to goe to my brethren, and say vnto them, Iascend vnto my Father and to your Father, and to my God and your God. Héer the truth it selfe saith, he had not yet ascended into heauen: whosoeuer therefore affir∣meth the contrary, affirmeth an vntruth. They wil answere Christ was not ascended in respect of his body: but I reply, if Christs soule being the principall parte of the humanitye had béene in heauen, as they imagine, then this speach is vntrue: marke my reason, for in death when both partes are sundered, a man is saide to be where his soule is, and not where his body is: for the man taketh his name of the prin∣cipall parte. In this forte Christ saith, Mat. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit with A∣braham,Mat. 8. 11. Isaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of heauen. Héere you sée because the soules of those Patriarkes are in heauen, they themselues are saide to be in heauen. Euen so if Christs soule were in heauen, Christ was in heauen, and
then this saying can not be verefied, I haue not yet ascended to my Father, for Christ ascended visibly, and for this cause willeth Mary to goe tell his brethren, whome he calleth to this action as witnesses. For as the time of his ascending is noted to be forty dayes after his resurrection, and the place to be Bethaniel and that on a mountaine, that it might the more esily be séen, and ye maner of his going to be meruelous for he was carried vp in a clowde: so his faithfull Disciples and glorious Angels were witnesses of his triumphant ascension into heauen. Out of these Scriptures this I con∣clude, as Christ was borne but once. dyed but once, was bu∣ried but once: so he did but once descend into hell, once arise from the dead, and once ascended into heauen, and but once shall come into iudgement. But if the soule of Christ went presently into heauen, thē not only this absurditie followeth that he ascended before he descended, but also that there are two ascendings of Christ into heauen: the one inuisible of his soule, the other visible of his body. Ignatius who died in the yéere of our Lord 112. (For he was cast to beastes to be deuoured) this Father lyuing in the time of Policarpus, who was Scholler to Iohn Euangelist, in his Epistle to theIgnat. epist. ad eccles. Trallis. Athanas. in Symbolo. Church of Trallis thus writeth; Christ descended into hell alone, but he ascended with a multitude. Athanasius in his Créed saith, who suffered for our saluation and descended in∣to hell: and interpreting the 2. Cor. 6. he saith Satan was enuyous against our Sauiour, for he killed him not know∣ing it would be against himselfe: for Christ after his crosse, going downe into hell hath vanquished death, and because he knew no sinne he could not be holden of death: so saith Am∣broseAmbro. in Gal. 3. in his exposition on the 3: Chap. of the Galathians, for when they thought yt he should be slaine that he might not teach, they profited nothing, for his doctryne encreased, and he euacuated death in his passion, for descending into hell he deliuered mankinde: for that cause he suffered himselfe to be murdered, knowing that he was for vs against the Diuell. And the same Father writing on the 1. Tim. 2. chap. thus
confirmeth this doctrine: because man now reconciled to God was subiect to infernall death, that he could not ascend to God to whom he was reconciled, our Sauiour to bring his will to effect, suffered himselfe to dye against lawe, that descending into hell, he might condemne death for the impie∣ty it wrought on him: taking away from death those which he hid holde, that from hencefoorth whatsoeuer had the signe thereof, shovld not be detayned therewith; of which thing he shewed a testimony, when he arose. Therefore to ende these woords, into (thy hands I commend my spirite) doo not shew vs the state of Christs soule, but sheweth vs how we must pray in all our tribulations, and in the houre of death. For the soule of Christ no doubt was in hell: but this consi∣der, that spirite héere signifieth the soule, which in S. Peter they will in no wise confesse. Farther where it is obiectedOb. that Cyprian saith, it is left out of the Créed of the Romane and orientall Church; I answere, that is not CypriansSol. woorke, for in that treatise is mention made of the Arry∣ans, who began their error vnder Constantine the great, in the yéere 320. But Cyprian was put to death vnder Vale∣rian in the yéere of our Lord God 249. Therfore Ciprian being dead almost an hundred yéers before that heresie sprāg vp, could not write of Arrians: for Cyprian is of my opini∣on, as it shal appeare by this yt followeth. For in his sermonCypria. de ascensu Chr. of the ascending of Christ into heauen, he vttereth his iudge∣ment thus: Christ did once descend into hel, and goeth down into hell no more, they shall not sée God no more on the crosse, nor those that are damned in hell. And in other pla∣ces he proueth the descension of Christ into hell by the 16. Psalme, and by the text of the 1. Pet. 3. Chapter before by me alleadged, which héer I omit for breuities sake. It is far∣therThis is Car leils argu∣ment. obiected that this article is left out of the Nicene créed, true it is: so Athanasius créed lacketh the buriall. Hieroms ad Damas. lacketh it also, Tertullian leaueth out in his Créede the catholique Church, the resurrection of the flesh, and life euerlasting. Cirill maketh mention only of the try∣nity,
and leaueth out all the rest of the articles, therfore this is the answere: ab authoritate humana negatiué non valet argumentum. It is no good reasoning from the authority of man negatiuely. Séeing then that this article is proued by many and manifest Scriptures, and by the generall con∣sent of the pure and primitiue Church, to beléeue it is safety, to deny it peruersely is infidelity. Last of all because it hath béen confidently auouched, that all the reformed Churches beyond the Seas allowe not this doctrine, I will therefore héere reproue that allegation as most false and vntrue, First as before I haue proued that Aepnius, Luther, and the au∣thors of the Centuries confirme this doctrine, so héer I willPomera. in Psal. 16. adde to them Pomeranus, who trauailed much in the re∣formation of the Churches of Germany, who thus in his exposition of the 16. Psalme hath left to eternall memorye: Christ not only dyed, but he would also for a litle season, that is vntill the third day, descend into the darknes of hell, where is the image of death, and as Iob saith euerlasting horror without any order, and a little after, for this cause did Christ dye and goe down into hell, that thou shouldest not goe the∣ther: so that as they shall returne from death, so he would redéeme them from hell, that he might abolish al thy death, by his death, and that thou maiest rest in the hope of the glo∣rious resurrection, as all the Fathers in the séede of Abra∣ham that is Christ. In which faith whosoeuer dyed, are said to be receiued into the bosome of Abraham. For in the faith of Abraham and of the blessing which should come by Christ, they did rest, and they doo rest to arise with vs. All o∣thers did dye in desperation and doo dye dayly being holden in horrible death, vntill the euerlasting fire shall come vpon them by the last sentence. Aretius a professor of diuinity inAreti. in probemat parte. 2. Berna, approueth this doctrine in his Problemes the 2. part: and setteth down it was necessary that Christ should descend into hell for 3. causes: 1. For the reprobates sake, that it might be known to them that he was come already, whom they had heard should come so often, but they had despised it
greatlye: to these therefore it was necessarye that Christ should be knowne by vertue of spirite. 2. It was méete also he should be manifested vnto Satan, that he might know the same Christ whom he had tempted in the desarte, and whom by the fraud of the Iewes he had put to death, the same was the Messias and the séede of the woman promised. This I say was expedient to be made knowne to the verye diuels in the bottome of hell. 3. It was expedient in respecte of the elect, that Sathan might know that he should haue no power ouer the bodyes of the Sayntes whom he will raiseHiperi. li. 3. de method. diuinitat. to life euerlasting héerafter. Hyperius a man endewed with most excellent giftes of learning, in his 3. book of his methode of diuinitye, writing de Ecclesia, thus saith: as Christ when he was dead and buried and descended into hell, then he did chéefely conquere death and hell: so the Church dooth most encrease and multiply, when it séemeth to be destroyed & ex∣tinguished.Pet. Mar in artic.  Peter Martyr who trauailed in this our realme in the most famous vniuersitie of Oxford, in planting the Gospelll, in his exposition on the articles of the faith, thus hath lefte his iudgment: the soule of Christe after it departed from the bodye remained not idle, but descended into hell. For Denmark we haue Hemingius: for Scotland, Alesi∣us: for Berna, Aretius: for Mapurge, Hipperius: for Ar∣gentorat, Peter Martir: for Hambrough, Aepnius: and for other partes of Germany, Luther, Siluerer, Pomera∣nus, Lucas Lossius, Vrbanus Rhegius, Musculus, and the authors of the Centuries, whose woorkes be worthy both of eternall memory and credite. And for our Realme of Eng∣land, we haue the Catechisme of M. Nowell, a man whom those that know not his face, doo loue and honour for his great trauailes he hath bestowed in the Church of God, butNowel in catechis. especially for the setting foorth of that Catechisme for the v∣nity of doctrine, which is the band of perfection. In which Catechisme he hath deliuered these woords: as Christ in his body descended into the bowels of the earth, so his soule be∣ing seuered from his body he descended into hell. And as this
was the iudgement of that reuerend Father, so was it no doubt the iudgment of the Synode of learned men assembled together in the conuocation house at that time, which was Anno Domini, 1571. who by an iuiunction there made tooke this order, that no other Catechisme in this Realme should be taught. Which iniunction if it had béene kept, we should not haue so many sectes in our Church as we now haue, to the great dishonour of God, the ioye of our endlesse aduersaries the Papists, and the bitter gréefe of all the good Ministers of this Land. The articles also of the Synode of London in ye time of King Edward the 6. in ye yéer of our Lord God 1552▪ published by the Kings authority approueArtyc. Syn. Lond. tem∣pore Ed∣uardi. 6. this doctrine: amongst which articles it is thus written; as Christ is dead and buried for vs, so is it also to be beléeued that he descended into hell: for his body lay in the graue vn∣till his resurrection, and his soule seperated from his bodye was with the spirites which were detained in prison or hell, and preached to thē, as witnesseth the place of Peter, which I haue before alleadged. But because now the iudgement of boyes is more estéemed then of reuerend Fathers, and eue∣ry singuler schismatique is more estéemed, then a whole Sy∣node of chosen and expert men in diuinitye. Héereof it com∣meth to passe, that whatsoeuer hath béene most gladlye and learnedly proued by M. Nowell, and approued by our cou∣uocations, is accounted error: and whatsoeuer euery fanta∣sticall spirite dooth vtter without study rashlye, and without feare of God presumptuously, is accounted truth, as though it had béene méerely reueiled vnto them from heauen. For what a rashnes and presumption is this, to say all reformed Churches are of their opinion, whereas the contrarye dooth appeare by their own writings to ye great glory of God, and to the no lesse great shame of them, which in the Pulpits af∣firme most impudently, that all reformed Churches beyond the seas are of their iudgement. But to lye is an vsual thing to all Martinists, as their books in other things can witnes against them aswell as in this behalfe. To conclude, not on∣ly
most of the reformed Churches beyond the Seas approue this doctrine, but euen the very Infidels haue acknowled∣gedAug. de ci∣uitate dei li. 18. ca. 23. it. For Sybilla thus prophecied of Christ as Augustine witnesseth in his 18. booke of the Cytie of God, the 23. chap∣ter: he shall come into the handes of Infidels, and they shall strike him with their filthy handes, and with their vncleane mouth shall cast on him their poysoned spittles, he shall giue simply his holy back to strips, and receiuing buffets shal hold his peace: for his meate they gaue him gall, for his thirste vinegar, shewing this table of inhospitality: for thou being a foolish nation didst not vnderstand thy God delighting in mens soules, but didst crowne him with thornes, and didst giue him bitter gall. But the vaile of the Temple shall be rent, and at noone it shall be darke for 3. houres: and he dy∣ing for thrée dayes shall sléepe, and then returning from hell shall come into the cléere light, being the firste that shewed the beginning of the resurrection. The same verses of Sibil∣la are repeated by the same Augustine in a sermon which heAugust. li. contra Iud. Pap. &. Arri ca. 16. & 17 writeth to those that are catechised, against the Iewes, Pa∣gans, and Arrians, in the 16. Chapter, and in the 17. Chap∣ter of the same booke, where he thus reasoneth: albeit O ye enuyous Iewes ye doo with a shameles face saye to Christ, Ioh. 8. 13. Thou doost beare witnes of thy selfe, and thy witnes is not true. Yet that the trueth of the Maiestye of God may apeare, besides so many excellent consents of wit∣nesses, euery creture hath séemed to giue testimony to christ their creator. Did not the heauen giue witues, when as a new Starre in the new generation of a man did as it were with his tung or hand point, to God was born a man for al nations? did not the sea giue testimony to him, when forget∣ting her selfe after a sorte, the liquide humor soliditye being receiued, carried the liuely steps of their Lord? that it might be fulfilled which is written Psa. 77. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters. When the seruant of Christ being wise about himselfe, that they might shewe what difference is betwéene the creature, and the creator,
the water had swallowed vp Peter in the flouds, vnlesse the Lord of all things had reached him his hand, being ready to be drowned: did not the earth giue him testimonye, when being mingled with his spittle, he annointing with it the eyes of the borne blinde, restored light to him that saw not? and by his woorkemanship like an Artificer he repaired that which he had not out of the dyrte of the earth, which made all men out of the earth before? did not thinges vnder earth giue testimony vnto Christ, when léesing their right they yéelded vp Lazarus whole, whom they had taken to be cor∣rupted, and kept him 4. dayes, yt they might render him safe when they heard the voice of the Lord commanding? and in the end thus concludeth, O Iudaei, daemones qui corda vestra possiderunt, dixerunt, scimus qui sis, quid venisti ante tempus perdere nos? the diuels which haue possessed your harts haue sayde, We know who thou art, why comest thou before thy time to destroy vs? Mark. 1. 24 Euen as the heauen, the sea, the earth, things vnder earth, and the diuels did con∣fesse him to be the Sonne of God in this life, so in his death, as the same Father noteth, the heauen was darkned, the earth did moue, the vaile of the Temple is rent, the stones did cleaue asunder, the graues are opened, the diuels at the presence of Christ doo tremble, and euery diuell in hell confes∣seth Iesus Christ to be the Lord, to the glory of God the fa∣ther,Phil. 2. 10. 1. Phil. 2. 10. If then we be led by the woord of God as we should be, then I hope I haue sufficientlye proued this article by the blessed woord of God, if Fathers, al, both gréek and Latin teach this doctrine to be true. If we estéeme the iudgements of the Ministers of the reformed Churches, if the aduersaries of this doctrine haue one to stand in their side, we haue fiue on ours: if we reuerence the authority of the Synode or conuocation of England, they allow this as∣certion. If we honour reuerend antiquity, this doctrine is most auntient: for it hath béen deliuered not onlye of late by Nowell, Beecon, Fox, Hutchinson, Lamier, Peter Mar∣tir, Hipperius, Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Aepnius and
Luther: But in times past by Augustine, Ambrose, Hie∣rome, Cyprian, Fulgentius, Vigilius, Oecumenius, Atha nasius, Epiphanius, Cyrill, Ignatius: Yea it is deliuered by Peter and Paul themselues, and this antiquity ioyned with verity is very strong as Cyprian saith. All these before na∣med with infinite others, which for breuities sake I omit, were the deuout faithfull learned and zealous defenders of Gods faith, and for this cause were hated, reuiled, persecu∣ted or murdered. And besides all these not only Zacharye, Dauid, and Esau foretolde of this descending into hell, but as you haue heard before, Sybilla being a Prophitesse of the Heathen. And as S, Augustine truely noteth, not only the creatures in heauen, in earth, and in the graues, but also the very diuels haue confessed it; which those that are possessed with diuels, as the Iewes, Seruetus, and Carleil doo denye stubbornlye without relenting, and desperately without re∣penting, and obstinately without ceasing, notwithstanding all those honourable witnesses of Prophets, Apostles, Mar∣tyrs, and Fathers before by me alleadged. Ioshua saide toIos. 24. 15. the Israelites, Ios. 24. 15. And if it seeme euill to serue the Lord, chuse you this day whom you will serue, but I and my housholde wil serue the Lord. So let others be∣léeue as they list, I and all those that beléeue my doctrine, will beléeue this article litterally as it lyeth, and as we be∣léeue the rest. For if hell héere should be taken metaphorical∣ly as some wil haue it, so may you allegorise the whole créed as doo the Heretiques, and so ouerthrow the whole substance of our faith. Besides no hell being in our Créed, men will not beléeue there is any hell at all, as doo the greatest parte of the worlde, as their blasphemous mouthes and abhomina∣ble liues declare the same euery where. Wherfore I exhortAug. ad Euodium Epist. 99. all men with S. Augustine in this sorte, epist. 99. ad Euo∣dium, therefore let vs holde most firmelye which our faith hath, being confirmed with most grounded authoritye, that Christ dyed and was buried and rose againe the 3. daye, and all other things which are written of him: amongst which
also this one is, that he was in hell. And againe, who but an infidel will deny Christ to haue béen in hell? but because I know the Papists dooth reioyce to sée this schisme in the Church of England, therefore let them well vnderstond thatHierome ad August. Epist. 9. it hath alwaies béene so, and so will be vnto the worlds end. Theophilus called Epiphanius an archheretique. Hierom thus writeth to S. Augustine in his 9. Epistle, in thy Epi∣stle I haue iudged somethings to be heriticall. And Augu∣stine to Hierome writeth thus, take vpon you the seuerity of a Christian to correct and amend your woorke and to re∣cant. Bonifacius saide that Augustine and other BishopsClemens Alexand. stromatum li. 7. of Africa were inspired with the diuel, Clemens Alexan∣drinus. stromatum li. 7. saith, that the Gentiles did thus vpbraid the Christians, ye Christians disagrée among your selues, and you haue sects, and albeit all doo challenge vnto themselues the title of christianity, yet one of you doth curse and condemne the other. Wherefore your religion is not good, nor came from God: as the Gentiles did vpbraide the Christians, so now the Papists the Protestants, saying asChrisost. in Act hom. . the heathen did say in Chrisostoms time, in Act. homil. 3. the Gentile commeth and saith I would gladly be a Christi∣an, but I know not to whom I may cleaue, what opinion I may chuse, or what I may preferre: all say, I say the truth. But as that was no lawfull excuse for the heathen in those dayes, no more is it for our Papists now in these daies: but rather because we haue enemies on euery side, they ought to beléeue that we are the tossed ship of Christs Church, and we are the souldiours of our Captaine Iesus, which must fight against all Heretiques and schismatiques: we are the pure Corne that are so wynowed, and the pure gold yt are so tryed in the furnace of tribulation, we are in the house buil∣ded vpon the rocke, who though beaten with the roaring waues of heresies, or with the turbulent windes of tempta∣tions, or with the stormy tempests of persecutions, yet we stand and the Papists doo fall, and therfore they should striue to come vnto vs. As Moses refused the kingdome of Egipt
for the rebuke of the Children of God, so should they refuse the damned security of the papish Synagogue, to enter into this tossed and militant Church, where great troubles cause great praier, and great praier causeth a great calme, and a great admiration of Christs power is caused by the great calme, and great admiration causeth great thanksgiuing for euer. But what is the cause of these schismes in ye Church? Leo in Epiphania ser. 6. sheweth the same; the Diuell is gréeued with the calling of the Gentiles, and is vexed with the daylye ruine and destruction of his power: sorrowing therefore that he is forsaken and the true king is woorship∣ped of all men, he layeth snares, and raiseth discentions. As héere, so in the 13. of Mathew you may learne who is the author of schismes, Satan: where dooth he sowe this wicked séede? in the féelde and Church of the Lord: how dooth he sowe it? he turneth himselfe into an Angell of light, and so doo his ministers, alleadging the woord of God contrarye to the meaning of the holy Ghoste: why dooth he raise discen∣tions? because he séeth himself forsaken and Christ worship∣ped: when dooth he sowe schismes? while the seruants slept. The sléeping therefore of the Ministers is an occasion that schismes are not onely sowen, but are rooted and doo groweChrys. in Gal. 3. and fructifie. For this cause saith Chrysostome in Gal. 3. are we made laughing stockes to the Iewes and the Gen∣tiles, while the Church is deuided into a thousand parts? our slothfulnes then causeth 2. great euils in the Church of God, that is schismes to grow, and our selues to be scorned at. Ci∣prian in his 40. Epistle thus writeth, there is one God, andCypria. E∣pist. 4. one Christ, and one Church: an other alter to be made and set vp, or a new préesthoode to be made it is impossible: who∣soeuer geathereth elsewhere, scattereth. It is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacriligious, whatsoeuer is instituted by mans fury to the breach of Gods diuine disposition: get yée from the contagion of such men, and flée from their spéeches as a cancker and pestilence, our Lord hauing premonished and warned before hand, they are blinde leaders of ye blinde:
where this good Martyr willeth vs to kéep verity in vnitye.Hiler. li. ad Constantiū Augustum. And so dooth Hillary li. ad Constantium Augustum, peril∣lous and miserable it is, that there are now so many faithes as wils, and so many doctrines as manners, whiles either faithes are so written as we will, or as we will haue vnder∣stoode. And whereas according to one God, and one Lord, and one baptisme, there is also one faith: we fal away from that which is the only faith, and whiles moe faithes be made they begin to come to that, that there is none at all. For we know that sith the Synode of the Nicene assembly there is nothing else written but the faith, but while there is con∣tention about the wordes, and question of nouelties, and while there is occasion of doubts, while there is com∣plainte of the authors, while there is strife about studies, while there is a difficulty in one consent, while one begin∣neth to cry anathema to another, almost no body belongeth to Christ Iesu. Labour therfore for vnity in the faith, stoppe the mouthes of them that preach falsehoode and lyes, and that will descant one our faith, and bring in as Hillary saith new faiths either in woord or vnderstanding; let not one holde of Paule, and another of Peter, but let vs all holde of Iesus Christ, let vs haue one mouth, minde and faith; then whatsoeuer is planted or watered by vs, God will encrease it: then the Iew by our schismes shall not be hardned, the Papists shall not be made glad, the weake shall not be dis∣couraged, the strong shal not be weakned, then it wil be good and ioyfull for vs as blessed brethren to dwell together in perfect vnity; then our house shall stand, our Citie shall flou∣rishe, our kingdome shall be inuincible, and against our Church the gates of hell shall not preuaile for euer. To all people in generall which are not Ministers, this counsaile I giue with Paul, to be wise vnto sobrietie, and that they read the Scriptures of God not to be authors or arbettours of controuersies, but to encrease their faith, confirme their hope, and to inflame their charity, and to imitate the vertues of the godly: as the chastity of Ioseph, the humility of Mo∣ses,
the zeale of Dauid, the wisedome of Salomon, the pati∣ence of Iob, the obedience of Noami, the repētance of Paul, the renouncing of the world with th'apostles. Let them spe∣cially note those places, that bréede the hatred of sinne, feare of Gods iudgements, and delight in spirituall cogitations. Let not this disorder continue amongst vs, that the wiues teach their husbands, Children their parents, fools wisemen,Hierom ad Paulinum. cap. 6. the Schollers their Maisters, the shéep their pastor, the peo∣ple their preacher. Hierome complained in his time in his book to Paulinus the 6. Chapter, that whereas no man pre∣sumed in any occupation to teach that they neuer learned, only saith he the art of Scripture is that which euery man challengeth: this the chatting olde wise, this the doting olde man, this the brabling Sophister, this on euery hand men presume to teach before they learne it. And again some with poise of lofty woordes, deuise of Scripture, matters among women, othersome (fye vpon it) learne of women what to teach men, and least that be not enough, by facilitye of tung, or rather audacity teach that to others, which they vnder∣stand neuer a whit themselues: to say nothing of such as he of my faculty. Who stepping from secular learning to holy Scriptures, and able to tickle the eares of the multitude with a smoothe tale, think all they speak to be the Lawe of God. In Hieromes time this malady of arrogancye & pre∣sumptionNazians. o∣rat: de mo∣deratione in reb, diui. in diuine matters was grieuous, but now it is al∣most incurable. Nazianzene in an Oration of his concer∣ning the moderation to be vsed in diuiue matters thus wri∣teth: order saith he hath made and bound togither al things, order preserueth earthly and heauenly things, order is to be kept in those things that are endewed with reason and a soule, there is an order in those things that are subiect to our sences, there is order in the Angels, there is order in the mo∣uing of the Starres, their greatnes, their mutuall relation and brightnes; there is order in the times of the yéere, com∣ming and going aptly and distinctly, and mitigating the as: perity of the extreames by the moderate quality of the mid∣dle
times: there is order in the Elementes whereof our bo∣dies are made: order hath made the firmament roune, hath vnfolded the aire, poured out the liquid nature and gathered it into one place, and sendeth out the windes, but not to the destruction of man hath he sent them: order hath bound the waters in the Clowdes but dooth not holde them there, but scattereth them comely and equally vpon the face of all the earth. A little after he addeth, order distinguished vs from brute beastes, made lawes, giueth honour to vertue, punish∣ment to vice, inuented artes, made marriages, and by ear∣nest loue towards our Children begotten, brought vs from the rude life to humanity, and that which is greater thē this terrene and carnall loue, it fasteneth in our minde the loue of God. For order is the father and safety of all things. Euen so) saith this diuine writer) order hath appointed in Chur∣ches yt some should be Shéep, some pastors, some shouldrule, others should be vnder & obey rule, one is an head, another is a foote, another an hand, another eyes, another some other member of ye body, to the concynnitie & beauty of the church and to the vtility both of ye subiects & rulers. And euen as in our bodyes, though the members be not abrupt or distracted, one from an other, but all that heape is one body made of di∣uers members: yet there is not one force or facultye of all, although otherwise for the necessitie of beneuolence & con∣corde, and for the like reason in their vnlike offices al mem∣bers are equally made others helpe. For neither the eye doth goe but sheweth the way, neither the foote dooth sée but goeth and changeth places; neither the tung dooth heare, for that is the office of the eares: neither the eare dooth speake, for that is the function of the tung; and the nostrell is the organe of those things that are smelled, but the throate tasteth meate, and the hand is the instruement of giuing and receiuing: but the minde ruleth all, from whence truely the power of sence doth come, and whether all the sences doo goe and are refer∣red. In like manner standeth the case with vs, that is with the common bodye of Christ: we are all one bodye in
Christ, and euery one of vs are Christs, and all of vs mem∣bers togither. Some haue dominion and rule, some obeye and are ruled: and albeit there is not the same action of both, vnlesse a man will saye it is all one to rule and to obeye, yet both of them are made and ioyned together in ye same Christ. and againe as among them that are vnder, there is found a great difference, for they differ one from another in learning and experience, exercise and age: so there is no small diffe∣rence also among the rulers: and sith the spirites of the pro∣phets are subiect to the Prophets, as Paul himselfe dooth af∣firme. 1. Cor. 14. 32. There is no cause why any man should doubt of it. For he saith Ephe. 4. 11. He gaue some to be Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly pastors and doc∣tors: first for the truth, secondly for a shadowe and obscuri∣thy, last of all for the measure and action of diuine vtilitye and illumination. And the spirite is one truelye, but the gra∣ces are diuers, euen as the conceptacles of the spirite are not alike. For. 1. Cor. 12. 8. To one is giuen the spirite of wise∣dome and speculation, to another the woord of knowledge and reuealation, to another a sure and vndoubted faith, to an other workinges of high miracles, to another the giftes of healings opitulations, that is defences patrocinices and go∣uerments, that is castigation of the flesh, languages, inter∣pretations of tungs: to some more excellent giftes, to others inferiour giftes according to the quality and proportion of their faith. This order my bretheren let vs reuerence, defend and obserue: let one be an eare, let another be a tung, an o∣ther some other thing: let one teach, another learne, an o∣ther woork with his owne hands that he may haue to giue to the néedy: let one rule and gouerne the people, let another by his dutifull ministery obtain the praise of iustice: he that teacheth let him teach in modesty, for let two or thrée Pro∣phets speak and that by course, and let one interprete, and if any thing be reuealed to another that sitteth by, let the first holde his peace. 1. Cor. 1. 29. 30. He that learneth in obe∣dience, he that giueth in redines, he that ministreth in chéer∣fulnes.
Let vs not all vse the function of the tung, which is most readye and prompt in all: for we be not all Apostles, we be not al prophets, we be not al interpreters. For albeit it is an honourable thing to talke of God, yet is it more ho∣nourable to kéep our selues pure vnto God. It is a great and worthye thing to be a teacher, I heare thée: but it is with out danger to be a learner. Why doost thou being a Shéep take vpon thée the office of a Pastour? Why doost thou being a foot, take vpon thée to be a head? why doost thou be∣ing a Souldiour take vpon thée to be a leader of an armye? why doost thou séek for those great, but doubtful and daunge∣rous gaines of the sea, while thou maist kéepe thy self in safe∣ty in the land, albeit with lesse gaine? If thou be a man ac∣cording vnto Christ, and hast thy sences exercised, and doest shine in the bright light of knowledge, goe to speak the wise∣of God, I say that wisedome which is preached among the perfect, and which is hidden in mistery, and that in such sorte at length, as if thou shalt get a fit opportunitye, and hast it committed to thy faith. For what hast thou of thy selfe, that thou hast not receiued it? but if thou be tender of age, or of a base or abiect minde, or of weaker strength then that thou art able to wade in higher matters, follow the Corin∣thians, be content with milke. Why doost thou desire strong meate, which thy members for weaknes can not consume and turne into nourishment? tell me if thou haue any thing better then silence? therefore where it is better to holde thy peace then to speake, be silent. And a little after he saith, if thou doost resemble Moses in vertues, enter also into the Cloude it selfe, and speake to God and heare his voice, and promulgate the Lawe: if thou also be Aaron, ascend toge∣ther truely, but stand without the Cloude, somewhat nigh. But if thou be Ithamar or Eleazar, or some third from Moses, of the order of the Senatours, and of their number, stand farther off and be content with the third place. But if thou be a lay man or of the basest sorte, let the hill it selfe
kéep thée back, which also if any beast touch, he shall be sto∣ned: tarry beneath and heare the voice onlye, and that after thou hast purified thy selfe, and that I may more plentifully instruct thée, who did consecrate the Préest? Moses. Who was the first that was consecrated? Aaron, who did care for the things that pertained vnto God, who was in stéed of the voice? Moreouer in the holy places, who might enter but one, and that not euer but once a yéer. Heb. 9. Who might carry the arke but the Leuytes? 1. Leuit. 15. And they as they were appointed, for some were of a high office, some of a lower as euery one was worthye, and because that ought to be kept, it was appointed also, who should kéepe it euerie way: for some should kéep one side, some an other side, nei∣ther should any thing remaine indistincted or disordered in their smallest matters. Marke good Reader, what is ye con∣clusion of this swéet discourse, for it toucheth most néerelye our disordered Martinists, but we if we haue gotten a little glory and excellency of name, and haue learned two or thrée woords of Scripture, not often but by chaunce, and these vn∣skilfully and ill couched together; by and by we furiously re∣bell against Moses, and followe the importune contumelye and impiety of Dathan and Abiram: whose contumelye I becéech you let vs flée, and let vs flée their madnes, least we be ouerthrowne with the same punishments. Nazianzene affirmeth that order is beautifull in naturall thinges in sen∣sible and in reasonable, but more beautifull in houses, Cit∣ties and common weales, but most beautifull in the house and Church of God. For God is not the God of confusion but of order. 1. Cor. 14. 33. And for this cause all thinges in the Church must be doone in order. 1, Cor. 14. 40. Take a∣way1. Cor. 14. 33. 1. Cor 14. 40. order from naturall things, all thinges would come to annihilation, take away order from men and we become brutish: but take away order from Christian men, and they become very diuels. In these last and dangerous times like beastes voide of reason we despise gouerment, and like diuels
that haue come out of the horrible pit of shameles confusion, we ouerthrowe all the orders which are established in the Church of England. Obedience by the woord of God is a sacrifice, but we holde it to be a superstitious yoke. S. Paul sayeth we should obey, not for feare of wrath but for consci∣ence: but now a daies they are accounted the holyest men, which haue no conscience, and doo stubbornlye resist all the orders of the Church, and desperately continue in their con∣fused disobedience, euery man will be a head, no man a foote, euery man a tung, no man a eare: S. Iames saith we should be slow to speak and swift to heare: but we haue peruerted his woords in our déeds, and are slowe to heare and swifte to speake against Prince and Ministers. And euen as the Do∣natists wrote against Augustine in his time, and the Ca∣tharoi against Ciprian in his time, aud as the Pharasies withstoode our Sauiour and his Apostles in their time: so are the Martinistes now bent against the Church of God and Ministers in our time. For as their hart is full of enuy, so their tung is as kéene as a rasour, as sharpe as a Swoord, as hotte as coles, asvenymous as vipers, and as they are swift to speak, without number, waight or measure of their woords, so are they slowe to heare: for they will not heare the voice of the charmer, charme he neuer of wiselye. Of these men Gregory Nazianzene in the place before quoted saith very well: it is a shame truelye when thou doost em∣brace not magnificence but basenes in thy apparrell and dy∣et, and to pretend humilitye in the hardnes of thy knées, in thy fastings and watchings, and in the asperitye of thy bed being laide in the ground, and in thy labours, and in al man∣ner of pyning and subduing thy body: and to challenge to thy selfe a principalitye and tirannye in diuine disputations, nei∣ther to yéeld to any man, but to aduance your self aboue the Preachers of the Law, where humility hath not only glory but also securitye. What then? will some of them which are of a hotte spirite obiect: doost thou by this Oration for∣bid
to talke of God? what shall we talke off? or how thinkeOb. you of this place? his praise shall euer be in his mouth. Psal. 33. I will blesse the Lord alwaies. Psal. 29. My throate shal meditate on his truth, and beholde I haue not forbid my lippes: and so will bring many testimonies meditated and quoted to that purpose. To whome I answere gentlye andSol. without bitternes of minde, that héereby we may teach al∣so the moderation of the minde. I doo not exhorte a wise man to silence. but I studye to feare thée from stubborne conten∣tion: neither doo I bid thée to suppresse or hide the truth, but I forbid thée that thou teach not besides Lawe. For I my selfe doo professe my selfe to be a chéefe man among them which praise wisedome and learning, and either doo spend or desire to spend their times in holy Sermons and sacred stu∣dies, and God graunt that I neuer be turned aways from this busines, least of wisedome it selfe I be pronounced a wretch and an vnhappy man, because I haue despised lear∣ning and wisedome. In the mean season I auoide the excesse and doo bridle the vnsatiable desire of man and am so minded, that if I could not auoide both faults and kéep a mediocrity, I had leyffer be too slowe then a busie body, or too fearful ra∣ther then too bolde or rash. He addeth shortly after, holde fast those woords, in the which thou hast béene instructed in thy infancy, commit the care of reasoning and disputation to the learned: it is inough for thée to holde fast the foundation, let a wise maister builder build vpon it: it is sufficient for thée to strengthen thy hart with bread, leaue dainty dishes to the rich and wealthye. No sober or wise man will accuse thée if thou furnish not thy supper with liberall and bountiful fare. But if thou wilt not set bread, or giue a cup of water to the Disciple of Christ. Mat. 10. Or to any other when thou art able, then art thon iustly and worthily condemned also. Be not swift in thy woords saith the wise man. Eccle. 5. And be∣ing poore compare not thy selfe with the rich, & affect not to be wiser thē the wise. It is a poynt of wisedom to know thy
self, and not to be immoderately proud: and so to be affected as the voices who whē they are strained too high, by reson of the immoderatiō they do altogither faint. Thus this auntiēt father perswaded the people of God to a moderation in his time, that knowledge might not make them proud: for pride is the cause of singularitye, singularitye bréedeth schismes, schismes disorder, disorder confusion. God saith in the 4. E∣phe. that he hath made vs Pastors and Doctors: héereby it is manifest that we are not the ordering or appointment of man, nor of angel, but of God himself. How dare euery man then being scarse skilfull in his owne mistery, take vpon him our office being in dignety the highest, in labours the paine∣fullest, in disposing the wisest, and in abusing the most daun∣gerous function of the worlde. Meate is common vnto all, but none can dresse it so well as Cookes: Cloth is common vnto all, but none know good and bad cloth so well as the Cloth maker: a swoord is necessarye, but none can vse it so well, as a skilfull maister of defence: so yt woord of God is to be read of all, but the desciding of controuersies pertaine to the learned ministers. If the vnlearned attempt to doo this, with the good meat of the woord of God they may surfeyte, and taking this swoorde by the pointe foolishlye, when they should discréetely take holde by the hyltes, they may hurte themselues vnrecouerably. For languishing about questi∣ons, 1. Tim. 4. They are euer learning and neuer comming to knowledge. 2. Tim. 3. 7. And as Peter saith, 2. Pet. 3. 16. Being vnlearned and vnstable peruert the Scriptures to their own damnation. The Lord graunt we may reade the Scriptures to our edification and amendment of life. And touching the vnsearchable misteries of our faith, to beléeue them without questioning or doubting. For as Athanasi∣usAthana. de in carnat: verbi. saith in his Book of the incarnation of the woord, to teach all things exactly few men can, but to kéep the faith all men are bound. To the aduersaries of this doctrine, I saye with Gregory Nazianzene in the place so often alleadged; and
peraduenture some of vs (which is lamentable) doo not vn∣derstand, how of God commeth euery good cogitation, word and action, and not only of good men, but also almost of all men, who being slowe Iudges of our own affaires, yet not∣withstanding in other mens matters we spéedilye take a sharpe censure, and rather we impute great faults to others, then smal to our selues: and albeit they themselues are more rude and vnlearned then we are, yet rather will they lay v∣pon vs the fault of impiety, then to accuse their owne igno∣rance. This I knowe will be my reward for this woorke, which the knower of all hartes knoweth I haue compiled for his glory, and for the vnity of the Church. I shall rather be iudged of aduersaries impious, and with me Fox, Bee∣con, Nowell, Martyr, and all the Fathers before alleadged, then they will account themselues ignorant. Therefore to staye their rash iudgement, Gregory thus counsaileth them;Greg. If thou burne in such an immoderate and insatiable desire of disputation, that thou canst not staye or represse thy disease, meditate those things, be conuersant in these things, poure out thy ambition on these things wherein is no danger: and if thou refuse this and cannot bridle thy tung, nor breake or suppresse the violence of thy minde, but thou mindest to rage and to be mad, and wilt not giue place to the angels, and wilt arise higher then it is for thy profite: at the least com∣maund thy selfe this, that thou condemne not thy brother, but rather shew héer a token of humility; héere to thy no de∣triment preferre thy brother before thée, where to condemne and despise thy brother, is nothing else but to eiect and cast him out from Christ and only hope, and to root out the secret wheat, wheate better then thy selfe with the cockle. This I say is Nazianzenes Counsell, and not only his but Paules. Rom. 14. 10. And Christs counsell, Luk. 6. 37. If the coun∣saileRom. 14. 10 Luk. 6. 37. of these cannot stay rash censuring, but some as they haue boasted will answere this treatise, and that within fourtéene dayes: if they will leaue lying to the Papists, rai∣ling
to scoldes iesting to Stagers, and cursed speaking to the Diuel; I wil be the man which by the aid of my God will be ready with al moderation to answere them, and that in such time also, as I hope they shal haue no iust cause to complaine of any slacknes. The almighty God the giuer of all grace so lighten vs in the reading of his woord, that we may vnder∣stand it, and so vnderstand it, that we may loue it; and so loue it, that we may kéep it; and so kéep the woord, that we may kéep the faith: and stedfastly beléeue that Christ was borne for our purification, taught vs for our edification, dyed forCaluin de∣fide. ca. 7. our purgation, was buried for our mortification, descended into hell for our reconciliation, rose againe for our iustifica∣tion, and ascended into heaueu for our sanctification, and shal come againe in power for our glorification, and there∣fore blessing, glory, wisedome, thanke-sgiuing, honor, might and power, be ascribed vnto our God for euer. Amen. THis Sermon being preached at Chippingham in Wiltesse, the 28. of February 1589. And deliue∣red vp in writing to M. Wisedome Minister: was an∣swered by one Alexander Huns Schoolemaister of Bath, whose answere wholy followeth, with a replye of the Author, wherby the truth of this controuersie doth more plainely appeer.
¶ The reply of Adam Hill Minister, to an answere made by Alexander Humes, to a Sermon preached at Chippenham▪ in Wiltes the 28. day of February, 1589. of the descending of Christ into Hell. Humes. Sectio prima. IT fell out vpon some occasions, that I was with a freend not farre from Chippenham, the day before you preached there. As I was pre∣paring to returne, word came to my friend that you had certified M. Chalfoult of your intent the day following, to defende that which he had spoken against M. Wisedome that day sen∣night before, concerning the descension of Christ into hell: wherefore my friend wrought me to stay, to heare what could be sayd for a matter, that both he and I did thinke to haue no great probabilitie. I did so, and it re∣penteth me not, for there I heard some thing which o∣therwise I might not haue thought vpon. And I was strengthned in the truth, because I proued that which I many times heard, that wit and eloquence was not able to shake it. Wherefore I haue not thought it amisse to write these few lines vnto you, eyther to winne you to vs, or to winne some better reasons from you, to bring me to you. I am not maryed to mine opinion, but if any man can bring me better proofe, I am content to yeeld. I hope the same of you, for you told me so in the pulpit,
where the toong should wait vpon the hart, and speake his affections. As yet your reasons confirmed mee and the rest of mine opinion, rather then confuted vs. Hill. In the entraunce of your aunswere, you haue told two vntruthes vpon vntrue report. The one, that I certified M. Chalfoult of mine intent, which is not so, for neither by messenger nor letter did I euer send to M. Chalfoult. The other is, where you auouch that I would make an Apology of M. Chalfoults sayings against M. Wisedome, which God knoweth was neuer my meaning: for first, I neuer knew what he had sayd in that controuersy, till the morning I preached. Secondly, I did alwayes loue and honor M. Wisedome, but M. Chalfoult till that morning I was not acquainted withall. Thirdly, hearing a strife reuiued of that matter which was not long before quieted in Sarum by the last Bishop, now Archbishop of Yorke, and being requested to deliuer my iudgement in the matter, not by M. Chal∣foult, but by one Richard Woodlands, to set vnity be∣twixt my brethren, and not to warre against M. Wise∣dome: in the feare of God, and not to please you or your friend or any other man, I layd downe my iudgement, and gaue vp my Sermon in writing to M. Wisedome, crauing an answere to the whole, and not to some part of it. Now you haue made an answere to some, how truly it shall ap∣peare: and, other things you haue left vnanswered, for what cause, let the reader iudge. In the end, you charge me with wit, which is small, with eloquence, which is none, and with my promise, which I will kéepe most willinglie, hoping that you will kéepe yours. Humes. Sectio. 2. Wherefore to grow to the matter, I see no cause why you should thinke better of Augustine and Ierome, then
of Beza and Caluine, for they were all but men, and they which now are old, were sometimes new. They had no better warrant of Gods spirit than these: and errors in those dayes were so thicke sowen, that there grew dar∣nell in the best fieldes, euen of them whome wee most admire. I speake not this to discredit the Fathers, but to proue that they were no Gods. They were no doubt the good instruments of our louing God, to maintaine his truth against his enemies, but they were but men: you can not deny, but the best of them had his steynes, and must confesse, that God is infinitely wise, who did before hand ordaine it, least we might honor them for Gods, and set their writings in the place of his eternall word, whereof one iot shall not passe, though heauen and earth perish. Hill. Two arguments you make against Augustine and Ie∣rome. The one is, they had errors, and therefore their inter∣pretation not to be admitted. The other is, the time where∣in they liued was corrupt, and for that cause they are not to be alledged in a controuersy of Diuinitie. The same argu∣ment I make against all new writers. All new writers haue errors, and they liue in a most corrupt time, wherein (as Christ saith) shall be many false Prophets, and many false Christs, to deceiue the very elect if it were pos∣sible, Math. 24. 24. Therefore because men are vaine, and the time corrupt, we must beléeue no man. You argue ab accidente ad subiectum. For Augustine and Ierome to erre it is an accident, but the substance of all Fathers is to beget men in the word of truth, 1. Cor. 4. 15. And for this cause Augustine himselfe willeth vs not to beléeue him, vnlesse he bring the word of God. Truly (sayth Augustine) I do de∣sire not only a godly reader, but a frée corrector in all my writings, especially in those things where there is great
doubt: but as I will not haue him to be geuen vnto me, so I will not haue him to be giuen to himselfe: let him not loue me more then the Catholike faith. As I say to him, beléeue not my sayings as Canonicall Scriptures, but beléeue sted∣fastly when thou hast found that which thou beléeuedst not, but beléeue not firmely that which thou hast not séene out of Gods word. So I say to him, do not correct my writings by thine owne opinion, or of contention, but by the word of God, & by the reason thereof vncontrouleable. And against Cresconius the Grammarian he thus writeth, lib. 2. cap. 32. I am not moued with the authoritie of this epistle, but I cousider them out of the Canonicall bookes, and if they a∣grée with the word of God, I receiue them with praise, if they disagrée, I refuse them with peace. The like he hath Epist. 3. and Epist. 112. And Ierome ad Theoph. is of the same iudgement. I knowe that I estéeme otherwise the Apostles, and otherwise other interpreters: these men speake truth alwayes, these men in some things do erre sometime. These Fathers themselues confesse themselues to be but men, and will vs to beléeue them no farther then they agrée with Gods word. Therefore they building vpon Christ aswell as your new, ought to be beléeued rather in this point than they: for what they wrote in this contro∣uersy, the same did all other godly Interpreters both Gréek and Latin, hauing a good warrant from Gods word. But those of your side write contrary to Gods word, to the aun∣cient Fathers, yea and contrary to the new Fathers, name∣ly, Luther, Selueccer, Chytraeus, Pomeran, Aepinus, Lu∣cas Lossius, Alesius, Aretius, Peter Martyr, M. Fox, and M. Nowell. Therefore because Augustine and Ierome a∣grée both with the old and new writers, and especially with the word of God, I like better of them, teaching the affir∣matiue, then of any other labouring to prooue the negatiue. To end therefore, you must note this, that all sayings of the Fathers, either they are demonstratiue out of the Scrip∣tures, and then they are the voyce of God: or else probable,
and these are the voice of man: or else false, and then they are the voyce of the Serpent. Humes. Sectio tertia. Their weakenes is no where more apparant, then in this matter that we haue now in hand: for Ierome ioy∣neth his opinion herein with a palpable error, that Christ descended to deliuer the Fathers which to that day had bin in prison. Augustine is not far behinde him, who though he confesseth that the Fathers were in ioy with Abraham and Lazarus, yet after some long dispu∣tatiō whether he did deliuer all or some, and why these more then those? at length he concludeth, that he did deliuer whom he himselfe thought good. For after that they had once conceaued that he descended into Hell, there followed (which could not choose) many incon∣ueniences. There was not one of them dreamed that which you auouch, that he descended into hell, there to triumph or bind the diuels, or to augmēt their sorrows, by shewing them from what grace they had fallen. Hill. You write that Ierome & Augustine did hold a palpable error, that is, that Christ descended to deliuer the Fathers. I hope you will not deny, but the Fathers haue their deli∣uerance by Christ from hell, therefore by the merits and works of Christ, who I am sure conquered both death and hell. Therefore where you proue that Augustine & Ierome do erre, I will leaue them as I said before, but wherein they speake the truth, I will praise God for them. But let vs see how many wayes the scripture may be corrupted, that is, by adding, altring, and diminishing. Eue in the thirdThe scrip∣ture is cor∣rupted by 3. means Chap. of Genesis taught all her childrē so to do: for in the 3. verse thus she saith, But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the gardē, God hath said ye shal not eate
of it, neither shall ye touch it least ye dye. First, she chan∣geth the word of God, for God sayth Gen. 2. 17. of the tree of knowledge of good and euill thou shalt not eate. Those words (of the trée of knowledge of good and euill) she changeth, & putteth in for them (in the midst of the garden.) Farther God said, they should not eate of it, she added (that they might not touch it.) God said they should surely dye, Eue said (least we dye) héere she diminished the scriptures. If then the Fathers haue added to the scriptures, that the Fathers were set out of hell, there I leaue them. And if you change hell into graue, as you doo in the 16. Psal, & Act. 2. I will leaue you also: for I stande not vpon mens say∣ings, but vpon the word of God. But where you boldly af∣firme that not one of the Fathers haue déemed that which I say, you shewe your selfe either to be malicious in hiding the truth, or else so ignorant, that you haue not read the Fathers: for diuers both old and new are of my iudgement. Ambrose on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians thus writeth. Christ therefore comming downe from heauen in∣to the earth, was borne a man, afterward he died, and des∣cended into hell, from whence rising the third day, he shewed death vanquished to euery creature. Augustine de tempore in his 137. sermon, and in his third sermon of the resurrec∣tion, thus sayth: Hell did restore him as a conquerour, and the Heauens did receaue him as a triumpher. And in his second sermon he saith thus. Behold, you haue heard what our defender the God of vengeance is said to haue done frée∣ly. For after that he was exalted, that is, was hanged of the Iewes on the crosse, that I may touch these things briefely, assoone as he had giuen vp the ghost, the soule vni∣ted to the deuinitie, descended into the bottome of hell: and when he had touched the band of darkenesse as a fearefull and glorious spoyler, the wicked and hellish Legions were afrayde, and trembling, began to enquire, saying, Who is this dreadfull and glorious man? Eusebius writing of the resurrection of our Sauiour, hath the lyke: We must
knowe that in the selfe same houre wherein our Sauiour bowing his head gaue vp the ghost, his body béeing left, in the graue, his Soule with the Diuinitie went downe, to triumph ouer Hell. Fulgentius writing to King Thra∣symund in his third booke and eight Chapter, not drea∣ming but well aduised, thus writeth: The true humanitie of the Sonne of God neyther was wholie in the graue, nor wholie in Hell, but in the Sepulcher he lay dead ac∣cording to his true fleshe, but in his Soule descended into Hell. In his Soule he returned to the flesh which lay in the Sepulcher, but in respect of the Deuinitie, which ney∣ther is holden in place, nor limited by bond, he was who∣lie in the graue with his flesh, and wholie with his Soule in Hell. And by this meanes was fully euery where Christ, because God was not seperated from the huma∣nitie which he had assumpted, which was both with his Soule in Hell, that from Hell his Soule might returne a Conqueresse, and was with his flesh, that by reason of his spéedie resurrection, it might not be corrupted. I haue héere alleaged the olde which disprooue your assertion, for all these accord with mée. Now to these will I adde also the iudge∣ments of some newe Writers. Mollerus a very learned Minister of Germany, on the 16. Psalme, thus teacheth: Christ would shewe his victorie in a certaine sort ouer the Diuells to strike perpetuall terrors into them, and to take away from vs the feare of their tyrannie. To this agréeth Musculus on the sixtie and eight Psalme. This GOD which was in Christ, reconciling the world to himselfe, first descended into the lowest partes of the earth, then he led captiuitie captiue, and not only wée are deliuered from the captiuitie of Satan, sinne, and damnation, but also triumphing ouer them as Tyrants, he hath ascended aboue all heauens to fulfill all things. The same learned Father interpreting the second Chapter of the Colossi∣ans, thus hath: There are some that be perswaded it is an absurditie, if it be sayd that Christ did triumph ouer
the principalities and powers, but if all these things be at∣tributed to God the Father, that he did them with Christ, and in Christ, we may truly reade héere, triumphing ouer them in his owne person. In like sort dooth Hemingius expounde this place in the second Chapter of the Colos∣sians: As by his death he conflicted with the Diuell on the Crosse, so by his glorious descending into Hell, Resurrec∣tion, and Ascention, he triumphed, as it is Ephes. 4. leauing his Crosse lift vp as a monument of his victorie. So doth M. Fox vnderstand this place in a booke which hée hath written, entituled, Christus triumphans. Therefore in this behalfe you haue tolde a manifest vntruth, where∣fore I shall thinke you will scarce haue care to set forth the truth of God, when you will presumptuously vtter such an vntruth, which may be reproued by so many and honourable witnesses. Farther, héere you leaue out at your pleasure two other endes of Christs descen∣ding into Hell, which I taught in my Sermon: the one is, the manifestation of his death, the other is, our deliuerance from Hell. Playne dealing ought to be in this case, and therefore I exspect it at your hands. Humes. Sectio. 4. But if you will see how doubtfull Augustine was in this point, I pray you reade his 99. Epistle to Euodius, where you shall finde many his doubts and almost no other thing affyrmed for certaintie, but only that hee doubteth not that Christ went to Hell, building vpon the wordes of the Prophet Dauid, and the Apostle Saint Peter: Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hell, nor suffer thy holie one to see corruption. Where I can not choose but wonder what should moue so worthy a wit, and so learned followers of him, seing it is apparant that the word doth signifie aswell the sorrowes of hell, as the place of hell in the scripture to passe by that significatiō
of the word, which the whole church of Christ cōfesseth to be true, that our Sauiour did suffer vpon the Crosse whole torments of hell for our redemption, and to fall vpon that signification which hath slender proofe, and led them iuto such streites as Augustine himselfe can∣not escape. Whosoeuer doubteth that the name of hell is vsed in the Scripture, for those sorrowes let him read that of 1. Samuel 2. 6. The Lord killeth and makaeth aliue, he casteth downe to hell and bringeth vp againe. Or that of Dauid Psal. 30. 3. Thou hast brought my soule out of Hell. Or that of Ionas 2. 2. I haue called to thee out of the bow∣els of hell. And many other places, where the woord can not signifie the pit of hell, whence there is no redempti∣on, but the sorrowes of hell which the Saintes of God did suffer in this life. Now seeing this is so, I would fain know of you (good M. Hill) why we may not more safely take the woord Hell in that signification, which you cannot deny, then you in that signification, which the better parte of Christians do take to be false. For that Christ descended into the pit of the damned, it hath no other warrant out of the woord, but such as is builded vpon a woord of a double signification, which standeth at the curtesie of the reader to take it as to him shall seeme probable. Hill. Héere you confesse that Augustine doubteth, and yet you say that in the matter in controuersie betwéene you and me he doubteth not, but proueth it by the Apostolicall and pro∣pheticall testimonies: for he willeth vs to hold it firmissima fide, with a most firme faith, and saith that none but an In∣fidell will dony it. He doubteth whether the Fathers were in hell, or whether they were conuerted in hell by Christs preaching, as some did affirme vntruly, and many such like thinges, little or nothing appertaining to the question we
haue in hand. But ad Dardanū. he doubteth not. Fo. 3. col. 272. Fo. 10. col. 1410. Fo. 3. col. 213. & 702. Fo. 6. 788. Fo. 10. 899. 989. In all these places and in many other he telleth without doubting, that he descended into hell, and the end why. To strike a terror into the diuels, and to tri∣umph ouer them: It pleaseth you to make your selfe merry with S. Augustines infirmity, I pray God you will with Saint Augustine acknowledge your owne, which by and by shal be laide before you. You wonder at S. Augustine, but we wonder at your teachers and you, for you confesse S. Augustine to builde vpon Dauid and Peter, and yet you labour to ouerthrow this building, how deceitfullye it shall now appeare. You say that hell signifieth the sorrowes of hell, sometime I graunt it dooth: Héereupon you make this argument: sometime it signifieth the sorrowes of hell, therfore it dooth so in the 16. Psalme. I deny your argumēt, and that you haue spoken an vntruth, the holy Ghoste by Peters mouth shalbe a witnes against you. For you say it is spoken of the sorrowes which Christ suffered vpon the crosse, Peter saith it is spoken of the resurrection: and in the resurrection I am sure Christ suffred no tormentes or sor∣rowes. Peters interpretation is thus, Act. 2. 32. He knowing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soule should not be left in hell, neither his flesh to see corruption. Now then héere is an answere to your demaund: these woords are spoken of the resurrection, a mat∣ter of ioy and not of torments, for Dauid saith in the person of Christ, Therefore did my hart reioyce, and my tung was glad. And moreouer also my flesh shal rest in hope. If Christ at this time did reioyce, how was he sorrowfull? if he were glad, how was he tormented? if he did rest in hope, how was it true also that he was afflicted with torments? And héere you vtter another vntruth, that Christ did svffer his whole torments on the crosse, which is most vntrue: for he suffered some in the Garden, when he said, Math. 26. 38. My soule is heauye vnto death. And some in Caiphas
house, aud some vnder Pilat: but all his torments and sor∣rowes were ended on the crosse, which I think you would haue said. Last of all the woords of the text that commeth af∣ter, aswell as the woords going before do proue, that it can∣not be spoken of Christs sorrowes, for they are these. Thou shalt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is the ful∣nes of ioy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for euer∣more. Sith then Dauid both before and after maketh men∣tion of ioy and pleasures for euermore, and as Peter saith these woordes proue the resurrection of Christ: I maruaile how you dare to contradict the meaning of the holy Ghoste. You speake not now contrary to Augustine, or Ambrose, or Hill, but contrary to Dauid and Peter themselues: you boast your selues to be the best Christians, but I shal hard∣ly beléeue you are better Christians then Dauid and Peter, In the conclusion you vtter blasphemy, for Sheol being ta∣ken sometime for the sorrowes of hell, and sometime for the place of hell, you say it standeth at the curtesie of the reader, to take it as to him shall séeme probable. Are Gods woords to be interpreted after our pleasure? Hillary was of a bet∣ter minde: he saide as God was the author of the Scrip∣tures, so God must be the Interpreter: he opened the wittes of the Desciples going to Emaus, so let vs pray that he may open our wittes that we may perfectlye vnderstand the Scriptures. Humes Sectio 5. That he neuer was there, what better proofe would a man aske then Christs own woords? Luc. 23. 46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirite. And in another place Luk. 23. 43. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradice. Where it is a world to see how men of your side do trou∣ble themselues to put out this candle. First you say that the place Into thy hands I commend my spirite, was borro∣wed of Dauid, and must be spoken of Christ in that
sence as Dauid did vse it before him. This we confesse and gather hereupon, that Christs soule did no more descend into hel then Dauids did: but say you his soule did not straite way ascend into heauen, for he liued ma∣ny yeeres after. That maketh not to the question when his soule went to heauen, but whether his soule which was still in the hands of God, euer went to hell, proue this and we will giue you the goale. As for Dauid he hauing deuoured heauen in hope, did not doubt to speake that in the present time which he was sure would come to passe shortly. Furthermore seeing Dauid was a figure of Christ, and spake many thinges of himselfe in Christs person, (which were more agreeable with the thing figured then with the figure) you must think that these wordes were spoken of Christ, who was straite way to cōmend his soule with these words vnto his Father. Wherfore if you will answere this place, you must bring proof out of the Scriptures, that he which meanes to go to hell, doth vse to commend his soule into the handes of God, or els you shal neuer be able to darken the light of this Sonne without any cloud of Sophistry. Hill. Indéede if these woords were spoken in the present time, some shew of truth were in your woords, but in the Gréeke they are in ye future tence,  Father into thy hands I wil cōmit my spirite. Now your argument is thus: Christ commended his soule vnto his Father, ergo immediatlye he went not downe to hell. Héere is more in your conclusion then is in your premi∣ses. You may conclude his soule went to heauen. But not immedlatly: for it went to hell as I haue proued before, for hell in the 16. Psalme, doth not signifie the sorrowes of hel, but the place as I haue confirmed already. Therefore it is better to translate I will commend, then I doo commend,
as Stepanus on this place noteth. Paule sayth Eph. 4. and 10. verse, Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he first descended into the lowest parts of the earth. He that descended is euen the same that ascended farre a∣boue all heauens, to fulfill all things. Now if the same Christ did first descend which did ascend, then he descended in soule and body, as he ascended in soule and body. For both these must be effected in a wonderfull maner, for they are reconed by Salomon amongst the most stupendious works of the Sonne of God. Prou. 30. 4. Who hath ascended vp to heauen, & descended? who hath gathered the winde together in his fyst? who hath established all the ends of the world? By this scripture I inferre, that to ascend and descend are as miraculous works as to create & gouern the world. But if the soule of Christ did go to heauen imme∣diatly as you affirme contrary to this text, then the descen∣ding of Christ had not bin so maruelous as his ascending. Besides, as you after alleage, there is but one ascending, but if Christs soule first went to heauen, and then his body, then were there two ascensions. But euen as Christ was but once borne and once dyed and was once buried and once rose from the dead, and but once commeth into iudgement: so as Cyprian saith in his Sermon of the ascending of Christ, Christ did once descend into hell, they shall sée God no more on the crosse, nor they that are damned in hell. Wherefore may it please you to accept the iudgement of Athanasius a Gréeke Father, and a man persecuted for the truths sake by the Arrians, he in his Créede saith thus, who suffred for our saluation, and descended into hell. And interpreting the third Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he writeth, Satan was enuious against our Sauiour, for he killed him, not knowing that it would make against himself, for Christ after his crosse going downe into hell, hath vāquished death, & because he knew not sinne, he could not be holden of death. Thus you sée, that not only Hill, Augustine & Ierome doo say, that Christ after he had vtterd these words (into thy
hands I will commend my spirit) but Athanasius a gréeke father, who better then you, vnderstood the meaning of these words. Therfore it is a wonder to sée how those of your side labour to extinguish this euerlasting light of Gods truth, and set vp a consuming candle of your owne making. Where you teach that Christs Soule did no more descend into hell then Dauids did, therein you are deceaued, for Christ was to deliuer vs from hell and Dauid also: where∣fore if Christs soule had not gone to hell, Dauids must, and mine and yours. And for this cause as you say they are true in Christ figured, but not in Dauid the figure. And héere∣vpon Peter thus reasoneth, that they could not be true in Dauid. For Christs soule was in hell, and yet not tormen∣ted, and his body in the graue, but not corrupted. Whereas Dauids body saw corruptiō, and if his soule had gone to hell it had found no redemption. Therefore to be in graue and returne without corruption, and to be in hell and returne with conquest of the diuell, were two peculiar things to the Sonne of God, and not to any other of the sonnes of men. And héere you vtter an other blasphemy that Christs soule had no other prerogatiue then Dauids soule, for by ye same reason you may argue that Christs body had no greater prerogatiue then Dauids body, for as this is false, so is the other. For as Athanasius saith in his booke of the incarna∣tion of the word, Death could not preuaile on the humane soule of Christ to tye him there, neither corruption inuading his body by tiranny could shew her force on him to putrefa∣ction, as things not well séene vnto, for to thinke so of him, so, were a wicked thing: for euen as Adam had a double pu∣nishment inflicted on him for his disobedience, the one was on his body, earth thou art, and to earth thou shalt returne, and so by this decrée the body of the Lord departed vnto the earth: but to the soule he said, Thou shalt dye the death. Hereof it cōmeth to passe that man is deuided into 2. parts, and is condemned to depart to 2. places, and therfore it was necessary that the selfesame Iudge which had made this de∣crée,
that he by himselfe being vnder the colour of a condem∣ned man, should frée from that sentence all beléeuers. Héere you sée by this learned Father, that Christs soule went to hell to deliuer our soules from hell, and his body to the graue to deliuer vs from death, and by this meanes both body and soule personally and not potentially (as you teach) working our deliuerance from death & hell, haue those prerogatiues which Dauids soule and body had not. And for this conside∣ration though the one was in the graue, & the other in hell, yet both were in the hands of the Lord. Héere then we must learne what the hands of the Lord do signifie. Sometime the hand of God doth signifie the Sonne of God, Psal. 144. 7. Send thy hand from aboue. Sometime it signifieth the power of God, Psalm. 136. 12. With a mighty hand, and outstretched arme. Thirdly the bountifulnes of God, Psal. 145. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest euery li∣uing thing with thy blessing. Fourthly it signifieth con∣solation, Ezec. 3. 22. The hand of the Lord was with me comforting me. Fiftly grace, Psalm. 118. 16. The right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly. Sixtly it signifieth the gift of prophecie, Ezec. 8. 1. The hand of the Lord fell there vpon me. Seuenthly mercy, Psal. 37. 24. Though he fall he shal not be cast off, for the Lord putteth vnder his hand. Eightly the protection of the Lord, Psal. 31. 15. My times are in thy hand. Ninthly the aide of the Lord, Psal. 74. 11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand. Tenthly the punishment of the Lord, Iob. 19. 21. Haue pity on me (o yee my friends) for the hand of the Lord hath tou∣ched me. Lastly it signifieth the gouernment of the Lord, Psal. 95. 4. In his hand are all the corners of the earth. This place therefore must néedes haue this construction, into thy consolation, mercy, protection and gouernment, I will commende my soule. I hope you your selfe commende your soule into the hands of God euery day, but yet you minde not to goe to heauen immediatly. So said Dauid, Psal. 30. 5. Into thine hands I commende my spirit, but
he went not to heauen in many yeares after, neither did Christ ascend into heauen in many dayes after, but went downe to hell, where it was in the protection and gouern∣ment of the Godhead, which as you confesse descended into hell. For as we being in the damned world, are in the pro∣tection and hand of the highest, so Christ being in the place of the damned, after a wonderfull manner was also in the Lords aide and protection, by meanes whereof he hath wrought our deliuerance from hell. Therefore proue you that Christ went straitway to heauen, and you shall effect that which many of your side haue attempted, but neuer yet any could bring to passe. It is written of Procustes that if any were too short for his bed, he would stretch them out, and make them fit for his lodging: so you, this place being too short to fit your waste, will enlarge it with a word (im∣mediatly) which is not in the place primitiue or deriuatiue, expressely, or by way of implication. Moreouer where you say, if I will aunswere this place I must proue that he that mindeth to goe to hell, doth vse these words. I wonder that you dare vse such blasphemous spéeches, for hereby you in∣sinuate that Christ was but a méere man, and that other men haue a part in the worke of our redemption aswell as Christ. For as he is our only Sauiour, so as Luther saith on Gen. 21. Chapter. This was singular in Christ (Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to sée corruption,) for his soule could not be deteined in hell, nor his body in the graue. For as this was singuler in Christ that he did giue vp his ghost, so was it singular in him to go to hell and returne againe. Ambrose saith, Tradidit spiri∣tum suum quia non inuitus amisit, quod enim emittitur vo∣luntarium est, quod amittitur necessarium. He gaue vp the ghost because he lost not his soule against his will: for that which is emitted is voluntarie, but that which is amitted is necessary. Theophilact saith, he cryed out with a loude voice & gaue vp the ghost, for he had power to lay down his life, & take it vp again. Now whē you can proue that you or
any of your side haue this power in you to dye when he will, and liue againe when he will, then will I prooue that he that speaketh these wordes (Into thy hands I com∣mende my spirit) hath an intent to goe to Hell. But as Christ his birth was a singular thing in him, so was his death buriall, descending into hell, resurrection, and ascention into heauen. Eccle. 8. 8. Man is not Lord ouer the spirite, to retaine the spirite. Aud Iohn 10. 18. Christ saith, No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe: I haue power to lay it downe, and power to take it vp againe. By these two places it is euident, that no man can lay down his owne spirite, but the only Sonne of God had that prerogatiue, and therefore as the laying downe of his spirite and the taking vp of his spirite againe was won∣derfull: so was the state of the soule and body during the time of the seperation of the partes of the humanity, singu∣lar and wonderfull. Humes Sectio. 6▪ For the other place you bring a ready answere out ofM. Hils an∣swere to the place, This day shalt thou be with me in paradice. Augustine, of that which is God, but not of that which is man: how ready soeuer this construction be, I am well assured it can not stand with the woords of Christ. Luk. 23. 43. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradice. For what I praye you could the Godhead of Christ goe to heauen in the future time, which was stil in heauen from all eternity? For this day shalt thou be with me in Para∣dice is al one, as if he had said: this day shal thou & I be in Paradice: which no man that hath one drop of braine in his head dare auouch of Christ who was neuer thence. But here you tell me that the future verbe is attributed to the theefe onely, and that which is giuen to Christ (with me) is limited with no bound of time. I told you euen now, that thou shalt be with me, is all one with, I and thou shall be together. But to let this passe, what
say you to the theefe then that said Luk. 23. 42. Remem∣ber me Maister when thou commest into thy kingdome, This theefe was not sure of your minde, for he did suppose that Christ to whom he spake was not yet in his king∣dome, and I am sure that Christ was so good a Doctor that if the poore theefe had mist his footing, he would haue set him vp againe. Thus you see that these two pla∣ces are to strong for your ordinance, if you haue no bet∣ter shot then this, we will spread our banner with Mag∣naest inuicta veritas. Hyll. Héere you condemne S. Augustins answere. Well, be∣cause S. Augustine is dead, and in your margine you say that it is M. Hills answere, by Gods grace and his woord M. Hill will defend it. First I note a falsification of the text by you alleadged. for whereas it is in the text Luke 23. 42. Remember me Lord when thou comst into thy king∣dome. You for (Lord) say (Maister) I tolde you in the be∣ginning Eue did change the woords of the Scripture to her ouerthrow. Therefore I pray you leaue it, for otherwlse I must tell you of it: if a boy in the Grammer schoole construe  Maister, he is worthy to be beaten: and if a schoole∣maister teach so, he is worthy to be controlled: for this word  written by Stephanus with a capitall letter, will cashire your banner of boasting, and bring your glorye to shame. I preached in my sermon at Chippenham, that (to day) did signifie for euer, and (with me) did signifie the God∣head. I will not only affirme it, but confirme it, that (to day) doth signifie for euer in this place, first I proue it by this philosophicall reason out of Aristotle, which saith: In aeter∣nis non est tempus, In eternall things there is no time. For time is the measure of motion, therfore if there be time then is there motion. Now as in hell all men do suffer torments, and in earth all labour: so in Heauen all doo rest. Apoc. 14.
13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, so saith the spirite, for they rest from their labours. Therefore where there is no mutation frō day to night, nor from sum∣mer to winter, there is no day naturall or artificiall, as you suppose. And this is proued Apoc. 10. 6. And the Angell sware by him that liueth for euermore, which created heauen and the things that are therein, that time shalbe no more. And this woord  to day, is vsed for (euer) in many Scriptures. Psal. 2. 7. Thou art my Sonne this day haue I begotten thee. Act. 13. 33. And we declare vnto you touching the promises made vnto the Fathers God hath fulfilled it vnto you their Children, in that he hath raised vp Iesus, euen as it is written in the se∣cond Psalme: Thou art my Sonne to day haue I begot∣ten thee. And in ye epistle to the Hebr. 1. 5. And to which of the Angels said he Thou art my Sonne, to day haue I begotten thee. And againe, Hebr. 5. 6. He prouing Christ to be a préest for euer, thus saith. Christ took not to him∣selfe this honor, to be made an high Preest: but he that said to him, Thou art my Sonne to day haue I begotten thee, as he also in another place speaketh. Thou a preest for euer after the order of Melchisedech. Héere Dauid and the Apostle doo take this woord (to day) to signifie (for euer). And so dooth S. Augustine and M. Hill against all the gainsaiers of it in the world: For the circumstances of the place doo strongly conuince it. For what doth the théefe aske? forgiuenes of his sinnes: who can forgiue sinnes? God onely. He asketh for grace, who is the giuer of all Grace? God only? he desireth glory, who giueth glory and life euer∣lasting? God only. That God only forgiueth sinnes, it is proued Mar. 2. 7. That he is the giuer of all grace, it is ma∣nifest 1. Pet. 5. 10. That God only giueth glory and life e∣uerlasting, it is euident 2. Tim. 48. Rom. 6. and last verse. Secondly where shall he receiue this glorye? in Paradice. For as much then as the thing that is giuen is eternall, the person that giueth it is perpetuall, the place where it is gi∣uen
is euerlasting: it must of necessitie follow that the time also be world without end. And that (with me) signifieth as I doo teach the Godhaad: it is constantlye auouched by all the Fathers. Ierome on this place noteth. Christ brought the théefe from the crosse to Paradice, least any man should think conuersion to be too late at any time: he made the pu∣nishment of homicide Martirdome: the truth being counted among the wicked, he left the one in the left hand, and tooke the other in the right hand, as he will doo in the day of iudge∣ment. It were an absurd thing to say the soule of Christ on∣ly shall giue iudgement in the last day. Augustine hath the like on this place, The crosse if you mark it was the iudge∣ment seate, the Iudge was set in the middle, the one théefe which beléeued was deliuered, the other which blasphemed was condemned. To saue and condemne is the office of the deity, and therfore (with me) signifieth the Godhead, as the other théefe no doubt was with ye Diuell. Ambrose in his Sermon of the holy théefe writeth thus: He saw him han∣ging on the crosse and praieth to him as though he were sit∣ting in heauen: he seeth him condemned, and yet he prayeth vnto him as to a king. To this accordeth Damascene hand∣ling this place. In respect of his bodye he was in graue, in respect of his soule in hell: and as God he was both in Para∣dice with the theefe, and in the throne with the Father and the holy Ghoste. Therefore Ferus a writer not to be con∣temned, interpreteth these woordes thus. Mecum eris qui sum vbiq{us} omnia in omnibus. Thou shalt be with me which am euery where all in all. In Exodus 34, 6. 7. verses, be set downe the 13. names of God, and Lord is one of the first of them. Therfore when the théefe calleth Christ Lord, he acknowledgeth him to be God, and desireth to dwell with the Godhead, in whose presence is the fulnes of ioy. Where you afke me how the Godhead can goe to heauen, the word is : Euen as God came downe frō heauen, so is he said to goe vp to heauen. If you wil read Augustine in his booke of the essence of the Deuinitie he wil teach you. Psa. 68. 24.
They haue sene o God thy goings, the goings of my god & king, which art in thy sanctuary. From heauen he camo into the virgins womb, from ye virgins womb after his birth he was laid in the cratch, after that he had fulfilled all for the which he was sent of his father, he was fastned to the crosse, he was taken downe from the Crosse, he was buried in re∣spect of his flesh, but in soule he descended into hell: the third day by the power of the Deuinitie he raysed his flesh out of the graue, and after the dayes of his resurrection, the fortith day, his Apostles séeing it, he ascended into heauen, and sit∣teth at the right hand of the Father, that is, in his glorie. The théefe then prayeth to Christ, that as he should sit at the right hand of his Father in glory, so he might be parta∣ker of that glory, and that he might haue his perfect con∣summation and blisse in heauen as Christ should haue after his ascention: and that his vile body which was partaker of the suffrings of Christ, might also be partaker of his glo∣ry, and made like to the glorious body of Christ Iesu. Twise you haue told me that (thou shalt be with me) is as much as (I and thou) but you bring neither scripture nor father to confirme it in that sense that you meane it. But if you meane thus I and thou shall be together, that is, thou shalt be pertaker of the glory of the deitie, as thou hast bin pertaker of the suffrings with the humanitie it is true. For what néede had the théefe to pray for the presence of Christs soule, when he had the presence both of body and soule. But it is the presence and fellowship of the deuine na∣ture that he prayeth for, wherein as Dauid saith, is the ful∣nes of ioy and pleasures for euermore, Psal. 16. 11. In Luke. 13. 26. The Iewes say, We haue eaten and drun∣ken in thy presence, and thou taught in our streetes. Christ thus aunswereth in the 27. and 28. verses. I tel you I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of ini∣quitie, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shal see Abraham Isaac and Iacob in the king∣dome of God, and your selues cast out of dores. There∣fore
it is cléere, they are not all blessed which were present with Christs humanitie, but they of whome Saint Peter saith, 2. Pet. 1. 4. Whereby most great and precious pro∣mises are giuen vnto vs, that by them we should be pertakers of the nature of God. For therefore did Christ take vpon him our nature, that we might be pertakers of the nature of God, and be one with Christ, as he is one with his Father. Christs prayer is to this end, Ioh. 17. 21. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall beleeue in me through their word, that they all be one, as thou O Father art in me and I in thee, euen that they also may be one in vs. Humes. Sectio. 7. But now to come to your reasons. First, you make much adoo about the Hebrew names of Hell, against almost all the learned of this age. It will cost you a great deale of eloquence to perswade the world that Tremel∣lius and Iunius, men that haue spent their age in that study, did not knowe these words aswell as you. For my part, neither am I minded to stand with you vpon that point, and I see no inconuenience to hurt vs, nor van∣tage giuen you, if I graunt you that Sheol is Hell. Only I stand vpon this which I haue sayd, that this word Hell doth signify the torments of the soule, and must needes in these places which you alleage be so taken, for in the place of Psal. 16. 10. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. The very order of the words do ouerthrow your conceit: for seeing in these words the hell which his soule should not be left in, go∣eth before Christs buriall, wherein that holy one should not see corruption, tell you me what hell should go before Christs buriall but that of the passion, wherein he payd the full raunsome of our saluation, and nayled the hand writing that was against vs to the Crosse.
Hill. Two vntruthes are in these few words. First you say I make much adoo about Sheol against almost all the learned men of this age. There are on my side Luther, Aepinus, Felinus, Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Selueccer, Vrbanus Rhegius, The authors of the Centuries, Erasmus, Chy∣traeus, Mollerus, Peter Martyr, Lauaterus, Prouerb. 27. In England Lambert, Robert Samuel, Latimer, Becon, Hutchinson, Fox, and Nowell. Héere are 20. most lear∣ned men of these latter times, as I can shewe you in my poore Library, besides that most learned and reuerend Fa∣ther M. Allen, and besides the aduised iudgement of the learned Conuocations of England not only in King Ed∣wards raigne, Anno Domini. 1552. but also since the raigne of her Maiestie. 1571. In the which Conuocati∣ons I am perswaded were as learned men as any were either in England or Europe. Therefore the learned reader must either thinke you a man of little reading, and that you neuer sawe these learned mens workes, or else of great malice, that you will disable all these for learning, who left a better testimonie behinde them then euer you will, vnlesse you haue more then you haue shewed in this aun∣swere. The other vntruth is, that Sheol in the 16. Psalme doth signifye the torments of hell, which Christ suffred in his passion on the crosse. That this is vntrue it is manifestM. Humes disagreeth with Saint Peter. not by conceit, but by Peters Sermon, Act 2, 31. Hee knowing this before spake of the resurrection, that his soule was not left in hell, nor his flesh sawe corruption: You say it is spoken of the passion, Peter saith it is spoken of the resurrection: and good cause hath he so to say, for the words going before and comming after doo prooue it. The wordes going before are these, Psalm. 16, 9. Wherefore my hart was glad, my glory reioyseth, my flesh also shall rest in hope: The words following in the 11. verse
are these: Thou shalt shewe me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnes of ioy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for euermore. Where can you finde your tor∣ments, in the word (glad) or in the word (reioiseth) or in the word (rest) or in these words (fulnesse of ioy) or in these (pleasures for euermore.) Was Christ glad of his tor∣ments? Did he reioise or wéepe in them? Who would deliuer this doctrine but he that wanteth either science or conscience, or both. To lye once is a fault, but to affirme it twice is a greater fault. To speake a lye is hurtfull, but to write a lye aduisedly is more hurtfull. To lye in a matter politicall is dangerous, but to lye in deuine matters with∣out spéedie repentance is damnable. You say no vantage is geuen to me nor inconuenience to you, if you graunt Sheol to be Hell: Let your friends iudge what vantage you haue geuen to the truth, and shame to your selfe by gainsaying Saint Peter, and by affirming, that in the resurrection are torments, where Dauid and Peter say are fulnes of ioy and pleasures for euermore. Therefore it is the saying of Peter, that Christs soule was not left in hell, and not my conceit, and it is deceit in you to affirme the contrary. Further where you say that Tremellius and Iunius are better learned in the Hebrew language then my selfe, I confesse it, so are the Iewes themselues then Tremellius and Iunius, shall I therefore beléeue the Iewes? no more will I beléeue the Translation of any other learned man, if hée disagrée with Dauid and Saint Peter. Final∣ly, to aunswere your curious question, you aske me in what hell was Christs soule before his buriall? To this I answere, in that hell whither all Infidels goe for their vnbeliefe. I reade but of one Hell, if you knowe any more let me sée your proofe, and then will I tell you into what hell Christ descended. But who but you doth thinke it an vnpossible thing for a soule to descend into hell before the body be buried? The soule in an instant passeth to heauen or hell, but the body I am sure must haue time to be buried: for
bodies are in places circumscriptiuely, Angels and soules definitiuely, and God is in all places vniuersally. And the soule came out of hell into the body, before the body could come out of the graue: therefore most aptly it is saide Acts 12. 31. Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nor suffer my flesh to see corruptiou. For as Augustine saith in his 57. epistle ad Dardanum, That was spoken of his soule which came from hell so quickly, this of his body which could not corrupt by reason of his spéedy resurrection: and writing on the 85. Psalme he saith: wherefore this is his voice in the Psalme not by any mans coniecture, but by the expasition of th'apostle, Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to sée corruption. Humes. Sectio 8. Therefore to let this passe, your next reason is from that place of Paule Ephe. 4. 9. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that descended first into the lowermost partes of the earth. Where you holde out of the Hebrew, that the lowermost partes of the earth must needs signifie the pit of hell: which thing if it were so sure as you beare vs in hand, then were it a wonder that no diuine (I speake of the modester sort) did euer yet gather vpon that place hell, which they dare not dispute, where it were in the very center of the earth. But whereas you auouch so confidently, that Erets tacthioth doth signifie hel, as cō∣monly in the Hebrew tung, as our English name Hell is vsuall for that place among vs: though I meane not to stand with you for the tung, giue me leaue to dissent from you in this, for in some of the places which you cite, in my simple vnderstanding it cannot carrye that sence. You quote the 63. Psal. They which seeke my soule, shall go into the lowermost partes of the earth. This I think cannot be hell, for first it were a presumption for the Prophet to enter so farre into Gods secrets, as to iudge
his enemies. 2. It standeth not (me thinketh) with the affection of a godly minde to assigne that place to his enemies, out of the horror whereof there is no redemp∣tion, for the children of God do rather pray for their e∣nemies and wish their amendment. This place may wel be construed of the graue, and in my simple iudgement it is an argument to lay the pride of them which sought his soule, and a comfort to himselfe, that their enmitye must needs haue an end one daye, when the graue shall deuoure them. The woordes following confirme this sence. They shall fall on the edge of the Swoord. Psal. 63. which cannot be spoken but of temporall death. Hill. Indéede I brought this place Ephe. 49▪ to proue that Christ descended into Hell. And whereas you charge me with immodesty for so alleadging of it, I must néeds charge you with two vntruthes in answering this allegation. The one is, that I called it the pit of Hell, which phrase I neuer vsed: The other is, you haue impudently auouched, that none of the modester sorte of deuines haue euer alleadged this place to proue the descending of Christ into hel. For ma∣ny, and those both learned and modest haue alleadged this▪ place to this purpose. Athanasius interpreting this Epistle and text thus writeth▪ Into what place did he descend? Into hell truely, which he calleth according to the common opini∣on of men, the lowest partes of the earth. Ambrose on this place saith thus. This Christ therfore comming down from heauen into the earth was borne a man, afterward he dyed & descended into hell, from whence rising the third day, he wēt vp to heauen before all mortall men, that he might shewe death to be vanquished to euery creature. Chrisostome on this place saith. He went to those partes of the earth, then the which nothing is lower, and from thence he ascended in∣to heauen, then the which nothing is higher. The like hath
Augustine li. de Trin. cap. 19. Ierome on this text thus noteth. That Hell is vnder the earth no man doubteth, for he that descended in soule into hell, ascended both bodye and soule into heauen. Mollerus a learned Minister of Germa∣ny on the sixtéene Psalme saith: that the descending into hel is plainely proued out of the Ephesians the fourth chapter. Musculus on the 68. Psal. thus writeth. This God which was in Christ reconciling the worlde vnto himselfe, first des∣cended into the lowest partes of the earth, then he led capti∣uitie captiue, and not only we are deliuered from the capti∣uity of Satan, sinne, death and damnation: but also Christ triumphing ouer them as tirants, hath ascended aboue all heauens, to fulfill all things: Hemingius on the 2. Chapter to the Colossians thus also teacheth. As by his deathe he conflicted with the enemye on the crosse, so by his glorious descending into hel, resurrection and ascention, he triumphed as it is Ephe 4. Leauing his crosse lift vp as a monument of his victory. To conclude, Alesius a very learned preacher of Scotland, on the 19. chapter of Iohn, affirmeth that the 1. Pet. 3. and Eph. 4. do manifestly proue the descending of Christ into hell, if Athanasius, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Augustine and Ierome, of the olde fathers, and Mollerus, Musculus, Hemingius and Alesius of the new writers: be all immodest diuines, then haue you truelye saide: but if in the iudgement of the learned, all these were most reue∣rend men, then most shameles are you to accuse them of the want of modesty. Moreouer where you saye no deuine da∣reth to dispute where hell is: it is true in some sorte, for no deuine can circumscribe the place of hell which is infinite, nor yet of heauen: only the woord of God affirmeth that heauen is aboue, Gal. 4. 26. And hell is beneath, Prouerbs 15. 24. Therefore the lowest partes of the earth may well be taken for hell: Then you goe farther and say, that Erets tachthi∣oth doth not signifie hel, Psal. 63. and for this you bring two reasons: the one is, that it were a presumption in the Pro∣phet to iudge his enemies: 2, that it standeth not with the
affection of a godly minde, to assigne hell to his enemies, but to pray for them: to your first reason this I answere. In the Psalme 9. 18. Dauid vseth the like spéeche: The wicked shall be turned to hell, and all the people that forget God: which text Caluin thus expoundeth, the Hebrewe woord Sheolah which was doubtfull, I haue not doubted to translate hell, for though it doth not displease me that others turne it (Sepulcher) yet it is sure héere is something noted besides common death, otherwise he should speak nothing of the reprobate, but that which did generally happen to all be∣léeuers. In the hnndred and ninth Psalme also Dauid thus praieth: Let Satan stand at his right hand, let his prayer be turned iuto sinne, let the wickednes of his Father be had in remembrance in the sight of the Lord, and let not the sinne of his mother be done away. Do you think this to be spoken presumptuously? Many such texts could I alleadge to proue that Dauid inspired with the spirite of prophecye, did foretell not onely of the tragicall destruction of bodies of his enemies, but also of the extreme damnation of their soules. This then is my replye to your second reason: these enemies were not priuate enemies, but publique, and did hate Dauid for his religions sake: Dauid therefore by the gift of prophecye doth foretell, that their soules should go to hell to be tormented, and their bodies should be the porti∣on of Foxes, that is, should neuer come to the graue, for what néed Dauid tell vs they should dye, which we know is common to all? or how can that betrue which you say, that they should be in graue, when Dauid himselfe saith they were not in any graue, but were the portion of Foxes. AndHumes disa greeth with Dauid and Caluin. so M. Caluin (whom I hope you will beléeue) teacheth you, writing vpon this Psalme and verse. To be the portion of Foxes, is as much as to be deuoured and torne of wicked beastes: for God (saith Caluin) doth threaten this: punish∣ment to the reprobate, that they shall be a pray to Wolues and dogges, because he would depriue them of the honor of their graue. Héer you sée M. Caluin saith they came not into
their graue, you say they did. How M. Caluin and you may be reconciled I knowe not: for Caluin addeth this reason. It hapneth sometime that we know the same temporall pu∣nishments to be common to the good & the bad: but this is the difference, the bones of the godly are gathered together and kept in safety, that not one of them shall perish, but the scattring of the bones of the reprobate is a signe of their e∣ternall destruction. Therefore how can the lower partes of the earth signifie the graue as you say, since (as M. Calùin truly saith) they were in no graue: Aunswere me this (good M. Humes) plainely. Psal. 63, 9. The lower parts of ye earth signifie (not the graue) but hell. Christ descended into the lower parts of the earth, Eph. 4. 9. Ergo Christ descended into hell. Humes. Sectio. 9. Next, you quote Ecclesiasticus 24, 37. I will pearce through all the lowest parts of the earth, and looke vpon them that be asleepe. Also the 31. of Ezechiel the 18. vers. Thou shalt be cast downe into the lower parts of the earth, and shalt sleepe in the midst of the vncircumcised. These two places by your leaue can not be well meant of hell. The text doth shewe plainly that heere is rest and quietnes in the place that heere is spoken of: but I hope you will not say that there is any great rest or quietnes in hell. In all these places Erets Tacthioth cannot signifye any thing but the graue. The same word is vsed also in the 139. Psal. 14. verse. My bones are not hid from thee though I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth. Heere the Prophet I beleeue doth not say of himselfe that hee was fashioned in hell, which must needs be if your assertion were true, that those Hebrew words doo signify hell, as commōly as hell in the english doth note that place. Here Beza doth well obserue, that the place of the Apostle which you alleage may fitly be applyed
to the sence of this place, and doth note vnto vs the descension of Christ into the womb of the virgin: for Erets Tachioth out of all question doth signifye his mo∣thers womb. Hill. First you say, the place quoted by me Syrac. 24. 37. ma∣keth not for the proofe of my assertion. If you had conside∣red what went before, and what followeth, you would haue bin of another minde. For before in the 8. verse it is sayd, I alone haue gon round about al the compasse of heauen, and haue walked in the bottome of the depth. Which depth Pellicanus a learned writer doth interprete abyssum mortis & inferorum, the depth of death and hell. Yea the whole Chapter speaketh of the Sonne of God, and of his wondrous works in sauing mankinde: of the which this is one, that he was not only aliue among the liuing, but after death his body was among the dead bodies, and his soule a∣mong the soules in hell, which he calleth the lower partes. The like scripture to this is in Iob. 38. 16, 17. Hast thou entred into the bottom of the sea? or hast thou walked to seke out the depth? haue the gates of death bin ope∣ned vnto thee? or hast thou seene the gates of the sha∣dowe of death. These words are thus opened by Martin Borrhauius in his learned Commentaries vpon Iob. I haue dwelled in the highest places, and my throne is in the pillar of the cloudes: I haue gone round about the compasse of heauen aboue, and haue walked in the flouds of the sea. I pearce through all the lower parts of the earth. Haue those in hell or the dead bin searched out of thée? and doost thou knowe their state and condition, and what shall happen to their bodies hereafter? and what doth happen to their soules now? The force of death and of hell he maketh manifest by the name of gates, as it is manifest in that scripture, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against thée. By these words it is euident that the nethermost parts of the earth, Syrac.
24, 37. and Zalmaueth the Hebrew word, Iob. 38, 17. doo signifye hell, and that none but the Sonne of God aboue hath personally shewed himselfe in all these places. For the place in Ezechiel that it maketh most significantly for my purpose, I will proue it by Esay, Ezechiel, and diuers other both learned & modest writers. Esay handling the same mat∣ter, saith 14, 9. Hell beneath is moued for thee to meete thee at thy cōming. And Ezechiel in the 15. and 16. ver∣sesHumes dis∣agreeth with Esay, Ezechiel, Munster, Lauater, and Pelli∣can. calleth it hell plainly. Sith then both the prophets call it hell, how dare you to interpret it graue. But that the ne∣thermost parts of the earth do signify hell, I prooue it out of the 12. ver. of Ezechiel. And the strangers haue destroyd him euen the terrible nations, and they haue left him vpon the mountaines, and in all the valleis his branches are broken. Munster on this place saith, that by the bran∣ches are vnderstoode the carcasses of his hoast which the beasts of the field did deuoure. Lauaterus the Minister of Tigurine agréeth with him. All the beasts of the field shall dwell vpon his ruine: the kings carkas shall not be laid vp into the sepulcher of his elders, but shal be a pray to crowes, griphins, and to other carniuorous birds. So doth Pellican a learned Linguist interpret this place. At the last there is an auersion or apostrophe to Pharao himselfe, or to the As∣syrian King. To whom art thou likened O thou noble and high among the trées of pleasure, thou hast passed all other in power, and yet with other kings that were in thy com∣pany they were brought to the lowermost parts of the earth (that is) to hell, among the abhominable heathen shalt thou sléepe, and lye as a wretched and miserable man. Now be∣cause you take hold of the word sléepe, you must remember that these words are spoken ironically, as it is noted in the contents of the 14. Chap. of Esay. The derision of the king of Babilon. Moreouer Lauaterus on this place of Ezekiel saith: These things may be better vnderstood out of the 14. Chap. of Esay, which prophecying of the destruction of the king of Babilon Baltassar, describeth with what bitter
scoffs he is entertained in hell. To ende, Lauaterus on this place proueth these foure things, first, that there is an hell, secondly, that hell in this chapter is called by thrée names, that is, 1. Sheol, 2. Erets Tacthioth, 3. and Bor. Hell, the lowest parts of the earth, and a pit: thirdly, that this hell is beneath vs: and lastly, that the tyrants and wicked of the world doo descend into it, and this he proueth out of Numb. the 16, 33. Psal 55, 15. And addeth also that Tertullian and Ierome doo prooue hell to be beneath in the earth. The con∣clusion then is thus, forasmuch then as the Assyrians dyed with the sword, & were deuoured of the beasts & birds of the field, I pray tell me how that can be true that you affirme that the lowest partes of the earth doth signifye the graue: for how were they in the graue that were neuer buried: therefore they were in hell as both Esay and Ezechiel doo affirme, and as Pellican, Munster, and Lauater, thrée no∣table learned men in the holy toong doo interpret it. I thinke your owne friends when they reade this will confesse you either to be ignorant of the word of God, or else to wrest it cōtrary to the meaning of the holie ghost. Moreouer, where you mislike with me because I said that Erets Tacthioth, that is, the lowermost parts of the earth doth signifye hell generally in the Hebrew toong, and you bring an instance out of the 139. Psal. and 14. verse, where you prooue that the lower parts of ye earth doth signifie the mothers womb, and therefore it doth not signifie hell alwaies: this is a chil∣dish reason. In a metaphoricall signification it signifieth the mothers womb, therefore in his proper signification it can not signifie hell. Argumentum a metaphora ductum non va∣let, an argument drawen from a metaphore is of no force. And that héere is a metaphor, M. Caluin shalbe the iudge. He compareth (saith Caluin) the mothers wombe to the lowest and inward dens of the earth: and a little after, for no doubt Dauid would expresse metaphorically that inesti∣mable cunning which appeareth in the figure of mās body. The mothers womb is cōpared to hel for the darknes of it:
for as Caluin saith, that artificer which maketh a cunning péece of work in a darke place is more to be cōmended then he which doth the like in the light. Dauid also is here said to be made in the nethermost partes of the earth, because he was by nature the child of wrath & of hell, if he had not bin deliuered therehence by Iesus Christ. Bréefely, where you say that he descended into the Uirgins wombe, and that it is the true meaning of the place Eph. 4. 9. both you and your Maister B. are deceaued. For Paul reproueth you Ephe. 4. 10. He that descended is euen the same that ascended. Now the body and soule of Christ ascended into heauen, therefore the body and soule of Christ descended into the vir∣gins womb: if the body did descend into the virgins womb, then Christ took not flesh of the virgin. Thus that you may contradict me, you are not afraide ignorantly or wittinglye to deny the incarnation of our Sauiour: Theophilact saith well of these woords, when you read that the Sonne of man came downe from heauen, you may not think that his fleshe came downe from heauen, for this is the opinion of Here∣tiques, which did teach that Christ brought his bodye from heauen, and did passe through the virgin, I hope you holde not this opinion, but if you holde this interpretation you must néeds fall into it, For he that descended, is euen the same that ascended. Eph. 4. 10. Humes Sectio 10. But heere to let you alone with your Hebrew, these woords can no waies be taken as you beare vs in hand, for hell: but do purporte to vs the same that Iohn tolde vs in other woords, Ioh. 16. 18. I came from my Father into the worlde, againe I leaue the world and go to my father. For seeing the Apostle in this place bringeth his ascen∣sion as an argument of his descension, which Iohn the E∣uangelist did before: it must needs follow by necessarie consequence, that his discense was rather thither whence
he ascended. Now I trust you will not say he ascended into heauen from hell: but rather from the earth in the sight of his desciples. 2. If the place whence he descen∣ded was heauen, hell could not be the place whether he descended. For if he were there at all, he went not thi∣ther 30. yeeres and more after he descended: if you will say, that he descended first into the earth and afterward into hell, then that descense could not be one motion, which was so many yeeres intermitted, but needes must be two. First from heauen into the earth, and next from the earth to hell. Lastly if hell were the place whither he descended, it must needes be also the place from whence he ascended, which cannot be: for his returning thence (if euer he was there) was when his soule retur∣ning into his body, he came again to his Disciples, from whom he was seperated before by death, which in the Scripture is called his resurrection, and not his ascenti∣on. For his resurrection (as it hath beene heertofore taught) is no part of his ascention. If it were so as you beare vs in hand. that thence his ascention beginneth, then his returning againe to his Disciples was but a pro∣ceeding so farre in his way, and his abode with them but a resting place, which was neuer hard of to this day. Hill. Where you say you will let me alone with my Hebrew woords, and yet deny they signifie hel, I hope because I haue proued that they signifie not the graue (as you haue ignorant ly or against your conscience affirmed) at your next aunswe∣ring you will say they signifie hell, and confesse your disagrée ment with Dauid, Esay, & Ezechiel. Now you conclude with certaine pregnant reasons as you imagine: your first is this: These words do purporte vnto vs that which Iohn tolde vs in other woords, I came from my Father into the world, aud againe, I leaue the world and goe to my Fa∣ther.
Ioh. 16. 18. This is nothing pertaining to the matter we haue in hand, vnles this be your argument. Christ came into the world, ergo he went not into hell. Héerof I thus ar∣gue, Christ descended into the virgins wombe (as your selfe say) ergo he came not into the world. Or thus, Christ descen∣ded into the worlde, ergo he descended not into the graue. Christ was borne of the virgin, and came into the world to reconcile vs to his Father by his death, taking away our sinnes, and triumphing in his owne person ouer death and hell, therefore not only Christ came downe into the worlde, but as our body for sinne lyeth in the graue, so his body wēt into the graue: and because our soule was mancipate vnto hell, his soule went into hell, that by his discending our soules might be freed from hell. In your next reason you say that Christ descended thither whence he ascended: Now that is méerely false, as appéereth Math. 12. 40. For as Io∣nasM. Humes disagreeth with Ma∣thew. was in the whales belly 3 dayes and 3. nights, so shal the Sonne of man be 3. daies and 3. nights in the hart of the earth. Now Christ ascended from the superficies of the earth, but he descended into the hart of the earth. Therefore as this is no good argument, Christ ascended from the mount ergo he ascended not from the graue, so this is also a weake argument, Christ ascended from the world, ergo he went not into hell: M. Humes lyeth in his bed and early ariseth, af∣terwards many séeing him he rideth towards Bromham, ergo M. Humes came from Bath and not from his bed. Then you adde this reason, if Christ descended into hell, then it was 30. yéeres after his birth, and so it was not one moti∣on: you charge me with cloudes of sophistry, but héere is a thick mist of sophisications: what you mean by this motion I know not, but all the actions of our Sauiour are aptly de∣uided into humility and glory: of his humilitye there are 4. degrées. First he came into the virgins womb, secondly into the world: thirdly to the graue: fourthly to hell. Of his glo∣ry and exaltation likewise there are foure degrées. First he came out of hell and the graue: secondly he conuersed in the
earth: thirdly he was carried in the aire in a cloud, and then entred the heauens with glory. Also where you say, that if hel were the place whether he descended, it must néeds be the place from whence he ascended. This as I haue said before is vtterly false, if you mean the immediate place from whēce he ascended, for it is known to all beléeuers, that Christ did descend into the graue, but he did not ascend immediatlye from the graue, therefore your reason is against Scripture, where you make a distinction betwéen the resurrection and the ascention: you may vnderstand if it please you, yt Eph. 4. 9. The woord (ascend) containeth in it all the degrées of Christs exaltation, and therfore the resurrection also: as the woord descend doth comprehend all the degrées of Christs humilitye. Humes. Sectio 11. Your next argument is taken from the wordes of our Sauiour to Mary Magdalen, Ioh. 20. 17. Touch me not, for I haue not yet ascended to my Father. Wherupon you ga ther, that seing the whole man is said to be there where the soule is, that Christs soule was not yet with his Fa∣ther, seeing he doth say that he was not there himselfe. Here truely it is strange that a man of your learning and iudgement, seeth not so apparant a fallacy: an argumēt you know negatiue a toto ad partes deuisas, was neuer good among the learned: as for example, the whole race of Mankinde is not in England, ergo there is no man in England. Or Edmund Campions whole body is not ouer Newgate, therfore no parte thereof hangeth there. That these words are ment of the whole, it is manifest by the text, for that which had not beene with the Father, was the same that Mary was forbidden to touch: That I trowe you will not say was his soule, but his soule and his body ioyned together, that is to say, the whole man Christ: wherefore it was the whole man that he saith here was not with his Father, and not his soule alone.
Hill. My next place was not this, but a text out of Syrac. 17. 21. At the last shall he arise and reward them, and shall repay their reward vpon their heads, and shall turne them into the lower parts of the earth. In the margin is noted Math. 25. 35. So that this place sheweth that after iudgement, the wicked shalbe turned into the lower partes of the earth, that is, hell. This place, because you nor your Sinod can answere, you haue passed it ouer and said nothing to it, but are now come to your scholepoints, the which whē I vse you call sophistry: and so it were indéede if I did vse them as you doo. You say an argument drawen negatiuely from the whole to the parts doth not hold. True it is if by (parts) you meane integrall parts, but not essentiall parts. My instance was this, Math. 8, 11. Many shall come from the East and the West, and shall rest with Abraham Isa∣ac and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen. Out of this place I proue that where the soule of man is after death, there is the man sayd to be, as we vsually say that these Pa∣triarkes and all the saints are in heauen though their bodies be in the earth and are dust and ashes. If then the soule of Christ were in heauen vntill his resurrection, then could not these words of Christ be true Iohn. 20. 17. Touch me not, for I haue not yet ascended vnto my father, for it is the preterperfectense . Therefore as this is vntrue to say that Abraham is not in heauen because his body is not in heauen: so this is false to say Christ was not in heauen, because his body was not in heauen. Our body is gouerned by the soule, and man taketh his appellation of a reasonable creature not of ye body but of ye soule: and therfore if Christs soule went vp into heauen as you say, this can not be true (I haue not yet ascended to my father) Besides if Christs soule went first to heauen & afterward his soule & body together, then were there 2. ascensions: proue this, and I will geue
you the goale. You dally also with my argument in this manner. The whole race of mankinde is not in England, ergo there are no men in England. Do you thinke there is no more vnion betwixt Christ and his soule, then betwéene all the men of the world? then by this reason the body and soule of Christ were neuer vnited together. Your next re∣semblance is this: Edmund Campions whole body is not ouer Newgate, Ergo no part of him. Héere is a foule error to thinke Christs soule to be an integrall or diuisible part, which is an essentiall or indiuisible: for by your reason Christs soule is mortall and may perish as the integrall partes of Campion doth. You vtter also in an other error in these words (the whole man Christ) for the whole man doth not make Christ, but God and man as you may sée in Athanasius Créede: As the reasonable soule and flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ. I will ende there∣fore with this saying of Irynaeus who liued vnder Marcus Antonius in the yeare of our Lord God 125. which thus proueth the descending of Christ into hell. For he writing against Heretiques that sayd hell was in this world (as many doo now adayes) thus reproueth them in his fift booke and last Chapter. As Ionas taried in the whales belly thrée dayes and thrée nights, so shall the Sonne of man be in the hart of the earth. And the Apostle saith, what is it that he ascended, but that he first descended into the lowest partes of the earth? and Dauid prophecying of this, sayd: Thou hast deliuered my soule from the nethermost hell: and ri∣sing againe the third day he sayd to Mary which he sawe first and worshipped him: Touch me not, for I haue not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my Desciples and tell them I will go to my Father and to your Father. If then the Lord kept the law of the dead that he might be the first begotten of the dead, how are they ashamed that saye hell is in this world. Thus you sée it is no strange thing to sée this scripture alleaged to prooue that Christs soule was not in heauen vntill his visible and glorious ascention. Iri∣naeus
a man of more learning and iudgement then I am of, alleaged it to the same ende aboue 1300. yeares agoe, and then it was accompted a currant argument among the learned. Humes. Sectio. 12. Now let vs come to the great bulwarke of your de∣fence you choose to be your foundation and text. Peter sayth that Christ was put to death in the flesh and quickned in the spirit, by the which he went and preached to the spirits that are in prison which were in times past disobedient, &c. Here following the Geneua translatiō, I leaue some van∣tage that the Greeke doth offer me, but I hope to finde heere matter enough to defende the truth. Beza heere (whome we also follow because he groweth neerest to the meaning of the Apostle) by this word spirit doth giue vs to vnderstand the deity of Christ, following Iohn that calleth God a spirit, Iohn. 4. 24. and by this word flesh his manhood conteining both his body and soule as he findeth the word vsed both of Paule, 1. Tim. 3. 16. God was manifested in the flesh, and also of Peter himselfe, 1. Pet. 4. 1. Christ suffred for vs in the flesh. Which antithe∣sis of the deuine and humane nature Paule doth also ex∣presse in the same tearmes speaking of Christ, which was made of the seed of Dauid according to the flesh, and declared mightely to be the Sonne of God according to the spirit. Rom. 1. 3. 4. where you see he vseth the words no otherwise then he findeth them vsed in the scriptures. Now that this can not be the sence of them you reason thus. First you say that this participle  that is, going doth signifye motion from some place which can not stand with the deuine Essence, which can not possibly leaue any place, being at all times in all places. To this I aun∣swere, that it is spoken of the same spirit or deuine es∣sence in Gen. 18. 21. I will go downe and see whether the So∣domites
do altogether according to the cry that is come vnto me. And in Exod. 3. 8. I am come downe to deliuer them, that is the Israelites, out of the hand of the Aegiptians. You can not be ignorant (M. Hill) that the holie ghost speaketh oftentimes of the deuine Essence by a figure called , whē God declareth his presence in one place more then in another by some notable effect, which in this place was most necessary to expresse the continuall presence of Christ in his Church in those dayes of Noah, and so in all ages either past or to come, departing as it were from all other places (which indeed he can not) and sitting as it were a perpetuall moderator and ruler thereof. Next you alleage the other participle , that is quickned, that because it is passiue, it can not stand with the deuine essence which can not suffer. This we deny not, for we attribute not this par∣ticiple to the deuine essence, but to the whole Christ God & man: for we say not Christ the spirit was quick∣ned, but Christ was quickned in spirit. Thirdly you tell vs that mortified and quickned were both participles, and both attributed to Christ at one time. We confesse they were attributed to one Christ, but we see no mat∣ter to leade vs to refer them both to one time. But by the contrary (me thinks) that the order of the wordes haue sufficient matter in them to proue that he was first mortified and then quickned. As for the distinction of time, the distance was not to great as to require it. To this you adde how he was dead, and how he was aliue, by putting to killed flesh and to quickned spirit. The very text as I take it will deny you this, for it saith not that the flesh was killed and the spirit quickned, but that Christ was killed in the flesh and quickned in the spirit, which is all one, as if he had said that Christ dyed as he was man, and ouercame death as he was God. Which thing also Paule doth expresse in other words, 2. Cor. 13, 4. He was crucified concerning his infirmitie, yet
liueth he through the power of God. Fourthly, you say that the scriptures do ioyn together this going & preaching close to his passion, as if he had said, assone as he had suf∣fered he went & preached. This (as if) concludeth no necessary matter. We expect demonstrations, & cannot be caried with as, and if. Fiftly, you adde out of Gen. 6. that the preching of Noah is attributed to the 3. person, and not to the second, which putting on mans flesh re∣deemed vs. We confesse that ability to preach was gi∣uen Noah by the holy ghoste, but he was stirred vp and sent by the whole Trinity. The actions whereof seeing they are common to all three, he erreth not that attri∣buteth them to any of the three. Where you saye that Christ was raised from the dead by the first person, and not by the second: I see not how that can stand with the truth of the Scriptures, which telleth me that the second person did put on man, and did neuer forsake him in all his distresses. Afterwards you tel me that  that is disobedient, and sometime doo seperate the time of their disobedience and Christs going to thē. But I can not take it at your woord, for  is, not as you seeme to take it a Verbe but a Participle, gree∣ing with  that is spirits in the verse before: and the Aduerb  sometimes belongeth to the prin∣cipall Verbe,  that is, preached, so that the sence must needs be, he preached sometimes to the spirites that are in prison, and were disobedient in the dayes of Noah. Whereas you argue this can not be spoken of the preaching of Noah, because he preached to men and to spirites: it is strange to me how he can preach to men and not to spirits, seeing that whosoeuer doth instruct men dooth also instruct their soules. Lastlye. you charge this construction to doo violence to the text, ta∣king the woord spirite for the diuinity in one place, and for the power thereof in another: where you doo vs great wrong, for Beza himselfe refuseth it, and proueth
it is not taken for the power of the deitye in this place at all. Hitherto haue I answered all that you can saye a∣gainst vs, now will I proue that your sence which you make of this place, can not stand with the truth of the text. You take this woord (flesh) only for the bodye of Christ, which dyed and was buried: and the woord (spi∣rite) for his soule, which you beare vs in hand descen∣ded into hell, preached to the soules which had beene rebellious in the dayes of Noah: if this your constructi∣on shall goe for currant, then the apostle speaketh no∣thing heere of Christ, which may not be verified of any man. For though our bodyes dye, yet our soules liue as∣well as his. The spirite here (as it appeereth by the text) doth signifie that which gaue life, to that which was dead: that I trust was not his soule, but his deity: third∣ly this participle  killed, doth signifie not onelye the death of the bodye, but also whatsoeuer Christ did suffer either in body or soule for the redemption of our bodies and soules: and doth comprise his whole passion which the Spriptures doth many times terme death, which if it be so (as it is so indeed) then the woord flesh noteth vnto vs the whole subiect of his passion, that is, the whole man Christ, for it was expedient that he did as∣wellIf this be true, then Christ was not dead as Peter saith. suffer in soule for our soules, as in body for our bo∣dies: or else he had been but halfe a redemer. Fourthly seeing his body was quickned, that is, restored from the graue aswell as his soule from the sorrowes of hell, if you take spirite there for the humane soule, then you confound those thinges which the Apostle doth distin∣guish, attributing that to the soule alone, which is also common to the body. Fiftly, seeing  is to giue life, and  to receiue life, this cannot be vnder∣stood of the soule, which neuer lost life after that it had once liued with the body, and therefore could neuer receiue it againe. Here you tell vs that to be quickened is to be deliuered from miseries: how the English word
may be taken I leaue it to the wise, but in the Greeke woord  or the Latin word viificari, I am sure it were strange and seldome seene to finde that sence. Furthermore, I am sure that if this deuise may stand, that then you will ouerthrowe the antithesis betweene  and  dead and quickned, for if quickned doth not signifie a restitution to life, what an∣tithesis can it haue with death or dead. Lastlye, adde to those if it please you that infallible reason of Beza, ta∣ken from the scope and drifte of the Apostle, to whose greater notes I referre you, being not able to handle his reason so effectually as he dooth himselfe. Hill. Héere you play the Captaine, and will beate downe bul∣warkes, and therefore you should haue these 4. properties in you: vertue, knowledge, authority and felicity: for the first two they are in you (God graunt you vse them to his glory) but what authoritye you haue to interprete the woord I know not, therfore in this case (I hope) you shall haue no fe∣licitie. Where you say that this woord (spirite) doth signifie the deity: and this woord (flesh) the humanity of Christ, and that there is an antithesis betwéene the diuine and humane nature: I confesse that (spirite) sometime dooth signifie the Godhead, and (flesh) the humanity of Christ. But they doo not so signifie in this place: as I proue by the circumstan∣ces of the text and the woords themselues. For where you say  killed or put to death, dooth signifie the whole passion of Christ, and  signifieth the resurrection of Christ that cannot be: for of the passion of Christ is men∣tion made before in the same 18. verse, Christ suffered for vs, the iust for the vniust, to bring vs to God. Now after his sufferings ended as Peter saith, he was both killed and made aliue. Now of his resurrection is mention made in the 21. verse, as of his ascention in the 22. verse. Therfore sée∣ing
the suffrings of Christ are mentioned before, and his re∣surrection is namelye set downe after: whereof can these woords be vnderstoode, but of the seperation of the bodye and the soule, and of the state of them during their seperation, for an antithesis as you know is of contrary, or diuers things, as in this place you sée, in (killed and quickned.) Now how both these were true at one time, S. Peter doth shew, for at the same time he was dead as concerning his body, he was aliue in spirite, that is in soule: for the soule seperate from ye body is aptly called in spirite. Eccle. 12. 7. And dust return to earth as it was, and the spirite returne to God that gaue it. So is it taken Heb. 12. 23. Act. 7. 59. and so dooth this woord signifie in this place: for Christ was not killed both in body and soule, but only in body and in flesh, for if the soule of Christ had béene killed, then had it béene mortall. Therfeore Athanasius, Epiphanius, and all the Fathers which did confute the Heretiques called Damoerite & Ap∣polinaris, which denyed Christ to haue a soule, doo confute them by this place, prouing that his spitite was among the spirits, that his soule seperate from his body, was among the soules seperate from their bodies. This interpretation you sée is gathered out of Gods woord, and is made more mani∣fest by the woords following: , which we translate. In which spirite he went & preached to the spirites in prison, First you tran∣slate  by the which. But in the 1. Pet. 16. you doo not so translate it, nor in the 2. Chap. and 12. ver. the same woords  are Eph. 1. 13. 2. 22. 5. 18. and so could I cite at the least an hundreth texts in the new testament, where if you tran∣slate  by the which, or by whom, you shal ouerthrow the meaning of the holy ghoste. The next woord in construing, is  which as I haue saide before, so I auouche still, is spoken not of the deity neuer in all the Scriptures, and therefore must néedes be spoken of the soule of Christ. To confute this, you alleadge Gen. 18. 21. Exod. 3. 8. First I
must tell you these bookes were written in the Hebrewe toong, and not in the Gréeke, I craued an instance out of the new testament. Secondly, in those places that you haue na∣med the interpreters do translate Iarad by the gréeke word  or , and not by . And this I proue, Ioh. 16, 7. . For if I shal not depart the cōforter wil not come vnto you, but if I shall depart I will send him vnto you. Here you sée when he speaketh of the descending of the deity, he vseth the word , but when he speaketh of the humani∣tie . And in the same Chap. verse the 28. . I came out frō the Father & came into the world: againe, I leaue the world, & go to my father. And this proprietie of speach which ye holy ghost vseth ought to be obserued. I confesse the scripture vseth the figure , but when God is said to come downe, there is vsed the verbe , or some one of the forena∣med, and when mention is made of , it is alwayes spoken of the humanitie, as it is to be séene Luk. 4. 30. 9. 51. 52. 56. 57. Luk. 13. 22. Ioh. 8. 1. And in this place of Peter the last verse is vsed the same word . He went vp into heauen. Therefore if you can quote but one text in the new Testament that  is figuratiuely applied to the deitie, your interpretation may séeme tole∣rable: but if you can not (as I knowe it is impossible) then can you neuer proue your interpretation to be agréeable to faith, because it is not agréeable to the word. Out of the next word  this I note: he that was killed and quickned did preach, but Christ was killed and quickned, ergo Christ and not the deitie preached. He preached not vocally for he was killed, ergo he preached really in soule: for here is no∣ted. First, who preached? Christ. To whome? to the spi∣rits. Where? in hell. When? after his death, and before his resurrection. This is the order of Peter and of our
Créede, which can not be by man ouerthrowen. The word , that is spirits also is not as you take it, for you say it signifieth the men in Noahs time, but you can not bring one scripture to proue it. Therefore I say as I sayd before it signifieth soules separated from the body. That my exposition is true, I haue proued by thrée scriptures, Eccle. 12, 7. Heb. 12, 23. Act. 7, 59. Now as mine is true, so will I proue yours to be false and impossible by Christs owne words. Luk. 24, 59. where our Sauiour to prooue himselfeHumes disagreeth with the words of our Sauior Luk. 24, 39 to be no ghoste, but to haue a true body after his resurre∣ction, thus reasoneth: behold my hands and my feet that I am the same, handle me, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as yee see me haue. This was Christs argument, I haue a body, therefore I am not a spirit, and so I reason against you and your teachers. The men in Noahs time had bodies, ergo they could not be called spirits. Euery boy can tell you in Oxford that Substantia is deuided into cor∣pus and spiritum, and that one of these opposit species can not be affirmed of an other. And therefore to be short when you can proue out of the new testament, that  that is, mournying is spoken figuratiuely of the deity, or  that is spirit, signifieth a man that hath a boy. I will geue you the goale, but if you will runne on this course vntill you haue prooued these two points (which you must doo if you will haue me to recant) then take héed least you run your selfe out of breath. Lastly, the word , that is prison, doth signifye hell, as it is to be séene Apoc. 20. 7. When a thousand yeeres shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison. Thus thou séest (good reader) how I haue proued my interpretation out of the word of God for euery word, which our aduersaries can not do for their interpreta∣tion: therfore thou maist safely assure thy self ours to be good, and theirs to be false. And that this word prison doth signify hell, you may sée Epiphanius, Athanasius, Fulgentius centuria 1. lib. 2. cap. 14. Peter Martyr on the Créede, Nowell in his Catechisine, Beacon in the sick mans salue,
and Crowley in his answere to the reasons of Pound the Papist. All these olde and new writers haue alleadged this Scripture as I haue doone with good warrant & conscience. Now that I haue proued this my owne interpretation, I will (by Gods grace) proue your answere to be friuilous. First you confesse that killed and quickned are Participles of one tense, and yet you say they are not referred to Christ at one time, this is méerlye false, as I thus proue: Christ was after his passion dead and aliue, or neuer; if he were neuerM. Humes disagreeth with Peter Paule and himselfe. dead and aliue at one time, then Peter saith not truely, if he were dead and aliue at one time then you speak falsely. Now you your self cōfessed that he was dead and aliue at one time a little before, and proued it out of the 2. Cor. 13. 4. He was crucified concerning his infirmity, yet liueth he by the power of God. Héere by your owne woordes Christ was aliue when he was crucified: so may I say with Peter, he was aliue when he was dead, and at one time, Then you say the (flesh) signifieth the manhoode, and (spirite) the deitye: this also is vntrue, for the body may be killed, but the soule cannot. Againe, shew me any Scripture where one and the same woord in one sentence and period, is taken for diuers things: for in this sentence, In which spirite he went and preached to the spirites that are in prison. Héere ye woord spirit in the beginning of the sentence signifieth the deity, in the latter ende the same woord signifieth the men that liued in Noahs time by your interpretation: but by my inter∣pretation it signifieth the soule seperat from the body in both places. For as Cirill saith, as Christ was with the liuing in body and soule, so to shew himselfe a true man, his bodye was among the dead bodies, and his soule among the soules. Then you auouch the preching of Noah is attributed to the whole Trinity, be it so, but can you proue that Christ after he was killed did preach in Noah, for this preaching was af∣ter Christs death, which is mentioned in the 18. verse, and before his resurrection, which is spoken of in the 21. verse. You goe forward and tell me, that  dooth not determin
the Participle , that is, disobedient, but , that is, preached. I must tell you plaine you speake neither like a Deuine, nor a Gramarian. For an Aduerd is some∣time put to a Participle, as Mathew. 2. 7. . Then Herod calling priuilye the wise men. Sometime to a Noune, as Homo egregiè impu∣dens. Sometime to an Aduerb, as Parum honestè se gerit. Therfore the Aduerb  comming after  next and immediatly, and being distinguished from  by a Comma, cannot by any example in diuinitye, or by any rule of Grammer be coupled with the Uerbe  Now to answere your infallible reasons. First you reason against me, that if my construction be true, then nothing did happen to Christ which might not be verified of any man. And did you not blush when you wrote these things? Can any mans soule goe to hell, and returne againe? For his going downe to hell I proue in the 19. verse, and his returne from hell in the 21. verse. Seconly, you say the woord spirite doth signifie that which gaue life, what then? as God giueth life to the body effectually, so the soule giueth life to the body for∣mally. Your Geneua translation which you follow, saith, he was quickned in the spirite, not of the spirite. And this I note against your side  in the 18. verse you translate (In) But in the next verse as though you had not doone well in the former, you translate it (by) Now you know the preposi∣tion  signifieth (by) and not  as it appéereth in the 21. verse and in many places mo:  that is, by the resurrection. Moreouer if you had said quickned of the spi∣rite▪ then had you made a probable answere: but no diuine is able to proue this exposition, that Christ was quickned in the spirit, that is, in the deity, for the deity is life it selfe. Your third pregnant reason is, that  signifieth not only the death of the body, but also the whole passion of Christ. This cannot be, for the suffrings of Christ are set downe be∣fore in the same verse: then in this woord  is she∣wed the manner of the death that Christ suffred, that is, he
was killed and suffred a violent death. For  be∣ing deriued of , must néeds signifie put to death. Now I hope you will not say Christ was put to death in soule and body, but in body only. And where you say that Christ suffered in soule aswell as in body, that is true, and that is gathered not of , that is killed, but out of these words antecedent (for Christ suffered the iust for the vniust.) No reasonable man but he will say, that the sufferings of Christ are comprised rather in the word (suf∣fered) then in the word (killed.) To your fourth reason I reply, that Christ was raysed from the dead, but it is spe∣cially signifyed in the word resurrection, verse 21. and therefore I doo not confound those things that are distingui∣shed, but your selfe: for you make suffered and killed all one, and quickned and the resurrection all one, and so make not only a confusion, but a fantology and néedelesse repeti∣tion which neuer was read in the word of God. To your fift argument, where you say  is to receaue life, I confesse it is to be made aliue. Then you vrge it can not be spoken of the soule which neuer lost life: Then by the same reason more strongly it can not be spoken of the God∣head, which hath, doth, and shall liue for euer: for God can not receaue life, but the soule is sayd to liue when he is out of the body, not because he liued not before, but because the body doth hinder the actions of the soule, Iohn. 11, 25. Hee that beleeueth in mee though he were dead yet shall he liue. Sap. 9, 15. The corruptible body is heauie vnto the soule, and the earthie mansion keepeth downe the minde that is full of cares. 2. Cor. 4, 16. Therefore wee faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet our inward man is dayly renewed. Héere Paule sayth, the weaker the body is, the stronger is the soule, therefore the death of the body is the life of the soule. To drawe to an ende, your Antithesis of the Deuinitie and humanitie isFortissi∣mum ar∣gumētum answered before. For your Antithesis must be of things contrary or at the least diuers and separate, but as you af∣firme
truly the Godhead was neuer separated from the humanitie: therefore this antithesis is of the body and soule which at this time were deuided, and not betwéene the deity and humanitie which were alwayes vnited: wherefore this bulwarke I can assure you will stand, and you haue ouershot both it and your selfe in attempting to ouerthrowe it. For the very scope of the Apostle is this, All Christians must suffer afflictions for well doing, for Christ did not only suffer both in body and soule, but also was put to a shamefull death in his body, and in his soule went downe to the soules in hell, which were vnbeléeuers in the dayes of Noah: but Christ did arise againe from hell and the graue, and ascended both in body and soule to hea∣uen: therefore shall you that suffer for well doing be deli∣uered from death and hell by his merits, and goe vp into heauen, and be partakers of his glory as you haue bin partakers of his afflictions. Moreouer, as you referre me to reade Bezas great notes on this text, so I pray you to reade Aretius handling this place, whose wordes are these. Generally (sayth Arctius) Peter repeateth thrée effects of Christs death if you marke it well. The first per∣taineth to the damned. The second to the elect. The third to the person of Christ. The first was declared in his des∣cending into hell. The second in his resurrection. The third in his ascention into heauen. This is the true and naturall meaning of this place which we will follow, leauing the intrications of other interpretations. I willinglie confesse this place is very hard, for Augustine doubteth of it, and Luther doubteth of it how it is to be vnderstoode, but this obscuritie ariseth not of the place, but of the varietie of In∣terpretations. If thou marke the plainnesse of the place, the matter will be easye, but that pleaseth not all men: therefore that euery one may establish his owne sence, they apply the words of the Apostle Peter to their owne conceit. But leauing these, let vs embrace that which the words do teach vs: in the which, if we attaine to the truth
it is well, if not, yet they shall be probable, because they haue warrant out of the scripture, and leaue to the very letter , otherwise it is certaine the knowledge of man to be vnperfect in many questions of holie scripture, of the which the Apostle doth warne vs 1. Corin. 15. For now we knowe vnperfectlie. I haue sayd héere is decla∣red thrée effects of Christs death which differ in time, and are set in order in the Créede. The first effect is, that Christ being dead, denounced eternall paines to the wicked in hell. The words of the Apostle are these. In which spirit hee went and preached to the spirits detained in prison. I take the place simply of the descence into hell, for so the words doo plainely sound, and I sée all the Fathers so to interprete them: sée Augustine Epist. 99. and Cyprian doth manifestly interprete this place of the descending into Hell. Neither doth the word prison hinder this Interpre∣tation, which in the Apocal. 20. 5. is taken for hell. When a thousand yeeres shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be loo∣sed out of his prison. Therefore the prison that Peter héere speaketh of, is the place deputed to the damned. Hy∣ther came Christ, as we confesse in the Créede, he went downe into Hell. Where Hell is, it is a foolish and curious question to enquire, sith no man comming to that place euer returned but only Christ. Furthermore, what Christ did there, Peter expresseth, he preached to the spirits, that is, he declared that he shewed himselfe manifestly to the world, and made that dire and mournefull sermon namely to the wicked, that the merit of his death did nothing per∣taine vnto them, but by his presence were confirmed those punishments of the which Noah and other Prophets had forewarned them. And the tyme of this Preaching I re∣ferre not to the tymes of Noah, but to the tyme of hys descending into Hell. Whereunto agréeth the worde , that is, spirits, for hée preached to the spi∣rits, that is, to dead, and not to liuing men. Thus farre Aretius. I could héere alleage many other newe Wri∣ters,
whiche are of my iugement, but because you yéelde them no credite, therefore of purpose I will omit them. Humes. Sectio. 13. These things being thus, I pray you (good M. Hill) seeing you would haue vs vndoubtedly to beleeue that Christ descended into hell. Tell vs vndoubtedly to what end he should descend thither. I trust you will not teach vs neither Augustine neither Ieroms lesson, that he went thither to deliuer prisoners. As for that new les∣son that he went thither to triumph, that is a base de∣uise to send him thither to triumph, who had conque∣red hell on the crosse. For my owne part, I haue often∣times read the name of hell ioyned with shame and ig∣nominy, but to this day I neuer hard it ioyned with tri∣umphHe ioyneth it himselfe a litle after with tri∣umph. and glory. But be it so, and tell me if you can, how Christ who was yet in the graue and bands of death could triumph ouer hell. Is it likely that he could tri∣umph before the victory? You adde two other causes to binde the deuill and to deliuer vs from hell. You bring vs many places of scripture to confirme this geare Gen. 3, 15. The seed of the woman shall breake the serpents head. Osee. 13, 15. O death I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy victory. 1. Cor. 15, 55. O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory. In all which places there is not a syllable sounding that Christ descended into hell.A litle be∣fore hee saith hee neuer read hell, with triumph. As for his triumphing ouer hell, we neuer denied it, and doo auouch that he perfourmed, that most gloriouslye by the power of his Godhead, which did present his most noble victory ouer his enemies, hell, and death, both in heauen, earth and hell, without his bodily pre∣sence.
Hill. You aske me why Christ descended into hell, and yet you confesse I noted 3. ends of Christs descending into hell, the one to triumph ouer the Diuels: the other to binde the Di∣uels, and to take away their power ouer mankinde: the 3. to deliuer vs from hell. There was also set downe a fourth end, that is, to manifest his death vnto those in hell & to re∣proue them of their incredulity: and héere labouring to catch me in a snare, you are fallen into it your selfe: for firste you say Christ conquered hell on the crosse, then as hauing for∣gottenHumes is contrarye to himself. your selfe you aske this question with admiration. How could he conquere being in the graue? Is it likely that he would triumph before the victory? First you stoutlye af∣firme that he had conquered, then you boldely deny it. Con∣uenit nulli qui secum dissidet ipse. Next you saye you haue not read the name of hell, but ioyned with shame and infa∣my: why doo you write then that the Godhead did tri∣umph ouer hell? Did you not read your owne writing, I am sure in this place. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory? The name of hell is ioyned with triumph, but you answere these places with a flat negatiue. Héere is not a sillable to proue the descending of Christ into hell. I am sure Paule proueth héere the re∣surrection of Christ and of our selues, and how can he proue the resurrection, vnlesse he proue the knitting together of the body and soule? for as death is the parting of body and soule, so resurrection is the reuniting of them together againe, and héere Paule sheweth that the body comming out of ye graue and the soule from hell, Christ did conquere both. And there∣fore it is not the deity as you say, but the humane nature of Christ did vanquish death and Hel. Heb. 2. 14. For as much then as the children were partakers of fleshe and bloud, he also himselfe likewise tooke parte with them, that he might destroye through death him that had power of
death, that is the Diuell. Therefore Hemingius on the Col. 2. saith. As on the Crosse he conflicted with the diuell, so by his glorious descending into hel, resurrection and ascen∣tion he did triumph. Therefore these places proue the des∣cending into hell aswell as the buriall, for the reason of the apostle is this. Christ came out of the graue, ergo he conque∣red death, and Christ came out of hell, ergo he ouercame hel. Therefore thus I reason against you, that did conquere which did fight, but the humane nature of Christ did fight,Humes disagreeth with Peter and Paule, 1. Pet. 3. 22. Phil. 2. 9. 10 Eph. 1. 20. 21. 22. ergo it did also conquere, and is gon vp into heeuen, to whom the Angels, powers and mightes be subiect. 1. Pet. 3. 22. Col. 2. 15. Phil. 2. 9. 10. Eph. 1. 20. 21. 22. Therefore sith all these Scriptures doo witnes that Christ as man did tri∣vmph, and is exalted, and hath all power, I doubt not but in your next answere you will reforme your iudgement. Humes. Sectio 14▪ You alledge for his descending into hell to binde the diuels this, how can a man enter into a strong mans house and spoyle his goods, vnles he first binde the strong man, Here is not that you took vpon you to proue that he descended into hell to binde the Diuell. The house of this strong man which is heere spoken off, by the circumstances of the place is apparantly to any man of iudgement (not hell) but this world whereof the diuell had taken posses∣sion, and had polluted many hartes, out of the which he was cast by Christ, who thereby proueth himselfe to be stronger then he. Hill. Your interpretation is true, and the other is true also, for Christ did not only ouercome the diuell in the world, but al∣so in hell. For as Cyrill noteth on this place, there was be∣fore the comming of Christ much violence, taking away the
flocke of God, and carrying them to his owne house, wher∣fore before the comming of Christ, the heathen and people of the world went into eternall death: but Christ hath deliue∣red both their bodies from the graue, and their soules from hell: by his death and personall descending into hell. This place is alleadged by one Georgius Princeps Anhaltinus, in his learned commentaries on the 16. Psalme, which you may read it if you please, for as Dauid trampled on the face of Goliah, so did the soule of Christ trample on Satan in hell, and trod on his face: and this is noted by the Prophe∣tesse Sibilla, as also by the Heathen Poets, whose woordes I haue set downe in my Sermon at large. And therefore Clenard in his grammer giueth this obseruation,  id est . he went downe into hell, that is, into the house of hell. Humes Sectio. 15. Now one thing remained wherin you seemed to run beyond your selfe, and most men doo wonder what you meant thereby, whereas Christ vpon the Crosse did vt∣ter to the hearers then, and to all ages after, that he had finished the woork of our redemption in these woords, It is finished: you take on you to proue that he meant not so, alleadging these places. Ioh. 17. 4. I haue finished the woorke which thou gauest me. Act. 13. 29, And when they had fulfilled all things that were written of him. Ioh. 19 28. Seeing all things were finished that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Out of al these places say you it may be seen that there remained somewhat to doo. Good M. Hill remember your selfe and you shall finde no man of our side that will deny you so much. When our Sauiour cry∣ed out It is finished, he had not yet giuen vp the ghoste, which was the ende of his woorke: but I trust you will graunt vs this, that the meaning was this woorke there should be at ende, when he had breathed his last breath
for you know it is a common manner to speake that in the time past, which is meant presentlye to come. So Christ himselfe speaketh in another place. Beholde the time commeth, and it is already come, that you shall be scatte∣red. You brought vs here a distinction of Consummatum re, and Consummatum spe, out of the Dunces. I pray you to send it againe to those thicke skummes whence you had it. It wil not serue our turn, for it seemeth no other∣wise in our eares then that our Sauiour should tell vs that he had done, and had not doone. And tell those Harpyae quae tactu suo optimas dapes foedarunt: that a thing may be consummatum spe, which a man meaneth not to begin twentye yeeres hence, and perhaps neuer finish. Such ware will yeeld but little money and lesse thankes in these daies: heere we wonder what you meant by de∣nying that he had finished al things on the crosse, would you send him to hell to suffer there too? then his woork was so farre from any end, it was scarse begun. He that will holde that must needs condemne truth it self for an vntruth: for if he had but onely passed the death of the body, they which feele hell, and we also should know that he had scarsely yet beene fleabitten, in respect of that which is to come. This truely (M. Hill) was ware not worthy your wit. Hyll. Héere you haue spoken much and proued nothing, for of those reasons which I haue laide down in my Sermon con∣cerning this point, not one is answered. Onely as you tolde me before I was immodest, so now you tell me I am a mad man, and the wonder of the worlde. I must answere you with Dauid, I am become as a monster vnto many, but my trust is in thy law. But what will men iudge of you, that in one and the same matter affirme and deny. You con∣fesse in the beginning, that there remained somewhat to doo,
and in the end you wonder at me because I sayd all things were not finished in the crosse. Your next words are these, when our Sauior cryed it is finished, he had not geuen vp the ghost which was the end of his worke. It is true that after the speaking of Consummatum est, it is finished, he gaue vp the ghost, but that was not the finishing of his worke, for he must also shead his bloud. Heb. 9. 22. With∣out sheading of blood there is no forgeuenes of sins. 1. Pet. 1. 19. Iohn. 1. 7. Apoc. 1. 5. In all which scriptures it is set downe, that we are redéemed with the precious bloud of Christ. The bloud of Christ doth purge vs from all sinne: he hath loued vs, and washt away our sinnes in his bloud. Therefore the geuing vp of the ghost was not the end of his worke. Héere is a fault committed by you, but I will not woonder at you, nor say you are runn besides your selfe, but you runn against your selfe, and resist also the holy ghost. Then you scornefully reiect my destinition of Consummatum re, and Consummatum spe, that is, finished in hope, and finished in déede. I will defende it, for it com∣meth not out of the Dunces, but out of Gods sacred word. Rom. 8. 24. it is sayd, We are saued by hope. Gal. 5. 5. for we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousnes through faith. Luc. 21. 24. Lift vp your heads (sayth Christ to his Disciples) for your redemption draweth nigh. Rom. 8. 23. And not only the creature but we al∣so which haue the first fruites of the spirit do sigh, euen we do sigh in our selues waiting for the adoption, euen the redemption of our bodyes. Musculus on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians thus writeth, the places are these, That we are called in hope not in déede, and that the hope of future blessings is the stay of our faith as long as we are in this flesh, for we are saued nondum in re sed in spe, not yet in déede but in hope. By all these scriptures it is ma∣nifest that our consummation is in hope and not in déede (as Musculus noteth) neither shall be actually perfited vn∣till the day of iudgement. Therefore I did with this dis∣tinction
refute the argument which is made of those that are on your side, who thus conclude. Christ sayd on the crosse It is finished, Ergo he went not downe to hell. By the same reason I thus argue. Christ said on the crosse It is finished, Ergo he did not shead his bloud, nor was bu∣ried, nor rose againe, nor ascended into heauen to fulfill all things. Ephes. 4. 10. for if all things were then fulfilled on the crosse, what néede he to ascende to fulfill all things. Therefore I did proue that this argument of yours did make no more against the descending into hell, then a∣gainst the sheading of his bloud, buriall, resurrection, ascen∣tion or iudgement, all which are necessary to our weale and perfect consummation. Farther, to proue my distinction to be true, I did then quote that as Christ is sayd to be the Lamb slaine from the beginning of the world, so the death of Christ did reach to the first beléeuers, and shall doo to the last. Which consummation by hope is so enioyed as if we possessed it already: for all the promises of Christ are yee yee and amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. Therefore I told you this ar∣gument It is finished, ergo Christ went not downe to hell was a fallary a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter. Also I noted how these words were to be vnderstood. First, that all the scriptures and prophecies were fulfilled, for so the text noteth. Secondly, it is finished doth signifye, there is no other sacrifice for sinne: for by one sacrifice once of∣fred, he hath made perfect all that shall be sanctified, Hebr. 10, 14. And therefore the Papists ioyning the merits of Saints with the merits of Christ, doo erre most shame∣fully. Thirdly it was finished as concerning all his labors and sorrowes. Fourthly all his suffrings both of body and soule were ended, which he finished on the crosse. Briefely his obedience to his Father was ended, for he yéelded a pure, perfect, and perpetuall obedience to his Father, and therefore had all power giuen him in heauen earth and hell. Moreouer I did proue this interpretation by this text, 1. Cor. 15. 54. Then shall be brought to passe the say∣ing
that is written, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory, and did alleage Beda, Peter Mar∣tyr, and Musculus vpon this place, all which were of my iudgement, and therefore you had no more cause to wonder at me, then at these learned men, whome all the reformed Churches of England do reuerence. Last of all, you séeme to charge me as though I had said that Christ went downe to suffer, which thing I neuer mentioned, but that he went downe to manifest his death, to triumph in his owne per∣son ouer the Diuell, and personally to redéeme vs from hell. Then you call them dunces whence I had that distinction. I had it from Musculus, and Musculus from the word of God, and therefore you must embrace these distinctions, or else you will speake erroneously. Omnia probate quod bo∣num est tenete. Try all things, hold that which is best. This word is worthy my wit or any other Interpreters. Neither wil I leaue the ware that is in my poore pack for all the treasures of Egypt. Humes. Sectio. 16. In the end of your Sermon you bring vs two incon∣ueniences if this article be not beleeued. First, that men would doubt whether there were an hell. Secondly whether Christ had redeemed vs thence. In deede you take the way to make men doubt thereof, to see lear∣ned men to striue about that which all the world doth knowe to be true. If you be remembred you tolde the people in the beginning of your Sermon that neyther M. Wisdome, nor M. Chalfort did doubt of this article, and why are you now contrary to your self. Why would you haue it seene that these inconueniences would fol∣low. If you should not be beleeued & beare the world in hand that we take away both hell, and the benefit of Christes death. This is good Rhetorique, but it is ill Diuinitie. It was your part to haue delt plainely, and
to haue told the people. If you would needes speake thereof, that neither you nor we did doe either of these points, and that thereof they had no matter to doubt, but to walke as the children of God, if they would ey∣ther auoide the one, or possesse the other. Hyll. I brought two inconueniences if this article were de∣nyed, to moue the people not to leaue out any. It is not vnknowne to you that Seruetus and Carliell deny it, and diuers others now liuing among vs (by reason of the nega∣tiue doctrine which is preached of your side) will not re∣peate this branch of the Créede he descended into hell. And some haue sayd to my face that Thomas Aquinas did in∣sert it into the Créede. Of these men I knowe too many, against whome I did direct my speach, for feare least some might be in that populous assembly. Bad doo they that de∣ny the personall descending, but worse do they which denye both personall and potentiall. Therefore I was not contra∣ry to my selfe, but contrary to those which haue giuen occa∣sion that so comfortable an article of our Christian faith, should be put out of the Créede. You say it was my parte to deale plainely. I hope I did deale plainely, for I preached the truth. Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flatterye getteth sréends, truth getteth hatred. I knowe the eares of that Auditory did itche for other matter, but I am Gods Minister, and I haue preached Gods truth, which I will (by the hehe of my God) defend against all gainsayers what∣soeuer. Humes Sectio. 17. We heare that you haue preached since at Leecock & condemned al your aduersaries in this matter of igno∣rance,
fury and madnes, as denying so commodious and comfortable, so wholesome and needefull a doctrine as you think yours to be. Heere I appeale to your consci∣ence, shew vs what cōmodity or comfort, what whole∣some or necessary matter we deny, that you do teach. If all your comfort and commodite consisteth in our redemption from hell and death to heauen and health, there to behold the glorious face of our immortall God and to sing amongst the Angels Osanna in the highest: do not we teach this as diligent as you? what comfort or cōmoditie can it bring vs to send Christ the Sonne of the euerliuing God, (who hath borne all the torments of hell on his tender bodye for our sakes, and paide a full raunsome of our redemption) downe to the pit of hell, without warrant of his word, neither to redeeme vs thence, nor them that were there▪ I referre to the godly considerations of all good Christians. As for you M. Hill, the world is sory to see a man so learned and so elo∣quent, to bestowe his wit and eloquence in so weake a cause. As for Chalfout the worlde doth condemne him as a man without iudgement or discretion, that so impu∣dently and vnaduisedly as some suppose (I praye God they be deceiued) enuiouslie did set his face against the truth, and did so irreuerently vse the diligent and meek labourer in the Lords haruest M. Wisedome, I speake not this for any fauour of him, in respect of his owne person more then M. Chalfouts: for I haue some great causes to esteeme of the other, but truth is truth, I will not be ca∣ryed for any priuate considerations against it, you pro∣mised if any man could answere your reasons, to recant them in the same place. I pray God you meant as you said, God open our eyes, and giue vs vnderstanding harts and willes obedient to his knowen truth.
Hill. Truth it is, I did preach at Leicocke, and because I heard that M. Wisdome had set that opinion of yours a∣broche againe at Cosham, I did here also confirme mine. Not because I am desirous to be contentious, but because I would haue no Christian man to doubt of the articles of his Faith, you aske me what comfortable or necessarye matter you déeme, that we doo preach? I answere: and I pray you consider of it, we are borne in sinne: how are we deliuered from sinne, but by Christ, which was conceiued by the holy Ghoste: we haue the magnitude of sinnes with Peter, the multitude of sinnes with Mary Magdalen: the turpitude of sinnes with the woman taken in adultery, the infamy of sinnes with the Publican: the diuturnity of sinnes with the théefe on the gallowes: the cruelty of sinnes with Paule, and the recidiuation into sinnes with diuers of the Sainies: yet if we repent we are pardoned for Christs sake, who purely, perfectly, and perpetually obeyed the law of God. By reason of our sinnes we are subiect to all punishments, both corporall and spirituall, and to the wrath of God: All these punishments due to vs, did Christ suffer vpon ye crosse, both in body and soule, and therefore it is called his Passion. He suffered in the Garden, in Annas and Caiphas house, in Pilats hall, but vpon the crosse as you say truely he suffered the agonies of death and torments of hell. Further by rea∣son of sinne this was laide vpon our first Parentes, Thou shalt dye the death: so by reason of this sentence not onelye the body was condemned to death, but the soule to damnati∣on. To deliuer vs from these two punishments, the soule of Christ went to hell and returned, and the body of Christ that lay dead in the graue rose againe mightily, naturallye, spéedily and happely. Besides Christ arose in déede, he gaue himselfe to be felte and handled, hereupon we are assured that he conquered death and hell. He ascended into Heauen
and therefore our praiers are hard, when we pray vnto him and he giueth vs gifts for our ministery, and so he shal come to iudgement at the last day to giue vs perfect blessednes. You confesse that Christ was borne in déed, liued and fulfil∣led the law in the likenes of our flesh (sinne excepted) he dyed in déede, he was buried indéed, he arose and ascended indéede, and yet you will not confesse that he personallye descended. How can all these articles going before and comming after be vnderstoode of the person of Christ, and of his humanity, and not this. Therefore you denying this personall descen∣ding of Christ into hell, take away the great comfort of our deliuerance from hell. You say we are deliuered from hell by Christs death: so are we too by his birth. For if Christ had not bene borne he had not dyed: so if there had not béene a seperation of the bodye and soule of Christ, he could neuer haue conquered death or hell for by descending into ye graue, and that personally, he conquered death, and hath deliuered vs from death, and by going downe into hell personallye, he hath conquered hell. And for this cause the Scripture appli∣eth it to the death of Christ, because death was (as Paule saith, Phil. 3. A dissolution of body and soule, and these 2. partes being dissolued, Christ came from the graue and from hell, and so Christ did conquere both, and triumph ouer them in him selfe, as it is Col. 2. 15. These Iewes doo aske a signe from heauen, Math. 22, 38. Luke. 11. 29. to whom Christ said, A wicked & aduoulterous Generation doth aske a signe, but no signe shalbe giuen thē, but the signe of Ionas the Prophet, for as Ionas was in the whales belly three dayes and three nights: so shall the sonne of man be in the hart of the earth, three daies and three nights. Which woords Basilius Magnus interpreteth very well. These woords (a signe) is a matter made manifest contey∣ning the declaration of some thing that was hidden, as the signe of Ionas representeth the descending of Christ into hel, and the resurrection of Christ, and as Bede saith and Rha∣banus also, he gaue them a signe but not from heauen, be∣cause
they were vnworthy to see it but from the deapth of hell.. Therfore (M. Humes) this is a most comfortable doc∣trine that Christ doth deliuer vs from hell, which albeit you agnise aswell as we, yet because you deny the meane where∣by it was purchased, you deny a most comfortable doctrine: for not only the body of Christ was in the hart of the earth, but the Sonne of man, which signifieth the whole humani∣ty, that is, the soule and the body. Ionas was in the whales belly aliue and yet came forth, Christ was in the graue dead in flesh, and aliue in hell and yet came forth. Therefore to take away this maner of descending, taketh away from the Church a singuler comfort, and openeth a gapp to many er∣rors confuted already by the Fathers. For if Christ did con∣quere hell by the power of the Godhead only and not as he is man, what néed had he to take vpon him our nature? but because as man he might be Lord not of heauen and the An∣gells, but of the earth and the inhabitants therofand of hell and the diuells. You say the worlde is sory for me. In the worlde saith Christ you shall haue affliction. And he tel∣leth me the world will hate me. I way not these thinges, for I am no man-pleaser, nor louer of the worlde. But if in my Sermon I had disagréed with Dauid, Ezechiel, Esay, Peter, Paule, and Christ himselfe as you haue done in your answere, I hope I should be both sory and ashamed. Tou∣ching M. Chalfoult whom you terme a man without iudg∣ment, and that he spake impudently and enuiously, I neuer saw him before that time and but ouce since, but by that spéech and conference which I had with him I finde him to be learned and voide of gall. Such of his neighbours as I haue talked with, did giue him the deserued praise of a lear∣ned and honest man. And forasmuch as he hath preached sound doctrine in preaching the affirmatiue, and that doctrin which is allowed by the learned conuocation of this land, it doth not become you to libell against him, for in speaking a∣gainst him you traduce all those reuerend and learued men, which made an Iniunction for kéeping of vnitie, that no o∣ther
Catechisme should be taught of any Schoolemaister then M. Nowels. Therefore because you are a strauger you ought not be , and speake euill of those Ministers which vpholde the doctrine established: and because you are a Schoolemaister, you ought to teach and not to gainsaye it. Qui pergit dicere ea que vult, audiet ea que non vult. As you reuile at M. Chalfoult, so doo you and your freends pri∣uily against me, calling me a Bishoppling and a timeseruer. Indéed I was brought vp vnder Bishop Iewell, who cate∣chised me in this faith, & therfore I will not easily or rashly departe from it. I confesse my selfe also to be a timeseruer, for it is the day & time of saluation accepted. Let them murmure with Martin that list, I praye God my dayes may end with this time, and my time may continue no lon∣ger then these daies of the state of our Church that now is do continue. I haue séene the beginning, I haue séene the propagation of the Gospell, I haue séene God hath defen∣ded our Church mercifully and miraculously from heauen, God graunt that I and all my Auditors may walk worthy of our calling, Godly, iustly, and soberly. Therefore I end with this saying of S. Paule 1. Cor. 4. 3. As touching me I passe very little to be iudged of you, or of mans iudg∣ment. And in the 5. verse, Therefore iudge nothing be∣fore the time vntill the Lord come, who shall lighten things that are hidden in darkenes, and make the coun∣sels of the hart manifest, and then shall euery man haue praise of God. The conclusion to M. Humes. M. Humes in the latter end of your answere you request me to recant: if your answere did please me as it doth you, I would be as willing to recant as you and your fréendes would be glad to heare it. But I will plainely set down my reasons why I do not recant: The first is: I alleadged
Act. 2. and proued out of Peters sermon my assertion, and to the reasons I drew out of that place you haue answered nothing. Secondly I alleadged Syrach 17. 21. To proue that this phrase the nethermost partes of the earth doth sig∣nifie hell, to this you haue in like manner saide nothing. Thirdly in all your answeres to my allegations, you haue disagréeed with the word of God. In answering of the 16. Psalme, you say my allegation is to be vnderstoode of the passion of Christ: And Peter Act. 2. saith it is spoken of ye resurrection, whether is to be beléeued of Peter or you, I referre it to the indifferent Reader. Then I proued that Erets tacthioth that is, the nethermost partes of the earth did signifie hell, out of 63. Psalme and 9. verse: In answe∣ring of this you dissent from Dauid and M. Caluin. Now whether it be more safe to foliow Dauid or you, let my ene∣mies iudge. I alleadged Ezechiel to proue that point also 31. Chapter, 5. 16, 17, 18, 19. In answering to that place you haue gainsaide Ezechiel, Esay in his 14. chapter. La∣uaterus, Munster, and Pellicane. Now whether it be more fit for me to beléeue you or Esay, or Ezechiel, let your owne fauourites iudge. Then I alleadged the knowne place of Peter, you trauailed much about this place, yet in your in∣terpretation of this woord  that is spirites, which you interprete the soules of the men that liued in Noahs time, you contradict the woords of our Sauiour Luk. 24. 39. For Christ saith a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me haue. And yet you and your Masters say that this word spirit may signifie a man liuing. Now whether it be more expedient for me to beléeue you or Christ, I referre it to your owne iudgement. You said my Sermon at Chip∣penham did confirme you and your fréends, but I hope your owne answeres will not confute me but your selfe, and cause your selfe and them both to recant. You say you séeke to know the truth, so do I, as knoweth the knower of al harts wherfore whether you or I haue taught the truth, let not
Humes nor Hill iudge, but the learned of the vniuersities. For as Paule saith, 1. Cor, 14. 32. Yhe spirits of the Pro∣phets, are subiect to the Prophets. That is, the labours of learned men are to be iudged of the learned. The God of patience and consolation giue vs grace that we may be like minded one towards another according to Christ Iesus, that we may with one minde & with one mouth, glorifie God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ. Rom. 15. 5. 6. To whome be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen. . Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iouis ira nec ignis, Nec poterit ferrum nec edax abolere vetustas.
