1499 S109184 99844833 9679
decorative border surrounding title page 1534 The armyng of a Christen Warrier rea∣die to fyghte with the enemies of our captain and Sauioure Iesus Christe, to the whiche soldiers, Henry Bar∣ret the writer of this rude boke, wisheth health & muche increase of faith. Anno. 1549.
TO THE RYGHT VVOR∣shypfull Sir Iohn Marcham Knyghte Lieutenaunte of the Kynges maiestes Tower of London. Hen∣ry Barret wysheth healthe and long encreace of worshyppe. COnsideryng the manifold enormities which hereto∣fore hathe crepte into this realme through the false vsur∣ped power of the bishop of Rome and the vngodly doctrine of his adherentes not only to the gret decaye of Christen religion but also (if gods mercy were not) to the vtter destruccion of many erable soules, whiche throughe Ipocrisie and pernicious doc∣trine wer seduced, and brought from honouring of our only ca∣pitain the true, liuing and eter∣nall
god vnto the worshippyng of creatures, stockes and stones vnto voluntarie woorkes and phātasies inuented of men, such was their hypocriticall & pha¦risaicall policies in the warres of their master the bishop afore¦said, their armure so pestylente strong, that hitherto is not only thoroughly pearced, but had in some estimacion and price, ye ap¦pointing of their armure so de∣lectable and pleasaunt, and or∣dered in such abuse sort and fa∣shion that vnneth any christen captaine or souldier may with∣out long trauaile make playne the false deuyse therof, apparel∣lyng the said christian soldyers in barnesse of sauegard fashio∣ned, inuented, and made by our euerlastyng captain Christ, but for my parte lackyng learnyng
and knowledge, yet of a good & earneste mynde to the furthe∣raunce therein, and also to pro∣uoke the learned captains who hath read the ordre of Christes batail wherin he teacheth what ordre and armuur his soldiers muste vse to explane & set furth thesame, haue taken in hād this simple & illiterate treatise, dedi¦catyng thesame, to youre good maistership whom I doubt not wyl esteme and accept my good will which may stere and insti∣gate the learned to trauayle for the perfit armyng of all Christē souldiers, and ordre in battayle that therby they maye haue the rewarde that is laied vp for thē which god of his infinite mercy grant vs for his sōnes sake our sauiour Iesu Christ The greaues and Queshes.
FIrste put on your greaues and queshes, that your leg∣ges maye bee so armed that ye may boldly walke in ye right wayes that is directid vnto vs by our captain and sauiour,Ephe. iiii. and wāder not in the wrong wayes whiche of long tyme hath been taught vs, by the false gydes of Rome and ther tradicions, but ye shal only folow our own cap∣tain to whom is geuen al power in heauen and in earth,Mat. xviii. for he is an euerlasting king, and we his famile and souldiers which are baptised in our captain,Roma. Vi. by faith are baptysed with hym to the death, and by his prouision shal be partakers of his euerlastyng campe and kingdome,Roma. Vi. for when ye were dead through sinne we wer quickened with him in spi∣rite. &c. Wherefore let vs take
that same waye that we haue in commandement by our captayn Iesu Christ, which is our saui∣our, and captayne after the or∣dre of Melchisedech. The Coller ANd ye shall Arme your self with a Coller, of good and perfite metall so well tem∣pored that there shall not passe through the same anye wepons of our enemy Satan, which go∣eth about with many proud as∣sayes to pearse our armure and to hurt both our body and soule but like good and true soldiers kepe the ordres that is geuen to you in our graunde captaynes boke, and your enemy Satā nor all his disciples shal not pearse your armure, neither hurt your body nor soule.Math. V First ye shall not sweare by youre captayne Iesu
christes name nor by any thing that is of his makynge, not by one heare of youre heade whyte nor blacke,Zacary. 5. for the curse of God our captain shall rest in ye house of him that sweareth falsely, ye shall not let passe thorough the same any woordes of vntrewth other to the dispraise of our cap¦tain, or to the hurt of our neigh¦bour: but let your cōmunicacion be agreable with your liuynge, so that ye loue your captayn a∣boue al,Math. xii. and your neighbour as your self: & beware of excessious drinkynge whiche oftentymes maketh an vnable souldier, and causeth his captain to put hym out of his boke,Exodi. xxxii. and then he be∣cōmeth a venturer which when he is taken, is not sure of his raunsome withoute the greate mercy of his captain, also your
captain wyll aske accompt of e∣uery idle worde that shall passe thorough your coller,Ephe. iii wherfore be not outragious in any thyng but let your wordes and liuing be agreable with your captaīs commaundement, so that your accompt, maye be the better at the last day. The Corsolate other wyse called Curates. THen put on your Corsolat, with a reste basses & tasses to defende youre body in al places made of pure and gostly metall so edified with a good & cleare conscience voyd of al vn∣chast liuinge, as horekepynge, dronkennes, extorcion, coue∣tous and malicious mindes &c which be cleane contrary to the commaundementes written in the newe testament of our cap∣tainIohn. xiii
which saith if ye do loue me kepe my comaundementes,m. viii. and put your only trust in the death and passion of our captaine and sauiour Iesu Christ, that tho∣rough the sheadyng of his pre∣cious blud, and his merites, we his souldiers were onelye saued frō the house of thraldome,me. iiii. and are made partakers of his cāpe and kingdōe, through our fayth in his only bloud. The vanbrasses and gauntlets Then put on your vanbrasses and gantlets that your ar∣mes and handes may be de∣fended frō al vngodlinesse from stelyng,. x. 8. defraudyng, from figh∣ting and killyng, and from vn∣iust dealing, & be of suche liuing as ye haue in cōmandement and to thy power geue to hym that Vi.
asketh in our captayns name & from hym that woulde borowe,Marc. x tourne not away thy face, but to thy power assiste hym, yf thou lacke worldly substance deliuer such talant as thou haste recey∣ued of our captayn, as one chri∣stian souldier ought to do to an other wherwith he may be com∣forted and bee thy selfe ware of the proud assaultes of ye world, the deuill and the fleshe,Iohan. ii & take the weapon of our captayne in your hand, and therwith ye shal strike the vngodly til thei be cō∣uerted to ye faith of Iesu Christ. The Helmet THen put on youre Helmette moost Ghostly edified with the stronge woorde of God, that with the same youre heade maye be couered from all your enmies and from al vayne wor∣des,Ephesi. ii
woorkes and thoughtes so that ye maye only consist in our captaynes death and passione which hath payed the raunsom of all faythfull warriers, which walketh in the right warres of his vocaciō, then yf ye fynd any soldiar that hath ben necligent in ye true seruice of our captaine let him call faithfully and with a good intent to offend no more and he shall be suer to fynde an aduocate, withe god the father euen the same captayne that al¦redy hath payed the raunsomes of all his faithful soldiers with his precious bloudde who also seeth the thoughtes of al hertes and is redy to receyue all repen¦tant offenders acordyng to his saiyng: which saith, come to me all ye that labour and are laden and I shall refreshe you, also
if ye knock it shalbe opened vn∣to you. &c. And then locke down your bauier and moffle so fast & close,Deutronon that it maye defende you from all flesshely syghtes and worldly temptacions and from the buffetes of all false Char∣mes, witchcraftes, & sosseries, and from all Hipocrysy Super∣sticions and Idolatrye, so that ye haue your hole trust onlye in our Captayne and sauioure, in none other but in our only cap∣tain and sauiour the liuing god and then your helmet shall de∣fend and beare the strokes of al your enemies bodily and gostly through the helpe of oure sayde captain & sauiour, Iesu Christ. The graund garde and polgremes
THen set one youre Graunde garde and polgremes whi∣che shall be edifyed with all spyrituall consolacion, that you maye be by the healpe of our ca∣pitayn defended from all the in¦coūters of our enemies though ye be assailed, by many meanes to call you from your owne cap∣tayne, and to brynge you to the seruice of satan, the deuell, and the rather through the false gui¦des of Rome. &c. But be you faythfull soldiers to your owne captayn, and ye maye be sure ye shall be placed with the felow∣shyppe of warriers in heauen which folowed theyr Captayn, on white horses, and were clo∣thed in pure white sylke,poca. 17, accor∣dyng to the purenesse of yt place, to the which campe our captain and sauiour geue vs grace so to
serue that we maye be worthye to come at the last daie. The Sworde. THen gyrde faste aboute you the two edgedsweorde and therwithe ye shall ministre execucion to the soldiers of vn∣belefe euen to their vtter confu∣sion and ye shall extoll and only magnify ye name of our captain whiche is in heauen,Ebrues. 4 and there sytteh on the ryght hand of God the father,Mat xx. 5 and frome thence he shall come to iudge the quicke & the deade. The Lawuse or Speare THen take the launce of faith in your hande,Ephesy. 4 whiche is prepared to in coūter with the vngodly and with it ye shall stoutly stryke thē to their great ouerthrowe,Math 4 and shall put them to vtter silēce through the helpe
of oure capitayne, but beeware that your frayle flesh cause you not to forget your Captayne & that ye pearse him not in sted of the enemy, as blind lunges did, and that you kisse him not with Iudas vnfaythfully. The warryars Charge THen being thus armed and weponed and throughe the healpe of our Captayn and sauiour which hath the gouer∣naunce of heauen and earth the sea,Mathew i. and all that is in them, for they be of his owne handes ma∣kyng, and he is a king of kinges and a lord of lordes, and of hys kyngdome there is no ende,Apoca. 17, go forth boldly and do the message of our Captayn & sauiour and if ye fynde any enemies or the∣ues
that will robbe our captain of his honour or glorious inhe∣ritāce, or wil attribute his glo∣ry vnto stocks or stones, or to a∣ny thyng of mans makyng, or wil say that they haue our cap∣tains & sauiours Iesu Christes naturall bodye naturally, euen the same that was born of Ma∣ry ye virgyn, fast presoner & loc∣ked in a boxe & carye hym whe∣ther they list at their comaūde∣ment &c. ye shall take the wea∣pons whiche our captain did at his last supper leaue in the new testament of our captain & sa∣uiour Iesu Christ whiche is in heuen & there sitteth on ye right hād of god the father almighty, which whē he ascended, and be∣fore the cloude, receyued hym oute of the sight of the menne of Galilee: he said,Iohn 14. & 20. I goo to my fa∣ther, and your father, and to my god, and your god, to prepare a
eate for you, & wyl receyue you euē to my self, that where I am there shall you be, & when that the lorde had spoken to them he was receyued into heauen and there sytteh on the ryght hande of god euē with his whole god∣hed and manhed,arke 16 uke xxii. ctes. 7. although hys godhed be eueriwhere: also you shall fynd so many places of au∣ctorite in the same Testament to proue the same that the infi∣deles romysh Champyons and all other the disciples of the de∣uil shall be confounded by the same, although the Enemyes haue ben suffred by our graund captayn to iudge by great false tyranye, some trewe solders to the fyer for the trewth sake, & so hath persecuted them as thei dyd our Captaine and sauiour before gyltlesse &c. but he hath raūsomed them home vnto hys owne Camp and kyngdom that
Ioyfull soldiars be they which hath receiued such persecucions for their Captains sake.Iohn. Ther∣fore good christen soldiers take thys armur vnto you & gouern your selfes with it so well that ye put youre hole confidence & trust in our Captayne and sa∣uiours death and passion,Actes i and ye shalbe suer that ye shalbe pla¦ced with the feloship of ye faith∣ful which shall neuer see corup∣ciō. &c.Dauyd 1 O what kind of soldiers be they that haue so good a cap¦tain & yet wyll seme so vnkynde vnto hym to refuse hys saruice which hath louid them so welle that he hath writteen their na∣mes in hys boke with hys owne precious bloode so that they are sure their raunsōe is not to seke for he hath payed it all redye wt hys precious bodye and bloode vpon the Crosse,Peter  & yet some vn∣godly souldiers, of a deuelyshe
minde doth willynglye forsake theire owne god and trew cap∣tayne and becometh venterers & subiectes to the deuill, which when they haue serued a cer∣tayne tyme after the lustes of the flesh, they shalbe rewarded accordyng to their seruice, that is, to lose the kyngdom of Ioye and to enter into the continual payne emonge the forlorn hope of lost soldiers which when thei wer once placed with their cap∣tayne of their vngodlye mynde refused thesame, soo that with¦owte the greate mercye, of the great Captayne they haue lost their ransome & must remayne Presoners for euer from which preson our graunde Captayne and sauiour Ihesu Christ saue all soldyars and geue vs grace to amende our liuynge in tyme and to serue truly lyke faithful Soldiars.
The souldiers charge. NOw verely there is a faut emonge many soldiers, as well emong some English soldiars as other nacions whi∣che when they be once chosen to goo agaynste the kynges enne∣mies whether it be in Scotland or Fraunce or else where, they do vse such vngodlye vsages wt in the kynges realme both owt¦warde and homewardes as ys great shame to reherse for some wyll take their neyghboures Cattayle and vittayle and will paye nothinge, and some wylle procure mens wyues & seruan∣tes to vngodlye liuinge & some vseth excessiows drynkynge & other some abhominable swe∣ryng in such wyse that the god∣lye soldiars often tymes feare to be plagued for the euels sake wherfore good Christian soldi∣ers let vs praye to our graund
Captayne that he may geue vs hys grace so to imbrace hys ho∣lye worde that we may lyue ac∣cordyng to the same and that e∣uery Christen souldier maye re¦ioyce eche with other so that frō this tyme forward no Englishe soldier shalbe worthy of reproch in the offence aforesayd & that we may liue only by the kynges wages & by hys conduct money which we haue according to his graces godly custome & that we may be an ensample to al other nacions to vse the same vnto ye lande and prayse of god, and to the plesure of our kyng. For ve∣relye we are sure that he that asketh of god the father,Math xi for god the sonnes sake it shalbee gran∣ted hym, for our good captayne and sauiour is so readye an ad∣uocate for vs that yf we bee re∣pentant he wyll purchase grace for vs of God the father accor∣dingeIohn xiiii and xvii.
to hys godly promes and custom, not only for my synnes, but for the synnes of all the hole worlde. Also our ennemy satan hath so manye kynde of spyes & so manye wayes to allewer sol∣diars to hys vnprofitable ser∣uice that manye of them that is lede by the flesh and be louers of gold & syluer putteth themselfs so to serue for the same, as if yt wold last euer, lyke vnto the re∣ward of our true Captayne, for some men feare not to swere an oth to their prince for to be true subiectes, & yet of an vnfaithful mynd breaketh thesame, whose faltes be spied immediatly & be put out of our own captaīs boke and hath lost their seruyce, and raunsomes & be of the forlorne hope, which fault our Captayn and sauiour geue vs al grace to amende. The Soldiars charge,
ALas good Christian soul∣diers remembre what an harde sayinge it is when our graund Captayne shal saie to the vniust soldears of vnbe∣lefe depart from me ye soldiars of vnbelefe,Mat. xxv. & ye shal go to euer∣lasting pain for your enfidelitie where there shall be waylyng & gnashing of teeth and burnyng fier without ceassyng. &c. From the which our captain & sauior Iesu christ geue vs the grace so to mortify our frail flesh and to lead our lyfe in such ciuilytie of the lawe that we may dread his centēces so that we may be wor¦thy to be partakers of the glory of his kyngdom & there to reste in the peace of GOD with Abraham Isaak and Ia∣cob in the kingedome of Heauen.ohn xiii. A∣men.
