19622 99850970 16217
A SPANISH GRAMMAR, first collected and published by Richard Perciuale Gent. Now augmented and increased with the decli∣ning of all the Irregular and hard verbes in that toong, with diuers other especiall Rules and necessarie Notes for all such as shall be desirous to attaine the per∣fection of the Spanish tongue. Done by IOHN MINSHEU Professor of Languages in London. Hereunto for the yoong beginners learning and ease, are annexed Speeches, Phrases, and Prouerbes, expounded out of diuers Authors, setting downe the line and the leafe where in the same bookes they shall finde them, whereby they may not onely vnderstand them, but by them vnderstand others, and the rest as they shall meete with them. Virescit vulnere Virtus. printer's device of Edmund Bollifant Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1599
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP∣FVLL GENTLEMEN STVDENTS OF Grayes Inne health and happines, and to the affected to languages there, daily encrease with perfect accomplishment of the most commendable qualities. LVcius a famous Roman meeting on a time with the Emperor Marcus, asked him whither he went: who answered, I am going to Sextus, vt discam quod nondum scio, that I may learne that which I doe not yet know. Diogenes the philosopher went to Athens to Antisthenes to learne of him somewhat that he was ignorant of; but Antisthenes not willing to im∣part at that time any of his doctrine, repulsed him: the other left not off his purpose, but more and more importuned him in such sort, that Antisthenes taking vp a staffe to driue him away, Diogenes stretched out his necke, willing him to strike on hardly, for he should not finde a staffe so hard, that could driue him from him so long as he might learne any matter by him woorthie the hearing. I speake this Gentlemen, meaning none of you to be bound by their example, seeing one was an Emperor and might doe what he list, and the other a Cinick philosopher that would doe that he ought: therefore if a man haue any learning or qualitie, let him bring it to you, and if it be too tedious vnto you, or hinder your sport, rather then be troubled with him, bob him or flout and scoffe him away. Be not imitators of Demosthenes which spent more oyle in the lampe in studying to enrich his minde, then wine to comfort his bodie; but rather waste your wine and spare your candles: neither be so foolish as Cleanthes the philosopher, that drew water in the night that he might follow his studie in the day; rather take your ease in the night and your pleasure in the day, because Mutantur tempora & nos mutamur in illis. Yet Gentlemen, if you doe but set before your eies these famous men, which haue beene and are of the house you now remaine in, (the names of some few I can now recite) as Sir Nicholas Ba∣con Lord Keeper, Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, Sir Walter Mildmay and Sir Francis Walsingham, learned Fitzherbert Lord chiefe Iustice of the common
pleas which abridged the law, and Sir William Stanford, which wrote the pleas of the crowne, Sergeant Yeluerton, Sergeant Daniell, Sergeant Spurling, Master Brograue, Master Stanhop, Master Hesquit, Master Anthonie and Master Francis Bacon, with diuers others might well mooue you to consider that, Qui veult plus qu'vn autre valoir, doibt plus qu'vn autre scavoir: He that will be esteemed aboue another man, must haue more knowledge then another man: And Meglio esser mendicante che ignorante, Better to bee a begger then barren of good letters. But these letters are painefully purchased, why Petit ardua virtus; Difficilis virtutis via; Difficilia quae pulchra: Therefore Pythagoras coun∣selled his familiar friendes that they should choose out the best kinde of life, al∣though the most difficult: and Salust saith, deckings pertaine to women, and trauels belong to men: and Seneca affirmeth, that base is that honor which is gotten with idlenes, which the Roman pollicie when it flourished confirmed by an auncient lawe duly kept, that euery father that had children of the age of tenne yeeres should become suretie for them, that they shoulde not liue idle, or commit any excesse, which was so neerely looked vnto, that they publikely chastised Cato the Censors sonne for a saucines committed, and banished a brother of good old Ciña for liuing idlie among them. None durst presume to go into the streetes but hee carried some token in his hande what kinde of life or studie hee follo∣wed, which if in these times it were in force, how many streete walkers woulde re∣tire themselues to some vertuous studies. But me thinke I heare some saie, Ars lon∣ga & vita brevis, I answere them with the Thebane Philosopher, which in the 75. Olympiade, came to the solemne sports kept about the citie Olympia in honor of Iu∣piter, who had made all the apparell he ware with his owne hands: his shooes he had sowed his shirt he had wouen, &c. being demanded where he had learned so manie mens arts, answered, In the beginning there was but one arte at all, & that the sloth of men had caused that one to be diuided into many, and how euerie particular man with diligence and labour might obtaine to the knowledge of that that all men in ge∣nerall had knowledge of.Pythagoras. To this purpose Pythagoras said, He that knoweth not what he ought to know, is a brute beast among men: He that knoweth no more then he hath need of, is a man among brute beasts: He that knoweth al that may be knowen, is a God among men. So many examples present themselues that ra∣ther time would faile then matter herein, & for that my case standeth now rather to demand remedie and not giue counsell, or to giue thankes for good turnes receiued, and not prescribe precepts, I thinke good briefely and plainely to shew vnto you how hauing founde my selfe beholding to some of you, whom I had read vnto in the toongs, I thought nothing could better agree with my profession as to shewe my gratefull minde towards you, then by labouring for your ease, in these instructions of the Spanish toong: which if they be thankefully receiued, I shall thinke my labour well imploied. Yet before I coulde make an ende of this and the Dictiona∣rie, I did as Robertus Stephanus saith of himselfe in gathering togither his Dictionaries called Thesaurus linguae Graecae & Latinae; I haue made Thesau∣rum, that is, a Treasure for others, but thereby haue made my selfe a bagger, where∣of some of the right vertuous and woorthie gentlemen of that your house, (to whom I am most beholding, and therefore stande most in affection bounde) vn∣derstanding,
wished me to goe forewarde in so good a woorke, and not to giue ouer for some wants: which then of themselues they supplied, whose good kindnes if I forget, I wish the law of Draco, (which was to punish with death, if there were any found so vnthankfull as not to requite a good turne, or at least to forbeare to acknowledge his benefactors for the same) might be inflicted on me: for there can be no greater iniurie offered to a free minde, then to bee reputed ingratefull: al∣though in these daies fower as great euils left vnpunished as those that are puni∣shed, Vntemperatenes, Vnshamefastnes, Vnfaithfulnes, and Vnthankefulnes. But to begin with my benefactors in this worke in order as they began with mee in Graies Inne, first Master William Willoughby, a gentleman as vertuouslie minded and of as good carriage as the rest: next Master Henrie Bing, whose ex∣cellent learning, placed togither with such gentlemanlike conditions, makes him be∣loued among the Elders, and honored among the yoonger sort: after him Master Frances Barneham, and Master Iames Hewes, endued with exceeding good wits, and no lesse good natures: I may not forget the good woorths of Master Ro∣bert Hill, and Master Cheeke, gentlemen well studied in the most commendable kindes of learning: Master Dauison of excellent learning, wit and vertues: Ma∣ster Helmes and Master Gill both for their good parts better knowne then I can heere set downe: Master Thomas Mason, and Master Iohn Roberts, adorned with ornaments of languages, to their other learning and vertues: Master Archer as he is well read in language, so is he a good fauourer of learning. The rest of the well accomplisht yoong gentlemen whom I know not, I saie of them as my minde is towards them best: Gentlemen, if for these praises you shall one plaie on ano∣ther, I pray you cast all on mee, for I protest none of them euer knewe that I ment to write vnto them, much lesse put any of their names in print. Thus wishing to you as much as Cicero writing to his friend Atticus, would limite to be wished to his deerest friends, viz. To enioy health, to possesse honor, and neuer to suffer want, I rest: At your command IOHN MINSHEU.
To the Reader. IF it be vanitie and vexation of minde, for a man to toile in this life to gather riches togither, when he knowes not whether he be wise or foolish that shall enioy it: we may thinke the sweate of our spirits and the toile of our bodies, to be altogither vaine, which write or print, when we cannot tell whether they will prooue sober or franticke, to whom we leaue the possession of our tra∣uels. But the Spaniard saith, Quien de miédo se murió de cagaxónes le hizié∣ron la sepoltura; and because as the Italian saying is, A molti puzza l'ambro, Amber is accounted stinking by many: and Dal asino non ne hai che calzi & petti: I am resolued for this once to put on merchants eares, to heare with patience euerie mans speech and dispraisings of his wares, because Quot homi∣nes, tot sententiae, So many men, so many mindes. Therefore he that should leaue off any good worke for any mans ill speech, may well be likened to that poore seely fellow, which on a time went with one of his sonnes with his Asse before him to the wood, to fetch him a loade thereof for his wife and children, and meeting trauellers by the way; some misliking with him that he should goe on foote, and let his Asse goe leere; others, that he roade himselfe, and suffered his childe to goe a foote; others, that he loaded the poore Asse with two persons, being scarce able to carrie himselfe; others, when he left his sonne alone riding and himselfe go on foote; in such sort that the countrey fellow could not tel what to do, seeing do what he could, still he found repre∣henders: whereupon he would goe no further forward, but returned sad home to his house without wood, where he remained for feare of fault finders, till he and his houshold were neere starued with colde, till at last finding his owne simplicitie, he returned to the wood, and to as many as he met by the way, he said; Hee that passeth for other mens speeches and repreefes, endureth colde and a thousand greefes; and he that will throw a stone at euerie dog, shall haue a wearie arme: but I hope, Qui bien ferá, bien aurá, And for all the dogs bar∣king, the moone will stand where it did. And I say to the malitious, Mets ta main sovent en ton sein, et tu ne mesdirás de ton prochain. And let them remem∣ber, that Chifa quello che non deve, gliavien quel che non crede, According to a Historie I haue read of an Emperour, who had his brothers sonne for his cupbearer: The Emperours steward and vncle, for enuie perswaded the cupbearer that his breath did stinke, and wished therefore to turne his face from the Emperour when he deliuered the cup till remedie were found: forth∣with he told the Emperour, that his cupbearer had defamed him to all his court, by saying his breath did stinke; and to know it for a certaintie, he like∣wise told him how he should see the cupbearer turne away his face from him when he came neere him; whereupon the Emperour conceiued such wrath against him, (as the saying is, the anger of a Prince the messenger of death)
that he sent expresse commaund to his burners of bricke, that they should burne that man that came vnto them first the next morrow; and likewise commaunded his cupbearer to be there so earely that none might be before him: on the morrow morning verie earely the cupbearer going, and passing by a church in the way went in and fell into such a sound sleepe, that it was the afternoone before he could awake. The steward in the meane time to see the euent of the cupbearer, went and was burned himselfe aliue. The cupbearer at his returne signified to the Emperour what had happened, and also was de∣sirous to knowe of the Emperour why he should send him thither, &c. If nei∣ther Histories nor reason perswade them, they must needs be answered with silence, and so gentle Reader I rest silent from troubling thee or them herewith any longer, more grieued at my mishap and disabilitie, then wan∣ting good will or liking to doe thee seruice. Haec raptim. Vale. Iohn Minsheu.
In opus M. Minsheui edendum, Iohannis Keperi generosi . Qui cupis auriferi contingere flumen Jberi Vocibus & veris noscere gentis opes, Ʋel mores, vel quas exercet Iberia merces, Hesperiam & totam noscere quisquis aues: Minshaeum legito, lectum (mihi crede) probabis, Ingenium, genium, munera, verba, fidem: Qui totidem subijt noctésque diésque labores, Et flores veluti sedula carpsit apes; Qui tibi qui patriae, sese sumptumq́ue dicauit, Edidit, & tantae sedulitatis opus, Aut lauda, aut saltem noli mordere, latrando Zoile, tabificus, ne videare, canis. Soneto de un capitan Español del Autór. De un diamantino muro circuydo Con puertas de metál ynpenetrable; Y por guarda un dragón fiero espantáble; Era el huérto de Atlante defendido: Mas siendo del fuerte Ercules vençido, Fue abierta la puerta yncontrastable, Y las pomas de précio ynestimáble Gozáron luego quantos han querido, Vos Mincheu soys el Ercules famoso, Que a pesar de la ynbidia (dragon fiero) Abristes puerta al huerto ameno umbroso, De la yspanica lengua, que primero Cerrada estubo al yngles curioso, Do gozara pomas de oro verdadero.
The Proeme. SPanish is a speech, whereof in times past (in Spaine) there hath beene fower kinds vsed:Fower sorts of Spanish. 1. Biskay toong most ancient. This toong drawen from the Caldean. The first and an∣cientest is the Biskaine, which was the speech of the prouince of Biskay and Nauarre: it hath his originall from the Caldean toong, as the learned in them both affirme, to whome it plainly appeereth that this is of greatest antiquitie. The next is that which was spoken in the kingdom of Granado,2. Arabique toong in olde time vsed in Granado, An∣daluzia, Valen∣cia, and Ara∣gon, and yet re∣taine it in the pronunciation of these letters, ç, g, j, x, z. 3. Catalan toong or Pro∣uençal, a kinde of French, had originall from Gāscoigne, and was vsed in Ca∣taluña, Malor∣ca, Juiça, Cer∣deña. 4. The Spanish now vsed. Difference be∣tweene the Spa∣nish and Portu∣gall toong. and in parte in the kingdomes of Anda∣luzía, Valencia, and Aragon, and was the Arabique, whose originall is the Hebrewe almost among them quite worne out, yet to this daie they keepe the pronunciation of some of their letters still, as ç, G, j, X, Z. The thirde is the Catalan, which is a kinde of French, and had his beginning from the prouince of Gascoigne, from the ancient citie Limojes: they spake this in the kingdoms of Cataluna, Mallorca, Menorca, Iuiça and Cerdena. This Cáta∣lan toong was called Prouençal: and the Italians confesse that the Prouençals were the first inuentors of their rimes and verses, which are so much prised in Italie where Petraque, Boccace, and Dante, giue some testimonie in retaining their wordes in manie places. The fourth is that which is now at this day commonly vsed and spoken thorowe all Spaine, and is called Léngua vulgár, the mother toong, otherwise Léngua Ca∣stellána, or Española, the Castilian or Spanish toong, principally vsed in Aragon, Andalucia, Múrcia, Castilla, Nuéeua, and Veja, León: also in Portugall, although the Portugall toong haue such difference in certaine wordes and pronunciations, that it may well be called a language by it selfe, euen as the English and Scottish, yet in truth, it is not so seuered, but that they sprange from one fountaine, and haue one descendence. This Lengua vulgár or Spanish toong draweth his originall from the Latine or Romaine, and bicause the Romaine conquerours were most politicke in proui∣ding for the continuance of their estates & language to their posteritie, by planting where they woone,A Colonie is a place vnhabi∣ted, whither people are sent to dwell: or peo∣ple sent to inha∣bite such place: or a citie, the people whereof once came from another citie or countrey. Why the Spa∣nish keepeth so much of the Latine. Andaluzia, whereof first so named. Colonies and garrisons; as also not permitting any stranger to the priuiledge of their lawes or freedome of their townes, to buie, sell, or traffique, but in the Romaine or Latine toong, as in Spaine they haue done: Therefore the Spanish retaineth still to this daie so much of the Latine toong. And by rea∣son of the Incursion and ouerrunning of so many strange nations, as the Africans inhabiting about Carthage, called Carthaginians, Gothes, Huns, and Vandals, which ceased not till they had ouerrunne the most part of Europe, yet so setled themselues in Andaluzia in Spaine, that they called it by their owne name Vandaluzia or Vandalia of Vandalles, as also Africans inhabiting Mauri∣tania called Moores, whose first comming in, proceeded from the licentious li∣uing
and vnbrideled lust of Don Rodrígo then king,Howe the Moores first en∣tred and con∣quered Spaine. Chro. of Spaine. in dishonouring and de∣flowring a ladie called Cáva the daughter of earle Iulian, one of his nobles. By meanes heereof, this language remaineth so altered and changed from his owne first propertie and nature, admitting wordes, accents, and pronunciations of other strange nations, as it is become a language of it selfe compounded of the La∣tine and aboue named toongs: but yet so, that it hath much more of the Latine then of all the other, whereby it may be called the Latine toong altered or corrupted. For Spanish wordes comming from the Latine, marke the table heere following and their like. Spanish wordes drawen from the Moorish toong begin much with Al, as Al∣cúza, a vessell for oyle: Alfidél, or Alfilér, a pin: Almúd, a measure, a pecke: Al∣guarísmo, Arithmeticke: Almoháda, a pillow, &c. or in ç, as çaherír, to vpbraid, çahórda, a hogstie: or sounde on r, or x, Almaráxa, an ewer of glasse: Xabón soape: Almoradúx, marjoram: Arredrár, to driue away: Arrélde, fower pounde waight, &c. also in z, as Zagál, a shepheard. And at this day the Moores in spea∣king Spanish for júro a Dios, I sweare by God, they saie jureux a Deux: for Hom∣bre, they say Homber, for Vuéstra mercéd, your worship or mastership, they saie Voxár mérxe.
Generall Obseruations from the Latine for the framing of the SPANISH. Substantiues of the Latines in as, as Charitas, in Spanish thus, Caridád. Maiestas, Magestád. Crudelitas, Crueldád. Ciuitas, Ciudád. Fidelitas, Fedelidád. Securitas, Seguridád. Obscuritas, Escuridád. Conformitas, Conformidád. Calamitas, Calamidád. Voluntas, &c. Voluntád. The most part of words in Latine beginning with Pl. changed in Ll, as Plenus, In Spanish, Lléno. Planus, Lláno. Pluuia, Llúvia. Plaga, Llága. Plorare. Llorár. In like sort F. turned into H, as Facere, Spanish, Hazér. Faba, Háva. Faex, Héz. Falco, Halcón. Farina, Harína. Foetor, Hedór. Formosus, Hermóso, Ferrum, Hiérro, Feruor. Hervór. The Latine ending in io, made Spanish by put∣ting n to it, as Educatio, Spanish, Educación. Religio, Religión. Electio, Eleción. The Latine ending in tum, by changing um into o, as Ornamentum, Spanish, Ornaménto, Experimentum, Experiménto, Exemplum. Exémplo. The Latine ending in lis, by taking away is, as Materialis, Spanish, Materiál. Finalis, Finál. Subtilis, Sutíl. Debilis, &c. Débil. The Latine ending in the Infinitiue moode in e, by taking away e by Apocope, as Castigare, Spanish, Castigár. Amare, Amár. Tenere, Tenér. Perdere, Perdér. Sentire, Sentír. Salire. Salír.
By adding to the end of a word by Paragoge, as Apostema, Spanish, Apostemación. Appetere, Apetecér. Anas. A'nade. By adding to the middle of a word by Epenthesis, as Certum, Spanish, Ciérto. Coelum, Ciélo. Membrum, Miémbro. Messis. Miésse. By adding to the beginning of a word by Prothesis, as Plumescere, Spanish Emplumecér. Capistrare, Encabistrár. Scala, Escála. Scandalum. Escándalo. By changing a letter by Metathesis, in the middle of a word, of the second person plurall of the Imperatiue moode, as D and L changing places, as for Castigádle, they write Castigalde, for Dezídle, they say and write Dezílde. The Spanish sheweth his original from the Latine, although by corruption many words haue changed letters, as in these fo∣lowing & their like, as a into e as Lac, milke, Léche. Caseus, chéese, Quéso. b u Barba, a beard, Bárva. Bibo, I drinke, Bévo. c g Amicus, a frend, amígo. Acutus, sharp, agúdo. e i Directus, directed, derigído. lectus, read, leýdo. f h Ferrū, iron, hiérro. facere, to make or do, hazér g y Regnum, a kingdome, Reyno. I procéede no further herein, but leaue euery Latinist to consider of them as he shall méete with them by reading, whereby he shall manifestly perceiue by the mul∣titude of words in this tongue deriued from the Latine,No difficultie in the Spanish tongue or other vulgar tongues comming from the Latine. how easie it is for euerie meane scholler spéedily to obtaine the knowledge of the same, and with these rules and precepts, which here I shall set downe, I doubt not but that euery one (desirous thereof) may with facilitie and short time speake it and write it more than meanly: the which the better to performe, I take it the best order (according to the saying, Qui bene diuidit bene docet, He that diuideth the matter, he handleth well, teacheth well) to diuide this present Grammar into Orthographie, Prosodie, Etymologie, and Syntaxis, of which though I shall not deale with all of all that may be said, yet at least that shall bee necessarie to be saide for the instruction of the learner in this tongue.
OF ORTHOGRAPHIE Of Grammar and hir parts. GRammar is an Arte teaching the right rules of true speaking and writing,Definition of Grammar. and it is deri∣ued from the Greeke word , which is litera, as much as to say scientia literaria, a knowledge of letters. Deuision of Grammar. Grammar according to Quintilian, is two fould: Historicall, and Methodicall. Historicall, gotten by imitation of Authors. Methodicall, is taught by precepts, which onely we heere handle. Subdiuision of Grammar. Grammar methodicall is deuided into fower parts, Orthography, Prosody, Etymology, & Syntaxis.Deuision of Grammar. Orthography, conuersant in letters. Prosody, in syllables. Etymologie, in words. Syntaxis, in sentences.Propertie of the fower parts of Grammar. Orthographie, of the Greeke word  right,  writing. Prosodia, of , i. ad, & , cantus, that is Accentus. Etymologia, of , true,  speech. Syntaxii, of , i. con. & , ordino, quasi, coordinatio. Orthographie is a right rule of true writing, as before of  right,  writing,Definition of Orthographie. Definition of Orthopoeia. whereby euerie word is to be set downe with his true letters, as Cierro, certaine, not Sierto. Heereto belongeth Orthopoeia, which is a right rule of true speaking, of  right,  word, that in speaking men pronounce not more grosse or smal, then the nature of language will allow, or otherwise then the accustomed maner of pronounciation vsually permitted therein, as Vino, wine, not to pronounce it as Englishmen doe, Veino, but smaller as they pronouncethe double ce, Veeno, Dios, God, not Deios, but Dheeos. But of this hereafter in the letters more at large. And because Orthographie (the former part of our Grammar) chiefly consisteth in the true writing of euerie word with his right letters: It must of necessitie follow, that whosoeuer speaketh, or heareth a toong spoken in his proper Idioma, and would write downe the same so spoken,The force of letters. that he know the power and proprietie of each letter in that toong (because of letters are framed syllables, and of syllables are made words, and of words the whole speech, and language, the which neglected, must needs bring a confusion to the learner, and little or no fruite to the Teachers labour. Therefore to our purpose. There are in the Spanish toong 27. letters, whereof 24. are single, and three double. The single, A. b. c. ç. d. e. f. g. h. i. j. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. v. x. y. z.Letters. Double letters. The double are these, ch. ll. ñ. If any aske the question, why the Spanish, being descended from the Latine, hath in it more letters then the Latin: I answere,Nota. that although it be now (for the most part of words therin) corrupt & broken Latin, yet it had at the first (as in the Proeme before going) his originall from the Caldean, Arabique, and Moores toong, of which they reserue someç. g. j. x. z. letters. But now to our letters as they are in order in the Alphabet or crosse row, without beginning with the vowels, and then skipping from one consonant to another, distracting the memorie of the yoong beginner in a toong, which would much better retaine the precepts giuen thereon, so they might not be driuen to a new order of reckoning their letters, differing from that in their childhood they learned, and now can hardly be drawen from. A Is sounded plainely, with opening the mouth as in the Latin, French, and Italian, as in English man, can: so in Spanish, Manáda, a flocke, Ensaláda, a salade of herbs. B Is as the Latin, and is called litera labialis, one of the labiall or lip letters, because it cannot be pronounced without ioyning the lips togither. It is pronounced as in English, baker, basket: so in Spanish, Bacía, a bowle, Bárro, clay, but in the middest of a word, except the word come of the Latin. The Spaniards vsually confoundeth it with V consonant, and
soundeth it as V consonant, as Trabájo, trauell, they pronounce Travájo: Palábras, words, they sound Palávras:B and V conso∣nant, written and pronounced one for another. Cábra, a goate, Cávra: Labór, labour, Lavór: Albárda, a parkesaddle, Alvárda: Alabárda, a holbard, Alavárda: so oftentimes in the beginning of a word, as Bay∣lár, to daunce, Vaylár: Basquíña, a peticoate, a kirtle, Vasquína: Bellóta, an acorne, Vellóta: Berméjo, red colour, Vermejo: Bexica, a bladder, Vexica. Wherefore I aduise the studious in the Spanish toong,Nota. if he finde not a word in the Dictionarie, in one of these letters, let him turne to the other: as if he finde not Báyo, which is vsed in good Authors for Bay co∣loured, or Bayard, let him looke Váyo, and there he shall finde the same: If not Vañar, to bathe, looke Bañár: If not Vóz, looke Bóz, a voice. B cast away.B In the middest of a word going before another consonant, and making the pronunciation harder, is cut off in Spanish, as Subtil, they write, Sutíl, Absénte, Ausénte, Obscúro, Oscúro, or Escúro. C This letter hath two manner of soundings according to the vowels that follow it. If a o or u follow it, he is sounded as k, as in Cára, a face, Cóco, weuell, Cuchia, a spoone: so like∣wise in the middle of a word, as Descánso, rest, Escória, drosse, Escudill, a dish: but going be∣fore e or i pronounce almost as the Italian z, as Prudenza, Diszo, or their t before ia or io, as Prudentia, Iustificatione, Cecina, powdred flesh, Ciruéla, a um. C cast away.C Before t, cut off as Acto, an acte: the Spaniard saith, Ao, Pacto, a couenant, Páto. Ç Marked with a dash vnder it thus, ç, called ç, Cerilla, or ç Cedilla, is proper to the Arabíque toong, from whence it was first taken: it is sounded by putting the toong to the ranckes of the teeth,ç pronounced as the Italian Z. ç pronounced as English Ths. as the French ç en ça, or verie neere: the Italian Z, as Dilligenza, Scienza. This ç must be so pronounced, whether it be at the beginning, end, or middle of a word, though a o or u follow: and is sounded as in English Ths, as çaraguélles, great gascoine or Spanish hose, çoçóbras, crosse blows of fortune, çúfre, brimstone: pronounce Thsaraguélles, Thsosóbras, Thsú∣fre, in like maner before e and i, as çenogiles, garters, çiénto, a hundred: pronounce Thsenogí∣les, Thsiénto. D Is pronounced in the beginning of a word, as in Latin, French, and Italian: as in En∣glish, Dagger, Doctor: so in Spanish, Dága, a dager, Dóze, a doosen: this word Dios is ex∣cept from this rule, and is pronounced as these that follow: that is, if d come in the middest or end of a word,D pronounced as Dh. you must pronounce him as ♩ in Greeke, as dh in English, as Cada, euery, Cádha, fidelidád, fidelitie, fidhelidhadh. E Is as the Latin, and the Italian, and as in English, Bend, Lend: so in Spanish, Bende∣zír, to blesse, Bevér, to drinke: and it must neuer be sounded so small as the English ee, as fee, wee: nor so broad as the French do their e feminine, as Femme, a woman, pronounced Fam∣ma, but betwixt both as first aboue. F Is as the Latin and the Italian toongs, and iust as the English. The Spaniard writeth him when the Latins write Ph, as Philosophus, in Spanish Filósofo. G Answerable to the Hebrue Gimel, & hath two maner of soundings according to the vowels which follow it, if a o or u immediately followe, it is pronounced as in the Latin, Gabriel, Gorgias, Gubernator: Italian, Galante, Gotta, Gustare: French, Garçon, Gourmand: as in English, Gate,Ga. Go, Gu. Gua. Gold, Gutter: so in Spanish, Gáfo, a lazare, a leapour, Gófo, rude, Gúla, guttonie. But if after the u immediately come a, as Guante, a gloue, sound Gwante: Agua, water, Agwa: Mengua, want Mengwa. Gue, Gui, like Ghe, Ghi.But if after u follow e or i, pronounce as the French Guerre, Guide: as in English Guest, guide: so in Spanish Guérra, war, Guía, a guide: sound Gherra, Ghia, except these wordes follo∣wing, Guéro, adle, Aguéro, soothsaying, Garguéro, the throat, Sirguéro, a drawer or tower of a boate with a roape, Hoguéro, a woodpile, Triguéro, a sparowe that lieth in the wheate, Ci∣guéna, a storke, Pediguéno, wanton, Halaguéño, flattering, Siguénça, a citie of Spaine, Ver∣guénça, shame, Aguélo, a grandfather, Deguéllo, a beheading, Reguéldo, belking, Vnguénto, ointment: and words that come of the Infinitiue moode in Guár, as Enxaguár, to water, Enxágue, Menguár, to want, Mengue. Ge, Gi, as je, ji, which is as in English she shi.G Before e or i is sounded as the Latin Gero: Italian, Giorno: French, Gisant: English, Gef∣frey, Giles: or more like the Spanish, called j jota, or j consonant, which is pronounced as sh in English: so they say Gémir, to groane, pronouncing as it were written in English shemir, Gingíbre, ginger, shinshibre. For the Spaniard maketh no difference in speaking of this G before e and i, from the j conso∣nant,G and j conso∣nant written one for another. and they write one for another, as Agéno, Lináge, Menságe, Lisongéro, Magestád, or Ajéno, Lináge, Mensáje, Lisonjéro, Majestád. G Before n in the middle of a word lost, as Ignomínia, Inomínia, ignominie, Ignoráncia, Inorán∣cia, ignorance. H This letter is neither vowell nor consonant, but a note of aspiration, it is called in the Spanish as in the English Ache, which were more properly in my opinion to be called as
some nations do, Ha, bicause it doth so import in pronouncing as in English, Harmes, Harnes, Hate, Hang. This H in the beginning of a word is pronounced in Spanish with more vehemencie and em∣phasis, and in the middle or end of a worde weakely and faintly.H in beginning of a word. In the beginning he must be pronounced with more force, or else there woulde be no difference found in speaking these wordes, and their like, Háca, a nagge: Acá hither: as Ven acá, come hither, Hásta, vntill, and Asta for a speare: Háya, a beech tree: A'ya, a nurse: Húso, a spindle: U'so, vse. In the middle of a worde not so forcible, as Ahechár, pronounce as Aechár, Alholí, Alolí,H in middle of a word. a barne or garner. This H goeth before all the fiue vowels, as Hazér, to make or doe: Hécho, made or done: Híga∣do, the liuer: Hollín, the soote of a chimney: Húso, a spindle. But it may not in true Spa∣nish orthographie be written before a consonant, as Cristo, not Christo. Besides it is lost after T, as Ortografía, not Orthografía, Teólogo, not Theólogo.H taken away. With P also it is lost, and the P turned into F, as Filósofo, not Philósopho, which they must ob∣serue that would write the Spanish toong aright in all that are like these. Where Ue followeth H, it is pronounced as W, Huérto, an orchard: Huésso, a bone:Hue pronoun∣ced as Wue. pronounce Wuerto, Wuesso: or as if G went before thus, Gwerto, Gwesso, which I take to be more fit for the Englishmans pronounciacion for these and the like wordes. That worde which beginneth with H, shall not haue H in the middle, except C goe before it, as in Hécho, made, Hechizár, to bewitch and the like. I There be three kindes of I in the Spanish, that is small i, Greeke y, and j Jota,I three kinds. or conso∣nant. These two i, y, with a verie small slender sounde, as the French and Italians doe, which is as the double ee in English, wee, shee, fee, decree, so in Spanish, Tiráno, a tirafit,A note for Englishmen. Teerano: Vida, life, Veeda, & not as Englishmen pronounce Teyráno, veida, which all other nations mislike in hearing them speaking Latine, saying, Propino tibi, they pronounce Pro∣peino tibi, which I would wish they woulde but marke, and take notice thereof: for the French, Italian, and Spaniard, do learne and are taught by their Schoolemasters to pro∣nounce the Latine different from their owne toong, otherwise one nation shoulde not vn∣derstand another speaking the Latine. But in this toong as in the Italian and French, they must obserue except they will fal into the vice of Iotacismus and be laughed at, and not be vnderstood by strangers when they speake or reade. This small i is vsed in a worde as a vowell by it selfe, as Tinta, yncke, and in a diphthong,Small i. as Niéto, a nephew. Y is put in the beginning of a worde before a vowell or consonant, as yo, ya, ýr,Y. and in the ende as Daréys, Podéys. J jota or j consonant, which this toong taketh of the Arabique, is pronounced as in French,J pronounced like sh. Jamais, Deja, Jehan, in English like sh, as Jardín, a gardin, shardin, Járro, a pot sharro, ójo, an eie Osho: Hoja, a leafe, Hosha: Ovéja, a sheepe, Ouesha: Abéja, a bee, A besha: In Se∣uill and thereabout, they pronounce it not so much in the teeth, but more in the throate, as Cshardin, Csharro, Ozho, Hozha, Ovezha, Abezha. Some authors in the Spanish write these wordes (yet ill) and the like, with H. Hierusalem, Hierónimo, which should be thus Jerusalem, Jerónimo. K The Spaniard neuer vseth this letter but when it is required of the Greeke and proper names then founded as in the English, as Kalendas. L, M, N, O, P. Are all pronounced as in the Latine, French, Italian, and iust as in English: But P may not be doubled in Spanish,P not doubled. P cast away. as Apro∣var, to approoue, Apetíto, appetite, and not Approvár, Appetito. P before T in the middle of a worde lost, as Captívo, pronounce Cautívo, captiue. Neither can L be doubled in Spanish when the worde commeth of the Latine,When L not doubled. When N not doubled. Nota. and keepeth the Latine sounde, as Ilústre, in Latine Illustris: Sílaba, in Latine Syllaba: Colégio, Collegium. So likewise of N, as Tiráno, not Tiránno, in Latine Tyrannus, but when these keepe not the sounde of the Latine, looke heereafter in double Ll, ñ, and there you shall finde howe they are pronounced. Q Hath two pronunciations, not of his owne nature, but by reason of a vowell following him. If ua follow as in Latine and English, Quantitie, Quarter, so in Spanish Quándo, when, Quartána, Quál. But when ue or ui follow, it is to be pronounced as the Italian Che, Chi, or the French Que,Que, Qui pronounced as Ke, Ki. Qui, as English Ke, Ki, as Questión, a Question or quarrell, Kestion, Quieto, quiet, Kieto, except when the word is Latine, as Delinquente, Eloquente.
R With the Greekes and Latins termed Litera canina, so the Spaniard calleth him Letra per∣rina, the doggish letter, because dogs in grinning their teeth, when they would bite, sound this letter R. It is pronounced as the Latine, Italian, and French, but if it be in the be∣ginning of a word it is sounded strongly, as the Grecians doe sound. The Spanyard saith Ráyo, a sun beane, Réy, a king, or if it be doubled in the middest of a word you cannot sound with too great vehemencie, as Bárro, Clay, Cárro, a Cart. But if it be in the middest of a word and single, with a gentle and milde pronunciation, as ara, an altar, Móro, a blacke Moore. S With x. z. and ç. are pronounced (although the one more plaine and sounding, and the rest lesse) by putting the tongue to the roofe of the mouth, and then hissing out the voice with the lips open as a snake,S made like a snake doubled with his head lifted vp. and therfore the Greekes called this letter S by that hissing name, as also made it in fashion double as a snake, with his head lifted vp, accordingly is it made in Latine, Italian, and Spanish. In Spanish these letters are called Culebrinas, which is snakie, of Culébra, a snake, which vseth hissing. This S in the beginning of a word as in Latine, Italian, and French, and as in English Sand, Seeth, Sin, Sod, Sudden, so in Spanish Sabér, Sembrár, Sóbra, Sudór. But if S be single in the middest of a word betweene two vowels, then with a gentle sound almost like Z, as the French doe, adding thereby great grace to their tongue, as Eglise a Church, Cause, so in Spanish Causa, Rosa, úso, púso. But if it be doubled, then strongly, as in English Crossed, tossed, so in Spanish Fuéssemos gruésso. Nota, S neuer in beginning of a word except a vowel follow.In the end of a word as Z, as Cártas, Letters, Cámaras, Chambers, or going to stoole. And note that this letter cannot be in the beginning of a word when a consonant next follow∣eth. Therefore you must write Espéro, I hope, and not Spéro. Escrivo, I write, and not Scrivo. T Is pronounced as in the Latine, Italian, French & English, except it can neuer sound ci,Ti neuer turned in Ci in Spa∣nish, as in other tongues. as the Latins, Italians, French and English doe when after t followeth i with a vowell, as in Latine Prudentia, Italian Amicitia, French Justification, English Ambition, in Spanish it must be written Prudéncia, Amicícia, Justificatión, Ambición, otherwise the writing were false, and you should pronounce Ti as in Tibi. Also if H follow T, as Theólogo, Theopómpo, write and pronounce Teólogo, Teopómpo. U pronounced broad as ou.U Being a vowell not to be pronounced with a small sound as English, Stue, Brue, Crue, Issue, but as the French doth in his diphthong ou, almost as the English ou, as Tu, tou, Buche, the maw, Bouche. But being a consonant is pronounced as in other languages in the beginning of a word, as Váca, a Cow, Véna, a Veine, Víno, Wine, Vóto, a Vow, Vúlgo, the common people, in the middes of a word as Aváro, Gávia, úva. Also when two ou come togither, and a vowell following, the second is a consonant, as úvo, Túve, except Vuéstro. X pronounced as sh. X and j written often in Spanish one for another.X Is one of the Culebrínas létras, the snakie or hissing letters, as aboue said in the letter S, and is pronounced like J consonant, and the Spanyard often writeth one for another, as Xaráue, sirrup, Jaráue, and is pronounced as the French Ch, as the English sh, as Faxa, a wastband, Brúxa, a hag, Flóxo, weake, Fasha, Brusha, Flosho. Y As aboue in I. Z Is called in Spanish Zéta, as the Hebrew Zain, from whence it is drawen, and from the Moorish tongue, and is pronounced as the English Z, as Zángano, a droane, Zélo, zeale, Zodiaco, the Zodiacke, so likewise in the end of a word, as Bóz, a voice, Crúz, a Crosse. Ch as in Eng∣lish Ch.Ch Before any of the fiue vowels to be pronounced as in English, Chapman, Chiefely, Chic∣ken, Chop, Choose: so in Spanish, Chamelóte, Chamlet: Chiminéa, a Chimney: Chórro, a brooke: Chúsma, a companie of people of the common sort. Ll pronounced as Li.Ll As gl in Italian, as Cavagli, Moglie, Figli, as double Ll in French, as Fille, Coquille, as Li in En∣glish, as Lláno, plaine: Lléno, full: Llovér, to raine: Llúvia, raine: pronounce Liáno, Liéno, Liovér, Liuvia: so likewise in the middle of a worde, as Querrellóso, Kerrelioso, quarrel∣some: in the end of a worde neuer in Spanish written double, as Mil, a thousande, not Mill. ñ As the Italian and French gn, Montagna, Campagna, French Compaignon, Mignon, in En∣glish as ni:ñ pronounced as ni. as Montáña, a mountaine, Montania, Campáña, Campania, so Dáño, losse, Dannyo, Baño, a bath, Bannyo.
Of Orthographie in Diphthonges. A Diphthong (according to the definition of Grammarians) is a sounding togither of two different vowels, as if they were but one onely, as in English, Aide, Auditor.Definition of diphthongs. In Spanish there are twelue sorts. The first in ai, or ay, as gaita, andáys, cantáis.1. Ai, ay. But when two vowels come togither and make more then one sounde, they shoulde be marked ouer head with two prickes, to take awaie confusion, as Caïda, pronounced Caída, and so the rest. The second in ao, where a is more sounded then o, as Quartáo, a nag, Saráo,2. Ao. a hall to dance in, Vilbáo, a proper name of a towne, are pronounced in the same sort, as Cats maule. The third in au, where a sounds more then u, as Cáusa, Autór, Caudillo: except Laúd, a lute,3. Au. Ataúd, a tombe: La-úd, Ata-úd. The fourth in ei and ey, where e is more sounded then i, as Réy, a king, Léy, a law:4. Ei, ey. when they are seuered, write them with two pricks thus, Leïstes, Reïr. The fift in eu, where is most perceiued, as Féudo, Déudo, Réuma:5. Eu. being disioyned write thus: Reüntar, Reüngír. The sixt in ia, in which a is more heard sound then i, as Saia, Vaià, Malícia, Preséncia:6. Ia. except Mía, Dia, Porfía, Desvía. The seuenth, ie, ye, where e is most heard pronounced, as Viénto, Sciénto, Viéne, Bién, Quién,7. Ie, ye. Quiéra, Arriéndo, Dispiérto, Apriéto, Pie, Piédra, Tiérra, Ciélo, Infiérno, Diéz, Siéte, Miél, Hiél. The eight in io, or yo, where o is most sounded, as Yo, Dió, Vió: except Mío, Río, Frío, Tío.8. Io, yo. The ninth in iu, where i is more heard then the u, as Ciudád, a citie.9. Iu. The tenth in oi, or oy, as Soy, Doy, Voy, Oygo: except Oydo, Roýdo.10. Oi, oy. The eleuenth in ue, where e more sounded then u, as Fuérça, Muérte, Fuérte, Cuerno, Nuevo,11. Ue. Fuego, Huélgo, Nuéz, Vihuéla. The Twelfe in ui, and uy, where u is more sounded then the i, as Muy, Fuy, Cuidádo, Húyo.12. Ui, uy. Fower Rules following shewing how euery vowell maketh a seuerall syllable by himselfe, or is sounded in diphthong with another. The first Rule. If betweene two vowels come h, or a consonant,The first Rule. such vowels cannot ioyne themselues togither to make a syllable or diphthong, as Ahínco, Bolár, except Auré, Aurás, Aurá, Aurémos, Auréys, where u r and the vowell make a syllable, the like in Auría, Auríamos. The second Rule. Any two vowels comming togither, neither of them being i nor u, make two syllables,The second Rule. as Neémias, Posséer, Roér, except these Hebrew words which end in two ee, as Oseé, Bethleem, Bersabeé. The third Rule. When the first person of a verbe doth end in two vowels, and the first vowell being i,The third Rule. and the accent stand vpon the same i, then that i maketh a syllable of it selfe without ioyning it selfe with the vowell following, as Embío, Embías, Embía, Embiámos. Porfío, Porfías, Porfian. Espío, Espías, Espían. Confío, Confías, Confía. The fourth Rule. But if the word doth end in two vowels, and the first of them being i,The fourth Rule. and the accent not on the first, then they make both the vowels a diphthong into a syllable, as Grácia, Justícia, Da∣niél, Ezechiél, Gabriél, Senténcia, Vitória, and in like sort doe they when they haue the accent on the last of them, as Passión, Religión, Nación, Caución, Ración, because they come of words of the Latine that haue their accent in the Antepenultima, therefore must the Spanish haue it in the Vltima. Except these words in Spanish, Anciáno, Dioclesiáno, Diáblo. Of Triphthongs. A Triphthong is a sounding of three vowels into one syllable with one breath togither,Definition of a Triphthongs. 1. iay, yay. 2. iey, yey. 3. iue, yue. 4. uai, uay. 5. uei, uey. and that after fiue sortes. The first in iai or yay, as Vayáys, Espaciáys, where a is heard more then i. The second iey or yey, where e is more sounded then i, as Ensuziéys. The third in iue or yue, where e is heard more then u, as Hoyuélo, Arroyuélo. The fourth in uai or nay, as Guáy. The fifth in uéi or uey, as Buéy, Buéytre.
Of Prosodia or Accents, the seconde part of this Grammar. AS Orthographie handleth letters, so Prosodie treateth of syllables, and the right sounding and pronouncing the same with their true ac∣cents, which is to make the syllable or worde long or short, soft or sharpe, without the which the learner can not tell how to read or pro∣nounce the toong, much lesse to be vnderstood when he speaketh the same, whereby he shall be not onely disgraced, but be driuen to bestow longer time, in forgetting that ill touch taken vp, then he might bee in going forward in learning fiue times so much. The which being care∣fully looked vnto at the first, cannot but much adorne the speaker, make himselfe vnderstood, as also giuing himselfe exceeding comfort in going forward, when he knoweth hee singeth true harmonie, which cannot but delight those that will listen thereto. Description of Prosodia.Prosodia, is a rule or knowledge, shewing with what accent euery syllable of a worde is to be pronounced, as Cárcel, not Carcél a prison. Many haue affirmed the Spanish toong to be subiect to the Latine accents, seeing it is for the most parte deriued from the same,Spanish not subiect to La∣tine accents. but common speech and vse shewe the contrarie in manie words, as Latin Génesis, in Spanish Genesís, Sódoma, in Spanish Sodóma, Hélena, Heléna, so in Latine ámor, in Spanish amór, aútor, autór, Cérasus, Cerézo. But yet note this, that words de∣riued of the Latine do keepe the accent of the Latine,Of the Latine, the Latine ac∣cent. Words ending in D, I, N, or R, accented in the last sillable. Except these. Nota. Opus laboris. except some proper names or words en∣ding in d, l, n, or r, as Abstinéentia, Abstinéncia, Obediéntia, Obediéncia, Beneficio, Blándo, Cadúco, Ceremónia, Cúlpa, Dígno, Dóte, Família, Fecóndo, Furióso, Prémio. But if they end in d, l, n, or r, then they haue alwaies the accent in the last syllable, as Amistád, Pestilenciál, Camelón, Pastór. Except some few ending in l, n, & r, ángel, ábil, apóstol, árbol, jóven, lóor, ánsar, ámbar, acíbar, açú∣car, açófar, alcáçar, nácar, tíbar, cármen, cáncer, carácter, cárcel, Cristóval, cónsul, crímen, débil, defícil, móbil, Immóbil, fócil, dócil, Estéril, estiércol, fácil, Dátil, frágil, v'til, inv'til, fértil, inábil, mástil, márgen, mártir, mármol, Trébol, órden, orígen, vírgen, exámen, volúmen, imágen, betúmen, Estévan, and verie fewe or none besides these, for that in setting these downe I ran ouer (as neere as I coulde) euery word in the whole Dictionarie, whereby you may coniecture, what paines, trouble, & time, such books of such method as this haue bestowed on them, before they can come foorth to shew to the learner in a moment, that which the composer can hardly finde out in a moneth: but if any other there be, I haue accented them in their places, as all the words ge∣nerally in the whole Dictionarie whatsoeuer to make the beginner, and also the well read to bee perfect in the pronunciacion, without which he shall be derided, as not vnderstoode when hee readeth or speaketh. All Nounes in ion, and in or, accent in the last sillable, as Occasión, Predicadór, so also in i, s, z, as Alcaucí, Cortés, Pertináz, Cervíz, except Adíves, a beast in Barbarie like a foxe, which barketh and crieth in the night as loud as a foxe. 2 Accents in one worde.Although in the Latine there is in no worde but one accent dominant, yet in the Spanish often are two found, as Ciértaménte, Fuértaménte, wherefore I will set downe the order of the Spanish accenting, first giuing example of those wordes which continually are accented, then of those which are somtimes, and somtimes not; last of al, those which haue two or three accents. These words alwaies accented, as Hé há ýd ýr aquí acá séd sóy cál bóz grán áy Augustín acullá. These words following sometime accented, sometime not, as Al, If it be an article, it is not accented, as Dezíd al Señór ésto, Tell your master this. But if it be not an article, it is then accented, as Pensád en ál, Thinke on some thing. Aun, When que followeth it is not accented, as Pédro aunque sépa morír no hará, Peter al∣though he knew he should die, he would not doe it. But asking a question it is then accen∣ted, as Aún duérmes Pedro? Doe you sleepe yet Peter? Ante, Being a Preposition is not accented, as Ante Dios estámos, We stand before God. But being an Aduerbe it is accented, as Anté víno Pédro que Juán, Peter came before Iohn.
Cerca, a Preposition not accented, as Cerca tódòs dád buén exémplo, Aboue all giue good example. But if it be a Verbe, Aduerbe, or Noune or this particle De going before or fol∣lowing, then it is accented, as El Rey cérca con su génte, que tiéne, cerca de si,Nota. la ciudád y la rodéa cérca tóda, y tiéne la cérca de piédra, y de cérca paréce fuérte, The king doth besiege with his people, which he hath about him, the citie, and compasseth it all about, neere vnto it, which hath his wall of stone, and neere hand it séemeth strong. De mi, A possessiue not accented, as De mi pádre heredé virtúd, Of my father I inherited vertue. But if it be not a possessiue it is accented, as De mí habláys segun véo, You speake of me as I perceiue. Del, The article not accented, as Del virtuóso es la virtúd amáda, Vertue is beloued of the ho∣nest. But if it be a Pronoune it is accented, as Dios és buéno y dél nos viéne el bién, God is good, and from him commeth goodnes. Do, Spoken indefinitely not accented, as Do estuviére el buéno estaré yo, Where the good man shall be, there will I be also. But spoken in asking a question it is accented, as Dó está Juán? Where is Iohn? El, Being an Article not accented, as El buéno téme a Dios, The iust feareth God. If it be a Pronoune then accented, as Crísto nos áma y él nos redimió, Christ loueth vs, and he it is that hath redeemed vs. Entre, A Preposition not accented, as Entre los sántos desséo estár, I desire to be among the godly. But being a Verbe is accented, as Entré Pédro y no Juán, Let Peter enter and not Iohn. Mas, The Coniunction not accented, as No hagáis mal, mas hazéd bien, Doe not euill but doe good. But being an Aduerbe, then it is, as Más queéto bíve, &c. y es más querído, He liueth more at quiet, &c. and is better beloued. Medio, In composition not accented, as Medio en burlas, medio en véras, Halfe in iest, halfe in earnest. If alone, then otherwise, as Tenéd el médio en cosas, Keepe a meane in matters. Nos, Not accented, as Hábla nos Jesus, Christ telleth vs. But if it be a nominatiue case to the verbe, then it is, as Nós querémos, We will, &c. Vn, Not accented, as Vn hómbre, A man. But if y the Coniunction goe before, then it is, as Dí le pán, y ún reál, I gaue him bread and sixe pence. These words following not accented, as Alo, Alos, Aunque, Con, De, Dela, Delo, Delas, Delos, De mis, Desde, Desque, Don, Doña, E, En, En mis, Enlo, Enlos, Enla, Enlas, Fray, Y, Lo, Le, Me, Micer, Mossen, as Micer sancho, y Mossen Pedro viénen, Master Sanches and Master Peter comes. Ni, Os, Pero, Pues, Por, Quan, Quel, San, Si, Su, So, Tan, Tal. Also all the Articles while they keepe the nature of Articles, which are these, A, al, ala, alo, alas, alos, Del, dela, delo, delos, delas, El, la, las, Lo, los, le, les. Words of two Accents. A'ltaménte, Hártobásta, Buénaménte, Biénditaménte, Ciértaménte, Bienaventuradaménte,Words of two Accents. Dié∣straménte, Gráveménte, Grasiósaménte, Yguálménte, Iúntaménte, Luéngaménte, Magníficaménte, Ra∣zonábleménte, Ráraménte, Sábiaménte. Words of three Accents. Múy málaménte, Múybuénaménte.Words of three Accents.
Of Etymologie and the Nowne. Definition of Etymologie.ETymologie, is a Rule of shewing and searching out the originall of words, with that pertaineth to them. This searching out of originall and descendence of words is considered in diuers manners: but among the rest, for the beginners in any language whatsoeuer, this is so necessarie, that without it, they could not vnderstand or learne it: The which by the Latine Grammarians hath beene, and is called Declension and Coniugation (which is likewise a declination) but that the former is of the Nownes, and the other of the Verbes. The Spaninsh hath eight parts of Speech, as the Latin. Nowne, declined. Aduerbe, vndeclined. Pronowne, Coniunction, Verbe, Preposition, Participle. Interiection. Of the Nowne. Nownes be deuided into Substantiues and Adiectiues, which are likewise deuided into Primitiues,Primitiue. Deriuatiue. Deriuatiues. The Primitiue, which is not deriued of any other, but is Primū, of himself, as Abéja, a bee. The Deriuatiue, is drawen from the Primitiue, as Abejonázo, a great Bee. And of like nature to these Primitiue nownes, are these Interrogatiues, Redditiues, and Numerals following. To the Primitiue, these following, and the like are subiect, as Interrogatiue.The Interrogatiue, as Quién? who? Quál? what manner? Quánto? how much? Quán∣tos? how many. The Relatiue which answereth to the Interrogatiue, as tal, such a one, Tantos, so many. Numerall. Cardinall.The Numerall to which these kinds following do belong, as Cardinal, from which as from a fountaine the rest do spring, these do I wish the learner to haue by hart. 1 vno 21 veinte úno 1500 míl y quiniéntos 2 dos 22 veynte dos, &c. 2000 dos míl 3 tres 30 tréynta 3000 tres míl Cardinall Numerals.4 quátro 40 quarénta 4000 quátro míl 5 cínco 50 cinquénta 5000 cínco míl 6 seýs 60 sesénta 6000 séys mil 7 siéte 70 seténta 7000 siéte mil 8 ócho 80 ochénta 8000 ócho mil 9 nuéve 90 novénta 9000 nuéve mil 10 diéz 100 cién, or ciénto 10000 diéz mil 11 ónze 101 ciéto y vno 100000 cién míl 12 dóze 200 dociéntos y doziéntos 1000000 millón 13 tréze 300 treziéntos 2000000 dos millónes 14 catórze 400 quatrociéntos 3000000 tres millones 15 quínze 500 quiniéntos     16 diés y séys 600 seysciéntos     17 diéz y siéte 700 siéteciéntos     18 diéz y ócho 800 ochociéntos     19 diez y nuéve 900 nuéve ciéntos     20 véynte 1000 mil     Ordinall Numerals.The ordinals, which declare the order of a place or time, as Priméro, segúndo, tercéro, quár∣to, quínto, séxto, séptimo, or seténo, octávo, nóno, or novéno, décimo, or dezéno, onzéno, dozéno, trezéno, catorzéno, quinzéno, décimo séxto, décimo séptimo, décimo octávo, décimo nóno, veinté∣no, veinténo úno, veinténo dós, &c. Treinténo, quarenténo, cinquenténo, sesentèno, setenténo, ochen∣téno, noventéno, centésimo, or cienténo, dosienténos, trezenténos, quatrocienténos, quinienténos, seyscienténos, sietecienténos, ochocienténos, nuevecienténos, miléssimo.
Partatiues which signifie many seuerally, as Cáda vno, euery one, Entrámbos,Partatiue numerals. Vniuersall numerals. Particular numerals. Aduerbiall numerals. both of them, ni vno, ni ótro, neither of them, or one among many, as ótro, another, algúno some body. Vniuersals, as tódos, all: ningúno, no bodie. Particulars, as Algúno, some bodie. Aduerbials, ioyning the Cardinall Numerals with this Aduerbe vez, as v'na vez, once: dos vézes, twise: tres vezes, thrise: diez vézes, ten times: cien vezes, a hundred times: mil vézes, a thousand times. Deriuatiues. Deriuatiues, which haue contained vnder them these following, viz.Deriuatiues. Of countries or townes. Of the nation. Of countries or townes, as Aragonéz, a man of Aragon: Andalúz, a man of Andaluzia: Gra∣nadíno, a man of the citie or countrie of Granada: Gaditáno, a man of Cadis or Caliz. Of the nation, as Dalmácios, people of Dalmatia: Ingléses Englishmen, or people of England: Escosséses, Scottishmen: Francéces, Frenchmen: Móros, blacke Moores: Túrcos, Turkes. Words in óso are deriuatiue of their Primitiues, as Mentiróso, lying, of Mentíra, a lie:Deriuatiues from Primi∣tiues. Excessiues in údo, & ázo. Diminutiues. Clamoró∣so, clamorous, of Clamór, clamor: glorióso, &c. Of signifying excesse in údo, and ázo, as Baruúdo, hauing a great long beard, of Barba, jarrázo, a great blowe with a cup, of jarro a cup: Papúdo, hauing a great wide throate, of Papo a throate: Rodillázo, a great blowe with the knee, of Rodílla a knee. Deminutiues in íco, íto, éta, uéla, ílla, íllo, as Boníco, Boníto, prettie, good: vaquéta, vaquílla, a little cowe or heifer, of Váca a cowe: Ropilla a little gowne or cassocke, of Ropa: Calderuéla, a little kettle, of Calderón a kettle: Cardeníllo, somwhat blacke and blew, of Cardéno blacke and blewe. Of Numbers. To Nounes as well Substantiues as Adiectiues, there are these affections following belonging, Number, Case, Gender. The Number sheweth the quantitie, the Case the qualitie, and the Gender the sexe. There are two Numbers. The Singular and the Plurall.Numbers. The Singular speaking of one, as Libro, a booke. The Plurall of moe, as Líbros, bookes. This is a generall Rule, if the singular number doe end in a vowell,Nota. the plurall num∣ber is made by putting to s, as Palábra, palábras, Cuérpo, cuérpos, Muérte, muértes, Ja∣valí, javalís. Except some few, which must haue es added to them, as Rey, réyes, Léy, léyes, Fe, fées, Buéy, buéyes, so in this manner all nounes ending in consonants must haue es added to them, as Mer∣céd, mercédes, Ciudád, ciudádes, Mortál, mortáles, Pastór, pastóres, &c. Of Cases. The Spanish hath Cases as the Latine, but all in one ending or termination,Cases. and are declined with an article, as the Nominatiue with el la, the Genitiue with the Preposition De, as the Italian and French, the Datiue Para, the Accusatiue a, the Ablatiue as the Genitiue de. Of Genders. There are three, The Masculine, as El Pádre, the father.Genders. Rules to know the gender of most part of Nounes. Nota. Nounes in l, o, r, Masculine. Exception. The Feminine, as La Mádre, the mother. The Neuter, which is of small vse with the Spanyard, as Lo sincéro, Lo malo, for they speake by the substantiue, as La Sinceridád, El mal. To knowe the Genders, obserue well these Rules following. All nounes ending in l, o, or r, are commonly of the Masculine gender, as Cardinál, a Car∣dinall, Cárdo, a Thistle, Pastór, a Shepherd. Except la Cárcél, a prison, la Piél, the skin, la Ca∣nál, a Gutter, la Equinoctiál, the Equinoctiall, la Nauál, a battell at sea, la Hiél, gall, la Sál, Salt, la Máno, a hand. All Nounes for the most part in a, d, or ion, are of the Feminine gender, as Mantéca,Nounes in a, d, ion, feminine. Butter, Magestád, Maiestie, Deliberación, Deliberation.
Names of trees com∣monly the Masculine gender, and the fruits the feminine, as El Perál, a Peare tree. El Ciruélo, a Plum tree. El Narrānjo, an Orange tree. El Cidro, the Citron tree. El Mançáno, the Apple tree. El Camuéso, the Pippen tree. El Cerézo, the Cherrie tree. El Alméndro, the Almond tree. El Avelláno, the Hazell nut tree. El Castáño, the Chestnut tree. El Nogál, the Wallnut tree. El Azeytúno, the Oliue tree. El Olívo, idem. El Morál, the Mulbery tree. El Granádo, the Pomgranat tree. La Péra, the Peare. La Ciruéla, the Plum. La Narrānja, the Orange. La Cidra, the Citron fruit. La Mançāna, the Apple. La Camuésa, the Pippen. La Ceréza, the Cherrie. La Alméndra, the Almond. La Avellána, the Hazell nut. La Castáña, the Chestnut. La Nuez, the Wall nut. La Azeytúna, the Oliue. La Olíva, idem. La Móra, the Mulberie fruit. La Granáda, the Pomgranate. Exception.Except these whose tree and fruite are both Masculine, as El Menbríllo, the Quince tree and Quince fruite. El Limon, the Limon tree and fruite. El Alvérchigo, the Apricocke tree and fruite. El Avercóque, idem. El Péro, the tree and fruite of a kinde of Apple, very rawe, and cold by nature, good to roste, red on one side. Another ex∣ception.Except these also whose fruit is the Masculine & tree the Feminine, as El Higo, the Fig. El Dátil, the Date. El Razímo, the bunch of grapes. La Higuéra, the Fig tree. La Pálma, the Date tree or Palme tree. La Parra, the Vine, or La víd. Verbals in or make them∣selues feminine, by putting to a.Verbals in or are of the masculine gender, and make themselues feminine, by putting to a, as Habladór, a prater, Habladóra, a she prater. Likewise Nownes in o, make their feminine, by changing o into a, as Honrádo, honored, Honráda: Suégro, a father in law, Suégra, a mother in law. Of Declensions and of the Article. Declension of the Article.The Spanish (as likewise the Italian and French) haue but one manner of Declen∣sion or declining, that is with the Article, which in Spanish is thus declined: Article mascu∣line Sing. Nom. el. Plu. Nom. los. Gen. del, de lo. Gen, del los. Dat. Para el, Para lo. Dat. para los. Acc. a el, al, alo. Acc. alos. Ab. del, delo. Ab. delos. The Feminine Article thus. Article femi∣nine Sing. Nom. la. Plu. Nom. las. Gen. de la. Gen. de las. Dat. para la. Dat. para las. Acc. al, ala. Accus. a las. Abl. de la. Abl. de las. In the Spanish (as Italian and French) the Article Masculine is put oftentimes in steede of the Feminine, when the word beginneth with a vowell, as el agua, the water, el alma, the soule: to make the pronunciation more sweete Euphoniae gratia, and it may also be put la agua, la alma. Also in the Spanish (as Italian and French) the Article is neuer separated from Nownes Appellatiues, neither in Singular nor Plurall number: as Spanish, el libro, los li∣bros,Nota. la cámara, a chamber, las cámaras. But in Nownes proper it is not vsed so: for it were absurd to say, el Francisco, la Iuána: neither is it vsed with this word Dios, except there be ioyned with it some Epitheton, as el Dios todo poderóso, God almightie.
Declining of a Nowne. All nownes are thus de∣clined, Sing Nom. el maétro. Plu. Nom. los maéstros. Gen. del maéstro. Gen. de los maétros. Dat. para el maéstro. Dat. para los maétros. Acc. a el, or al maéstro. Acc. a los maéstros. Abl. del maéstro. Abl. de los maéstros. The femi∣nine gender thus, Sing. Nom. la doctrína. Plu. Nom. las doctrínas. Gen. de la doctrína. Gen. de las doctrínas. Dat. para la doctrína. Dat. para las doctrínas. Acc. a la doctrína. Acc. a las doctrínas. Abl. de la doctrína. Abl. de las doctrínas. Adiectiues are declined like the Substantiues both singular and plurall number. Comparatiues and Superlatiues. The Spanish to make comparison, in the Comparatiue degree vseth this particle Mas,Comparatiues. as Mas diligénte, more diligent, Mas vil, more vile: and to diminish, they vse Ménos, as Ménos dili∣génte, lesse diligent, Ménos vil, lesse vile. The Superlatiue. The Superlatiue is made of this particle Muy, as Muy iusto, verie iust:Superlatiues. sometime with ex∣aggerating & magnifying a matter, they forme their Superlatiues from nownes Adiectiues, as Ilustrissimo, Humanissimo, Hermosissima, most excellent, most humaine, most beautifull. These following thus compared Buéno, mejór, or mas buéno. Malo, peór, muy málo. Gránde, mayór, muy gránde, or Grandissimo. Chico, menór, or mas chico, muy chico. Mucho, mas, muy mucho, or muchíssimo. Poco, ménos, muy poco. There be also Aduerbes of qualitie which are vsed with Comparatiue & Superlatiue, as nownes whereof they come, as Muy mas elegantaménte, much more eloquently, Muy mas discre∣taménte, much more discreetly. In like manner, Prepositions, as Detrás, behinde, mas Detrás, more behinde, muy Detras, much behinde: Debáxo, beneath or vnder, mas Debáxo, more below or vnder, muy Debáxo, much vnder or beneath. A Pronoune. The Spanish Pronoune is as the Latine, like a Noune, and is vsed in rehearsing, of a proper name of Pro and Nomen, i. for the name and in spéech is vsed therefore. Pronounes are deuided into Primitiues and Deriuatiues. The Primitiues are these, yo, tu, si, éste, aquéste, el, ésse, aquél, el qual, que, quien, mismo,Primitiues. to which Mismo all before going may be coupled, as yo mismo, I my selfe: tu mismo, thou thy selfe: si mismo, himselfe: el mismo, he himselfe, and so may you say yo misma, tu misma, &c. they are cal∣led Primitiues bicause they are Primi, first, and not deriued of others. Primitiues deuided into Demonstratiues. Relatiues. They are called Demonstratiues bicause they shewe a thing not spoken of before, as yo, tu,Demonstratiues si, aquel, este, el. Relatiues as repeating or hauing relation to some thing spoken before, as el, este, que,Relatiues. quien, el qual. Deriuatiues or Possessiues,Deriuatiues. because they be deriued of the Primitiues and signifie pos∣session, as belonging to something, as mio, or mi: tuyo, or tu: suyo or su, nuéstro, vuéstro. In Pronounes are chiefely to be noted, the Persons, bicause all Nounes and Partici∣ples
be of the thirde Person, but Pronounes of all three Persons, as yo and his Plurall nos, be of the first Person, Tu and his Plurall vos, of the second: and all the rest whatsoeuer of the thirde Person, according to this rule. All Nounes, Pronounes, and Participles, be of the third Person, except yo and tu. The first person Yo, thus declined. Yo declined.Sing. Nom. yo. Plu. Nom. nos, nosótros. Fem. Plu. Nosótras. Gen. de mi. Gen. de nos, de nosótros. de nosótras. Dat. Para mi. Dat. Para nos, para nosótros. Para nosótras. Accu. a mi, a me. Accu. a nos, a nosótros. a nosótras. A bla. de mi. Abla. de nos, de nosótros. de nosótra. Nota.This Pronoune in the singular number serueth as well for the Masculine as Feminine gender, so in the Plurall doth Nos. But Nosótros onely to the Masculine, and Nosótras to the Feminine. The Spaniard in speech & writing vseth this Pronoune Nos with the first person Plu∣rall of the Imperatiue moode, by taking away s, from the Verbe, as Vámonos, for Vámos Nos, let vs go: Dexámonos, for Dexámos Nos, let vs leaue. From this Pronoune Primitiue are two other deriued, one from the Singular number, as Mio, from yo, another from the Plurall Number as Nuestro from Nosótros. Mi, and Mio.Mio, Mia, in Latine Meus, mea, meum, in Italian Mio, mia, in French Mon, ma. Example.   Mascul. Fem.   Mascul, Fem. Sing. Nom. Mi, mio. Mia. Plu. Nom. Mis, mios. Mias. Gen. de mi, de mio. de mia. Gen. de mis, de mios. de mias. Dat. Para mi, para mio. para mia. Dat. para mis, para mios. para mias. Accu. a mi, a mio. a mia. Accu. a mis, a mios. a mias. Abla. de mi, de mio. de mia. Abla. de mis, de mios. de mias. The learner in the Spanish must note, the manner how the Spaniard vseth these Pos∣sessiues, Mi, mio, Tu, tuyo, Su, suyo: and when he ought to vse them in speech or writing, other∣wise straight he will bewray himselfe in vsing vnproperly the toong. A rule when Mi, tu, su, and Mio, tuyo, suyo, are to be vsed. Nota.Mi, tu, su, are still vsed, ioyned with another worde, as Mi cavállo, my horse, not Mio caval∣lo: Tu piensamento, thy thought, not Tuyo piensamento: Su provécho, his profite, not Suyo Pro∣vécho. But when a question is asked, and Mio, Tuyo, Suyo, put absolutely and not ioyned, as Cuya es essa espáda? whose rapier is this? Answere: Mia, tuya, suya, mine, thine, his: and not Mi, tu, su: De quien es este cuchillo? whose knife is this? Answere, Mio, tuyo, suyo: and not, Mi, tu, su. In like sorte when they make a relation of a thing spoken of before, and are placed at the end of a sentence, clause or period, as éste cavallo no es mio, mas deaquél que a milo dexó, pa∣raque yo fuésse a vna casa tuya: this horse is not mine but his that left it me, that I should ride to one of thy houses, and you cannot say, éste cávallo es mi, que yo fuesse a vna casa tu. These and many such like I wish the learner in the Spanish to marke diligently in authors as he reades. S. added ma∣keth Plurall number.To make the Plural number of Mi, Tu, Su, adde to s, as Mis, Tus, Sus, and so of other words whatsoeuer, as before of numbers in the Noune. This other deriued from the Plurall Nosótros is thus declined.   Mascul. Fem.   Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. Nuéstro, Nuéstra. Plur. Nom. Nuéstros, Nuéstras. Gen. de Nuéstro, de Nuéstra. Gen. de Nuéstros, de Nuéstras. Dat. para Nuéstro, para Nuéstra. Dat. para Nuéstros, para Nuestras. Accus. a Nuéstro, a Nuéstra. Accus. a Nuéstros, a Nuéstras. Ablat. de Nuéstro, de Nuéstra. Ablat. de Nuestros, de Nuéstras. The second person Tu, thus declined.     Mascul. Fem. Second person, Tu.Sing. Nom. Tu, Plur. Nom. Vos Vosótros, Vosótras. Gen. de Ti, Gen. de Vos de Vosótros, de Vosótras. Dat. para Ti, Dat para Vos para Vosótros, para Vosótras. Accu. a Ti, a Te, Accus. a Vos a Vosótros, a Vosótras. Abl. de Te, Ablat. de Vos de Vosótros, de Vosótras. Nota.Note that the Spanyard most ordinarily ioyneth to the Infinitiue moode of any verbe, this particle os, which is as much as vos, as Habláros, to speake vnto you, Véros, to see you, De∣ziros, to tell you.
Of this Primitiue, likewise come two Deriuatiues, the one of the Singular number, as of Tu comes Tuyo, in Latin Tuus, Tua, Tuum, Italian Tuo, Tua, French Ton, Ta. The other of the Plurall, Vos or Vosótros comes Vuéstro. Example.   Mascul. Fem.   Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. Tu, Túyo, Túya. Plur. Nom. Tus, Túyos, Túyas. Gen. de Tu, de Túyo, Túya. Gen. de Tus, de Túyos, Túyas. Dat. para Tu, para Túyo, Túya. Dat. para Tus, para Túyos, Túyas. Accus. a Tu, a Túyo, Túya. Accus. a Tus, a Túyos, Túyas. Abl. de Tu, de Túyo, de Túya. Ablat. de Tus, de Túyos, de Túyas. But note how the Spanyard and Italian accounteth it a disgrace to speake to any man in the second person singular either in the Nominatiue Tu, or in other cases Ti or Te,Nota, how the Spaniard vseth Tu, and the se∣cond Plu, except it be to his Neager, his slaue, his lackie, horsekeeper, or to some of base & vile account. To their ser∣uants of the better reckoning, and to artificers and such like persons they speake in the seconde person Plurall, as Traéd aqui, bring hither, &c. Yréys a mi çapitéro, you shal goe to my shoomaker, Direys que me haga unos borzeguís, and you shall tell him that he make me a paire of buskins. To all others they vse the third person, as Quiere V.M. andár, will your Mastership go?Nota. Ruéga a V.M. que me haga essa mercéd, &c. I intreat your Mastership that you doe me this curtesie, &c. And whereas Englishmen say You, the French Vous,Nota. the Spanyard and the Italian spea∣keth in the third person singular, as V.M. V.S. your Mastership, or worship. The other Deriuatiue of the plurall number is this, Vuéstro, of Vos or Vosótros,Nota. in Latine Vester, Vestra, Vestrum, in Italian Vostro, Vostra, French Vostre, in English Yours. Example. Sing. Nom. Vuéstro, Vuéstra. Plural. Nom. Vuéstros, Vuéstras.Vuéstro. Gen. de Vuéstro, Vuéstra. Gen. de Vuéstros, Vuéstras. Dat. para Vuéstro, Vuéstra. Dat. para Vuéstros, Vuéstras. Accus. a Vuéstro, Vuéstra. Accus. a Vuéstros, Vuéstras. Ablat. de Vuéstro, Vuéstra. Ablat. de Vuéstros, Vuéstras. The third person Si, thus declined.Si. Sing. and Plural. Nom. caret. Gen. de si, Dat. para si. Accu. a si. Abl. de si. Of this Primitiue one Deriuatiue, which signifieth in Latin, Suus, sua, suum: Italian, Suo, sua: French, Sien, sienne: English, His, as. Example.   Mascul. Fem.   Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. su, Súyo, Súya. Plu. Nom. sus, Súyos, Súyas.Su, Súyo. Gen. de su, Súyo, Súya. Gen. de sus, Súyos, Súyas. Dat. para su, Súyo, Súya. Dat. para sus, Súyos, Súyas. Accu. a su, Súyo, Súya. Accus. a sus, Súyos, Súyas. Abl. de su, Súyo, Súya. Abl. de sus, Súyos, Súyas. I proceed with the examples of all the Pronounes following by declining them, because as I before saide: it is one of the difficultest things in the toong to haue the true vse of them, and whereby a stranger or the vnlearned in his speech or writing, shall soonest discouer himselfe to the naturall or learned in the toong. Wherefore let not onely the yoong learner;Nota the diffe∣rence of these Pronounes following. E'ste, Aquéste. but also the well grounded, and those that are able to discourse and write the toong well, obserue how and when these Pronounes following (so little differing the one from the other) are to be vsed in their due time and place, as followeth: These two, E'ste and Aquéste, doe signifie vnto vs any thing that is neere vs, in that signi∣fication as the Latin, Hic, haec, hoc: in Italian, Cotesto, Cotesta, Costuy, Costei, Questo, Questa: in French, Cestuy cy, Ceste cy, Cecy: in English, this heere, or this man heere. They do differ thus.Nota. E'ste, Aquéste. E'sse. Aquél, El. E'ste and Aquéste, in Latin, Hic, is he, or that which is neere or next to me. E'sse, in Latin, Iste, he or that, neere or next to thee. Aquél and El, in Latin, Ille, is he, or that which is neither by me nor thee, but a part from vs both.
Example.   Mascul. Fem. Neu.   Mascul, Fem. Sing. Nom. éste, ésta, ésto. Plu. Nom. éstos, éstas, Gen. déste, désta, désto. Gen. déstos, déstas, Dat. para éste, para ésta, para ésto. Dat. para éstos, para éstas. Accus. a éste, a ésta. a ésto. Accus. a éstos, a éstas. Abl. déste, désto. désto. Abl. déstos, déstas. In the singular number of this Pronouns, the first wordes in e, as éste, déste, para éste, &c. are of the Masculine gender: the second, ésta, désta, para ésta, &c. of the Feminine: the third, as ésto, désto, &c. of the Neuter: but in the Plurall, the first is the Masculine & Neuter: the other the Feminine gender. Nota.In the Genitiue case, we say déste, and déstos, casting away the first e, Euphoniae gratia, that it might sound the smoother, yet one may also say, de éste, de éstos. Aquéste. E'sse.Aquéste, Aquésta, Aquésto, declined as in the example next aboue, and so is, E'sse, E'ssa, E'sso: in Latin, Iste, ista, istud: the Italians and French haue no proper words to expresse it, but must vse circumlocution: in English, he or that, neere or next to thee. Mismo,Mismo. Misma, Mismo, declined after the same. Aquél, El. Aquél, and El: in Latin, Ille illa, illud: Italian, Quello, colui, quella, Colei: French, Celuy iceluy, Cella, icelle, he or that which is neither neere me nor thee, declined both alike. Note that this El, a Pronoune, and El the Article doe differ in declining, specially in the plurall number.Nota. This making E'llos, and that Los, as by comparing the one with the other, the Reader may see. Looke the declining of the Article El before in the Nowne.   Mascul. Fem. Neu.       Sing. Nom. el, élla, éllo. Plu. Nom. éllos, éllas. Gen. dél, d' élla, d'éllo. Gen. d'éllos, d'éllas. Dat. para el, para élla, para éllo. Dat. para éllos, para éllas. Acc. a el, a élla, a éllo. Accu. a éllos, a éllas. Abl. d'el, d' élla, d'éllo. Abl. d'éllos, d'éllas. Nota.Note that the Spaniard commonly vseth this Pronoune Le before a Verbe thus, Le ví∣no a la memoria, it came to his memorie: Le díxo, he told him: Que del alma le salía, which came from his soule: Dar le lo, to giue him that: Le respondió, he answered him. Nota.Also the Spaniard vseth this Pronoune Le ioyned to the Infinitiue moode of a verbe, by changing r of the Infinitiue into l, Euphoniae gratia, as Hablárle, to speake vnto him, Hablálle: Oýle, to heare him, Oylle: Vérle, to see him, Velle. Now followeth Que, Quien, El Qual, in Latine Quis, Qui, Qua, Quod, in Italian, Chi, Che, Il Quale, La Quale, in French, Qui, Lequel, Laquelle, in English, who, which, thus. Que, Quien. Sing. and Plural. Nom. Qué. Gen. de Qué. Dat. para Qué. Accus. a Qué. Ablat. de Qué. In this same manner is Quien declined. El qual.El qual.   Masc. Fem. Neut.       Fem. Sing. Nom. el qual, la qual, lo qual. Plur. Nom. los quales, las quales. Gen. del qual, de la qual, de lo qual. Gen. de los quales, de las quales. Dat. para qual, para la qual, para lo qual. Dat. para los quales, para las quales. Accus. al qual, a la qual, a lo qual. Accus. a los quales, a las quales. Ablat. del qual, de la qual, de lo qual. Ablat. de los quales, de las quales. Verbes.Of Verbes. THe Spanish tongue hath the same kinde of Verbes, Moodes, Tonfes, Numbers and Per∣sons as the Latine.Verbe passiue. But for the verbe passiue, they make of the verbe Soy, in Latine Sum, es, fui, and a participle, as Amádo, Leýdo, Partído, as Soi Amádo, Leýdo, Partído, I am loued, read, parted, or with this Accusatiue case or particle Se, with the third person actiue singular or plural, as Se dize, it is saide, Se dízen, they are saide, as hereafter in their place more at large shall be de∣clared. Gerunds.Also they haue the Gerund in Do in the same manner as the Latines, as Amándo, Leyéndo,
Oyéndo, in Louing, Reading, Hearing. But for the Gerund in Di and Dum of the Latine, they expresse after another manner. For Gerund in Di the Spanyard vseth the Infinitiue moode and the preposition De, as De amar, of Louing, De leer, of Reading. For the Gerund in Dum, the Infinitiue moode and the Preposition A, or the Infinitiue moode of Soy with a Participle, as A amár, or Ser amádo, to be Loued, A oýr or Ser oýdo, to be Heard. And in like manner their Supines, whereas the Latines say, Amat, Amatu, they say, A amar.Supines. Do ser amado. And for Participles of the Actiue voice, Aman, El que ama.Participles. For Participle of the Passiue voice, Amatus, Lo que es amádo. For Participle of the Future in Rus, Amaturus, El que ha o espéra de amár. For Participle of the Future in Dus, Amandus, Lo que ha de fer amádo. All which by particular examples following shall plainly to the Reader appeere. Of Coniugations. The Spanish hath three coniugations, onely both of Verbes Regular, and Irregular. 1 The first endeth in ar, as Mirár, to behold: Hablár, to speake. 2 The second in er, as Perdér, to loose: Caér, to fall. 3 The third in yr or ir, as oýr, to heare: Cumplír, to accomplish. Tenses. The first Person singular of the Indicatiue moode Present tense of all Verbes Regular, of what Coniugation soeuer, alwaies endeth in o, Míro, I beholde, Háblo, I speake, Piérdo, I loose: Oygo, I heare. Indicatiue moode. Euerie Preterimperfect of the Indicatiue, of Verbes Regular, of the seconde and thirde Coniugation in ia, or ya, as Perdía, I did lose: Caýa, I did fall, &c. Oýa, I did heare, Complía, I did accomplish, &c. And of the first coniugation all in áva, as Miráva, I did behold: Habláva, I did speake. First Preterperfect in y, or i, as oý, perdí. I haue heard, I haue lost: but of the first Coniugation all in é, as Miré, I haue beholden: Hablé, I haue spoken. Second Preterperfect of al the three Coniugations of all Verbes with this Verbe Hé, and the Participle, as Hé mirádo, I haue beholden: Hé leýdo, I haue read: Hé oýdo, I haue heard. Preterpluperfect thus, avía mirádo, leýdo, oýdo, I had beholden, read, heard. Future, of the Indicatiue of all Verbes Regular, & Irregular in ré, as Hablaié, I will speake: Leyré, oyeré, haré, podré, sabré, Daré. The Terminations of Verbs thus varied as followeth. Euerie Imperfect of the Indica∣tiue of the se∣cond & thirde Coniugation thus varied. ía, or ýa, as Perdía, as oýa, ías, ýas, Perdías, oýas, ía, ýa, Perdía, oýa, íamos, ýamos, Perdíamos, oýamos, íades, ýades, Perdíades, oýades, ían, yan, Perdían, oýan. Euerie Imperfect of the Indicatiue of the first Coniugation, in áva, ávas, áva: ávamos, ávades, ávan, as Habláva, hablávas, habláva, hablávamos, hablávades, ha∣blávan. Euerie Future of the Indicatiue of all Verbes of all Coniuga∣tions. ré, of first, seconde, and third, Con∣iugation in       rás, ár, hablaré, by adding é long or accent to the Infin. moode r. rá, ér, perderé, rémos ír, oyré, réys,       rán,      
The Terminations of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue. Euerie Present Tense of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of Verbes of the first Coniugation thus, by changing o, of the In∣dicatiue Present tense into e, thus, e, as háble, es, hábles, e, háble, émos, hablémos, éys, habléys, en, háblen. Euerie Present of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of the seconde and thirde Coniugation, by chaunging o, of the Present of the Indicatiue into a, thus, a, perda, as, perdas, a, pérda, ámos, perdámos, aýs, perdáys, án, pérdan, Euerie Preterimper. of the Optatiue & Subiunctiue of Verbes of the first Coniuga∣tion thus, ára, ría, ásse, hablára, habraría, hablásse, áras, rías, ásses, habláras, hablarías, hablásses, ára, ría, ásse, hablára, hablaría, hablásse, áramos, ríamos, ássemos, habláramos, hablaríamos, hablássemos, árades, ríades, ássedes, hablárades, hablaríades, hablássedes, áran, rían, ássen, habláran, hablarían, hablássen, Euerie Preterimperfect of the the Opta∣tiue and Sub∣iunctiue of the second and thirde Coniug. thus, éra, ría, ésse, perdiéra, perdería, perdiésse, éras, rías, ésses, perdiéras, perderías, perdiésses, éra, ría, ésse, perdiéra, perdería, perdiésses, éramos, ríamos, éssemos, perdiéramos, perderíamos, perdiéssemos, érades, ríades, éssedes. perdiérades, perderíades, perdiéssedes, éran, rían, éssen, perdiéran, perderían, perdiéssen. And these Preterimperfect Tenses as all other of what Coniugation soeuer of Verbes Regular, and Irregular, forme two voices of themselues of the seconde person singular of the first Preterperfect Tense of the Indicatiue moode, by taking awaie Ste, and by making it in the first Coniugation, ára, and ásse, as of this seconde person of the Preterperfect of the Indicatiue singular, Reveláste, commeth the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue, and Subiunctiue Revelára, Revelásse, and of the second and thirde Coniugation of all Verbes Regular and Irregular, by changing that ste, into éra and ésse, as of this Indicatiue moode entendiste, commeth the Preter∣imperfect of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue, entendiéra, entendiésse, of oýste, commeth oyéra, oyésse: of díste, diéra, diésse: of estuvíste, estuviéra, estuviésse: of anduvíste, anduviéra, anduviésse: of pudíste, pudiéra, pudiésse. And they forme the thirde voice of this Preterimperfect by putting to ia, to the Infinitiue moode, as of the Infinitiue revelar, commeth this Preterimperfect revelaría, of the Imfinitiue entendér, entenderíia, of oýr, oyría, of dár, daría, of estár, estaría, andár, andaría. Euery Future of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of verbes of the first coniugation, thus áre, as Habláre. áres, Habláres. áre, Habláre. áremos, Habláremos. áredes, Habláredes. áren. Habláren. Euery Future of the second & third Coniugation of the Opt. and Subiunctiue, thus ére, as Perdiére, Oyére. éres, Perdiéres, Oyéres. ére, Perdiére, Oyére. éremos, Perdiéremos, Oyéremos. éredes, Perdiéredes, Oyéredes. éren. Perdiéren. Oyéren. Now it remaineth to giue a Paradigma or example of euery Coniugation of their Moodes, Tenses, Numbers and Persons, that the Student in the tongue may forme the rest by, which is the chiefest point of this our Grammar, and without the which the learner shall neuer be able to write or speake but by aime and rote, and so be discouraged from so laudable a purpose.
And for the better delight of the Reader, and for the affinitie of these two tongues,Why the Italian added to the verbes follow∣ing. as for the pleasure and profit he may reape hereby, I haue here in the Examples following, set downe the Italian, that the vnderstander of both tongues, may with one labour (and yet at his ease) see the difference, the one from the other, and be hereby able in vnderstanding, writing and spea∣king, to practise either of them, without vsing the one for the other, or mixing them (a thing offensiue to the Spaniards nature, as all knowe who haue trauelled in Spaine.) For euen as two things very like one to the other, if you see them at diuers times, and in diuers places, may easily make one miscarrie his memorie, and mistake the one for the other, when you see either of them againe by it selfe: So if you sée them both at one time, and in one place togither, and take good heede of them by comparing them; no doubt by one marke or other, you shall euer after be able to discerne, know and call them: euen so these two languages (sometime altogither so like) being thus laid togither, will cause the Reader easily to discerne and remember them. Avér and Sér. And bicause this verbe Avér, in Latine Habere, in Italian Hauere, in French Auoir,Avér and Sér. in Eng∣lish to Haue, and Sér, in Latine Esse, Italian Essere, French Estre, English to Be, doe serue to the coniugating or declining of all other verbes: They are best in my opinion first to be declined, especially this verbe Avér, which may fitly be called Verbum auxiliarium, a helpfull verbe, bicause he doth not onely helpe to decline himselfe in his owne preterperfect and preterpluperfect, but doth serue to decline all other verbes whatsoeuer in the same tenses, as by the Examples fol∣lowing you may see. And this verbe Sér, as before serueth, as in the Italian and French to decline all verbes Passiues, for without it neither the Spanish, Italian or French can forme or decline their Passiues, as following you may perceiue.
AVER declined.The declining of the first Auxiliar verbe Avér, in Italian Hauere, in Latin Habere, in English to Haue. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. Yo HE, Io Ho & Haggio, Poeticall. Ego HABEO, I Haue. Tu ás, tu Hai, tu Habes, thou Hast. Aqueá or há. coluihá, & háue, Poetical. ille Habet. he hath. Plural. Plural. Plural. Plural. nosótros Avémos or Hémos Noi habbiámo & hauémo, Nos Habemus, we Haue. vosótros Avéys. voi Hauéte, vos Habetis. yee Haue. aquellos án or hán. colóro Hánno. illi Habent. they Haue. Imper¦fect. Avía, Hauéua & Hauéa, Habebam, I had Avías, Hauéui, habebas, thou Hadst, &c. Avía. Hauéua & Hauéa. habebat, &c.   Plur. Plur.     Avíamos, Haueuámo & haueámo,     Avíades, Haueuáte,     Avían. Hauéuano & hauéano.     First preter∣perfect úve, Hébbi, Habui, I haue had, &c uvíste, hauésti, habuisti, &c. úvo or húvo or óvo, hébbe.   Uvímos, Hauémmo,   uvistes, hauéste,   uviéron or huviéron or ovi∣éron. hébbero.   Secōd perfect. yo He, Avído Io Ho, haúto Habui, I haue Had, &c. tu ás, tu hai, habuisti, &c. aquél á or ha. colui ha,   nosótros hémos or avémos, noi habbiámo,   vosótros aveýs, voi hauéte,   aquéllos án or hán. colóro hanno.   pluper∣fect tēse Avía, Avído Hauéua, hauúto Habueram, &c. I had Had, &c. avías, hauéui, avía. hauéua. Avíamos, haueuámo, avíades, haueuáte, avían. hauéuano. Futur Avré, Haueró, hauró & haró, Habebo, &c. I shal or wil haue, &c. Avrás, hauerái, haurái & harái, Avrá. hauerá, haurá & hará. Avrémos, Hauerémo, haurémo & harémo, Avreýs, haueréte, hauréte & haréte, Avrán. haueránno, hauránno & haránno. Imperatiue moode. áyas tu, Habbitu, Habe, habeto, &c. Haue thou, &c. áya aquel, habbia colui, ayámos nosótros, habbiámo noi, ayáys vosótros, habbiáte voi, áyan aquéllos. habbíano colóro. The Spanyards vse in steede of this Imperatiue moode, this word Ten of Tengo, I hold: which Tengo is often vsed of them for this verbe He.
This Imperatiue moode, Ten of Tengo, so commonly vsed for áyas, áya, is thus declined:AVER declined. The Imperatiue of Tenér, ordinarily vsed for the Im∣perat. of AVE'R, to Haue. Tén tu. Hold thou. Ténga aquel. let him Hold. Tengámus nosótros, Hold we, or let vs Hold. Tenéd vosótros. Hold yee. Téngan aquéllos. Hold they, or let them Hold. The Optatiue moode is vsed with these signes, Oxala, or else Osi, or Pluguiésse a Dios: in Latin, Vtinam: in Italian, O Dio voglia, O che, Dio volesseche, O Dio che: French, Dieu vuelle, Pleust a Dieu: English, would to God, I pray God; God graunt. The Potentiall like the Latin,Nota. with these signes, May, can, might, would, Should, or ought: both declined like the Subiunctiues following: but that the Optatiue and Potentiall alwaies make their Future tense and Pre∣sent tense all alike, as Oxalá yo áya, I pray God I haue: so in the Future, Oxalá yo áya, I pray God I haue hereafter: Oxalá yo Revéle, God graunt I reueale: Future tense also, Ox∣alá yo Revéle, God graunt I reueale hereafter: and so of the rest. And because the Optatiue and Potential haue their Future tenses al one with their Pre∣sent: and the Subiunctiue hath two Futures, and both differing from the Present, I hold it needfull to decline the Subiunctiue, by whom the other two are framed. Subiunctiue moode   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como. áya, Quando Hábbia, Cum Habeam, when I had. áyas, Hábbi, Habeas, &c. when thou Hadst, &c. áya. Hábbia.     ayámos, Habbiámo,     ayáys, Habbiáte,     áyan. Hábbiano.     Imperf. Como auría, uviéra, uviésse, Quando haueréi, hauería, hauéssi, Cum haberem, &c. when I Had, or did haue, &c. aurías, uviéras, uviésses, hauerésti, hauésti, hauéssi, auría, uviéra, uviésse. hauerébbe, hauería, hauésse. auríamos, uviéramos, uviéssemos, hauerémmo, hauéssimo, auríades, uviérades, uviéssedes, haueréste, hauéste, aurían, uviéran, uviéssen. hauerébbono, haueríano, hauéssero. Or decline with H. Huviéra, Huviésse, or Oviéra, Oviésse. Perfec. Como áya, avído. Quando hábbia, Hauúto. Cum. habuerim, &c. when I haue had, &c. áyes, hábbi, áya. hábbia. ayámos, habbiámo, ayáys, habbiáte, áyan. hábbiano. Pluper. Como uviéra, or uviésse, avído. Quando hauessi, hauúto. Cum habuissem, &c. when I had had, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, hauésti, uviéra, or uviésse. hauésse. uviéramos, or uviéssemos, hauéssimo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, hauéste, uviéran, or uviéssen. hauéssero. First Future Como uviére, Quando haueró, banáto. Cum habuero, &c. when I shall haue here∣after, &c. uviéres, hauerái, uviére. hauerá. uviéremos, hauerémo, uviéredes, haueréte, uviéren. haueránno.
Second Future Como auré, avído. Quando haueró, hauúto. Cum habuero, &c. when I shall haue hereaf∣ter, &c. aurás, hauerái, aurá, hauerá.     aurémos, hauerémo,     auréys, haueréte,     aurán. haueránno.     Infinitiue moode Present tense AVE'R,] Hauere,] Habere,] to Haue. Preterperfect tense Avér avído,] Hauer hauúto,] Habuisse,] to Haue had. The Future tense Espéro de avér, Douer hauere, Habiturumesse,] to Haue hereafter. Esser per hauer, Gerund Aviéndo,] Hauendo,] Habendo,] in Hauing. Participle Avído,] Hauuto,] Habitus,] I Had. Participle of the Future tense El que espéra de avér, Essere per hauere, Habiturus, to Haue hereafter. SERThe other verbum Auixiliarum Sér, with which all Passiues are declined: it is in Latin Sum, es, fui: in Italian Essere, to Bée. Infinitiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. Yo SO'Y, Io SONO, Sum, I Am, thou Art, he Is, &c. tu éres, tu séi, es, aquél és. colui é. est. Plu. Plu. Plu.   nosotros Sómos, Noi siámo, Sumus,   vosotros sóys, voi séte, estis,   aquéllos són. coloro sóno. sunt.   Imperfect. éra, éra, eram, I was, &c. éras, éri, eras, &c.   éra, éra.     éramos, erámo, & erauámo,     érades, erauáte,     éran. érano.     First Preter∣perfect. Fúy, Fui, Fui, &c. I haue beene, &c. fúiste, fósti,     Fúe. fú.     Fúimos, Fúmo,     fúistes, fóste,     fuéron. fúrono, fúron, & fúro.     Second Preter∣perfect He, or úve, Sído. Sóno, Stato. Fui, &c. I haue beene, &c. ás, or uvíste, séi, Stato.     á, or úvo. e. Stato.     Avémos, or uvímos, Siámo, Stati.     auéys, or uvístes, séte, Stati.     án, or uviéron. sóno. Stati.     Plu∣perfec. Avía, Sído. éra, Stato. Fueram, &c. I had beene, &c. avías, éri, Stato.     avía. éra. Stato.     Avíamos, erauámo, Stati.     avíades, erauáte, Stati.     avían. eráno. Stati.    
Future Seré, Saró, & sia, Ero, &c. I shall or will be. serás, sarái,     será. sará & sia.     Serémos, Sarémo,     seréys, saréte,     serán. saránno.     Imperatiue moode Sé tu, or sey tu, Sij, sia, & sie tu, Sis, es, esto, Be thou, séa aquél. sia, & sie colui, sit, esto. Be he or let him be, &c. Seámos nosótros, Siámo noi, Simus,   séd vosótros, siáte voi, sitis, estote,   séan aquéllos. siano coloro. sint, sunto.   Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latine.   Pres. Como yo SE'A, Quando Io SIA, Cum sim, when I am, &c. tu séas, tu sij, sia, sis, &c.   aquél sea, colui sia, sie,     seámos, siámo,     seáys, siáte,     séan. síaon, & sieno.     Imper¦fect. Como. fuéra, sería, fuésse, Quando. sarei, fóssi, fussi, Cum essem, &c. when I was. fuéras, serías, fuésses, sarésti, fóssi, fússi,   fuéra, sería, fuésses, sarébbe, fósse, fússe,     fuéramos, seríamos, fuéssemos, sarémmo, fóssimo, fússimo.     fuérades, seríades, fuéssedes, saréste, fóste, fuste,     fuéran, serían, fuéssen. sarébbono, saríano, fóssero, fússero     Preter perfect. Como. áya, Sído. Quando sia, stato. Cum fuerim, &c. when I haue beene, &c. áyas, Sído. sij, stato. áya, Sído. sia, stato.     ayámos, Sído. siámo, stati.       ayáys, Sído. siáto, stati.       áyan, Sído. síaon. stati.             Quando     Pluper¦fect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Sido. fóssi, saréi, stato. Cum fuissem, &c. when I had béene, &c. uviéras; or uvésses, fóssi, sarésti, stato. uviéra, or uviésse, fósse, sarebbe, stato.     uviéramos, or uviéssemos, fóssimo, saremmo, stati.       uviérades, or uviéssedes, fósse, saréte, stati.       uviéran, or uviéssen, fósser, sarébbono, stati.       first Futu. Como fuére, Quando saró, stato. fuero, &c. when I shall be, &c. fuéres, sárái, stato. fuére, sará, stato.     fuéremos, sarémo, stati.     fuéredés, saréte, stati.     fuéren. saránno, stati.    
second Futur. Como avré, Sído. Quando, saró, state. Cum fuero, &c. when I shall be, &c. avrás, sardi, state. avrá, sará, state. avrémos sarémo, stati.       avréys, saréte, stati.       avrán, saráum, stati.       Infinitiue moode, Present Tense. SE'R,] Essere,] Esse,] To be. Preterperfect and Pluperfect, AVE'R sido,] Esser stato,] fuisse,] To haue beene. Future Tense. Auér de sér, douer essere, fore, To be heere∣after. hauer ad essere, futurum esse, Gerund. Siéndo,] Essendo,] The Latine wants,] In being. Participle. SI'DO] stato,] beene. 1. Coniug. of Regular Verbes in AR, RE∣VELARAn Example of the first Coniugation of Verbes Regular in AR, as Revelár] in Italian Riueláre] Latine Reueláre] in English] to Reueale or discouer, as Revelár, in Spanish is also as Rebelár, to rebell. Indicatiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latine.   Pres. yo REV'ELO, IO RIVE'LO, Reulo, I reueale, tu Revélas, tu riuéli, reuelas, Thou reuea∣lest, &c. aquel revéla, colúi reuéla, reuelat, &c. revelámos, riueliámo,     reveláys, riueláte,     Revélan. riuélano,     Imper∣fect. reveláva, riueláua, reuelabam, &c. I did reueale, revelávas, riueláui, reveláva, riueláua, revelávamos, riuelauamo, revelávades, riuelanáte, revelávan, riuelánam, First Perf. revelé, riuelái, reuelaui, &c. I haue reuea∣led, &c. reveláste, riuelásti, reveló, riueló, revelámos, riuelámmo, revelástes, riueláste, reveláron, riuelárono, riueláron, riueláro, riuelár.  
second Perf. hé, or úve, reveládo. ho, riueláto reuelaui, &c. I haue reuea∣led, &c. as, or uvíste, hái, á, or úvo, há, avémos, or uvímos habbiámo, avéys, or uvístes, habbiáte, án, or uviéron, hánno, Plu∣perfect. avía, reveládo. hauéua, riueláto reuelaueram, &c. I had reuea∣led, &c. avías, hauéui, avía, hauéua, avíamos, haueuámo, avíades, haueuáte, avían, hauéuano, Futur. revelaré, riuelaró, reuelabo, &c. I shall or will reueale, &c. revelarás, riuelarái, revelará, reuelará, revelarémos, riuelarémo, revelaréys, riuelaréte, revelarán, riuelaránno, Oftentimes for the Future of this Indicatiue Moode, as well of this first Coniugation,Noe. as of al the rest, is vsed the Infinitiue Moode, and the Present tense of the Verbe Avér, with a Particle going betweene them, as Revelár lo hé, Revelár lo hás, Revelár lo á. And so of the other Coniugations, as Entendér lo he, Entendér lo ás, oýr lo hé, oyr lo hás, &c. Imperatiue moode. revéla tu, riuéla tu, reuéla, reueláto Reueale thou, bee thou reuea∣led, &c. revéle aquél, riueli colúi, reuelet, reuelato Plu.     revelémos nosótros, riuelámo noi, reuelemus, reuelád vosótros, riueláte voi, reuelatis, revélan aquéllos, riuélino colóro, reuelent. Subiunctiue moode with signes, Si, Como, or other Coniunction. Spanish. Italian. Latin.     Pres. Como Yo Revéle, Quando Io Riuéli, Cum Reuelem, &c when I doe Reueale, &c. tu Revéles, tu Riuéli, aquel Revéle. colúi Riuéli. Plurall. Plurall. Revelémos, Riueliámo, Reveléys, Riueliáte, Revélen. Riuélino. Imper¦fect. Como Reuelára, revelaría, revelásse, Quando Riuelassi, riuelaréi, riuelaría, Cum Reuelarem, &c. when I did Reueale, &c. Reveláras, revelarías, revelásses, Riuelásti, riuelaresti, Revelára, revelaría, revelásse, Riuelásse, riuelarébbe, riuelaría, Reveláramos, revelaríamos, revelássemos Riuelássimo, riuelarémmo, Revelárades, revelaríades, revelássedes, Riuelaste, riuelaréste, Reveláran, revelarían, revelássen. Riuelássero, riuelarébbono, riuelaríano
perfect. Como áya, Reveládo. Quando Hábbia, Riuelato. Cum Reuelauerius, &c. whē I haue reuealed, &c. áyas, Hábbi, áya, Hábbia, ayámos, Habbiámo, ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan. Hábbiano.       Quando         Plu∣perfect Como uviéra or uviésse, Reveládo. Hauessi, Riuelato. Cum Reuelassem, &c. when I had reuealed, &c. uviéras or uviésses, hauésti, uviéra or uviésse, hauésse, uviéramos or uviéssemos, hauéssim, uviérades or uviéssedes, hauéste, uviéran or uviéssen, hauéssero, First future. Como Reveláre, Quando Haueró, Riueláto. Cum Reuelauero, &c. when I shal or will Re∣ueale, &c. Reveláres, hauerái, Reveláre, hauerá, Revelarémos, hauerémo, Reveláredes, haueréte, Reveláren, haueránno. Secōd Futur Como uviére or avré, Reve∣ládo. Quando Haueró, Riuelato. Cum Reuelauero, &c. when I shal or will Re∣ueale, &c. uviéres or avrés, hauerái, uviére or avrá, hauerá, uvierémos or avrémos, hauerémo, uviéredes or avréys, haueréte, uviéren or avrán, haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. Revelár,] Riuelare,] Reuelare,] to Reueale or discouer. Preterperfect tense. Aver reveládo,] Hauér riuelato,] Reuelauisse,] to haue Reuealed. The Future tense. Auér o Esperár de Revelár, Douer Riuelare, Essere per Riuelare, Hauer a Riuelare, to Reueale hereafter. Gerund. Revelándo,] Riuelando,] Reuelando,] in Reuealing. Supine of the Actiue signification. a Revelár,] a Riuelare,] Reuelatum] to be about to Reueale. Supine of the Passiue signification. De sér Revelado] D'essere Riuelato] Reuelatu] to be Reuealed. Participle of the Present tense and Actiue voice. El que Revéla,] Riuelante,] Reuelans,] Reuealing. Participle of the Preter tense and Passiue voice. Reveládo] Riuelato,] Reuelatus,] Reuealed. All verbes which haue their Infinitiues in A R, are declined in all points like this here declined, except the Irregulars here following in ar.
An Example of the second Coniugation of verbes Regular in ER, as Entendér, in Italian Intendere,2. Coniug. of Regular verbs in er Entendér. Latin Intelligere, to Vnderstand. Iudicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo ENTIE'NDO, Io Inténdo, Intelligo, &c. I do Vnder∣stand, &c. tu Entiéndes, tu Inténdi, aquel Entiénde. colúi Inténde. Plurall. Plur. Entendémos, Intendiámo, Entendéys, Intendéte, Entiénden. Intendino. Imper¦fect. Entendía, Intendéua & Intendéa, Intelligebam, &c. I did Vnder∣stand, &c. Entendías, Intendéui, Entendía. Intendéua & Intendéa, Entendíamos, Intendeuámo, Entendíades, Intendeuáte, Entendían. Intendéuano. First perfect. Entendí, Intési, Intellexi, &c. I haue Vn∣derstood, &c. Entendíste, Intendísti, Entendió, Intése, Entendímos, Intendémmo, Entendístes, Intendéste, Entendiéron. Intésero. Secōd perfect. He or úve, Entendído. HO Intéso. Intellexi, &c. I haue Vn∣derstood, &c. ás or uvíste, hái Intéso. á or úvo. ha Intéso. hémos or uvímos, habbiámo Intési. avéys or uvístes, hauéte Intési. án or uviéron. hánno Intési. pluper∣fect tēse Avía, Entendído hauéua Intéso. Intellexeram, &c. I had Vn∣derstood, &c. avías, hauéui Intéso. avía. hauéua Intéso. Aviámos, haueuámo Intési. avíades, haueuáte Intési. avían. hauéuano Intési. Futur Entenderé, Intenderó, Intelligam, &c. I shall or will Vnderstand. Entenderás, Intenderái, Entenderá. Intenderá, Entenderémos, Intenderémo, Entenderéys, Intenderéte, Entenderán. Intenderánno. Imperatiue moode. Entiénde tu, Intendi tu, Intellige, Intelligito. Vnderstand thou, Entiénde aquel. Intenda colui, Intelligat, Intelligito. Vnderstand he or let him vnderstand. Entendámos nosótros, Intendiámo noi,     Entendéd vosótros, Intendéte voi,     Entiéndan aquellos. Inténdano colóro.    
Entendér.Second Coniugation of Regular Verbes in ER, as ENTENDER. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latine.   Pres. Como yo ENTIE'NDA, Quando yo INTENDA, Cum intel∣ligam &c. when I doe vnder¦stand. &c. tu entiéndas, tu inténdi, aquel entiénda, colui inténda, Plu. Plu. entendámos, intendiámo, entendáys, intendiáte, entiéndan. inténdano,     Quando   Cum   Imper¦fect. Como. entendiéra, entendería, entendiésse, intenderei, intenderia, intendessi, intelli∣gerem, &c. when I did vnder¦stand. entendiéras, entenderías, entendiésses, intenderesti, intendéssi, entendiéra, entendería, entendiésses. intenderebbe, intenderia, intendesse, entendiéramos, entenderíamos, entendiéssemos, intenderémo, intendissimo, entendiérades, entenderiades, entendiéssedes, intenderésti, intendésti, entendiéran, entenderian, entendiéssen. intenderébbero, intenderieno, intendessero, Perf. Como áya, Entendído. Quando hábbia, inteso, Cum intel∣lex∣erim, &c. when I haue vnder¦stood, &c. áyas, hábbi, inteso, áya, hábbia, inteso, áyamos, habbiámo, intesi. ayáys, habbiáte, intesi. áyan. hábbiano, intensi.       Quando       Plu∣perfect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Entēdído haueréi, & hauéssi, inteso. Cum intel∣lexis∣sem, &c. when I had vnder¦toode. uviéras, or uviésses, hauerésti, & hauéssi, inteso. uviéra, or uviésse, hauerébbe, & hauésse, inteso. uviéramos, or uviéssemos, hauerémmo, & hauessimo, intesi. uviérades, or uviéssedes, haueréste, & hauéste, intesi. uviéran, or uviéssen, hauerébbero, & hauéssero, intesi. First future. Como Entendiére, Cum intel∣lexero &c. when I shal or will vnder¦stande &c. entendiéres, entendiére, entendiéremos, entendiéredes, entendiéren.       Quando       second future. Como uviére, or auré, Entendído haueró, inteso. Cum intel∣lexero &c. when I shal vnder¦stand. &c. uviéres, or aurás, hauerái, inteso. uviére, or aurá, hauerá, inteso. uviéremos, or aurémos, hauerémo, intesi. uviéredes, or auréys, haueréte, intesi. uviéren, or aurán, haueránno, intesi. Infinitiue moode Present Tense. Entendér,] Intendére,] Intelligere] To vnderstand. Preterperfect Tense. auér entendído,] hauer intéso,] intellexisse,] To haue vnderstood. The Future Tense. aver o Esperár de entendéer, douer intendere, intellecturum, hauer ad intendere, to vnderstande hereafter. Esser per intendere, Gerund. entendiéndo,] intendendo,] intelligendo] In vnderstanding.] Supines of the actiue voice. a entendér,] ad intendere] intellectum] To vnderstand. Supine of the passiue voice. de sér entendído,] d'essere in téso,] intellectu] To be vnderstood.
Participle of the actiue voice and present Tense. el que entiénde,] intendente] intelligens,] Vnderstanding. Participle of the Preter and passiue voice. entendido,] intéso] intellectus] Vnderstoode. All Verbes whose Infinitiues end in er, are in all points declined like this except the irre∣gular in er following. An Example of the third and last Coniugation of Regular verbes in Ir or Yr, as ABRIR, in Italian Aprire, Latin Aperire,3. and last coniugation of Verbes Regular in Ir, or Yr. to Open, Oyr, Italian Vdire, Latin Audire, to Heare. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. O'YO, y OY'GO, ODO, Audio, &c. I doe Heare, &c. óyes, odi, óye. ode. Plur. Plur. oýmos, vdiámo, oýs, vdíte, óyen. ódono. Imper¦fect. Oýa, Vdiua, Audiebam, &c. I did Heare, &c. oýas, vdíui, oýa. vdíua. oýamos, vdiuámo, oýades, vdiuáte, oýan. vdiuano. First Perf. Oý, Vdí & vdij, Audiui, &c. I haue heard, &c. oýste, vdísti, oyó, vdi. oýmos, vdímmo, oýstes, vdíste, oyéron. vdírono, vdíron, vdí∣ro, vdir. second Per∣fect. He, or úve, Oýdo. Ho, Vdíto. Audiui, &c. I haue heard, &c. ás, or uvíste, hai, á, or úvo, ha, ávemos, or uvímos, habbiámo, avéys, or uvístes, hauéto, án, or uviéron, hánno, Plu∣perfect. avía, Oýdo. hauéua, Vdíto. Audiueram, &c. I had heard. avías, hauéui, avía, hauéua, avíamos, haueuámo, avíades, haueuáte, avían, hauéuano, future. oyré, vdiró, Audiam, &c. I shall or will heare, &c. oyrás, vdirái, oyrá, vdirá, oyrémos, vdirémo, oyréys, vdiréte, oyrán, vdiránno. Imperatiue moode. Impe¦ratiue moode. Oýe tu, ódi tu, audi, audito, audiat, audito, &c. Heare thou, Heare he or let him heare, &c. oýga, or óya aquel, óda colui, oyámos nosotros, vdiámo noi, oýd vosótros, vdíte voi, oýan, or óygan aquellos, ódano colóro,
O Y R declined.The Third and last Coniugation of verbes Regular in IR, and YR. Subiunctitue moode   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como. O'YA, or óyga, Quando OD'A, Cum Audiam, &c. When I heare. óyas, or óygas, ódi, óya, or óyga, óda. oyámos, or oygámos, vdiámo, oyáys, or oygáys, vdiáte, óyan, or óygan. ódano. Imper. Como Oyéra, oyeria, oyésse, Quando Vdíssi, vdiréi, vdería, Cum Audirem, &c. when I did heare, &c. oyéras, oyerías, oyésses, vdíssi, vdirésti, oyéra, oyería, oyésse. vdísse, vdirébbe, vdiría. oyéramos, oyríamos, oyéssemos, vdíssimo, vdirémo, oyérades, oyríades, oyéssedes, vdiste, vdiréste, oyéran, oyrían, oyéssen. vdíssero, vdirébbono, vdiríano Perfect. Como A'ya, Oýdo, Quando Hábbia, Vdito. Cum Audiue∣rim, &c. when I haue heard, &c. áyas, hábbi, áya. hábbia. ayámos, habbiámo, ayaýs, habbiáte, áyan. hábbiano.       Quando,   Cum   plupe. Como Uviéra, or uviésse, oýdo. Hauéssi, haueréi, hauería, vdito. Audi∣uissem &c. when I had heard, &c uviéras, or uviésses, hauéssi, hauerésti, uviéra, or uviésse, hauésse, hauerébbe, hauría, uviéramos, or uviéssemos hauessimo, hauerémo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, hauéste, haueréste. uviéran, or uviéssen. hauéssero, hauerébbono, hauríano. First Future Como Oyére, Cum Audiuero, &c. when I shall heare, &c. oyéres, oyére, oyéremos, oyéredes, oyéren.           Cum   Second Future Como Uviére, or auré, oýdo. Quādo Haueró, vdito Audiuero, &c. when I shal heare. uviéres, or aurás, hauerái, uviére, or aurá. hauerá. uviéremos, or aurémos hauerémo, uviéredes, or auréys, haueréte, uviéren, or aurán. haueránno. Infinitiue moode present tense OY'R,] Vdire,] Audire,] to Heare. Preterperfect tense avér Oýdo] hauer Vdíto,] Audiuisse,] to haue Heard. The Future tense avér de Oýr, douer Vdire, hauer ad Vdíre, esser per Vdíre, Auditum esse,] to Heare hereafter.
Gerund. Oyéndo,] Odendo,] Audiendo,] in Hearing. Supine of the Actiue voice. a Oýr,] Vdíre,] Auditum,] to Heare. Supine of the Passiue voice. de ser Oýdo,] d'essere Vdito,] Auditu,] to be Heard. Participle of the Actiue voice and Present tense. el que Oye,] chi Ode,] Audiens,] Hearing. Participle of the Passiue voice and Preter tense. Oydo,] Vdito,] Auditus,] Heard. All verbes whose Infinitiues end in ir, or yr, are declined in euerie respect like this: except those in ir and yr, in the Irregulars following. Of Verbes Passiues. The Spaniards as the Italian and French decline their Verbes passiues with their Verbe Sum, es, fui, and the Participle of the Preter tense, as of Revelár, to reueale: soy Reveládo, I am reuealed. The Spanish formeth the Participle Passiue of the first and third Coniugation of their Infinitiue moode, by taking away r, and putting to do, as of Revelár, Reveládo, Pedír, to require, Pedído, required, Oýr, to heare, Oýdo, heard. But in the second Coniugation they take away as before, and change the last e into y or i, and adde to do as aforesaide, as Leer, to read, Leýdo: Entendér, to vnderstand, Entendído. A Verbe Passiue thus declined. Indicatiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. YO SOY, Reveládo. IO SO'No, Riueláto. Reuelor, I am Reuealed. thou art Reuealed. tu éres, Reveládo. tu séi, Riueláto. Reuelaris, &c. aquél és, Reveládo. colúi é, Riueláto. Plu. Plu. Sómos, Reveládos. Siámo, Riueláti. sóys, Reveládos. séte, Riueláti. són, Reveládos. sóno, Riueláti. Imper¦fect. E'ra, Reveládo. E'ra, Riueláto. Reuelabar, I was Reuealed thou wast reuea∣led, &c. éras, Reveládo. éri, Riueláto. Reuelabaris, &c. éra, Reveládo. éra, Riueláto. éramos, Reveládos. erámo, & erauámo, Riueláti. érades, Reveládos. eráte, Riueláti. éran, Reveládos. érano, Riueláti. First perfect. Fúy Reveládo, Fui, Riueláto. Reuelatus sum vel fui, &c. I haue beene Re∣uealed, &c. fuéste, Reveládo. fósti, Riueláto. fue, Reveládo. fú, Riueláto. fuymos, Reveládos. fúmo, Riueláti. fuístes, Reveládos. fóste, Riueláti. fuéron, Reveládos. fúrono, fúro, fúron, Riueláti. second Perfec HE, or úve Sído, Reveládo. Sono Stato, Riueláto. Reuelatus sum vel fui, idem vt antea, &c. I haue beene re¦uealed, &c. as, or uvíste Sído, Reveládo. séi Stato, Riueláto. a, or úvo Sído, Reveládo. é Stato, Riueláto. Hémos, or uvímos Sído, Reveládos. Siámo, Stati, Riueláti. avéis, or uvístes Sído, Reveládos. séte Stati, Riueláti. an, or uviéron Sído, Reveládos. son Stati, Riueláti.
pluper¦fect. Avía Sído, Reveládo. E'ra Stato, Riueláto. Reuelatus eram vel fueram, &c. I had beene Reuealed, &c. avías Sído, Reveládo. éri Stato, Riueláto. avía Sído, Reveládo. éra Stato, Riueláto. avíamos Sído, Reveládos. erauámo Stati, Riueláti. avíades Sído, Reveládos. erauáte Stati, Riueláti. avian Sído, Reveládos. érano Stati, Riueláti. future Seré, Reveládo. Saró, Riueláto. Reuelabor, &c. I shall or will be Reuealed. serás, Reveládo. sarái, Riueláto. será, Reveládo. sará, Riueláto. Serémos, Reveládos. Sarémo, Riueláti. seréys, Reveládos. saréte, Riueláti. serán, Reveládos. saránno, Riueláti. Imperatiue moode Sé tu, Reveládo, Sia, & sij tu, Riueláto. Reuelare, Reueletur, &c. be thou Reuea∣led, let him be Re∣uealed, &c. sea aquél, Reveládo, sia, & sie colui, Riueláto. Seámos, Reveládos. siámo, Riueláti. séd, Reveládos. siáte, Riueláti. Séan, Reveládos. siano, Riueláti. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como yo Séa Reveládo. Quando Io Sia Riue∣láto. Cum Reuelar, &c. When I am Reuealed, &c tu séas Reveládo. tu sij, sía Riue∣láto. aquel séa Reveládo. colui sia, sie Riue∣láto. Seámos Reveládos. siámo Riue∣láti. seáys Reveládos. siáte Riue∣láti. séan Reveládos. síano & síeno Riue∣láti. Imper¦fect Como Fuéra, sería, fuésse Reve∣ládo. Quando Fóssi, fússi, saréi, saria Riue∣lato. Cum Reuelarer, &c. when I was Reuealed, &c fuéras, serías, fuésses Reve∣ládo. fósti, fusti, saresti, Riue∣lato. fuéra, sería, fuésse Reve∣ládo. fósse, fusse, sarébbe, saria Riue∣lato. Fuéramos, seríamos, fuéssemos Reve∣ládos. fóssimo, fussimo, sarémmo Riue∣lati. fuérades, seríades, fuéssedes Reve∣ládos. fóste, fuste, saréste, Riue∣lati. fuéran, serían, fuéssen Reve∣ládos. fóssero, fússero, sarébbono, saríano Riue∣lati. perfect. Como A'ya Sido Reueládo. Quando Sia Stato Riuelato. Cum Reuelatus sim vel fuerim, &c. Whē I haue been reuea∣led, &c. áyas Sído Reueládo. sij & sia stato Riuelato. áya Sído Reueládo. sia & sie stato Riuelato. ayámos Sido Reveládos. siámo stati Riuelati. ayáys Sído Reveládos. siáte stati Riuelati. áyan Sído Reveládos. síano stati Riuelati. pluper∣fect tēse Como Uviéra or uviésse Sído Reve∣ládo. Quando Fóssi, fússi, saréi, saria stato Riue∣lato. Cum Reuelatus essem vel fuissem, &c whē I had been reuea∣led, &c. uviéras or uviésses Sído Reve∣ládo. fósti, fústi, saresti stato Riue∣lato. uviéra or uviésse Sído Reve∣ládo. fósse, fússe, sarébbe stato Riue∣lato. uviéramos or uviéssemos sído Reve∣ládos. fóssimo, fússimo, sarémo stati Riue∣lati. uviérades or uviéssedes Sído Reve∣ládos. fóste, fúste, seréste stati Riue∣lati. uviéran or uviéssen Sído Reve∣ládos. fóssero, fússero, sarebbono stati saríano Riue∣lati. Futur Como Fuére or uviére or avré sído Reve∣ládo. Quando Saró stato Riuelato. Cum Reuelatus ero vel fuero, &c. When I shal be Reuealed, &c. fuéres or uviéres or avras sído Reve∣ládo. sarái stato Riuelato. fuére or uviéres or avra sído Reve∣ládo. sará stato Riuelato. fuéremos or uviéremos or avrémos sído Reve∣ládos. sarémo stati Riuelati. fuéredes or uviéredes or avréys sído Reve∣ládos. saréte stati Riuelati. fuéren or uviéren or avrán sído Reve∣ládos. saránno stati Riuelati.
Infinitiue moode Present tense. Ser Revelúdo,] Riuelarsi, essere Riuelato,] Reuelari,] to be Reuealed. Pre tense. Avér Sido Reveládo,] Essere stato Riuelato,] Reuelatum esse vel fuisse,] to haue been reuealed. Future tense. Avér de sér Reveládo, Douer essere Riuelato, hauer ad essere Riuelato, Reuelatum iri vel Reuelandum esse, to be Reuealed hereafter. Participle of the Present tense. Lo que es Reveládo,] Riueláto,] Reuelatus,] that which is Reuealed. Participle of the Future tense. Lo que ha de ser Reveládo, Hauendo ad essere Riueláto, hauendo a Riuelarsi, Reue∣lanm, to be Reuealed hereafter. After this manner in euery respect all other verbes Passiues Regular or Irregular of what Coniugation soeuer are to be declined as of the second Coniugation Soy Vendido, Pos∣seydo, Defendido, and of the third Coniugation, as Soy Oydo, Corregído, Segdido, and so of the rest. Note that this Accusatiue case Se of the Pronoune ioyned with the third person of verbes Actiues, make them haue the Passiue signification, as Dize, he saith, e dize,Nota. it is said. Now will I handle and intreate of the verbes Irregular (in which is found hardnes and difficultie to the learner for their declining) in such order and manner that he may with his ease or very little paine decline any of them whatsoeuer: for which purpose and for whose ease and profite, I haue to my great labour brought them into the forme as followeth, and haue so dili∣gently searched, that no one of them needefull to his vse (as I hope) shall be wanting, not here following set downe, that my labours may be answerable to my desire, and the learners profit to my paines. The first Coniugation of Verbes Irregular in AR, as DAR, in Italian and Latin Dare, to Giue.1. Coniug. of Verbes Irregular in AR. The verbes Irregular like as the Regular diuided into three Coniugations,Nota. the fir in ar, the second in er, the third in ir or yr. The verbes Irregular differ from the Regular afore going in their first Preterperfect of the Indicatiue, and Preterimperfect of the Subiunctiue, as by the Examples following you may see. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo DOY, Io DO, Do, I doe Giue, &c. tu Dás. tu Dái, Das, aquel Da. colui Da. Dat, &c. Plur. Plur. Dámos, Diámo or Dám, Dáys, Dáte, Dán. Dánno. Imperf. Dáva, Dá, Dabam, &c. I did Giue, &c. Dávas, Dáui, Dáva. Dáu. Dávamos, Dauamo, Dávades, Dauáte, Dávan. Dáua. First Perfect Dí, Diedi & Dei, Dedi, &c. I haue Giuen, &c. Diste, Désti, Dió. Diede & Dette, Dímos, Démmo, Dístes, Desté, Diéron. Diédero.
Second Perfect yo He Dádo. Ho Dato. Dedi, &c. vt supra. I haue Giuen, &c. as next aboue. tu ás hai aquel á. ha hémos habbiámo aveýs hauete án hánno Pluperf. Avía Dádo. Hauéua Dato. Dederam, &c. I had Giuen, &c. Avías hauéui Avía hauéua Avíamos haueuámo Avíades haueuáte Avían hauéuano Future. Daré, Daró, Dabo, &c. I shall or will Giue, &c. Darás, Darái, Dará. Dará. Darémos, Darémo, Daréys, Daréte, Darán. Daránno. Imperatiue moode. Dá tu, Da tu, Da dato, Giue thou, &c. Dé aquél. Dia colui. Det dato, &c. Démos, Diámo, Dád, Date, Dén. Diáno. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como YO De, Quando IO Día, Cum Dem, &c. When I doe giue, &c. tu des, tu día, aquel De, colui día, démos, diámo, déys, diáte, dén, díano, Imper¦fect. diéra, daría, diésse, Quando déssi, daréi, daría, Cum Darem, &c. When I did giue, &c. diéras, darías, diésses, déssi, darésti, diéra, daría, diésse, désse, darébbe, daria, diéramos, daríamos, diéssemos, déssimo, darémmo, diérades, daríades, diéssedes, déste, daréste, diéran, darían, diéssen. déssero, darébbono, daríano, perfect. Como áya, Dádo. Quando hábbia, Dato. Cum Dederim, &c. When I haue giuen, &c. áyas, hábbi, áya, hábbia, ayámos, habbiámo, ayáys, habbiáte, áyan, hábbiano.
Plu∣perfect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Dádo. Quando. hauessi, haurei, Dáto. Cum dedissem, &c. When I had giuen, &c. uviéros, or uviésses, hauésti, haueresti, uviéra, or uviésse, hauésse, hauerébbe, uviéramos, or uviéssemos, hauéssimo, hauerémmo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, hauéste, haueréste, uviéran, or uviéssen. hauéssero, hauerébbono, future, Como diére, Quando haueró, Dato. Cum Dedero, &c. When I shall giue, &c. diéres, hauerái, diére, hauerá, diéremos, hauerémo, diéredes, haueréte, diéren. haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. DA'R,] Dare,] Dare,] To giue. Preterperfect Tense. avér Dádo, hauer dato, douer dare, hauer a dare. Dedisse. To haue giuen. Gerund. Dando,] dando,] dando,] In giuing. Participle of the Present tense, and Actiue voice. El que da,] Dante,] Dans,] giuing. Participle of the Preter tense and Passiue voice. Dado,] Dato,] Datus] giuen. Participle of the Future tense. El que há, or espéra de dár] Essere per dare] Daturum esse] to giue heereafter. These here vnder written onely differ from the Regular verbes in the first preterperfect tense of their Indicatiue moode, which alway change Car of the Infinitiue into qué, and gar into gue, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preterperfects. A cercár, to come neere, yo Acérco, Acerqué. Cercár, to compasse, yo Cérco, Cerqué. Cargár, to charge, to burden, yo Cárgo, Cargué. Achicár, to make little, yo Achíco, Achiqué. Ahogár, to choake, to drowne, yo Ahógo, Ahogué. Allegár, to come neere, yo Allégo, Allegué. Ahorcár, to hang vp, yo Ahórco, Ahorqué. Anegár, to drowne, yo Anégo, Anegué. Arrancár, to plucke vp, yo Arránco, Arranqué. Arremangár, to tucke vp, yo Arremángo, Arremangué. Arriscár, to endanger, yo Arrísco, Arrisqué. Apesgár, to weie downe, yo Apésgo, Apesgué. Assulcár, to furrow, yo Asúlco, Asulqué. Bogár, to rowe, yo Bógo, Bogué. Bolcár, to tumble downe, yo Bólco, Bolqué. Castigár, to chastise, yo Castígo, Castigué. Calcár, to kicke vnder feete, yo Cálco, Calqué. Colgár, to hang, yo Cuélgo, Colgué. Cocár, to gae at, to mocke, yo Cuéco, Coqué. Cavalgár, to ride, yo Caválgo, Cavalgué. Chocár, to sucke, yo Chuéco, Choqué. Denegár, to denie, yo Deniégo, Denegué. Derrocár, to throwe downe, yo Derruéco, Derrogué. Descolgár, to vnhang, yo Descuélgo, Descolgué. Desfogár, to coole, yo Desfuégo, Desfogué.
Embarcár, to embarke, yo Embárco, Embarqué. Desligár, to vntie, yo Desligo, Desligué. Embaucár, to cast into a hole, yo Embáuco, Embauqué. Embocár, idem, yo Embóco, Emboqué. Desnegár, to recant, yo Desniégo, Desnegué. Enarcár, to chest vp, yo Enárco, Enarqué. Divulgár, to publish, yo divúlgo, Divulgué. Empegár, to pitch, yo Empiégo, Empegué. Fabricár, to frame, yo Fabríco, Fabriqué. Encenegár, to durt, yo Encienégo, Encenegué. Fregár, to rub, yo Friégo, Fregué. Holgár, to be glad, yo Huélgo, Holgué. Mancár, to want, yo Mánco, Manqué. Jugár, to play, yo Juégo, Jugué. Marcár, to marke, yo Márco, Marqué. Mercár, to buie, yo Miérco, Merqué. Mascár, to chew, yo Másco, Masqué. Mendigár, to beg, yo Mendígo, Mendigué. Navegár, to saile, yo Navégo, Navegué. Otorgár, to graunt, yo Otórgo, Otorgué. Peliscár, to pinch, yo Pelísco, Pelisqué. Pagár, to pay, yo Págo, Pagué. Pescár, to fish, yo Pésco, Pesqué. Plegár, to fold, yo Pliégo, Pliegué. Regár, to water, yo Riégo, Regué. These here aboue and their like in all other Tenses varie nothing from the verbes regular in ar afore going, as Juzgár, to iudge, the Indicatiue present Tense Júzgo, I iudge, Preterim∣perfect Juzgáva, first Preterperfect Juzgué, the second Perfect He juzgádo, the Preterpluperfect avia Juzgádo, Future Juzgaré. Imperatiue Juzga. The Present Tense of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue Oxalá or Si Júzgue, the Preterimperfect Tense Juzgára, juzgaría, juzgásse. Perfect áya juzgádo, Pluperfect uviéra or uviésse Juzgádo, Future Juzgáre. Infinitiue Juzgár. Participle Juzgádo. Of Verbes Irregular the first Coniugation in AR, as Estár,] in Italian Essere,ESTAR] in Latin Esse,] To be, to stand. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. YO ESTO'Y, IO STO, Sto, &c. I stande, or I am, &c. tu estás, tu stái,   aquel está, colui sta;     estámos, stámo,     estáys, státe,     están. stánno.     Imper¦fect. estáva, stáua, stabam, &c. I was or did stande, &c. estávas, stáui,   estáva, stáua,     estávamos, stauámo,     estávades, stauáto,     estávan. stáuano.     First Perf. estúve, stetti, & stei, steti, &c. I haue beene, or haue stoode, &c. estuvíste, stesti,   estúvo, stétte,   estuvímos, stémo,     estuvístes, stéste,     estvuiéron. stéttero.    
second Per∣fect. yo Hé, Estádo. sóno, Stato. steti, &c. I haue beene, or haue stood, &c. tu ás, séi, Stato. vt supra. aquel há, é, Stato.   hémos, siámo, Stati.     avéys, séte, Stati.     án, sóno, Stati.     Plu∣perfect. avía, Estádo. éra, Stato. steteram, &c. I had beene, or had stood, &c. avías, éri, Stato.   avía, éra, Stato.   avíamos, erauámo, Stati.     avíades, erauáte, Stati.     avían, érano, Stati.     future. Estaré, staró, Stabo, &c. I shall or will stande or be, &c. estarás, starái,   estará, stará,     estarémos, starémo,     estaréys, staréte,     estarán. staránno.     Imperatiue moode. Impe¦ratiue moode. Está, sta, stá, sta, stato, &c. be thou, or stand thou, &c. esté, stía,   estémos,       stiámo,     estád, státe,     estén. stíano.     Subiunctiue moode   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Esté, Quando Stia, Cum Stem, &c. When I am or stand, &c. Estés, Stij, Esté, Stia,   Estémos, Stiámo,     Estéys, Stiáte,     Estén. Stíano.     Imper¦fect. Como Estuviéra, estaría, estuviésse, Quando Starei, stéssi, staría, Cum Starem, &c. when I Stoode or was, &c. Estuviéras, estarías, estuviésses, Starésti, stéssi, Estuviéra, estaría, estuviésse, Starébbe, stésse, staría,   Estuviéramos, estaríamos, estuviéssemos, Starémo, stéssimo,     Estuviérades, estaríades, estuviéssedes, Staréste, stéste,     Estuviéran, estarían, estuviéssen. starébbono, staríano, stéssero.     Perfec Como A'ya, estádo. Quādo Sia, Stato. Cum Steterim &c. when I haue stood or beene, &c. áyas, Sij, Stato. áya, Sia, Stato.   Ayámos, Siámo, Stati.     Ayáys, Siáte, Stati.     áyan, Siáno, Stati.    
pluper Como uviéra, or uviésse, estádo. Quādo Fossi, Státo. Cum stetissem &c. when I had beene, or stood, &c uviéras, or uviésses, Fossi, Státo. uviéra, or uviésse, Fosse, Státo.   uviéramos, or uviéssemos, Fóssimo, Stati.     uviérades, or uviéssedes, Fóste, Stati.     uviéran, or uviéssen, Fóssero. Stati.     First Futur Como Estuviére, Quando Saró, Státo. Cum Stetero, &c. when I shal or wil stand or be &c. Estuviéres, Sarái, Státo. Estuviére, Sará, Státo.   Estuviéremos, Sarémo, Stati.     Estuviéredes, Saréte, Stati.     Estuviéren, Saránno, Stati.     second Futur Como uviére, or avré, Estádo. Saró, Státo. Cum Stetero, &c. when I shal or wil be or stand &c. uviéres, or avrás, Sarái, Státo. uviére, or avrá, Sará, Státo.   uviéremos, or avrémos, Sarémo, Státi.     uviéredes, or avréys, Saréte, Státi.     uviéren, or avrán, Saránno, Státi.     Infinitiue moode Present. Estár,] Stare,] Stare,] to Stand or be. Preterperfect. avér Estádo,] hauer Státo,] Stetisse,] to haue Stood or beene. Future tense. avér or esperár d'estár, douer Stare, Staturum esse, to Stand hereafter. esser per Stare, Gerund. Estándo,] Stando,] Stando,] In Standing or being. Participle. Estádo,] Stato,] Status,] Stoode or beene. These Verbes following make their Present tense of the Indicatiue, by changing the last sillable saue one of the Infinitiue the e into ie, and the o into ve, as Infinitiue. Pres. Preterperfect. Assentár, to sit, to set, yo assiénto, Assenté. Approvár, to allow, yo appruévo, Aprové. Sentár, to sit, yo siénto, Senté, Sonár, to sound, yo suéno, Soné, Conservár, to keepe, yo consiérvo, Conservé. Atronár, to thunder, yo atruéno, Attroné. Cegár, to make blinde, yo ciégo, Ciegué. Contár, to reckon, yo cuénto, Conté. Cerrár, to shut, to locke, yo ciérro, Cerré. Degollár, to kill, to behead, yo deguéllo, De gollé. Enterrár, to put in the earth, yo entiérro, Enterré. Derrocár, to throwe downe, yo deruéco, derroqué. Colgár, to hang, yo cuélgo, Colgué. Desterrár, to banish, yo destiérro, Desterré. Dessollár, to paunch, yo desuéllo, Desollé. Hollár, to tread on, yo huéllo, Hollé. Entesár, to bend, yo entiéso, Entesé. Segár, to cut, yo siégo, Sequé. Resollár, to breath, yo resuéllo, Resolié. Resolgár, idem, yo resuélgo, Resolgué. Temblár, to tremble, yo tiémblo, Temblé. Tentár, to assaie, yo tiénto, Tenté. Tropeçár, to stumble, yo tropiéço, Tropecé. Adereçár, to make readie, yo aderésço, Aderescé.
Of Verbes Irregular of the first Coniugation in AR, as ANDAR,ANDAR In Italian, Audare, in Latin, Ire, Gradi, to Goe. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Present. A'ndo, Vo, & Vado, Eo, I Goe, thou Goest, &c. ándas, Vai, is, &c. ánda, Va,     Andámos, Andiámo,     andáys, Andáte,     ándan. Vánno.     Imperfect. Andáva, Andáua, Ibam, &c. I did Goe, &c. Andávas, Andáui,     Andáva, Andáua,     Andávamos, Andauámo,     Andávades, Andauáte,     Andávan. Andáuano.     First Perfect Andúve, Andái, Iui, &c. I haue Gone, &c. Anduvíste, Andásti,     Andúvo, Andó,     Anduvímos, Andámmo,     Anduvístes, Andáste,     Anduviéron. Andárono.     Second Perfec. He, Andádo. Sono, Andáto. Iui, &c. I haue Gone, &c. as before. as, Séi, Andáto. vt suprá. a, é, Andáto.     Hémos, Siámo, Andati.     avéys, Séte, Andati.     án, Sono, Andati.     Pluperfect. Avía, Andádo. E'ra, Andato. Iueram, &c. I had Gone, &c. Avías, éri, Andato.   Avía, éra, Andato.     Avíamos, Erauámo, Andati.     Avíades, erauáte, Andati.     Avían, érano. Andati.     Future Andaré, Anderó, andró, Ibo, &c. I shall or will Goe, &c. Andarás, Anderái, andrai,     Andará, Anderá, andrá,     Andarémos, Anderémo, andrémo,     Andaréys, Anderéte, Andréte,     Andarán. Anderánno, andránno.     Imperatiue moode A'ndatu, Vatu, Ito, &c. Goe thou, &c. ánde aquel, Vada, or vadacolui,     Andémos, Andiámo,     Andád, Andáte,     ánden. Vádano, or vádino.    
ANDAR.Of Verbes Irregular the first Coniugation in A R. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como ánde, Quando váda, vádi, Cum Eam, &c. When I doe go, &c. ándes, vadv, vadi, ánde, váda, vadi,     andémos, andiámo,     andéys, andiáte,     ánden. vádano, vádino.     Imper¦fect Como anduviéra, andaría, anduviésse, Quando andassi andarei, anderia, Cum irem, &c. When I did go, &c. anduviéras, andarias, anduviésses, andássi, anderésti,   anduviéra, andaría, anduviésse, andásse, anderébbe, andería,     Anduviéramos, andaríamos, anduviéssemos, andássimo, anderém,     anduviérades, andaríades, anduviéssedes, andáste, anderéste,     anduviéran, andarian, anduviéssen. andássero, anderébbero, anderíano.     perfect. Como áya, andádo. Quando sia, Andato. Cum iueri, &c. When I haue gone, &c. áyas, sii, Andato. áya, sia, Andato. áyamos, siamo, Andati.     ayaýs, siate, Andati. áyan, siáno, Andati.           Quando       pluper∣fect tēse Como uviéra, or uviésses, andádo. fóssi, sarei, Andato. iuissem, &c. When I had gone, &c. uviéra, or uviésses, fóssi, sarésti, Andato. uviéra, or uviésse, fosse, sarébbe, Andato. uviéramos, or uviéssemos fossimo, sarémmo, Andati. uviérades, or uviéssedes, fóste, saréste, Andati. uviéran, or uviéssen, fóssero, sarébbero, Andati.     Futur Como anduviére, Quando saró, Andato. Cum iuero, &c. When I shall or will goe heereaf∣ter, &c. anduviéres, sarái, Andato. anduviére, sará, Andato. anduviéremos, sarémo, Andati. anduviéredes, saréte, Andati. anduviéren. saránno, Andati. Infinitiue moode Present tense. ANDA'R,] Andare,] Ire,] to goe. Preterperfect tense. Avér andádo,] Essere andáto,] Iuisse,] to haue gone. Future tense. Avér or esperár de andár, Esser per andare, Douer andare, Háuer ad andare. Iturum esse, to go, or about to go. Gerund. Andándo,] Andándo,] Eundo,] in going. Participle of the Present tense and Actiue voice. El que ánda,] Andánte,] Euns,] one going. Participle of the Preter and Passiue voice. Andádo,] Andato,] gone.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as Traér,TRAER Sabér, Tenér, Podér, Querér, Ponér, Hazér, Cabér. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo TRA'YGO, io APPORTO, Adduco, &c. I fetch or bring, &c. tu tráes, tu appórti, aquel tráe, colui appórta, traémos, apportiámo, traéys, apportáte, tráen. appórtano.     Imper Traýa, apportáua, Adducebam, &c. I did fetch or bring, &c. traýas, apportáui, traýa, apportáua,     traýamos, apportauámo,     traýades, apportauáte,     traýan, apportáuano.     First Perf. trúxe, or tráxe, apportái, Adduxi, &c. I haue fetcht or bought, &c. truxiste, or traxíste, apportáste, trúxo, or, tráxo, apportó, truxímos, or traxímos, apportámo, truxístes, or traxístes, apportáste, truxéron, or traxéron, apportáron, apportáro, apportár. second Perf. hé, traýdo. as, &c. traýdo. ho, apportátio. hai, &c. apportáto. Adduxi, &c. I haue fetcht or brought, &c. Plu∣perfect. avía, traýdo. avías, &c. traýdo. hauéua, Apportáto. hauéui, &c. Apportáto. Adduxerem, &c. I had fetcht or bought, &c. Futur traeré, apportaró, Adducam, &c. I shall or will fetch or bring, &c. traerás, apportarái, traerá, apportará, traerémos, apportarémo, traeréys, apportaréte, traerán, apportaránno. Imperatiue moode. Impa¦ratiue moode. Tráe tu, Apportatu, Adduc, addu∣citio. Bring or fetch thou, &c. tráyga aquel. apporti colui, traémos, apportámo, traéd, apportáte, tráygan, apportino,
TRAEROf Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation ER, as TRAER, in Italian Apportare, Arrecare, Trahere, Addurere, Menare, in Latin Adducere, Afferre, Trahere, to Fetch, to Bring, to Carrie, to Drawe. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Tráyga or Tráya, Quando Apporti, Cum Adducam, &c. When I doe fetch, or bring, &c. Tráygas or Tráyas, &c. Apporti,   Tráyga, or Tráya, Apporti,   Traygámos, Apportiámo,     Traygáys, Apportiáte,     Tráygan. Appórtino.     Imper¦fect. Como Truxéra, Traería, Truxésse, Quando Apportaréi or Apportássi, Cum. Adducerem, When I had fetch or bring, &c. Truxéras, Traerias, Truxésses, Aportarésti or Apportássi, Truxéra, Traería, Truxésse. Apportarébbe or Apportásse. Truxéramos, Traeríamos, Truxéssemos Apportarémmo or Aportássimo Truxérades, Traeríades, Truxéssedes, Apportaréte or Apportáste, Truxéran, Traerían, Truxéssen. Apportarébbono or Apportássero you shal find in some authors Traxésse, Traxésses, &c. perfect. Como áya, Traýdo. Quando Habbia, Apportato. Cum Adduxerim, When I haue fetched or brought, &c. áyas, Habbi, áya, Hábbia, ayámos, Habbiámo, ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan. Hábbiano,       Quando       pluper¦fect. Como uviéra or uviésse, Traýdo. Hauerei or Hauéssi, Appor∣táto. Adduxissem, &c. When I had brought or fetched, &c. uviéras or uviésses, Haueresti or Hauéssi, uviéra or uviésse, Hauerébbe or Hauésse, uviéramos or uviéssemos, Hauerémmo or Hauéssimo,     uviérades or uvíéssedes, Haueréste or Hauéste, uviéran or uviéssen, Hauerébbono or Hauéssero Futur. Como Truxére, Quando Haueró Apportáto. Cum Adduxero, &c. When I shall bring or fetch, &c. Truxéres, Hauerái Apportáto.   Truxére. Hauerá Apportáto.   Truxéremos, Hauerémo Apportáto.     Truxéredes, Haueréte Apportáto.     Truxéren. Haueránno Apportáto.     Infinitiue moode Present tense. TRAE'R] Apportare] Adducere,] to Bring, to Fetch. Preterperfect tense. Avér Traýdo,] Hauer Apportato,] Adduxisse,] to haue brought. Future tense. Avér or Esperár de traér, Douer Apportare, Hauer ad Apportare, Essere per Apportare. Adducturum esse,] to bring hereafter. Gerund. Trayéndo,] Apportando,] Adducendo,] in bringing or fetching. Participle of the Actiue and Present tense. El que tráe,] Apportante,] Adducens,] one bringing. Participle of the Passiue and Preter tense. Traýdo,] Apportato,] Adductus,] brought. Participle of the Futue tense. el que ha or espéra de Traér, Douendo Apportare, Adductu∣rus, About to bring or fetch. Essendo per Apportare,
These Verbes following ending in cer, make their Present tense of the Indicatiue by adding an s before c, thus, Infinities, Pres. Preter. Acaecér, to happen, ýo acaésco, Acaecý. Acontecér, idem, yo acontésco, Acontescí. Adolescér, to be sorie or sicke, yo adolésco, Adolescí. Agradescér, to giue thankes, yo agradésco, Agradecý, Amortecér, to swonne, yo amortésco, Amortecí. Desfallecér, idem, yo desfallésco, Desfallecý. Apetecér, to desire, yo apetésco, Aperecý. Crecér, to growe, yo crésco, Crecí. Encallecér, to waxe hard as brawne. yo encallésco, Encallecí. Encarecér, to augment, yo encarésco, Encarecí. Empecér, to hinder, yo empésco, Empecí. Establecér, to establish, yo establésco, Establecí. Fenecér, to finish, yo fenésco, Fenecí. Pacér, to feede, yo pásco, Pací. Perecér, to perish, yo perésco, Perecý. Except. Vencér, to ouercome, yo venço, Vencí. In all other moodes and Tenses they are declined like the Verbes Regular of the second Coniugation in ER. These in ger, make their Present of the Indicatiue by changing g into j, which the Spaniards in writing do much vse, setting downe the one for the other, as wel in Nounes as in Verbes, as in Nounes Magestád, Majestád: Mensáje, Menságe, and the like. Infinitiues. Pres. Preter. Encogér, to withdraw, yo encójo, Encogí. Recogér, to gather vp or retire yo recójo, Recogí. Acogér, to entertaine, yo acójo, Acogý. Escogér, to choose out, yo escójo, Escogý. Cogér, to gather, yo cójo, Cogý. Vngír, to annoint, yo únjo, Vngí. In other moodes and Tenses like the Regulars. These make their Present tense of the Indicatiue by adding i in the last syllable saue one of the Infinitiue, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preter. Defender, to defend, yo defiéndo, Defendí. Dehendér, to cleaue asunder. yo dehiéndo, Dehendí. And these make the Present tense by turning o in the last syllable saue one of the Infini∣tiue into ue, as Infinitiues. Pres. Pret. Bolvér, to turne, yo buélvo, Bolví. Rebolvér, to returne, yo rebuélvo, Rebolví. Solér, to be wont, yo suélo, Solí. Cosér, to sowe, yo cuéso, Cosý. Cozér, to seethe, yo cuézo, Cozí. Dolér, to be sorie, to grieue; yo duélo, Dolí, And these following thus, Caér, to fall, yo cáygo, Caý. Roér, to gnawe, yo róygo, Roý. Valér, to be worth, yo válgo, Valí. Traér, to fetch or bring, yo tráygo, Trúxe. Oýr, to heare, yo óygo, Oý. In other Moodes and Tenses like the Regular Verbes. In like manner thorow all Moodes and Tenses are his Compounds declined, as Retraér, to withdraw, yo Retráygo, I do withdraw, Retrúxe, I haue withdrawen, &c.
SABEROf Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as SABER, in Italian Sapere, Latin Scire, Sapere, to Knowe. Indicatiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latine.   Pres. yo SE', Io So, Scio, I knowe, thou knowest. tu Sábes, tu Sái, Scis, &c. aquel Sábe. colui Sa.   Sabémos, Sappiámo,   Sabéys, Sapéte,   Sáben. Sánno.   Imper¦fect. Sabía, Sapéua, Sciebam, &c. I did knowe, &c. Sabias, Sapéui, Sabía. Sapéua. Sabíamos, Sapeuámo, Sabíades, Sapeuáte, Sabían. Sapéuano. First Perf. Súpe, Séppi, Sciui, &c. I haue knowen, &c. Supiste, Sappésti, Súpo. Séppe. Supímos, Sappémmo, Supístes, Sappéste, Supiéron. Séppero. second perfect. He Sabído. Ho Saputo. Sciui, &c. vt ate. I haue knowen, &c. as aboue. as Hai a Ha Hémos Habbiámo avéys Hauéte án Hánno Pluper fect. Avía Sabído. Hauéua Saputo. Sciueram, &c. I had knowen, &c. Avías Hauéui Avía Hauéua Avíamos Haueuamo Avíades Hauéuate Avían Hauéuano Futur. Sabré, Soppró, Sciam, &c. I shal or wil know &c. Sabrás, Sapprái, Sabrá. Sapprá. Sabrémos, Sapprémo, Sabréys, Sappréte, Sabrán. Sappránno. Imperatiue moode Sábe tu, Sappi tu, Sci, Scito, &c. Know thou, &c. Sépa aquel. Sappia colui. Sepámos, Sappiámo, Sabéd, Sappiáte, Sépan. Sáppiano.
Declining of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as SABER.SABER. Subiunctiue moode   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como SE'PA, Quando SAPPIA, Cum Sciam, &c. when I doe knowe, &c. Sépas, Sappi, Sépa, Sappia, Sepámos, Sappiámo, Sepáys, Sappiáte, Sépan. Sáppiano. Imperfec. Como. Supiéra, sabría, supiésse, Saprèi, sapéssi, Scirem, &c. when I did knowe, &c. Supiéras, sabrías, supiésses, Saprésti, sapéssi, Supiéra, sabría, supiésse, Saprébbe, sapésse, Supiéramos, sabríamos, supiéssemos, Saprémo, sapéssimo, Supiérades, sabríades, supiéssedes, Sapréste, sapéste, Supiéran, sabrian, supiéssen. Saprébbero, sapéssero.       Quando   Cum   Perfect. Como A'ya, Sabído. Hábbia, Saputo. Sciuerim, &c. when I haue knowne, &c. áyas, Hábbi, áya, Hábbia, Ayámos, Habbiámo, ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan, Hábbiano,       Quando   Cum   Pluperfe. Como Uviéra, or uviesse, Sabído. Hauerei, hauéssi, Sapúto. Sciuissem, &c. when I had knowne, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, Hauerésti, hauésti, uviéra, or uviésse, Hauerébbe, hauesse, uviéramos, or uviéssemos, Hauerémo, hauéssimo, uviérades, or uviésseds. Haueréte, hauéste, uviéran, or uviéssen, Hauerébbono, hauéssero,           Cum   First Future Como Supiére, Quando Hauero, Sapúto. Sciuero, &c. when I shal knowe, &c. Supiéres, Hauerái, Supiére, Hauerá, Supiéremos, Hauerémo, Supiéredes, Haueréte, Supiéren. haueránno,       Quando   Cum   Second Future Como Uviére, or avré, Sabído. Haueró, Sapúto. Sciuero, &c. vt antea. when I shall knowe, &c. uviéres, or avrás, Hauerái, uviére, or avrá, Hauerá, uviéremos, or avrémos, Hauerémo, uviéredes, or avréys, Haueréte, uviéren, or aurán. haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. SABE'R] Sapére,] Scire,] to knowe. Preterpefect tense. avér Sabído,] hauer Sapúto,] Sciuisse,] to haue knowne. Future tense. avér or es∣perár de Sabér, Douer sapére, Hauer a sapére, Essere per sapére, Sciturum esse,] to knowe hereafter.
Gerund. Sabiéndo,] Sapendo,] Sciendo,] In knowing. Participle of the Present, and Actiue. el que Sábe,] quello chi Sa,] Sciens,] one knowing. Participle of the Preter tense and Passiue. Sabido,] Sapúto,] knowen. Declining of Verbes Irregular of the second Coniugation in ER, as TENER, TENER. In Italian, and Latin, Tenére, to Hold. Indicatiue moode Present. YO TE'NGO, IO TE'NGO, Teneo, &c. I do Hold, &c. tu Tiénes, tu Tiéni, aquél Tiéne, colui Tiéne, Tenémos, Teniámo, Tenéys, Tenéte, Tiénen, Téngono. Imperfe. Tenía, Tenéua, & tenéa, Tenebam, &c. I did Hold, &c. Tenías, Tenéui, Tenia, Tenéua, & tenéa, Teníamos, Teneuámo, Teníades, Teneuáte, Tenían. Tenéuano. First Perfect. Túve, Tenni, Tenui, &c. I haue Held, &c. Tuviste, Tenesti, Túvo, Ténne, Tuvímos, Tennémmo, Tuvistes, Tenéste, Tuviéron. Ténnero. Second Perfec. Yo He, Tenído. Ho, Tenúto. Tenuì, &c. I haue Held, &c. as next aboue. Tu as, Hai, aquel á, Ha, Hémos, Habbiámo, avéys, Hauéte, án, Hánno. Pluperfe. Avia, Tenído. Hauéua, Tenúto. Tenueram, &c. I had Held, &c. Avias, Hauéui, Avia, Hauéua, Avíamos, Haueuámo, Avíades, Haueuáte, Avian. Hauéuano, Future. Tendré, or Terné, Tenneró, & Terró, Tenebo, &c. I shall or will Hold, &c. Tendrás, or Ternás, Tennerái, & Terrái, Tendrá, or Terná, Tennerá, & Terra, Tendrémos, or Ternémos, Tenerémo, & Terrémo, Tendréys, or Ternéys, Teneréte, & Terreste, Tendran, or ternán, Tenneránno, & Terránno,
Imperatiue moode Tén tu, Tiém tu, Tene tu, &c. Hold thou, &c. Ténga aquél, Ténga colui, Tengámos, Teniámo, Tenéd, Tenéte, Téngan. Téngano. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Ténga, Quando Tenga, Cum Teneam, &c. When I doe hold, &c. Téngas, Tenghi, Ténga, Tenga, Tengámos, Teniámo, Tengáys, Teniáte, Téngan. Téngano. Imper¦fect. Como Tuviéra, ternía, tuviésse, Quando Tenéssi, teneréi, tenería, Cum Tenerem, &c. When I did hold, &c. Tuviéras, ternías, tuviésses, Tenéssi, teneresti, Tuviéra, ternia, tuviésse. Tenésse, tenerébbe, tenería, Tuviéramos, terníamos, tuviéssemos, Tenéssimo, tenerémmo, Tuviérades, terníades, tuviéssedes, Tenéste, tenereste, Tuviéran, ternían, tuviéssen. Tenéssero, tenerébbono. perfect. Como áya, Tenído. Quando Habbia, Tenúto. Cum Tenuerim, &c. When I haue holden, &c. áyas, Habbi, áya, Hábbia, ayámos, Habbiámo, ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan, Hábbiano,       Quando   Cum   pluper¦fect. Como uviéra or uniésse, Tenído. Hauerei or Hauéssi, Tenú∣to. Tenuissem, &c. When I had holden, &c. uviéras or uviésses, Haueresti or Hauéssi, uviéra or uviésse, Hauerébbe or Hauésse, uviéramos or uviéssemos, Hauerémmo or Hauéssimo, uviérades or uviéssedes, Haueréste or Hauéste, uviéran or uviéssen, Hauerébbono or Hauéssero First Futur. Como Tuviére,   Cum Tenuero, &c. When I shall or wil hold, &c. Tuviéres,   Tuviére,   Tuviéremos,   Tuviéredes,   Tuviéren.   Secōd Futur. Como uviére or avré, Tenído. Haueró Tenúto. Cum Tenuero, &c. vt antè. When I shall or wil hold, &c. as next aboue. uviéres or avrás, Hauerái uviére or avrá, Hauerá uviéremos or avrémos, Hauerémo uviéredes or avréys, Haueréte uviéren or avrán, Haueránno Infinitiue moode Present tense. TENE'R,] Tenére,] Tenere,] to Hold. Preterperfect tense. Aver Tenído,] Hauér Tenúto,] Tenuisse,] to haue Holden.
Future tense. Avér de Tenér, Douér tenére, Hauér a tenére, Essere per tenére, Tenturum esse,] to Hold hereafter. Gerund. Teniéndo,] Tenéndo,] Tenendo,] In Holding. Participle of the Present and Actiue. El que tiéne,] Tenénte,] Tenens,] one Holding. Participle of the Preter and Passiue. Tenído, Tenúto, Tentus, Holden. Like this verbe simple are his Compounds in all points declined thorow all Moodes and Tenses, as Mantenér, to maintaine, yo Manténgo, Mantúve. Detenér, to detaine or stay, yo Detén∣go, Detúve. Retenér, to with hold or retaine, yo Reténgo, Retúve. Softenér, to sustaine or vphold, yo Sosténgo, Sustúve. PODERThe second Coniugation of Verbes Irregular in ER, as PODER, in Italian Potere, in Latin Posse, to be able. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo PUE'DO, POSSO, Possum, &c. I can or am able, &c. tu Puédes, Puoi, aquel Puéde. Puo. Podémos, Possiámo, Podéys, Potéte, Puéden. Póssano & Pónno. Imperfect Podía, Potéua or Potéa, Poteram, &c. I was able, &c. Podias, Potéui, Podía, Potéua or Potéa, Podíamos, Poteuámo, Podíades, Poteuáte, Podían. Potéuano. First per∣fect. Púde, Potei, Potui, &c. I could or haue been able, &c. Pudiste, Potesti, Púdo. Puoté. Pudímos, Potémmo, Pudistes, Potéste, Pudiéron. Potérono & Pótero. Second perfect. He Podído. Ho Potúto. Potui, &c. vt supra. I could or haue been able, &c. as next aboue. as Hai a Ha Hémos Habbiámo avéys Hauéte an Hanno Pluperf. Avía Podído. Hauéua Potúto. Potueram, &c. I had been able, &c. Avías Hauéuo Avía Hauéua Avíamos Haueuámo Avíades Haueuáte Avían Haueuáno Future. Podré, Potró, Potero, &c. I shall or will be able, &c. Podrás, Potrái, Podrá. Potrá, Podrémos, Potrémo, Podréys, Potréte, Podrán. Potránno. Imperatiue moode wanteth as in the Latin.
Of Verbes Irregular, the second Coniugation in ER, as PODE'R.PODER Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Puéda, Quando Possa, Cum Possim, &c. When I can or be able, &c. puédas, possi, puéda, possa, puedámos, possiámo, & potiámo, podáys, possiáte, & potiáte, puédan, póssano. Imper¦fect. Como Pudiéra, podría, pudiésse, Quando potéssi, potréi, potría, Cum Possem, &c. When I coulde or might be able, &c. pudiéras, podrías, pudiésses, potéssi, potrésti, pudiéra, podría, pudiésse, potésse, potrébbe, potría, pudiéramos, podríamos, pudiéssemos, potéssimo, potrémmo, pudiérades, podríades, pudiéssedes, potéste, potréste, pudiéran, podrian, pudiéssen. potéssero, potrébbono, potríano, Perf. Como áya, Podído. Quando hábbia, Potuto. Cum Potue∣rim, &c. When I haue been able, &c. áyas, hábbi, áya, hábbia, áyamos, habbiámo, ayáys, habbiáte, áyan, hábbiano,       Quando   Cum   Plu∣perfect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Podído. hauéssi, haueréi, Po∣túto Potuis∣sem, &c. When I had been able, &c. uviéra, or uviésses, hauéssi, hauerésti, uviéra, or uviésse, hauésse, hauerébbe, uviéramos, or uviéssemos hauéssimo, hauerémo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, hauéste, haueréste, uviéran, or uviéssen, hauéssero, hauerébbono,     Cum   First future. Como Pudiére,   Potuero, &c. When I shall be a∣ble heereaf∣ter, &c. pudiéres,   pudiére,   pudiéremos,   pudiéredes,   pudiéren.         Quando   Cum   second Futur. Como uviére, or avré Podído. haueró, Potúto. Potuero, &c. vt ante. When I shall or wil be able heer after, &c. as next a∣boue. uviéres, or avrás, haueraí, uviére, or avrá, hauerá, uviéremos, or avrémos, hauerémo, uviéredes, or avréys, haueréte, uviéren, or avrán, haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. Podér,] Potére,] Posse,] To be able. Preterperfect tense. Avér podído,] Hauer potúto,] Potuisse,] To haue beene able. Gerund. Pudiéndo,] Poténdo,] In being able. Participle. Podído,] Potúto,] Able.
Querér.Of Verbes Irregular of the second Coniugation, in ER, as QVERER, in Italian, Volere, in Latin Velle, To will, to loue, or to bée willing. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo QVIE'RO, Io VO'GLIO, Volo, I will, or loue, &c. tu quieres, tu vuoi, Vis, &c. aquel quiére, colúi vuole,   Plu. Plu.   querémos, vogliámo,   queréys, voléte,   quiéren. vógliono.   Imper quería, voléua, Volebam, &c. I did will, or I did loue, &c. querías, voléui, quería, voléua, queríamos, voleuámo, queriades, voleuáte, querian. voléuano. First Perf. quíse, volli, & volsi, Volui, &c. I haue willed, or I haue loued, &c. quisiste, vollesti, quiso, volle, & volse, quisímos, volémmo, quisistes, volleste, quisiéron. vólsero. second Perf. He, Querído. ho, Vo∣lúto Volui, &c. I haue willed, or I haue loued, &c. as next aboue. as, hai, vt antè. a, ha,   hémos or avémos habbiámo,   avéys, hauéte,   an, hánno,   Plu∣perfect. avía, Querído. hauéua, Vo∣lúto Volueram, &c. I had willed, or I had loued, &c. avías, hauéui, avía, hauéua, avíamos, haueuámo, avíades, haueuáte, avían, haueuano, Futur querré, vorró, volam, &c. I will, or shall will or loue, &c. querrás, vorrái, querrá vorrá, querrémos, vorrémo, querréys, vorréte, querrán. vorránno. Imperatiue moode. Impe¦ratiue moode. quére tu, vuoi tu, Latin wan∣teth the Im¦peratiue. moode. Will thou or loue thou, &c. quera aquél, voglia colúi, querámos, vogliámo, queréd, vogliate, quéran. voglíno,
Of Verbes Irregular of the second Coniugation in ER, as QVERER.Querér. Subiunctiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. Como Quéra, or Quérra, &c. Quando Vóglia, Cum Velim, &c. when I will or loue, &c. Quéras, Vógli, Quéra, Vóglia, Querámos, Vogliámo, Queráys, Vogliáte, Quéran. Vógliano. Imper¦fect. Como Quisiéra, quérria, quisiésse, Quando Voléssi, vorei, & vorría, Cum Vellem, &c. When I would or did loue, &c. Quisiéras, querrías, quisiésses, Volésti, vorrésti, Quisiéras, querrías, quisiésses, Volésse, vorrébbe, vorría, Quisiéramos, querríamos, quisiéssemos, Voléssimo, vorémmo, Quisiérades, querríades, quisiéssedes, Voléste, voréste, Quisiéran, querrían, quisiéssen. Voléssero, vorrébbono, & vorriano.       Quando       perfect. Como A'ya, Querído. Hábbia, Volúto. Cum Volue∣rim, &c. when I haue willed or lo∣ued, &c. áyas, Hábbi, áya, Hábbia, Ayámos, Habbiámo, Ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan, Habbíano,       Quando   Cum   pluper∣fect. Como Uviéra, or uviésse, Querído. Hauéssi, or hauerei, Volúto. Voluis∣sem, &c. when I had wil∣led or loued &c. uviéras, or uviésses, Hauesti, or hauerésti, uviéra, or uviésse, Hauésse, or hauerébbe, uviéramos, or uviéssemos, Hauéssimo, or hauerémo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, Hauéste, or haueréste, uviéran, or uviéssen, Hauéssero, or hauerébbono, First Futur Como Quisiére, Quando Haueró, Volúto. Cum Voluero &c. when I shall will or loue. Quisiéres, Hauerái, Quisiére, Hauerá, Quisiéremos, Hauerémo, Quisiéredes, Haueréte, Quisiéren. Haueránno,       Quando       second Futur Como Uviére, or avré, Querído. Haueró Volúto. Cum Voluero &c. vt. ante. when I shall be willing or loue, &c. uviéres, or avrás, Hauerái, uviére, or avrá, Hauerá, uviéremos, or avrémos, Hauerémo, uviéredes, or avréys, Haueréte, uviéren, or avrén, Haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. Querér,] Volere,] Velle,] to will or loue. Preterperfect tense. avér Querído,] hauer Voluto,] Voluisse,] to haue loued or beene willing. Gerund. Queriéndo,] Volendo,] Volendo,] In being willing or louing. Participle. Querído,] Voluto,] loued, willed. Ad to this verbe this particle Mas, and so decline it thorow al moods and tenses, and it makes the signification to be in Latin Malo, in English I had leifer, I would rather, as yo Quiéro mas, in Latin Malo, I would leifer, or loue more: tu quiéres mas, Mauis, thou hadst rather or louest more, Preterimperfect tense yo Quería mas, I would rather or loued more. Preterperf. Quíse mas, &c.
PONER.Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as PONER, in Italian, Ponere, Porre, Mettere, in Latin, Ponere, Locare, to Put, to place. Indicatiue moode   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. YO PONGO, IO PO'NGO, Pono, &c. I doe put, &c. tu Pónes, tu Póni, aquél Póne, colui Póne, Plu. Plu. Ponémos, Poniámo, Ponéys, Ponéte, Pónen. Póngono, Imperfect Ponía, Ponéua, Pónebam, &c. I did put, &c. Ponías, Ponéui, Ponia, Ponéua, Poníamos, Poneuámo, Poníades, Poneuáte, Ponían. Ponéuano. First Perfect. Púse, Pósi, Posui, &c. I haue put, &c. Pusiste, Ponésti, Púso, Póse, Pusimos, Ponémmo, Pusistes, Ponéste, Pusiéron. Pósero. Second Perfect. He, Puésto. Ho, Posto. Posui, &c. I haue put, &c. as, Hai, a, Ha, Avémos, y hémos, Habbiámo, Avéys, Hauéte, an, Hánno, Pluperfec Avía, Puésto. Hauéua, Posto. Posueram, &c. I had put, &c. Avías, Hauéui, Avía, Hauéua, Avíamos, Haueuámo, Avíades, Haueuáte, Avían, Hauéuano, Future Porné, or Pondré, Poneró, & Porró, Ponam, &c. I shal or wil put, &c. Pornás, or Pondrás, Ponerái, & Porrái, Porná, or Pondrá, Ponerá, & Porrá, Pornémos, or Pondrémos, Ponerémo, & Porrémo, Pornéys, or Pondréys. Poneréte, & Porréte, Pornan, or Pondrán. Ponneránno, & Poránno. Imperatiue moode. Pó tu, Pone tu, Pone, Poneto, Ponat, Po∣neto, &c. put thou, put he or let him put, &c. Pónga aquél, Pónga colui, Pongámos, Poniámo, Ponéd, Ponéte, Póngan. Póngano.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as PONER.PONER Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. Como Pónga, Quando Pónga, Cum Ponam, &c. When I do put, &c Póngas, Pónghi, Pónga. Pónga. Pongámos, Poniámo, Pongáys, Poniáte, Póngan. Póngano. Imper¦fect. Como Pusiéra, pornía or pondría, pusiésse, Quando Ponéssi, Ponerei, Cum Ponerem, &c. When I did put, &c Pusiéras, pornias or pondrías, pusiésses, Ponéssi, Ponerésti, Pusiéras, pornias or pondrias, pusiésse. Ponésse, Ponerébbe, Pusiéramos, porníamos or pondriamos, pusiéssemos Ponéssimo, Ponerémmo, Pusiérades, porníades or pondriades, pusiéssedes, Ponéste, Poneréste, Pusiéran, pornían or pondrían, pusiéssen. Ponéssero, Ponerébbono. Perf. Como áya Puésto. Quando Hábbia Pósto. Cum Posuerim, &c. When I haue put, &c. áyas Hábbi áya Hábbia ayámos Habbiámo ayáys Habbiáte áyan Hábbiano       Quando   Cum   Pluper¦fect. Como uviera or uviésse Puésto. Hauerei or Hauessi Pósto. Posuissem, When I had put, &c. uviéras or uviésses Hauerésti or Hauésti uviéra or uviésse Hauerébbe or Hauésse uviéramos or uviéssemos Hauerémmo or hauéssimo uviéredes or uviéssedes Haueréste or Hauéste uviéran or uviéssen Haberébbono or Hauéssero First Futur. Como Pusiére,   Cum Posuero, &c. When I shall or will put, &c. Pusiéres,   Pusiére.   Pusiéremos,   Pusiéredes.   Pusiéren.         Quando         second Futur Como Uviére or avré Puésto. Haueró Posto. Cum Posuero, &c. When I shall or will put, &c. uviéres or avrás Hauerái uviére or avrá Haterá uviéremos or avrémos Hauerémo uviéredes or avréys Haueréte uviéren or avrán, Haueránno Infinitiue moode Present tense. PONER,] Ponere, Mettere, Porre,] Ponere,] to Put. Preterpefect tense. Avér Puésto,] Hauer Posto,] Posuisse,] to haue Put. Gerund. Poniendo,] Ponendo,] Ponendo,] In Putting. Participle. Puésto,] Posto,] Positus,] Put.   After this manner are declined in all points Componér, to compose, yo Compóngo, I doe compose, yo Compúse, I haue composed, &c. Also Disponér, to dispose, yo Dispongo, I dispose, Dispúse, I haue disposed. And Anteponér, to put before, yo Antepongo, I doe put before, Ante∣púse, I haue put before. So Proponér, to set out, to alleage, yo Propóngo, Propúse.
HAZER.Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as HAZER, in Italian Fare, in Latin Facere, to doe, to make. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo HA'GO, Io FO, Facio, &. I doe make or doe, &c. tu Házes, tu Fai, aquel Háze. colui Fa. Hazémos, Facciámo, Hazéis, Fate, Házen. Fánno. Imperf. Hazía, Facéua, Faciebam, &c. I did make or doe, &c. Hazías, Facéui, Hazía. Facéua. Hazíamos, Faceuámo, Hazíades, Faceuáte, Hazían. Facéuano. First per∣fect. Hize, Féci, Feci, &c. I haue made or done, &c. Hizíste, Facésti, Hizo. Féce. Hizímos, Facémmo, Hizístes, Facéste, Hiziéron. Fécero. Second Perfect. He Hécho. Ho Fátto. Feci, &c. vt ante. I haue made or done, &c. as Hai a Ha Hémos Habbiámo avéys Hauéte an Hánno Pluper∣fect. Avía Hecho. Hauéua Fátto. Feceram, &c. I had made or done, &c. Avías Hauéui Avía Hauéua Avíamos Haueuámo Avíades Haueuáte Avían Hauéuano Future. Haré, Faró, Faciam, &c. I shall or will make or doe, &c. Harás, Farái, Hará. Fará. Harémos, Farémo, Haréys, Faréte, Harán. Faránno. Imperatiue moode. Ház tu, Fa tu, Fac, Facito, &c. Doe thou, or make thou, &c. Hága aquel. Fáccia colui. Hagámos, Facciámo, Hazéd, Fate, Hágan. Fácciano.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as HAZER.HAZER Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Hága, Quando Faccia, Cum faciam, &c. When I doe make or do, &c. hágas, facci, hága, faccia, hagámos, facciamo, hagáys, facciáte, hágan. fácciano. Imper Como hiziéra, haría, hiziésse, Quando facessi, farei, faría, Cum Facerem, &c. When I did do or make, &c. hiziéras, harías, hiziésses, facésti, farésti, hiziéra, haría, hiziésse, facésse, farébbe, faría, hiziéramos, haríamos, hiziéssemos, facéssimo, farémmo, hiziérades, haríades, hiziéssedes, facésti, faréste, hiziéran, harían, hiziéssen. facéssero, farebbono, faríno.             Cum   Perf. Como áya, Hecho. Quando hábbia, Fat to. Fecerim, &c. When I haue made or done, &c. áyas, hábbi, áya, hábbia, ayámos, habbiámo, ayáys, habbiáte, áyan, habbiano,       Quando   Cum   Plu∣perf. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Hecho. hauerei, or hauessi, Fat to. Fecissem, &c. When I had made or done, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, haueresti, or hauésti, uviéra, or uviésse, hauerébbe, or hauesse, uviéramos, or uviéssemos, hauerémmo, or hauessimo uviérades, or uviéssedes, hauerésti, or hauéste, uviéran, or uviéssen, hauerébbono, or hauessimo First future. Como hiziére,   Cum Fecero, &c. When I shall or will make or do, &c. hiziéres,   hiziére,   hiziéremos,   hiziéredes,   hiziéren.             Cum   second Futur. Como Uviére, or avré, Hecho. Haueró, Fat to. Fecero, &c. vt antè. When I shall or wil make or do, &c. uviéres, or avrás, Hauerái, uviére, or avrá, Hauerá, uviéremos, or avrémos, Hauerémo, uviéredes, or avréys, Haueréte, uviéren, or avrán. haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. Hazér,] Fare,] Facere, To do to make. Preterperfect tense. Aver hecho,] Hauer fatto,] Fecisse,] To haue made or done, &c. Future tense. Aver or esperar de hazer, Douer fare, Facturum esse vel fore. To make or do heereafter. Esser per fare, Hauer a fáre.   Gerund. Haziéndo] Facendo,] Faciendo,] In doing or making, &c.
Supine of the Actiue voice. A Hazér,] Di fare,] Factum,] To make or do. Supine of the Passiue voice. De sér hécho,] D'esser fatto,] Factu,] To be made or don. Participle of the Actiue and Present tense. El que háze,] Facente,] Faciens,] One doing or making. Participle of the Passiue and Pretertense. Hécho] Fatto,] Factus,] Made or done, &c. Participle of the Future tense. El que ha, or Espéra de hazér, Hauendo a fare, Facturus,] About to do, &c. Essendo per fare,   CABEROf Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as CABER, in Italian Capere, Latin Continere & Contineri, To containe, or to be contained. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latine.   Pres. Yo QVE'PO, lo CAPISCO, Ego contineo, tu contines, &c. Ego contineor, tu continéris, &c. Thou containest, &c. Thou art contained, &c. tu cábes. tu capísci, aquél cábe, colui capísce, cabémos, capiámo, cabéys, capíte, cáben. capíscono, Imper¦fect. cabía, capíua, continebam, &c. I did containe, &c. cabias, capíui, continébar, &c. I was contained, &c. cabía, capíua,     cabíamos, capiuámo,     cabiades, capiuáte,     cabían. capíuano.     First Perf. cúpe, capi, or capii, continui, &c. I haue contained, &c. cupiste, capísti, contentus sum vel fui, &c. cúpo, capé I haue beene con∣tained. &c. cupímos, capímmo,     cupistes, capíste,     cupiéron. capírono,     second Perf. he Cabído. Ho, Capíto. continui, &c. I haue contained, &c as Hai, contentus sum vel fui, &c. I haue beene con∣tained, &c. a Ha, avémos Habbiámo,     avéys Hauéte,     an Hánno,     Plu∣perfect. avía Cabído. Hauéua, Capíto. continueram, &c. I had contained, &c. avías Hauéui, contentus eram vel fu∣eram, &c. I had beene contai∣ned, &c. avia Hauéua, avíamos, Haueuámo,     aviades Haueuáte,     avían Hauéuano,     Futur cabré, caperó, continebo, &c. I shall or will con∣taine, &c. cabrás, capirái, continebor, &c. cabrá, capirá,   I shall or will bee contained, &c. cabrémos, capirémo,     cabréys, capiréte,     cabrán. capiránno.    
Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as CABER.CABER. Subiunctiue moode   Spanish.   Italian. Latine.   Pres. Como Quépa, Quando Capisca, Cum Contineam, &c. when I doe containe, &c. Quépas, Capísci, Quépa, Capísca, Continear, &c. when I am contained, &c Quepámos, Capiámo,     Quepáys, Capiáte,     Quépan. Capíscano.     Imper¦fect. Como Cupiéra, cabría, cupiésse, Quando Capíssi, caperirei, capería, Cum Cōtinerem, &c. when I did containe, &c. Cupiéras, cabrías, cupiésses, Capisti, capirésti, Cupiéra, cabría, cupiesse, Capísse, capirébbe, capería, Continerer &c. when I was contained, &c. Cupiéramos, cabríamos, cupiéssemos, Capíssimo, capirémmo,     Cupiérades, cabríades, cupiéssedes, Capíste, capiréste,     Cupiéran, cabrían, cupiéssen. Capíssero, capirébbono, ca∣piríano.           Quando         Perfec Como A'ya, Cabído. Hábbia, Capíto. Cum Continue∣rim, &c. when I haue contained, &c áyas, Habbí, áya, Habbia, Contentus sim, &c. when I haue been contai∣ned, &c. Ayámos, Habbiámo,   ayáys, Habbiáte,     áyan, Hábbiano,               Cum   pluper fect. Como Uviéra, or uviésse, Cabído. Hauéssi, & haueréi, Capíto. Continu∣issem, &c when I had contai¦ned, &c uviéras, or uviésses, Hauésti, & hauerésti, uviéra, or uviésse, Hauesti, & hauerébbe, Conten∣tus essem &c. uviéramos, or uviéssemos, Hauéssimo, & hauerémmo when I had bin, &c uviérades, or uviéssedes, Hauéste, & haueréste,   uviéran, or uviéssen, Hauéssero, & hauerébbono   Futur Como Cupiére, Cum Continuero &c. when I shal containe, &c. Cupiéres, Cupiére, Contentus ero, &c. when I shal be contained &c. Cupiéremos,   Cupiéredes,     Cupiéren.     Infinitiue moode Present tense. CABE'R,] Capere, Continere, to containe, &c. Contineri, to be contained, &c, Preterperfect tense. avér Cabído,] hauer capíto, Continuisse, to haue contained, &c. Contentum Esse vel fuisse, to haue been contained, &c. Gerund. Cabiéndo,] Capendo,] Continendo, In containing, &c. I being contained, &c. Participle. Cabído,] Capíto,] Contentus,] contained.
VER.Of Verbes Irregular the second Coniugation in ER, as VER, in Italian Vedere, Latin Videre, to Sée. Indicatiue moode   Spanish. Italian, Latin.   Pres. YO VE'O, IO Védo & VE'GGIO, Video, &c. I doe see, &c. tu Vées, tu Védi, aquél Vée, colui Véde, Vémos, Vediámo, & Veggiámo, Véys, Vedéte, Véen. Védem, & Véggono. Imper¦fect. Como Vía, Vedéua, & Vedéa, Videbam, &c I did see, &c. Vías, Vedéui, Vía. Vedéua, & Vedéa. Víamos, Vedeuamo, Víades, Vedeuáte, Vían. Vedéuano, & Vedéano. First perfec. Ví or Víde, Vídi, or Vidi, Vidi, &c. I haue seene, &c. Viste, or Viste, Vedésti, Vió, or Vído, Vidde. Vímos, Vidémmo, Vístes, Vidésti, Viéron. Viddero. second perfect. He Vísto. Ho Vedúto. or Visto. Vidi, &c. I haue seene, &c. as Hai, a Ha, Hémos Habbiámo avéys Hauéte, an Hánno pluper¦fect. Avía Vísto. Hauéua Veduto, or Visto. Videram, &c. I had seene, &c. Avías Hauéui, Avía. Hauéua, Avíamos Haueuámo Avíades Haueuáte Avían Hauéuano Futur. Veré, Vederó, & Vedró, Videbo, &c. I shall or will see, &c. Verás, Vederái, & Vedrái, Verá, Vederá, & Vedrá. Verémos, Vederémo, & Vedrémo, Veréys, Vederéte, & Vedréte, Verán. Vederánno, & Vedránno. Imperatiue moode. Vée tu, Vedi tu, Vide, videto, &c. see tou, &c. Véa aquél, Veda, & vegga colui, Veámos, Veggiámo, Véd, Vedéte, Véan. Védano, & Véggano. In the Subiunctiue and Infinitiue moode altogither as verbes aforegoing, as the Pre∣sent tense Véa, the Preterimperfect. Viéra, veria, viésse, the Preterperfect. áya visto, the Preterplu∣perfect. uviéra, or uviésse, visto, the Future viéro, Infinitiue vér, Participle visto.
Solér, to be wont or accustomed. Indicat. Pres. yo Suélo, I am wont, tu Suéles, aquél Suéle, thou art wont, he is woont. Solémos, we are wont, Soléys, ye are wont, Suélen, they are wont. Imperfect. Solia. Perfect. Soli. In like manner Dolér, to grieue, to be sorie, declined, yo Duélo, Dolia, Dolí, He Dolído, &c. Of the third and last Coniugation of Verbs Irregular in IR or Yr, as VENIR, in Italian and Latin Venire, to Come.VENIR Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. yo VE'NGO, Io VE'NGO, Venio, &c. I do come, &c. tu Viénes, tu viéni, aquel Viéne. colui viene. Plur.   Venimos, Veniámo, Venis, Veníte, Viénen. Véngono. Imperf. Venía, Veniua, Veniebam, &c. I did come, &c. Venías, Veniui, Venía. Veniua. Veníamos, Veniuámo, Veníades, Veniuáte, Venían. Veníuano. First Perfect. Víne, Vénni, Veni, &c. I haue come, &c Veniste, Vennésti, Víno, Vénne. Venímos, Venémmo, Veníste, Venéste, Veniéron. Vénnero. Second Perfect. He Venído. Sono Venúto. Veni, &c. I haue come, &c as sei Venúto. a é Venúto. Hémos Siámo Venúti. avéys Sete Venúti. an Sono Venúti. Pluperfe. Avia Venído. E'ra Venúto. Veneram, &c. I had come, &c. Avías éri Venúto. Avia éra Venúto. Aviamos Erauámo Venúti. Aviades Erauáte Venúti. Avian E'rano Venúti. Futur. Vendré or Verné, Veniró or Verró, Veniam, &c. I shall or will come, &c. Vendrás or Vernás, Venerái or Verrái, Vendrá or Verná. Venerá or Verrá. Vendrémos or Vernémos, Venirémo or Verrémo Vendréys or Vernéys, Veniréte or Verréte, Vendrán or Vernán. Veniránno or Verránno.
Imperatiue moode. Ven tu, Vien tu, Veni, Venito, &c. Come thou, &c. Vénga aquél. Vénga colui. Vengámos, Veniámo, Venid, Venite, Véngan. Véngano. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish. Italian, Latin.   Pres. Como Vénga, Quando Venga, Cum Veniam, &c. When I do come, &c. véngas, venghi, vénga, venga, vengámos, veniámo, vengáys, veniáte, véngan. véngano. Imper Como Viniéra, vernía, viniésse, Quando venissi, venerei, verrei, verria, Cum Venirem &c. When I did come, &c. viniéras, vernias, viniésses, venisti, venerésti, verresti, viniéra, vernia, viniésse, venisse, venerébbe, verrébbe, verría, Viniéramos, verníamos, viniéssemos, venissimo, venirémmo, verémmo, viniérades, verníades, viniéssedes, veniste, venréste, verréste, viniéan, vernían, viniéssen. veníssero, venirébbono, verrébbono, verriano. Imper¦fect. Como áya, Venído. Quando sia, Venuto. Cum Venerim &c. When I haue come, &c. áyas, sii & sia, Venuto. aya, sia, Venuto. ayámos, siámo, Venuti. ayaýs, siáte, Venuti. ayan, siano, Venuti. pluper fect, &c. Como Uviéra, or uviésse, Venído. fóssi, sarei, Venuto. Venissem &c. When I had come, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, fósti, saresti, Venuto. uviéra, or uviésse, fósse, sarébbe, Venuto. uviéramos, or uviéssemos, fóssimo, sarémmo, Venuti. uviérades, or uviéssedes, fóste, saréste, Venuti. uviéran, or uviéssen, fóssero, sarébbono, Venuti. First Futur Como veniére,   Cum Venero. &c. When I shall or will come, &c. veniéres,   veniére,   veniéremos,   veniéredes,   veniéren.   second Futur Como Uviére, or avré, Venído saró, Venúto. Cum Venero, &c. When I shall or will come, &c. uviéres, or avrás, sarai, Venúto. uviére, or avrá, sará, Venúto. uviéremos, or avrémos, sarémo, Venuti. uviéredes, or avréys, saréte, Venuti. uviéren, or avrán, saránno, Venuti.
Infinitiue moode Present tense. Venír,] Venire,] Venire,] To come. Preterperfect tense. Sér venido,] Essere venuto,] Venisse,] To haue come. Futur tense. Avér or esperár de venir Douer venire, Venturum esse, To come heereafter. Hauer a venire, Esser per venire, Gerund. Veniéndo,] Venendo,] Veniendo,] In comming. Participle of the Present and Actiue voice. El que viéne,] Venente,] Veniens,] One comming. Participle of the Preter tense and Passiue voice, &c. Venído,] Venuto,] Qui venit,] Come. These Verbes following in Ir, thus formed in the Present and Preterperfect Tense. Infinitiues. Pres. Preterp. Adormír, to fall asleepe, yo Aduérmo, Adormí. Dormír, to sleepe, yo Duérmo, Dormí. Avertír, to marke, yo Aviérto, Avertí. Arrepentír, to repent, yo Arrepiénto, Arrepentí. Cobrír, to recouer, yo Cébro, Cobrí. Concebír, to conceiue, yo Concíbo, Concebí. Cernír, to sift meale, yo Cigrno, Cerní. Consentír, to consent, yo Consiénto, Consentí. Elegír, to choose out, yo Elijo, Eligí. Fingir, to faine, yo Finjo, Fingí. Gemír, to grone, yo Gimo, Gemí. Mentír, to lie, yo Miénto, Mentí. Ungír, to annoint, yo Unjo, Ungí. Salír, to goe foorth, yo Sálgo, Salý. Diferír, to differ, yo Difiéro, Diferí. Imperfect of the Indicat. Difería. Imperfect of the Subiunct. Difería. Sofrír, to suffer, yo Sófro, Sofrí. Imperfect. of the Indicat. Sofría. Imperfect of the Subiunct. Soffriría. The Compounds of this verbe Venír, Véngo, are declined in euery respect in all Moodes and Tenses thorow out as it is, as Revenír, to returne, Revéngo, Revíne, &c. Convenír, to agree, to be expedient, yo Convéngo, Convíne. Devenír, to become, yo Devéngo, Devíne. Sobrevenír, to come vpon suddenly, yo Sobrevéngo, Sobrevíne. Of the third and last coniugation of Verbes Irregular in IR, & YR,DEZIR. as Dezir,] in Italian Dire,] Latin Dicere] to say. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian, Latin.   Pres. Dígo, Dico, Dico, &c. I saie, &c. dízes, dici, or di, díze, dice, dezímos, dicémo, dezís, dite, dízen. dicono,
Imper Dezía, Dicéua, Dicebam &c. I did saie, &c. dezías, dicéui, dezía, dicéua, Dezíamos, diceuámo, dezíades, diceuáte, dezían. dicéuano. First Perf. díxe, dissi, Dixi, &c. I haue saide, &c. dixiste, dicésti, dixo, disse, dixímos, dicémmo, dixistes, dicéste, dixéron. díssero. second Perf. hé, Dícho. Ho Détto. Dixi, &c. I haue saide, &c. as, Hai a, Ha hémos, Habbiámo avéys, Hauéte án, Hánno Plu∣perfect. avía, Dícho. Hauéua Détto. Dixe∣ram, &c I had said, &c. avías, Hauéui avía, Hauéua avíamos, Haueuámo avíades, Haueuáte avían, Hauéuano Futur diré, diró, Dicam, &c. I shall or wil say, &c. dirás, dirái, dirá, dirá, dirémos, dirémo, diréys, diréte, dirán. dirénno. Imperatiue moode. Impe¦ratiue moode. Di tu, Di, or dice tu, Dic, di∣cito, &c. Saie you, &c. díga aquel, dica colui, digámos, diceámo, dezid, dite, dígan. dícano. Note that you shall finde with good Authors Dezi for Dezíd, in the second person plurall number of the Imperatiue. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Díga, Quando Díca, Cum Dicam, &c. when I doe saie, &c. Dígas, Díci, Díga, Díca, Digámos, Diciámo, Digáys, Diciáte, Dígan. Dícano.
Imper¦fect. Como Dixéra, diría, dixésse, Quando Direi, dicéssi, dería, Cum Dicerem, &c. When I did say, &c. Dixéras, dirías, dixesses, Dirésti, dicésti, Dixéra, diría, dixésse, Dirébbe, dicésse, deria. Dixéramos, diríamos, dixéssemos, Dirémmo, dicéssimo, Dixérades, diríades, dixéssedes, Diréste, dicéste, Dixéran, dirían, dixéssen. Dirébbono, dicéssero, derí∣ano.     Quando   Cum   Perf. Como A'ya, dícho. Hábbia, Detto. Dixerim, &c. when I haue said, &c. áyas, Hábbi, áya, Hábbia, Ayámos, Habbiámo, ayáys, Habbiáte, áyan, Habbiano,       Quando   Cum   Pluper¦fect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, dícho. Hauéssi, Detto. Dixissem, &c. When I had said, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, Hauésti, uviéra, or uviésse, Hauésse, uviéramos, or uviéssemos, Hauéssimo, uviérades, or uviéssedes, Hauéste, uviéran, or uviéssen, Hauéssino, First Futur. Como Dixére,   Cum Dixero, &c. when I shall or will say, &c. Dixéres, Dixére,   Dixéremos,   Dixéredes,   Dixéren.         Quando   Cum   second Futur. Como uviére, or avré, dícho. Haueró, Detto. Dixero, &c. When I shall or will say, &c. uviéres, or avras, Hauerái, uviére, or avrá, Hauerá, uviéremos, or avrémos, Hauerémo, uviéredes, or avréys, Haueréte, uviéren, or avrán, Haueránno, Infinitiue moode Present tense. DEZIR,] Dire,] Dicere,] to say, to tell. Preterperfect tense. Avér Dícho,] hauer Detto,] Dixisse,] to haue said or told. Future tense. Avér de Dezir, Douer dire, Dicturum esse,] to say hereafter. Esser per dire, Hauer a dire, Gerunds. Deziéndo,] Dicendo,] Dicendo,] In saying. Participle of the Present tense and Actiue voice. El que Dize,] Dicente,] Dicens,] one telling or saying. Participle of the Preter tense and passiue voice. Dícho,] Detto,] Dictus,] tould, said, spoken. Participle of the Future tense. El que ha or Espera de Dezir, Douendo dire Dicturus,] about to say hereafter. Hauendo a dire, Essendo per dire,
The Compounds of this verbe Dezír, Digo, in all points thorow all Moodes and Tenses declined like the Simple, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preterp. Biendezír, to blesse, yo Biendigo, Biendixe. Maldezír, to curse, yo Maldígo, Maldixe. In like sort these following thus,   Conduzir, to conduct, yo Condulgo, Condúxe. Introduzir, to bring in, yo Introdusgo, Introdúxe. Induzir, to induce, yo Indusgo, Indúxe. Traduzir, to translate, yo Tradusgo, Tradúxe. Produzir, to produce, yo Produzgo, Prodúxe. Salir, to goe forth, yo Salgo, Salí. Regir, to gouerne, yo Rijo, Regí. After the maner of Dezir, is this verbe Salír, to go out or make a sallie, declined, as in the Present tense of the Indicatiue moode yo Sálgo, I go out, tu Sáles, thou goest out, &c. Preter∣imperfect yo Salia, &c. First Preterperfect, Sali. Second Preterperfect, he Salido, &c. Pluperfect. avia Salido. Future, yo Saldré. Imperatiue Sal tu, goe thou out, Sálga aquél, let him goe out, &c. Subiunctiue Present tense, yo Sálga, tu Sálgas, &c. Preterimperfect. Saliéra, Saldria, Saliésse, &c. Preterperfect. aya Salido. Pluperfect. uviéra Salído. Future Saliére. Infinitiue Salir. Gerund Sa∣liéndo. Participle Salido. So Seguir to follow, yo Sígo, Siguía, Sigui. He Seguído, avía Seguído, Seguiré. Imperatiue Sigue tu follow thou, Siga aquél let him follow, Sigámos let vs follow, Seguíd follow yee, Sigan let them follow. Subiunctiue Present, Como yo Siga. Imperfect. Siguiéra, Seguiría, Siguiésse. Pre∣terperfect. áya Seguído. Pluperfect. uviésse Seguído. Future Seguiére, &c. Infinitiue Seguír, Par∣ticiple Seguido. So in all points is Conseguir to obtaine, declined. Sumir, to drench or ouerwhelme, differing from Sumár, to sum vp, thus. In the Present of the Indicatiue all one yo Súmo, Imperfect yo Sumía, I did drench, yo Sumáva, I did summe vp. First Perfect, yo Sumí, I haue drencht, tu Sumíste, aquél Sumió, yo Sumé, I haue summed vp, tu Sumáste, thou hast summed vp, aquél Sumó, he hath summed vp, &c. Of the third and last Coniugation of Verbes Irregular in IR or YR, as YR, in Italian Ire or Audare, in Latin Ire, to Goe. Indicatiue moode.   Spanish. Italian. Latin.   Pres. VOY, VO & VADO, Eo, I goe, thou goest, &c. Vás, Vái, is, &c. Vá, Vá,   Vámos, Andiámo,   Váys, Andáte,   Ván. Vánno.   Imper¦fect. Y'va, Andáua, Ibam, &c. I did goe, &c. ývas, Andáui,   ýva, Andáua,   ývamos, Andauámo,   ývades, Andauáte,   ývan. Andáuano.   First Perfec Fuý, Andái, Iui, &c. I went, &c. Fuiste, Andásti, Fué, Andó, Fuímos, Andámmo, Fuistes, Andáste, Fuéron. Andárano,
second perfect. He, Y'do. Sono, Andato. Iui, &c. I haue gone, &c. as Sei, Andato.     a. é, Andato.     Hémos, Siámo, Andati.     avéys, Sete, Andati.     an, Sono, Andati.     pluper¦fect. Avía, Y'do. Era, Andato. Iueram, &c. I had gone, &c. Avía, Eri, Andato.     Avía, Era, Andato.     Aviámos, Erauámo, Andati.     Aviades, Erauáte, Andati.     Avían, Érano, Andati.     Futur Yré, Anderó, & Andró, Ibo, &c. I shall or will go, &c. Yrás, Anderai, or Andrái,   Yrá, Anderá, or Andrá,     Yrémos, Anderémo, or Andrémo,     Yréys, Anderéte, or Andréte,     Yrán. Anderánno, or Andránno.     Imperatiue moode. Va, & Ve, Vá, Váya, Váda, Vadi, Vámos, Andiámo, ýd, Andáte, Váyan. Vádano, & Vádino. Vete, Vete, Get thee hence, Get thee hence. With Authors this Verbe is sometime written with Y, sometimes with I. Subiunctiue moode.   Spanish.   Italian.   Latin.   Pres. Como Váya, Quando Vada, Cum Eam, &c. When I doe goe, &c. Váyas, Vada & Vadi,   Váya. Vada & Vadi.     Vámos, Andiámo,     Váys, Andiáte,     Váyan. Vádano & Vádino.     Imper¦fect. Como Fuéra, Yría, fuésse, Quando Andassi, Anderéi, Andería, Cum Irem, &c. When I did goe, &c. Fuéras, yrías, fuésses, Andássi, Anderésti, Fuéra, yría, fuésse. Andásse, Anderébbe, Andería. Fuéramos, yríamos, fuéssemos, Andássimo, Anderémmo, Fuérades, yríades, fuéssedes, Andaste, Anderéste, Fuéran, yrían, fuéssen. Andássero, Anderébbono, Anderíano. Perf. Como áya, Y'do. Quando Sia Andato. Cum Iuerim, &c. When I haue gone, &c. áyas, Sij Andato. áya, Sia Andato.     áyamos, Siámo Andati.     ayáys, Siate Andati.     áyan, Siano Andati.    
      Quando       Plu∣perfect. Como uviéra, or uviésse, Y'do. Fóssi, sarei Andato. Cum Iuissem, &c. When I had gone, &c. uviéras, or uviésses, Fossi, sarésti Andato. uviéra, or uviésse, Fosse, sarébbe Andato. uviéramos, or uviéssemos Fóssimo, sarémmo Andati. uviérades, or uviéssedes, Fóste, saréste Andati. uviéran, or uviéssen, Fóssero, sarébbono Andati.       Cum   First future. Como Fuere,   Iuero, &c. When I shall or will be, &c. Fuéres,   Fuére,   Fuéremos,   Fuéredes,   Fuéren.         Quando       second Futur. Como uviére, or avré Y'do. Saró Andato. Cum Iuero, &. When I shall or wil go, &c. uviéres, or avrás, Sarái Andato. uviére, or avrá, Sará Andato. uviéremos, or avrémos, Sarémo Andati. uviéredes, or avréys, Saréte Andati. uviéren, or avrán, Saránno Andati. Infinitiue moode Present tense. Y'R,] Andare, ire,] Ire,] to Goe. Preterperfect tense. Aver ýdo,] Hauer andato,] Iuisse,] to haue Gone. Future tense. Aver de ýr, Douer Andare, Iturum esse,] to Goe hereafter. Hauer ad Andare, Esser per Andare, Gerund. Yéndo,] Andando,] Eundo,] In Going. Supines. Yr,] Andare,] Itum,] to Goe. De ser y do,] Esser Andato,] Itu,] to be Gone. Participle of the Present tense and Actiue voice. El que va,] Andante,] Euns,] one Going. Participle of the Preter tense and Passiue voice. Y'do,] Andato,] Gone.
Of Verbes Impersonals. THe Spanish as the French and Italian Impersonals are of the manner of the Latines, which want the first and second person, and are declined onely in the third person thorow out all Moodes and Tenses, as Indicatiue moode. Present. Ay,   There is. Imperfect. Avía,   There was. 1 Perfect. úyo,   There was. 2 Perfect. á, Avído, There hath beene. Pluperfect. avía, Avído, There had beene. Future. Avrá.   There shall be, &c. Imperat. A'ya,   Let there be. Subiunctiue moode. Present. Aya, When there is. Imperf. uviéra, avría, uviésse, When there is. Perfect. aya Avído, When there hath beene. Pluperfect. uviéra or uviésse Avído, When there had beene. Future. uviére or Avra Avído. When there shall be. Note that the Spanyard almost continually vseth this Impersonall Ay as the French their Il y ya, in English There is, as by obseruing you shall most vsually finde, as also this thirde person Comple thus declined, of Complir the Infinitiue. Indicatiue moode. Present. Cómple, Decet, Oportet, It beseemeth or behooueth. Imperfect. Complía, Decebat, Oportebat, It did beseeme. 1 Perfect. Complió, Decuit, Oportuit, It hath beseemed, &c. 2 Perfect. a Complído, Decuit, Oportuit.   Pluperfect. Avia Complido, Decuerat, Oportuerat.   Future. Complirá, Decebit, Opòrtebit.   And so thorow the third person of the rest. Indicatiue moode. Present. E's, There is. Imperfect. éra, There was. 1 Perfect. fue, There hath beene. 2 Perfect. avía Sido, There hath beene. Pluperf. avía Sido, There had beene. Future. Será, There shall be, &c. And so decline forward, as in the Subiunctiue moode of the verbe Ser, Soy afore going in the third person onely. Indicatiue moode. Present. Es menestér, Oportet, It behooueth. Imperf. era menestér, Oportebat, It did behooue. 1 Perfect. fue menestér, Oportuit, It hath behooued. 2 Perfect. a sido menestér, Oportuit, It hath behooued. Pluperf. avia sido menester, Oportuerat, It had behooued. Future. avra menestér, Oportebit, It will behooue. And so thorow the rest, &c. This verbe Impersonall Plazér declined. Indicatiue moode. Present. Pláze, It pleaseth. Imperf. Plazía, It did please. 1 Perfect. Plúgo, It hath pleased. 2 Perfect. a Plazido, It hath pleased. Pluperf. avia Plazido, It had pleased. Future. Plazerá, It will please. Imper. Pléga, Let it please.
Subiunctiue moode. Present. Pléga, When it doth please. Imperf. Pluguiéra, Pluguiésse, When it did please. Perfect. áya Plazido, When it hath pleased. Pluperf. uviéra Plazído, When it had pleased. Future. Pluguiére, When it will please. To forme an Impersonal of the Passiue voice, you must take this particle Se, and the third person of any verbe thus: which particle so added makes a verbe Impersonall Passiue, as Pres. Se Dize, Si dice or dicesi, Dicitur, It is said or spoken, Imper. Se Dezia, Si dicéua or dicéuasi, &c. Dicebatur, &c. It was said or spoken &c. 1 Perfect Se Dixo,       2 Perfect Se a Dicho,       Plupe. S'avia Dicho,       Futur. Se Dirá.       Of Participles. Participle of the Pre∣senttense.IN Spanish Participles of the present tense and actiue signification are made of the thirde person present tense of the Indicatiue moode of the same Verbe, putting before it the Relatiue, El que, as El que Revéla, reuealing, Latin Reuelans: El que Entiénde, vnderstanding, in Latin Intelligens: El que oye, hearing, in Latin Audiens. Participle of the Pre∣ter tense.Participles of the Preter tense and passiue signification end in ádo, ído, or ydo, which in the first coniugation are formed of the thirde person of the Present tense of the Indicatiue moode, by adding to do, as, Revela, reveládo: Ama, amádo: Castiga, castigádo: and in the seconde and thirde coniugation of the same Present tense, by chaunging e, into ído, and ydo, as Entiende, entendido: Lée, Leýdo: Crée, creýdo: Pide, pedido. But for the Irregular (according to the nature of the worde) without rule, as Factus, fecho, made, Dictus, Dícho, saide, spoken. Participle of the Fu∣ture tense.The Future tense with this Verbe Ha, or Espéra, and the Infinitiue of the Verbe, as El que ha or Espera de revelár, Entendér, or, oyr: Reuelaturus, Intellecturus, Auditurus, about to reueale, about to vnderstande, about to heare. Participle of Present tense and actiue signification. Pres.El que revéla, entiénde, óye, Latin, Reuelans, Intelligens, Audiens, Reuealing, vnderstanding, hearing. Participle of the Preter tense and passiue signification. Preter.Reveládo, Entendído, oýdo, Latin Reuelatus, Intellectus, Auditus, Reuealed, vn∣derstood, heard. Participle of the Future tense. Future.El que ha or espéra de Revelár, Entendér, oýr, Latin Reuelaturus, Intellecturus, Audi∣turus, to reueale heereafter, to vnderstand hereafter, to heare heereafter. Of Aduerbes. I Haue handled before the fower parts of speech declined. Now come we to the other fower vndeclined, called Indeclinable, beginning first with the Aduerbes, whereof some in the Spanish toong are formed of Nownes of the Feminine gen∣der in a,Aduerbes formed of Nounes of the Femi∣nine gender in a. Nota. as are almost all the Aduerbes of Qualitie, as Alta, high; Altaménte, highlie; Graciosa, graciosaménte, graciouslie; Luenga, luengaménte; in Latin Diu, long: which manner of forming the Italian likewise obserueth, as Gratiosamente, Longamente, Sauiamente, so doth the French, making the worde to ende in Ment, as Gratieusement, Longuement, Saggement. Wherefore I thinke good to set downe the Aduerbes following and the rest: first, the Spanish, then Italian, after French, next Latin, and last English: euerie one separated one from another with this crooked line thus,] Aduerbes some be
of Qualitie. Fielménte,] Fidelmente,] Fidelement,] Fideliter,] Faithfully. Buénamente, or bien] Bene,] Bien,] Bene,] Well. Malaménte, or mal,] Male,] Mauaisement,] Male,] Ill. De buéna gana] Di buona voglia, Volontieri volontieremente, Volutiers, de bon cueur,] Libenter] Willingly. of Quanti∣tie. Mucho,] Molto,] Beaucoup,] Multum vel Multo] Much. Poco,] Poco,] Peu,] Parum vel Paululum,] Little. Múcho mas,] Via piu,] Beaucoup plus,] Multo magis,] Much more. Mas,] Piu,] Plus,] Magis,] More. Por de mas,] Troppo,] Trop,] Nimis] to Much. Demasiádo,] Troppo] Trop,] Nimis,] to Much. of Time. Oy,] Hóggi,] Auiourd'huy,] Hodie,] To daie. Ayér,] Heri ieri,] Hier,] Heri,] Yesterdaie. Mañána,] Domani,] Demain,] Cras,] To morrowe. Antiér,] Antieri,] Deuant hier,] Pridie,] The other day. El dia siguíente,] Il seguente giorno,] Le lendemain,] Postridie,] The next daie after to morrowe. Mucho ha,] Molto fa,] Deja long temps,] Iamdiu,] Long since. Poco ha,] Poco fa,] Nagueres,] Iamdudem,] A little since. Agóra,] or, ora,] acest heure,] Iamiam,] Euen now. Antes] Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante] Before. Luégo,] Presto, Tosto,] Soudainement,] Illico, statim,] Foorthwith, by and by. Núnca,] Giamai,] Iamais,] Nunquam,] Neuer. Quando,] Quando,] Quand,] Quando,] When. Siémpre,] Sempre] Tousjours,] Semper,] Alwaies. Entónces,] Al hora,] Donques,] Tunc,] Then. Miéntras,] Mentre] Cependant,] Interim,] In the meane while. Súbito,] Subito,] Sodainement,] Subito,] Sodainly. Muchas vezes,] Molte volte, Molte fiate,] Fort souent,] Saepe] Verie often. Pocas vezés,] Rade volte,] Peu souent,] Raro,] Seldome. Algunas vezes,] Qual che volte, Qual che fiate, Quelquefois,] Aliquando,] Somtimes. of Place. A QVI',] Qui, quia, ci,] Icy,] Hîc, huc,] Heere. Aý, alli, alla,] Iui, la, cola, quiui,] La, audela,] Illic,] There. A Donde,] Doue, oue,] Ou,] Vbi, quo,] whither, where. De Donde,] Onde, donde,] Dont, d'ou,] Vnde,] from whence. Acá,] Di qua,] Par icy,] Hac,] this way. Acullá,] Cola per costa,] Par dela,] Istac istuc,] that way. De aquí,] De qui, Quinci,] D'icy,] Hinc,] from hence. De allí, de allá,] Indi, di la, Quindi,] Dela,] Illinc,] from hence. Dentro,] Dentro, entro,] Dedans,] Intus,] within. Fuéra,] Fuori, di fuori,] Hors, de hors,] Foris, foras,] without. Delánte,] Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante,] Before. Atrás,] Dietro,] Derrier,] Post,] Behinde. A parte,] De banda,] al'escart,] Separatim, scorsum,] aside, a part, by it selfe. Arríba,] Sopra, disopra, In su, suso,] Enhaut,] Sursum,] Aboue. Abáxo,] In giu, giuso, sotto, di sotto,] En bas,] Deorsum,] Beneath. Cerca,] Intorno, dattorno,] Enuiron,] Circiter,] About, nigh vnto, almost. Cábe, Iunto,] Apresso, dauicino,] Prest, aupres,] Prope,] Neere vnto. Léxos,] Lontano, di lunghi,] Loin,] Procul,] Far off. Encíma,] Su, sopra,] Sur, dessus,] Super,] Vpon. So,] Sotto, disotto,] Dessoubs,] Subter,] Vnder. of Affirming SI, as Si Senor,] Si, as Signore Si,] Ouy, as ouy Mounsieur,] Ita, ita Domine, Yea, yea sir. Ciérto, ciertaménte,] Certo, certamente,] Certes,] Certè, certò,] Truely. En verdád, verdaderaménte,] In verita, di vero, in vero,] Vrayement, en verite, certaine∣ment,] Verè,] Truely, in truth, verily. Tambien,] Si bene, etiandio, ancor, anche,] Si bien, ainsi, aussi,] Etiam, quoque,] as∣well. Antes,] Piu tosto,] Plustost,] Potius,] Rather.
of Denying NO,] Non, no, ne,] Non, neny, pas, point,] Non, haud, minime,] Not. Náda, No nada,] Niente, nulla,] Rien,] Nihil,] Nothing, nothing at all. Ni, Tam poco,] Ne,] Ni, ne,] Neque,] Neither. of numbring VNAVEZ,] Vna bolta, Vna fiata,] Vne fois,] Semel,] Once. Dos vezes,] Due volte, Due fiate,] Deuxfois,] Bis,] Twise. Tres vezes,] Tre volte, tre fiate,] Troifois,] Ter,] Chrise, &c. as in the Pronoune before of Numbers. Muchas vezes,] Spesso volte, molte fiate,] Beaucoup de fois,] Saepe,] Oftentimes. Pocas vézes,] Rade volte,] Rarement,] Raro,] Seldome. of Shewing HEAQVI,] Ecco,] Voicy, voila,] Ecce,] Behold. of Encou∣raging. EA, EA Pues,] Su, corrággio,] Sus, courage,] Age, perge,] Goe to then. of encreasing MAS,] Piu,] Plus,] Plus,] More. Mucho mas,] Molto Piu, molto assai,] Beacoup plus,] Multo magis,] Much more. De masiádo,] Troppo, di souerchio,] Trop,] Nimium,] Too much. of Demini∣shing. ME'NOS,] Meno,] Moins,] Paulo minus,] Lesse. Poco a Poco,] Poco, a Poco,] Peu a Peu,] Paulatim,] By little and little. Passo,] Pian, piano,] Tout bellement, Petit a petit,] Sensim,] Soft and faire. of wishing. OXALA,] O Dio vaglia, Dio volesse,] Pleust a Dieu,] Vtinam,] would to God, I pray God. O Si,] O se, O si,] Pleust a Dieu que,] Vtinam,] would to God, I pray God. of Asking. PORQVE?] Perche?] Pourquoy?] Quare?] Why? Wherefore? Que?] Che?] Quoy?] Quid?] What? Donde?] Oue?] Ou,] Vbi, quo,] Where. Adonde,] Doue,] Ou,] Quo,] Whether. De Donde,] Onde,] D'ou, dont,] Vnde,] From whence. Quando?] Quando?] Quand?] Quando?] When. of doubting. QVIçA',] Forse, a caso,] Fortuitement,] Fortassis,] Perhaps. Porventura,] Perauentura,] Parauenture,] Fortasse,] Peraduenture, Perhaps. of Order. DESPVE'S,] Poi, dipoi, Dapoi, doppo,] A pres, depuis,] Post,] After. Allénde de ésto,] Oltra a cio, oltra a questo,] Ontre ce, d'aduantage,] Praeterea,] Fur∣thermore. Finalménte,] Alla fine,] En fin, Finablement,] Tandem,] At length. of Likenes. CO'MO,] Comme,] Comme,] Sicut, velut,] As. Assi,] Cosi,] Ainsi,] Ita, sic,] So. of Chance. A CASO, Por dicho,] A caso,] Fortuitement,] Fortuito,] By chance, by hap. of Compa∣rison. MAS,] Piu,] Plus,] Plus,] More. Ménos,] Meno,] Moins,] Minus,] Lesse. Mucho mas,] Vta piu, Assai piu,] Beaucoup, d'auantage,] Multo magis,] Much more. Mucho ménos,] Molto meno,] Beaucoup moins,] Multo minus,] Much lesse. Mejór,] Megliore,] Mellieur,] Melius,] Better. Peór,] Peggiore,] Pis,] Peior,] worse. Todo del mundo,] Piu del mondo,] Tout le mond,] Maximé,] Chifely. Gathering togither. IV'NTO, Iuntaménte,] Insieme,] Ensemble,] Simul,] Togither. Seuering. A PARTE,] Seperatamente,] Al'escart,] Seperatim, seorsim,] A sunder Chosing MAS Aýna,] Piu tosto,] Plustost,] Potius,] Rather. Mucho mas,] Molto meglio,] Beaucoup mieux,] Potius,] much Rather. Contrariety TODA véz,] Tutta via,] Toutefois,] Tamen,] Notwithstanding. Aúnque,] Come, che, Etiandio che, Anchor che,] Encore,] Etiamsi,] Although.
withdra∣wing. ALOMénos,] Alméno, almánco,] Au moins,] At the least. Sólo,] Solo,] Seul,] Solúm,] Onely. Porque,] Pur, accioche, che,] Pourceque,] Propterea,] For that. Of a Coniunction. A Coniunction is that which knitteth and ioineth parts of speech togither, and is with the Spaniard almost in the same manner as the Latin, sauing they haue not so many, but yet some are of coupling as Y, and E,] e,] et] et, And. Como,] Comme] Comme,] Vt,] As. Tambien,] Ancor, Ancho, Etiandio,] Si bien, ainsi, aussi,] Etìam, Quoque,] Also. Nota.Note that E properly is not a Spanish Coniunction, but onely vsed for the Y, when the worde following beginneth with a Y, bicause two Y Y, shoulde not come togither, La ley e la Justicia, and not la ley y la Justicia, but otherwise alwaies vse Y. of Disioyn∣ing. Ni] Ne,] Ne,] Nec, Neque,] Neither. O,] O, ouero,] Ou,] Aut, Ve, Vel, Seu, Siue] Either. of Causing. PORQVE,] Accioche, Percioche,] Pourceque] Propterea quod,] For that, wherfore. of Conditio∣ning. SI,] Se,] Si,] Si,] If. Dado que,] Se cosi,] Si aussi,] Si ita,] If so. of Excep∣ting. SINO,] Se non] Si non,] Nis,] Except, if not. Mas,] Ma,] Mais,] Quin,] But. Otraménte,] Altramente,] Autrement,] Alioquin,] Otherwise. of Dimini∣shing. ALOMENOS,] Alméno, Almanco,] Au moins,] Saltem,] At least. AVNQVE,] Ancorche, Quantunche, Benche, Etiandio, Encore,] Etsi quamquam, Quamuis, Although. TODA via,] Tutta via, Tutta volta, Nondimeno, Nondimanco, Nientideméno, Toutefois,] Tamen, esto,] Notwithstan∣ding. A Preposition. Preposition.THe Spanish hath the same vse of Prepositions as the Latins haue, some∣times by composition with another worde, as Bolvér, to turne; Rebolvér, to ouerturne: Hazér, to do, Rehazér, to renewe, &c. Sometime by apposition (as the Latins doe) by putting the Preposition before the Noune, as Ala corte, to the court: Por el Rey, for the king: En la yglésia, in the church. Nota.Note that this Preposition De, or Des, alwaies makes the worde that it is ioyned with, of a quite contrary signification, as Hazér, to do: Deshazér, to vndoe: Atár, to tie or bind: Desatar, to vntíe: Cansado, wearie: Descansado, resting: Dicha, happines: Desdicha, vnhappines, misfortune: And so in the French, Faire, to do: Desfaire, to vndo: Lier, to binde, Deslier, to vnbinde, &c. Prepositions of the Spanish thus, A,] A,] Ad,] Ad,] To, as A fe, a la fe,] A fede, A fe,] Par ma foy,] Per fidem,] By my troth. De,] Di, de da,] De, du,] De,] Of or from, as De la corte,] De la corte,] Du palais,] From the court. Para,] Per,] Pour,] Propter,] For. as Para mi,] Per me,] Pour moy,] Propter me.] For me. Por,] Per,] Par,] Per,] For, by or thorow. as Por mi vida,] Por mia vita,] Par ma vie,] Per vitam,] By my life.
Contra,] Contra, Incontra,] Contre] Contra,] Against. Contra el estado,] Contra il stato,] Contre l'estat,] Contra statum, Against the estate. CABE] Presso, Appresso,] Prest, aupres,] Prope,] Neere. as Cabe la ciudád] Appresso la citta,] Apres de la citte,] Prope vrbem,] Neere the citie. FRONTERO,] Rimpetto, Dirimpetto, Vis a vis,] E regione,] Ouer against. HASTA,] Fino, Sino, Infino, Insino, Iusques,] Vsque,] Vntill. HA'ZIA,] Ver, verso,] Enuers,] Versus,] Towards. SOBRE,] Sopra, Disopra, In su, Sur, Sus, Super,] Vpon. ENCI'MA,] In il pu alto] En la somette,] In vertice,] Vpon the top. SO,] Sotto, disotto, Giu,] De soubs,] Subter,] Vnder. ENTRE,] Fra, Infra,] Entre,] Inter,] Betweene. ATRAS,] Dietro,] Derrier,] Pone,] Behinde. ADELANTE,] Dinanzi, Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante,] Before. Cerca, A cerca,] Circa, Intorno, Attorno,] Enuiron,] Circum, Circa,] About. Fuera,] Fuori,] Hors, dehors,] Foris, Foras,] Without dores. Dentro,] Dentro,] Dans, dedans,] Intus,] Within. Con,] Con,] Auec,] Cum,] With. Sin,] Senza,] Sans,] Sine,] Without. Desde,] From or since, as Desde la muerte, &c. From, or since the death, &c. These following are vsed with the Preposition De, with them, as A quende de la casa,] Di qua de la casa,] Par deçá de la maison,] Ex hac parte domus,] On this side the house. Allende,] Di la,] Par de la,] Ex altera parte,] On the other side. Al deredór, or Entorno,] Intorno, Attorno,] Enuiron,] Circum, Circa,] About. Of an Interiection. AN Interiection declareth a sudden passion of the minde. The Spaniards vse not so often Interiections or sudden passions of the minde; neither in their speech nor writing, as doth the French, or Italian, and yet they haue these follo∣wing:Mirth or Reioycing. Laughing. Some be of O Bueno,] Oh bene,] He bien, he dea,] Euax, vah,] O well. Hi, hi, hi, or Ha, ha, ha.] Ah, ah,] Ah, eh,] Ha, ha, he,] Ha, ha, he. wondring.O Iesus, or Vala me Dios, O vh, vh,] Oh, oh,] Pape,] O Iesus good Lord helpe me. Grieuing.AY, ay,] Aih, ah, ahime,] Las, ols, helas, ach,] Heu, hei,] Alas, out alas. Of Syntaxis. Definition of Synta∣xis.SYntaxis is a due coupling togither of Speech according to the right Rules of Grammar, which the best Authors, both Ancient and Moderne haue still vsed in writing and speaking. Syntaxis, of the Greeke word , which is Con, and , ordino, quasi, coordinatio, which is construction or agreement. But for that the Spanish (as the Italian and French) being deriued from the Latin (as before said, and still keepeth as great affinitie as siluer and tinne, both proceeding (as Alchimistes saie) from Quicksiluer, or as no one can gainsay from the mother earth, or as a different Plant grafted on a strange stocke or tree: It must necessarily be ordered by many Rules of the Latin, which here to repeate were lost labour and in vaine, as hath seemed to the most part of all those learned, that of any these vulgar languages haue written: Finishing their Grammars at the ende of the eight parts of speech and leauing this quite out: which order I haue obser∣ued, referring the Latin Reader to the Rules of the Latin Syntaxis for this part of Grammar, and other to due obseruation in reading good Authors: wishing in∣crease to both, to their owne contents, and my selfe hereby to haue furthered both, to mine owne chiefe desire. FINIS.
I Haue for the Learners vse desirous of the tongue, read ouer diuers Authors, ga∣thering out of them the hard phrases and manner of speech, the vncouth sayings, together with some prouerbes, as they fall in their places (which are the difficul∣tie of the tongue) and explained them in English, commonly setting downe first the English word for word as the Spanish is, then this i. for Latin, id est, that is to say, for the sense and meaning, then the line and the leafe of the booke, that by these the Learner may the better iudge of their like when he meeteth with them. For the leafe I set downe fol. and a. signifieth the first side of the leafe, and b. the second, lin. signifi∣eth what line, and the figure after fol. telleth the leafe, and lin. what line it is. If you finde pag. it is to finde what page of the booke. If you see 1. part. it is for the first vo∣lume or part of the booke, and 2. part. for the second, &c. Words, Phrases, Sentences and Prouerbes out of DIANA of Monte Mayor in 16. printed at Antwerpe 1580. Los de mas. fol. 3. b. lin. 14. The rest. Las hóras que se sobrávan. fol. 4. b. lin. 2. The howers which remained, or The rest of the howers. Tomándo a vézes. fol. 4. b. lin. 6. Taking by fits or turnes. Passár por el piensamiénto. fol. 4. b. lin. 14. and 7. a. lin. 25. and 26. b. 8. To enter into the minde or thought. Tam póco le dáva péna. fol. 4. b. lin. 17. Neither did it grieue or trouble him. A vuestro sálvo. fol. 6. b. lin. 17. Your selfe being safe, or without your owne danger. Como los uviste a las mános? fol. 10. b. lin. 5. How came they to your hands? or how came you by them? Por tu vída. fol. 10. b. lin. 21. By thy life, i. I pray thee hartily. Tomár de córo. fol. 10. b. lin. 23. To take by quire, i. To haue by memorie, hart, or with out booke. Favorescér me a mi. fol. 11. b. lin. 5. and Me moviéra a mi. fol. 2. a. lin. 8. To fauour me and did moue me. Here the Spanish vseth two accusatiue cases after the verbe, both of the person: and not as the Latin, one of the person and another of the thing. Despues que te fuíste. fol. 11. b. lin. 21. After thou wentest. Yo fuý, tu tuste, aquél fué, nos fuýmos, fuýstes, fuéron. I went, thou wentest, he went, we went, ye went, they went. This Fuy, fuýste, commeth of the Infinitiue moode ýr, to goe, and the very same Fuy, fuíste, fue, &c. commeth of the Infinitiue moode Sér, to be: but looke backe in the Grammar and compare the two verbes together. De ay a un póco. fol. 11. b. lin. 28. A prettie while after. Que es del? fol. 12. a. lin. 20. Where is he? what is become of him? Quando se póne el Sol. fol. 13. a. lin. 8. When the sunne sets. Fuéra de mi, fuéra de ti, fuéra de si. fol. 13. b. lin. 14. Besides my selfe, besides thy selfe, besides himselfe, or Out of my wit, out of thy wit, out of his wit. Tén púnto. fol. 13. b. lin. 24. Stay, hold, stop, Giue me leaue a little. Le va bien, le va mal. fol. 15, a. lin. 7. It goes well with him, it goes ill with him. He is well, he is ill. Múcho a. A good while since. Mucho avía, mucho úvo, mucho avrá. fol. 17. a. lin. 4. It was a good while agoe, it hath been a good while since, it shall or will be long agoe. Póco ha or Póco fa. A little while agoe, or a little since. Poco avía, Poco úvo, Poco avrá. It was a little since, it shall or will be but a little while agoe. Muchos dias acá, Pocos dias acá. fol. 17. a. lin. 7. Many daies since, a few daies since. Mucho tiempo há, Poco tiempo há. A good while agoe, a little while agoe. Grandes dias há, Pocos dias há. A great while agoe, a few daies past. Cosa en la vida. fol. 17. a. lin. 12. Any thing in the world. Hazér cáso. fol. 17. b. lin. 21. To esteeme of, to make matter of. Muchos ay, or Ay muchos. fol. 20. a. lin. 6. There are many. Que os téngo dicho. fol. 20. a. lin. 29. Which I haue told you. Quíso mi ventura. pag. 21. a. lin. 11. My fortune would haue it so. Que de oro no les llevára ventája. fol. 21. a. lin. 20. verbatim. That the vantage of golde did not
carrie it away from them. i. Gold did not exceede them in brightnes. Y a l mo ag. 21. b. lin. 28. verbatim. To goe to ones hand. i. To stop, to stay, to let or to hin∣der one from doing any thing. Desdichado de mi. fol. 22. b. lin. 6. verbatim. Wretched of me. i. wretch that I am, vnhappie crea∣ture I, woe is me, wretch that I am. No te haze mucho al cáso. fol. 22 b. lin. 11. It makes not much matter to thee, it concernes thee not much. De véras. fol. 22. b. lin 20. In earnest. De bulas fol. 22. b. lin. 20. In test. Toda via. fol. 23. a. lin. 2. Notwithstanding. Hazér de industria. fol. 23. a lin. 22. To doe of set purpose. Plgue a Dios fol. 23. b. lin. 5. I would to God. De y a ocho dias. fol. 24 b. lin. 6. Eight daies hence. No y cosa en la vida. fol. 25. a. lin. 14. There is nothing in the world. Assi pso per óbra. fol. 26. b. lin. 11. So he did put it in practise. Vaya sopiros a cuéntos. fol. 10. a. lin. 21. Let sighes goe by millions. Y quiéa Dios que, &c. fol. 40 b. lin. 4. And would to God that, &c. Ambos a dos fol. 46. b. lin. 5. Both. Fuéra de si. fol. 47. b. lin. 14. Besides himselfe, out of his wits. Venir a las mános. fol. 47. b. lin. 16. to come to blowes or fight. Como en ello les fuera la vida. fol. 48. a. lin. 11. As if thereon his life lay. A bueltas della. fol. 48. b. lin. 13. Togither therewith. Malya a aquel. fol. 49. a. lin. 13. Woe be vnto him. Poner el negócio a las manos. fol. 50. b. lin. 24. To bring the matter to blowes or fight. Que en otra cosa no entendia sino en, &c. fol. 51. b. lin. 24. verbatim. Which in any other matter vnderstoode not, i. which thought on nothing els but, &c. Se dexó dormir. fol. 52. a. lin. 25. verbatim. Let himselfe or herselfe sleepe, i. fell asleepe. No se qual me créa. fol. 53. b. lin. 19. I know not which I may beleeue. De vio ser. fol. 53. b. lin. 25. verbatim. It ought to be, i. it could not be otherwise. Básta lo hécho. fol. 54. a. lin. 16. It sufficeth that it is done. Basta lo dicho, it is enough that is once spoken of, or it needs no more words. Como súpo callár. fol. 54. a. lin. 19. How shee knew to holde her toong, how well she could be mute, and not answere a word. Ni por pensamiénto en ella. fol. 54. b. lin. 13. By no meanes. Querérme mas que a si. fol 55. b. lin. 1. To loue me more or better then himselfe, or herselfe. No es de cauallero fol. 55. b. lin. 26. It is not the part of a Gentleman. Tenér en mucho, Tenér en poco. fol. 56. a. lin. 2. To esteeme much, or to set much by, to set lit∣tle by or esteeme little. Y quien se lo dixo, Se lo súpo encarescér de manera. fol. 56. a. lin. 25. And he that told it, could tell how to augment and amplifie it in such sort. Assi pase por obra. fol 56. b. lin. 24. So I put it in practise, or set it a worke. Assi me fue derécha a la córte. fol. 57. a. lin. 3. And so I went straight to the court. Coss no poo gustósas de oýr. fol. 57. a. lin. 5. verbatim. Things not little tastefull to heare, i. Things not a little delightfull to heare. En la boz, or en la hábla le conoscý. fol. 57. a. lin. 25. I knew him by his voice of speech. La música dva a otra no a mi. fol. 58. a. lin. 20. The musicke plaied to another and not to me. Le déva mucho. fol. 61. a. lin. 9. verbatim. Oweth him much, i. he is much beholding to him. E'sta velláca de auséncia desháze las cosas. fol. 61. a. lin. 15. This rascals absence doth vndo all. No avrá ningúna que no se piérde por vos. fol. 61. b. lin. 3. There will be none which is not lost in loue for you, i. which will not be readie to runne madde for you. Moça boníta, or bonica. fol. 61. b. lin. 5. A good wench, a fine trull, maide or girle. Dár léxos de la verdád. fol. 62. b. lin. 13. to be wide or farre off from the truth. Parescér me hýa, or a. fol. 63. a. lin. 12. It did seeme vnto me. This manner of speech in Spa∣nish is by the figure Epenthesis, which is the putting in of a letter or syllable in the middle of a word, as in this Parescér me hýa, for Parecería me, It did seeme to me. Dár vna palmáda. fol. 63. a. lin. 13. To giue ones selfe a pat or blow on the breast, or els where in signe of wondring. Grangeár favóres. fol. 66. b. lin. 5. To hoord vp fauours. Perdido per amores, fol. 67. a. lin. 22. Lost for loue, madde in loue. Si fuésse servído. fol. 68. a. lin. 9. If he pleased, or liked well of. Vn desmáyo con que avia dado el álma. fol. 68. a. lin. 27. A swouning or traunce, with which he had giuen vp the ghost. Pluguiéra a Dios. fol. 68. b. lin. 12. Would to God. Llegat al álma, fol. 69. a. lin. 7. To enter into the soule, to greeue at hart.
Tomó la mano de respondélle. fol. 69. a. lin. 9. Tooke vpon her to answere her, or stoode vp be∣fore the companie to answere her. Pusiéron la mésa. fol. 71. a. lin. 15. They couered the table. El sol se pone. fol. 72. a. lin. 5. The sun was set. Que áya sido parte. fol. 74. a. 20. Which hath beene the cause. E hár lo en burlas. fol. 76. a. lin. 5. verbatim. To cast it off in iesting, i. To iest it out. A tódos hazia ventája. fol. 76. a. lin. 16. He did excell all, he did exceede or ouerpasse all. Rogándo muy encarescidaménte. fol. 76. b. lin. 8. Requesting very earnestly, very instantly. Fulána tiene buen áyre, Fuláno, es çapateadór. fol. 79. a. lin. 23. & 24. Such a one hath a good grace or countenance, such a one is dauncer of a gigge. Puesto en tanta obligación. fol. 80. a. lin. 20. Being so much beholding or bound. Echáda a la sombra, Echádo a la cáma. fol. 82. b. lin. 2. Laide in the shadowe, cast on the bed. Tuviésse por bien. fol. 82. b. lin. 8. verbatim. Did holde for good, i. Thought well of, or tooke in good part. Mal áya amór, su arco y su saéta. fol. 83. a. lin. 11. The diuell take Loue, his bowe and his shaft. Passallos hiá, or ía. fol. 83. b. lin. 7. I woulde passe them ouer. This speech by the figure Epen∣thesis, which is a putting betweene of a letter or syllable in the middest of a worde, as Passallos hia, for Passaria los, I woulde passe them ouer. Also in Passallos another figure called Antistoichon, which is a writing one letter for another, by changing R of the Infinitiue moode into L, a thing most vsuall in the Spanish, as heere Passallos for Passár los, so Hablállos, for Hablarlos, to speake vnto them: Vellos, for Ver los, to see them: Dezillos, for Dezirlos, to tell them: Oylles, or Oyllos or Oyr les, or los, to heare them. Aviendo ydo quanto média legua, fol. 89. a. lin 21. Hauing gone about halfe a league. Se fue su passo a pásso. fol. 84. a. lin. 6. Went very soft and leisurely. Los demas de los dias. fol. 86. b. lin. 2. The rest of the daies. Yen las manos sendos vasos héchos a la Romána. fol. 90. b. lin. 3. And in their hands each one a seuerall vessell made after the Romane fashion. Mesas puestas. fol. 91. a. lin. 21. Tables couered or laide. Piédras engastadas. fol. 91. b. lin. 1. Stones enchaced. Alçár, or quitár la mésa. fol. 91. b. lin 4. To take vp the table. Vistiéron a Felismena, vna ropa y basquiña de fina grána, recamádas de oro de canutillo, y aljó∣far, vn cuéra, y mangas de tela de plata. fol. 94. a. lin. 5. They apparelled Felismena with a gowne and peticote of fine scarlet colour imbrodered with imbost or raisd golde and pearle, a cassocke and sleeues of cloth of siluer. Escofión de redezílla. fol. 94. a. lin. 14. A coife of net worke. Las parédes eran labrádas de obra Mosáyca. fol. 94. b. lin. 16. The wals were wrote Iewish worke or Turkey worke without images. Duarte. fol. 98. b. lin. 19. Edward. Mirálde bien. fol. 101. a. lin. 1. Behold him well, by the figure Metathesis, which is a changing places of letters, for Mirádle very common in the Spanish in the Imperatiue moode the seconde person plurall number, as Leeldo for Leed lo, Reade yee it: Dezildo, for Dezid lo, Tell him that: or Dezildes for Dezid les, Tell them: so Miralda for Mirád la, Behold her: Miráldas, for Mirád las, Behold them. fol. 103. a. lin. 3. O'jos verdes y rasgádos. fol. 103. a. lin. 28. Faire and great eies. Desde el bórea al austro. fol. 104. a. lin. 22. From the north to the south. En quanto se hazía hora de cenár se fuéron a vna alaméda. fol. 105. a. lin. 16. And while supper time came they went to a groue of poplars. Mediante la quel fol. 109. a. lin. 24. By meanes whereof. Gentil hombre y bien talládo. fol. 110. a. lin. 13. A proper man and well shaped, and not for as English men call gentleman. Cavallo rúcio rodádo. fol. 110. a. lin. 15. A horse dapple graie. Traýa en la cinta vn alfánje. fol. 110. a. lin. 19. He caried at his girdle a Turkie sword. Traýa en el bráço ysquierdò. fol. 110. a. lin. 24. He caried on his left arme. Bolvér sobre si. fol. 110. b. lin. 21. To come to ones selfe as out of a traunce, astonishment or the like. Tocár un cuerno. fol. 111. a. lin. 16. verbatim. To touch. i. To winde a horne. Llevárel camíno de los companéros. fol. 111. a. lin. 19. verbatim. To carrie the way of his fel∣lowes. i. To take the same way, to be serued with the same sauce, to drinke of the same cup. Túvo lo en mucho. fol. 113. a. lin 9. He much esteemed it. De ay algunos dias. fol. 116. a. lin. 18. From hence a few daies. Tenérme campo. fol. 119. a. lin. 5. verbatim. To hold me field. i. To be able to stand with me or fight with me. Hazér campo. verbatim. To make field. i. To combat, to fight. No se lo que hará de mi. fol. 119. a. lin. 18. I know not what shall become of me.
Tenéd entendido. fol. 126. b. lin. 2. verbatim. Hold vnderstood. i. Vnderstand. Ambas a dos. fol. 126. b. lin. 27. Both. Pléga a Dios fol. 130. b. lin. 24. I would to God. Por lo poco que se dáva por el. fol. 133. a. lin. 23. For the little esteeme he made of him. No se me da náda. verbatim. It giues nothing to me. i. I care not. Avrá como cinco o seys méses. fol. 147. a. lin. 3. It shall be some fiue or sixe monethes. Cosa en que tan poco te ýva. fol. 149. a. lin. 19. A thing which so little did import thee. Me a dádo de mano. fol. 150. a. lin. 26. He hath taken his leaue of me. Fálda de unas montañas fol. 157. b. lin. 13. verbatim. the skirt. i. The side or hanging of an hill. Vino a dár en un bosque muy grande, de verdes alísos y azebúches assaz popládo. fol. 158. a. lin. 2. He came to light into a wood very great, sufficiently stored with greene fallowes and wilde oliues. Y de súbito fue a dár con los ojos en una muy hermosa ciudád, que desde de lo alto de una sierra, que de frente estáva. fol. 158. a. lin. 6. And vpon a sudden he espied a faire citie from the top of a moun∣taine, which was right against them. Se fué su passo a passo pot una senda que júnto a l rio ýva házia la parte. fol. 158. b. lin. 6. He went faire and soft in a path which lead neere the riuer toward that part, &c. Sobre las cabeças, tenían sendas guirnaldas de verde yedra. fol. 158. b. lin. 18. Vpon their heads they had each of them seuerall garlands of greene iuie. Con cierto desdén y un dár de mano. fol. 160. a. lin. 12. With a certaine disdaine and putting from with the hand. Dize pues que su mugér es fináda que me case con el? fol. 160. a. lin. 24. Saith he, seeing that his wife is dead, that I marrie with him? Paréd en médio bivír. fol. 190. b. lin. 28. To liue at the next wall, but one wall betweene. Parár mientes. fol. 193. a, lin. 21. To marke, to heede. Plazér a cabádo. fol. 226. a. lin. 12. Complete or full ioy or pleasure quite ended. Diana de Monte Mayor 2. part. Encaminár obras a personas de lustre. fol. 2. a. lin. 5. To direct workes to persons of fame. Si Dios fuére servido. fol. 2. b. lin. 7. verbatim. If God shall be serued. i. If it shall please God. De mi grádo jamas entendiéra sino en solo loáros. fol. 3. a. lin. 7. By my good will I would neuer do any thing else but praise you. Vaya fura oda arrogáncia fol. 3. b. lin. 12. All pride set aside. Como a cada uno complia. fol. 7. a. lin. 2. As was meete for euery one. No les comple ýrse. fol. 7. b. lin. 20. It is not meete they goe. Con el si del matrimónio. fol. 8. a. lin. 26. With the answering to the minister yea at the mariage. Vámonos fol. 10. a. lin. 10. Let vs goe, for Vamos nos. Dexémonos. fol. 19. a. lin. 22. Let vs leaue, for Dexémos nos. Amatár la sed. fol. 10. a. lin. 20. To quench thirst. Por una cuésta abaxo. fol. 11. b. lin. 11. Downehill. A vézes. fol. 21. a. lin. 1. By turnes, by fits. O vala me Dios. fol. 22. a. lin. 6. God helpe me. Pluguiéra a Dios. fol. 22. a. lin. 17. I would to God. Dado que fol. 22. b. lin. 21. Grant that, suppose that. Mercéd señ aláda. fol. 28. b. lin. 26. A notable curtesie. El traydór del Cupido fol. 36. b. lin. penultima. The traitor Cupide. Tenér en mucho fol. 38. b. lin. 1. To esteeme much of. Wordes, Phrases, Sentences and Prouerbes out of Celestina in 8. printed at Antwerpe En la oficina Plantiniana Anno 1595. De mas. pag. 1. lin. 5. Ouer and aboue, besides, moreouer. Recebído tienen. pag. 3. lin. 6. verbatim. They hold receiued. i. They haue receiued. Tenér la firma del autor. pag. 4. lin. 21. To haue the authors name to it. Leeldo. pag. 8. lin. 9. Read it, by the figure Metathesis, which is a changing of places of letters, very common in the Spanish in the seconde person plurall of the Imperatiue moode, as this Leeldo for Leed lo, as Castigaldo, chastise him, for Castigad lo, Pedilde, require of him, for Pedid le, Oylde, heare him, for oyd le. A tódo corrér devéis de huír. pag. 10. lin. 11. verbatim. With all running away you ought to auoide. i. With all haste possible to run or shun.
En quien quépa esta differénçia. pag. 17. lin. 14. In whom may be contained or found this dif∣ference. Conséja tras de fuego. pag. 13. lin. 3. A tale by the fires side, an old wiues tale. Ofrecido tenér. pag. 22. lin. 13. verbatim. To hold offered. i. To haue offered. Vete, vete de ay. pag. 23. lin. 18. Get thee hence, get thee hence. Abatióse el girafalte. pag. 23. lin. 28. The Gerfaulcon bated. Los Diablos te gánen. pag. 24. lin. 1. The Deuill take thee. Que cosa es? pag. 24. lin. 20. What is the matter? Dexárle he? pag. 25. lin. 2. Shall I leaue him? Matárse ha. pag. 25. lin. 3. He is to kill himselfe, or he will kill himselfe. Desbráve, Madúre. pag. 25. lin. 15. Let him pacifie or calme himselfe, let him ripen or come to a head. Si delante me tiéne. pag. 25. lin. 22. If he haue me before him. Mudár el pelo malo. pag. 25. lin. 29. To change ill fortune. Ves lo aquí. pag. 26. lin. 15. See it here. De la aparéncia a la existéncia. pag. 27. lin. 14. From that which seemes to be, to that which is indeede. No cabe en coraçón de mi ámo. pag. 28. lin. 6. It is not within the compasse of my masters hart. Que por la boca le sale a borbollónes. pag. 28. lin 6. But that it must bubble out of his mouth. Ha, ha, ha, & Hi, hi, hi. pag. 28. lin. 14. Voices of laughing. Assestár tiros. pag 28. lin. 17. To aime. Escozióte. pag. 30. lin. 27. It touchte you, it made you smart. Metér por los agujéros. pag. 32. lin. 25. verbatim. To put into holes, i. to take in at windowes. Desque se descúbren. pag. 33. lin. 12. From the time they discouer themselues. Catívo de mi, Mesquíno de mi. pag. 34. lin. 20. Wretch that I am. Assi me médre Dios, Assite medre Dios. pag. 34. lin. 23. verbatim. So God make me thriue, i. So God helpe me or prosper me. Duelos tenémos. pag. 34. lin. 28. We haue mournings in hand. Ojos verdes y rasgádos. pag. 35. lin. 14. Faire and great eies. La tez liza y lustrosa. pag. 35. lin. 24. The skin smooth and cleere. Buen ándo haze esto. pag. 37. lin. 8. This makes good going forward. Dias grándes ha, or Múchos dias ha. pag. 37. lin. 5. A good while since. Quede Dios con. v.m. pag. 37. lin. 29. God be with you, or God remaine with you. Dios vaya con v.m. pag. 37. lin. 29. God conduct, or be your speed. Vaya v.m. con Dios. Goe in Gods name. Que es del? pag. 38. lin. 15. What is become of him? where is he? Hi, hi, hi. pag. 39. lin. 2. A voice of laughing. Tres dias ha. pag. 39. lin. 4. It hath beene three daies. Vo, for Voy. pag. 39. lin. 12. I goe. Pormi vída, Por tu vida. pag. 39. lin. 27. I pray thee hartily. Quedate a Dios. pag. 40. lin. 11. God remaine with you, or keepe you. Sey, for Se tu. pag. 40. lin. 21. Be thou. No púde desseár bien, de que no te cupiésse parte. pag. 41. lin. 1. I could not so much as desire, as wish any goodnes, in which thy part was not contained therein. Si quiéra, for Solaménte. pag. 41. lin. 4. Gelo prometí. pag. 41. lin. 28. I promised him it or that, for Se lo prometí. Tha, tha, tha. pag. 42. lin. 3. The noise or beating of the knocking at a doore. O que comedór de huévos assados. pag. 43. lin. 21. Oh what a eater of roasted egges. De que le servías? pag. 44. lin. 4. In what place or office diddest thou serue her in? Curár de punto, pag. 47. lin. 18. To heale or cure with stitching vp, as with needle and threed. Téngote lo en grácia, or mercéd. pag. 48. lin. 24. I thanke thee for it. Como quiera. pag. 49. lin. 29. Howsoeuer. Dar en el fiel. pag. 51. lin. 4. To hit the pricke at shooting. Para mi santiguáda. pag. 51. lin. 13. By my hallidoome. Do víno el asno, verná el albarda. pag. 51. lin. 13. verbatim. Where the asse is come, the packe sad∣dle will come. i. where the greater doth yéelde, the lesse must of necessitie come after. AFter I had read ouer Diana de Monte mayor, and other authors, gathering out the hardest speeches and explaining them for the learners vse, and being come thus farre in Celestine, as you see, it came into my imagination that run∣ning thorow him and such other hard authors, by vnfolding so open to euerie ones
view the difficultest points in the toong, might breede some dislike in men of mine owne profession (to whom I wish as to my selfe) as also little thankefulnes of others, who hauing their turns serued, do commonly verifie this prouerbe, (Eaten bread is forgotten.) I thought good not to deale all at once, but to keepe some to sweeten their mouthes heereafter, as they shall be desirous heereof, and the rather, for that notwithstanding all this and more paines to, with cost out of my purse, neglecting my profession and liuing, I haue alreadie before I came neere the presse, tasted and had some experience of some of the greater sorte (if wealth and place haue that prerogatiue) which neuer sawe any thing of my dooing in their life, or heard mee speake, by discourteous dealing enough to discourage mee from the publishing of any thing, to pleasure or profit many; yet for the better minded, and more curteous disposed, I heere go so farre with the Englishing heereof, and some prouerbes fol∣lowing, whose curtesie if friendly I finde, may cause me to the farther vnfolding of this language to his farther content. Words, Phrases, Sentences and Prouerbs out of La vida de Lázaro de Tormes in 8 printed in Antwerpe En laoficina Plantiniána, Anno M.D.XCV. Lo que uno no cóme, otro se pierde por ello. pag. 2. lin. 13. That which one eateth not, another is lost for it, or longeth after it. No sér mas santo que mis vezinos. pag. 5. lin. 7. Not to be more holy then my neighbours. Achacáron a mi padre ciertas sangrias mal hechas en los costáles. pag. 7. lin. 18. They laid to my fathers charge certaine ripping the sides of the sacks. Armár a los buenos pag. 8. lin. 7. pag 91. lin. 1. To leane or stay ones selfe vpon the good. Echár la soga tras ei caldéro. pag. 10. lin. 12. verbatim. To cast the rope after the caldron. i. To cast the helue after the hatchet. Vale te por ti. pag. 11. lin. 16. verbatim. Be of auaile for thy selfe. i. Shift for thy selfe. Par de una cosa. pag. 11. lin. 26. Iust euen with any thing. Mas da el duro que el desnúdo. pag. 19. lin. 28. verbatim. More giueth the hard then the naked. i More giueth the miser or curmudgeon then he that hath it not to giue. Escapé del truéno y di en el Relampágo. pag. 28. lin. 23. I escaped the thunder and fell into the lightening. No podér tener en las piernas. pag. 30. lin. 23. Not to be able to stand vpon the legs. Dar el relóx la una, Dar las dos, las tres, &c. pag. 49. lin. 15. The clocke to strike one, two or three. Ha dado la una, Han dado las dos, las tres, &c. pag. 50. lin. 25. It hath strooke one a clocke, two a clocke, three a clocke. En un crédo. pag. 57. lin. 14. In the twinkling of an cie. Uña de vaca. pag. 62. lin. 1. A neates foote. La bolsa sin maldita la blanca. pag. 65. lin. 16. The diuell a penny in his purse. Oy dia. pag. 65. lin. 24. At this day. Quebrémos el ojo al Diáblo. pag. 66. lin. 7. Let vs breake the necke of the Deuill. Vóto or boto a Dios. pag. 70. lin. 4. I s eare by God. Del rey abaxo. pag. 71. lin. 6. From the king downeward. Rompér çapatos. pag. 77. lin. 13. To weare out shooes. Lançár del el demónio. pag. 85. lin. 8. To cast out the diuell from him. Matár con un hombre. pag. 92. lin. 6. To fight with a man. Quien bien te hará o se yrá o se morirá. pag. 94. lin. 7. He that shall or will doe thee a good turne, either he will be gon, or he will die. Words, Phrases, Sentences and Prouerbs out of Menosprécio de la Corte, or in French Mespris de la Court in 16. printed An. M.D.XCI. per Iehan de Tournes. Yr me a mia la mano. pag. 70. lin. 19. verbatim. To goe me to my hand. i. To hinder, let or stop my selfe. Ir por el atájo. pag. 93. lin. 14. To goe the shortest way. Dar de mano a la corte. pag. 127. lin. 20 To shake hands or take leaue of the Court.
Dár la corte a Dios. pag. 137. lin. 10. To bid the court farewell. Andár en cuérpo. pag. 197. lin. 1. To goe in hose and doublet without a cloake. No es de passár entre renglónes. pag. 200. lin. 20. It is not to be left obscurely, or it is to be plainely written or set downe. Verdúra para la olla. pag. 202. lin. 19. Hearbes for the pot, pothearbes. Bevér de buçes. 202 lin. 5. To drinke as an oxe or such beastes. Jugár al herrón. pag. 227. lin. 13. To play at coites. Corrér vn toro. pag. 228. lin. 3. So baite a bull. A paréd y medio, pared en medio. com. Plauto. fol. 4. b. lin. 18. pag. 234. lin. 13. The next wall to one, But a wall betweene. Clérigo sin breviário. pag. 259. lin. 8. A priest without a breuiarie. Ruár calles. pag. 273. lin. 14. To gad about the streetes. A pénas. 289. lin. 20. Hardly. Embocár la bola al juego de argólla. pag. 360. lin. 2. To cast the bowle into the hole of the ring at that play of Argolla, 1. A ring. Tirár coces. pag. 380. lin. 10. To kicke. Traér de tema la gorra. pag. 388. lin. 12. To set his hat to the good aleward, on one side the head. Sospécho que son pocos, y muy pocos, y aun muy poquitos y muy repoquitos. pag. 406. lin. 1. I suspect there are few and very few, yea most few, yea fewest of all. Wordes, Phrases, Sentences, and Prouerbes out of Floresta Española, in 16. Printed in Salamanca, 1592. Estoy maravillado. Epist. dedicatoria. pag. 2 lin. 9. I wonder, I marueile. El linage donde no avía corona, nunca medrava. fol. 6. b. lin 4. verbatim. That kindred that had had a crowne in it neuer thriued. i. a priest. Mas parée chichón, que Cardinal. fol. 7. b. lin. 1. It seemed rather a whelke or pustle then a stripe blacke and blew. Rézias cámaras, fol. 11. a. lin. 18. Strong stoolings. Macho de silla. fol. 13. a. lin. 15. A nagge. Vn hombre de gran memória sin letras, tiene rueca y huso y no estambre. fol. 21. a. lin. 1. A man of great memorie without learning, hath a rocke and a spindle, and no stuffe to spin. Bolár vna grulla o ave. fol. 43. b. lin. 5. To flie at the Herron. Guisár la comida. fol. 43. b. lin. 6. To dresse meate. Desensillar. fol. 53. b. lin. 19. To put out of a chaire. Also to vnsaddle. Vnos moços de espuelas, fol. 60. b. lin. 1 Lackeies or footemen. A esse Page o capalde o encapalde. fol. 61. b. lin. 18. Either gelde this page or giue a cloake. Tal cádreda vaca. fol. 74. b. lin. 2. Such a chaire was vacant. Llámo me. fol. 76. a. lin. 15. I call my selfe, or I am called. Puntos de çapátos. fol. 85. b. lin. 14. The stitches of shooes, or size of shooes, as nines, tens, &c. Al freýr lo veréys. fol. 93. a. lin. penultima, verbatim. By frying you shall see. i. By proofe you shall finde. Os demande la palabra. fol. 94. b. lin. 2. Let him challenge your word or promise. Hazér quartos. fol. 90. a. lin. 3. To quarter. Parár mientes. fol. 500. a. lin 7. To marke. Caldo. fol. 102, b. lin. 5. Broth, pottage. Hazér la barba. fol 112. a. lin. 16 To trim the beard. De buena gana fol. 226. b. lin. 5. With a good will. Dezir grácias. fol. 234. a. lin. 18. To speake merrie conceits. Marco Aurelio. Sublimár, abatír. pag. 11. lin. 18. To lift vp and to abase. A ley de bueno os juro pag. 27. lin. 28. By the faith of a good man I sweare. Conviene a sabér. pag. 42. lin. 16. That is to wit. Sobrepujár. pag. 46. lin. 11. To ouerpoise. Pendón de taverna. pag. 51. lin. 9. The signe of a tauerne. Jugár al axedrés. pag. 59. lin. 20. To play at Chesse. Poner obligación. pag. 234. lin. 26. to binde, to make one beholding to him. Ponér el águila en los péchos. pag. 245. lin. 20. To put the Eagle on his breast. i. To weare the Emperours armes the Eagle.
Armár çancadilla. pag. 256. lin. 2. To trip. Cavallo de axedréz. pag. 279. lin. 26. The Knight at Chesse. De Comédia de Plauto Milite glorioso in 16. printed at Antwerp M.D.LV. Fletár vna náo. fol. 8. b. lin. 19. To hire a ship and pay passage money. Hazér a lo largo en la mar. fol. 8. b. lin. 23. To lanch into the maine at sea. Dios te pague. fol. 12. a. lin. 11. God rewarde thee. Ponér or Hazer lumbre. fol. 17. a. lin. 23. To make a fire. El puerco muerto sabe mas quando se come. fol. 22. a. lin. 25. A dead hog tasteth best when he is eaten. Hermáno del leche. fol. 25. b. lin. 17. A foster brother. Poco me doy por esso. fol. 28. b. lin. 19. Little care I for this. Ordir tramas. fol. 29. b. lin. 8. verbatim. To spin webs. i. To worke deceites. Comédia de Plauto Menechmos, in 16. bound with Milite glorioso. Para que se ténga en mas. fol. 54. b. lin. 16. That he or it may be more esteemed. Ambos a dos mancebos. fol. 55. b. lin. 15. Both the yoong men. No perdáys palabra. fol. 56. b. lin. 10. verbatim. Doe not loose a word, i. Be attentiue to that one shall say. Hazér de nuéuas con alguno. fol. 67. a. lin. 19. To make himselfe strange with one, when he knoweth him well enough. Araucana in 16. three in one volumne, Printed in Antwerp. 1597. Cúchilla de la montáña. Elógio. pag. 3. lin. 8. The edge or ridge of a hill. Rociada dar. Elogio. pag. 3. lin. 12. To giue a volley of shot. Como consta por sus óbras. Elogio. pag. 7. lin. 5. As appeareth by his workes. Medir la pica al enimígo. fol. 3. b. lin. 33 To come to push of a pike with the enimie. Pobládos penáchos. fol. 4. a. lin. 32. Thicke plumes of feathers. Hazérse a lo largo. fol. 3. a. lin. 10. verbatim. To make himselfe aloofe, i. To step out as men in a quarrell to draw their weapon. A riénda suélta. fol. 31. b. lin. penult. verbatim. With a loose raine of a bridle, i. at libertie, freelie, as Reýr a riénda suélta. To laugh freely, at libertie. I would goe forward in this course of seeking hard places and phrases in Authors, but for that I haue now much other busines that neerer concernes me, onely certaine Prouerbes which I haue heretofore for mine owne vse gathered, and here leaue some of them to your vse, as yee shall best like them. Refranes. Prouerbes. First setting downe the English worde for worde according to the Spanish, with this worde Verbatim. Afterwarde if it haue a sence dif∣fering from the worde, the meaning thus, i. for id est: that is to saie. NO puede ser mas negro el cuervo que sus álas. verbatim. The crowe can not be blacker then his wings. i. Nothing can exceede the highest degree. Quien a su enemigo popa, a sus manos muere. verbatim. Whosoeuer disdainfully dallies with his enimie, dies by his owne hande. i. by making no reckoning of his enimie, receaues dam∣mage. Quien cóme y dexa, dos vezes póne la mesa. verbatim. Who dineth and leaueth for another time, couers the table twise. i. He that keepeth in store, serueth his turne when he hath neede. Gran sabór es comér y no escotár. verbatim. It is great sauorines to dine or eate, and not to paie any shot or reckoning. i. Good drinking of wine of another mans purse.
La codicia rómpe el saco. verbatim. Couetousnes bursteth the bagge. i. neuer thinketh it full till it breake. Mas véen quatro ójos que no dos. verbatim. Fower eies see better then two. i. Two heades are bet∣ter then one. Mas vále páxaro en máno que bueytre bolándo. verbatim. Better a birde in hand then a Vultur fly∣ing. i. A birde in hand woorth ten in the bush. E'ntre hermános, no metas tus manos: Porque, quien los desparte, lleua la peor parte. verbat. Betweene brothers put not thou thy hands; for who so seuers them hath the woorst of it. Ni de estópa buen camisa, ni de puta buena amiga. verbatim. Neither of hurdes is made a good shirt, nor of a queane a good louer. Quien ha officio ha benificio. verbatim. He that hath an occupation or office hath a benefite and a benefice. En la boca cerrada no entra mosca. verbatim. In a closed vp mouth a flie cannot get in. Mas cerca están mis dientes que mis pariéntes. verbatim. My teeth are neerer to me then my kinred. i. Neerer is my coate, but neerer is my shirt. Mas vale ser cabeça de Ratón, que cola de León. verbatim. Better to be the head of a Mouse then the taile of a Lyon. i. Better be chiefe in a meane place, then vnderling in a greater. Da Dios hávas, a quien no tiene quixádas. verbatim. God giueth beanes to them that haue no iawes to eate them. i. God sends fooles fortune. A cavallo comedór cabéstro corto. verbatim. To a greedie eating horse, a short halter. i. To a prodi∣gall man meane fortune: a curst cowe short hornes. Dime con quien ándas, y dezirte he quien éres. verbatim. Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will tell thee what thou art. i. Birdes of a feather will flocke togither; like will to like. En la boca del discréto, Lo público es secreto. verbatim. In the wisemans mouth, That is manifest is kept secret. Piedra movedíza, no cria moho. verbatim. The rolling stone engenders no mosse. Mas vale sabér, que avér. verbatim. It is better to haue knowledge then riches. Quien mal en horna, saca los panes tuertos. verbatim. He that setteth in the bread in the ouen naughtily, draweth out the loaues crushed awrie: as one brewes so let him drinke: as one plots so it prooues. Quien da presto, da dos vézes. verbatim. He that giues quickly, giueth twise. Miédo guarda viña y no viñadéro verbatim. Feare keepeth and looketh to the vineyard and not the owner. i. Feare makes one looke about. A muértos y a ýdos no ay amígos. verbatim. To dead men and absent there are no friendes left. i. Out of sight out of minde. La cóz de la yégua no haze mal al pótro. verbatim. The kicke of the mare hurteth not the colt. i. A friends reproofe neuer doth ill. A vn traydór dos alevósos. verbatim. To one traitor, two traitors. i. To ouer reach one craftie knaue, set two craftie knaues to him and they will cony catch him. The Italian saith, A vn fino, vn fino & mezo. Jurado ha el vaño de negro, no hazér blanco. verbatim. The bath of the blackmoore hath sworne not to whiten. i. That which is bred in the bone will neuer out of the flesh. En casa del mesquino, manda mas la mugér que el marído. verbatim. In the house of the simple soule, the wife commands more then the husband. i. In the house of the silly man of necessitie and of fore: The graie mare will still prooue the better horse. Es mas el ruýdo, que las nuezes. verbatim. The noise is greater then the nuts. i. More afraid then hurt. Dos pardáles en vna espíga, házen mala liga. verbatim. Two sparrowes on one eare of corne make an ill agreement. i. Two competitors cannot accorde. No es tan bravo el León como le pintan. verbatim. The Lion is not so fierce as they paint him. i. He is such a one as he makes shewe of. En hora buena nace, quien buena fama cóbra. verbatim. He is borne in a good houre that gets him∣selfe a good name. i. A good name is better then riches. De baxo de mala capa, yaze buen bevedór. verbatim. Vnder a bad cloake lies a good drinker. i. The woorse outwardly attired, the better inwardly lined. De rábo de puérco, nunca buen viróte. verbatim. Of a pigges taile you can neuer make a good shaft. i. Bray a foole in a morter you cannot make him leaue his follie: a clowne will neuer bee made a king. Que es esse hidalgo? El que hāze las obras. verbatim. What is this gentleman. i. Who is to be a gen∣tleman? Euen he that doth the workes of a gentleman. El asno súfre la cárga, no la sobre cárga. verbatim. The asse endureth his burden, but not more then his burden. Amenezados pán cómen. verbatim. Threatened men eate bread. i. The threatened men liue long.
Piénsa el ladrón, que todos son de su condición. verbatim. The theefe thinketh that all are of his condition, i. Euerie one iudgeth another by himselfe. Mas vale vn tóma que dos te daré. verbatim. One hold is better then two I will giue thee. Once giuing is better then often promising. No se gána çamóra en vn hóra. verbatim. çamóra (a strong towne) is not wonne in an hower, i. Rome was not built in a day. Quién tiémpo tiene, y tiémpo atiende, tiémpo viéne, que se arrepiénte. verbatim. He that hath time, and lookes for better time, Time comes that he repent himselfe of time. Buén coraçón quebránta mála ventura. verbatim. A good hart breaketh ill hap, i. A good hart ouer∣commeth all. Mundo redondo quién no sabe nadár va se en hóndo. verbatim. Round world, he that cannot swim let him sinke to the bottome. Malas son las búrlas verdadéras. verbatim. True iestes are ill, i. It is ill to iest at that which was done in deed. Quién te háze fiésta, que no lo suéle hazér, o te quiére engañár, o te hamenestér. verbatim. Who so ma∣keth much of thee that was not woont, either will deceiue or stands in neede of thee. Quién a sólas come el gállo, a sólas ensilla su cavállo. verbatim. Whosoeuer eates the cocke alone, saddles the horse alone, i. He that will keepe his meate and his money to himselfe, must doe his busines himselfe. Ház bien y no cates a quién, haz mal y guárte, verbatim. Doe good and regard not to whom, doe euill and take heede of thy selfe. Quién a buén árbol se arrima buéna sombra le cobíja. verbatim. Whosoeuer leaneth to a good tree, getteth a good shadow, i. whosoeuer hath a sure man to trust vnto, hath a great pleasure. Quien no paréce peréce. verbatim. Who appeareth not, perisheth, i. Out of sight, out of minde. Biva comígo y búsca quien te manténga. verbatim. Liue with me, and seeke some other that may maintaine thee, i. Doe me seruice, and get maintenance where thou canst. Hónra y provécho, no cáben en vn sáco. verbatim. Honour and profit are not contained togither in one sacke, i. If you be honorable, you must be liberall and not respect your money. Quien quita l'ocasión, quita el pecádo. verbatim. He that taketh awaie the occasion, taketh away the offence, i. He that remooueth the allurements, taketh away the sinne. La pobréza no es viléza mas inconveniéncia. verbatim. Pouertie is no vile or vitious matter, but yet an inconuenience. Las quéntas en la máno, y el diáblo en el capíllo. verbatim. The beades in the hand, and the diuell in his capuch or cape of his cloake, i. God in his mouth and the diuell in his hart: good words and wicked deeds. Palábras y plúmas el viénto las lléva. verbatim. Wordes and feathers the winde carrieth away, i. words are but winde. Ni Sávado sin sól ni moça sin amór, ni véjo sin dolór. verbatim. Neither Saboath without sunne, nor yoong wench without loue, nor an old body without griefe or ache. Fuégo de estópa, Amór de púta, Viénto del cúlo, Tódo es vno, Fire of flaxe, Loue of a queane, Winde from the taile, All is one. Guárdate De ýra de Señór y de alboróto de pué∣blo. De lócos en lugár estrécho, De hónra menguáda, y génte que no tiéne náda. De móça adeuína, y mugér latí∣na. De persóna señaláda, y de Biúda tres vézes casáda. De lódos al caminár, y de luénga en∣fermedád. De viénto que entre per horádo, y de enimígo que séa reconciliádo. De madrásta, el nombre le bá∣sta. Take heede Of the wrath of a mightie man & the tumult of the people. Of mad fooles in a narrow place. Of credit decaied, and people which haue nothing. Of a yoong wench a prophetesse, and a latin woman. Of a person marked, & a widow thrise married. Of fowle durtie waies and long sickenes. Of wind that comes in at a hole, and of a reconciled enimy. Of a stepmother, the very name of her sufficeth. FJNJS.
PLEASANT and DELIGHTFVLL DIALOGVES IN SPANISH and English, profitable to the learner, and not vnpleasant to any other Reader. By IOHN MINSHEU Professor of Languages in London. Ʋirescit vulnere Virtus. VERITAS FILIA TEMPORIS printer's device of Edmund Bollifant Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1599
Al muy illustre Señor, Don Eduardo Hobby: su aficionado servidor Juan Minsheu desséa salúd, y perpetua felicidád. MVy illustre Señor, de aquel famoso pintor Apeles se quenta, que aviendo acabado de pintár vna hermosa table, teniendola colgada en parte pública; inumerable gente de todas suertes combidáda de la lindeza della, suspendiéron su curso, y se detuviéron a contemplárla, entre los de mas, se acertó a llegár vn rústico labradór, y como todos alabássen grandemente el ingénio del ar∣tifice, juntamente con la pintura: el villáno con boz ronca y mal compuesta, díxo, vna gran falta tiene ésta tabla; lo qual como oyesse Apeles, le preguntó qual fuesse ésta? El respondió, aquella espíga sobre la qual está aquel páxaro senta∣do, deviéra estár mas inclinada, porque conforme al peso que presuppone el páxaro y la flaquéza de la caña, no podía sustenár le sin doblarse mas, oydo ésto por el pin∣tór, vió que teníarazón el villáno; y tomando el pinçél, emendó luego aquella falta, siguiendo su parec ér; sobérbio pues el rústico con ver que se uviésse tomado su voto, passó mas adelante, y díxo, aquellos çapatos que aquella figura tiene no están buen∣nos, a ésto le respondió Apeles, Hermano cura de tu arte, y dexa a cada vno el suyo. Está figura, muy ilustre señor, he querído traér, por dezír, que si todos los hombres se conformássen con lo que sáuen y que su ingénio alcança, no quisiéssen passár adelante, a sabér lo que no es de su professónny les toca, ny ellos quedarían corridos, como éste villáno, ni ellabradór se entremeterría a tratár de la guerra, ny el mercadér de la cavallaría, ny eloficiál de las sciéncias, ny el herréro se pondría a disputár puntos de teología; Sino que tratando cada vno aquello a que su capacidád se estiende, y no mas, seria vn concierto maravillóso, que resultaría en grande vtilidád de toda la república, y para ésto devríamos tomár exemplo en las cosas naturales, las quales perpetuamente guárdan su órden y conciérto, sin entremetérse las vnas a hazér el ofício de las otras, y ansi vémos que ny la tierra caliénta, ny el fuego produze, ny el viento riéga, ny el agua ventéa, sino que cada cosa tiene su calidád, y ofício particulár. Pues aviéndose de guardár éste conciérto y órden, a v.m. conviene y toca el jusgár de ésta mi obra, como aquel que entre todos los demas, tiene el primado de la lengua Española, segun la facilidád con que se le a dádo, y la perfecion con que la habla, peró tambien en otras muchas sciéncias, y facultádes, en que v. m. resplandéce sobre todos los de nuestro tiempo. Aqui no es de oluidár la refulgente, rara y acabada perfecion en hermosura, doctrina, lenguas, de la muy ilustre Señora Doña Margarita su muger de v.m. Dios sabe, si yo quisiera dedicár le toda la obra entera y no par∣tida en parte, (pues quando no uviéra las razones díchas para hazérlo; bastava el agradecimiento y benevoléncia, que v. m. mostró al que primero emprendió lo que he yo ampliado, y hecho mas copioso: Peró el lo dexádo de hazer, por dos razones amy júyzio; la vna es la obligación precisa que tengo a las personas a quien va deri∣gida, no solo de obediencia y amistád, sino tambien de ayuda, favór, y socorro, que me han dado, para podér llegarla a su fin; y la otra razón es, a verse començado, prose∣quido,
y acabado en su nombre, y para que se apovéchan della, en suministério. Peró ya que lo que es mayór en cantidád tengo empleado, lo que es ygual en calidád, o fresco y dedíco a. v.m. y ésto mas por lo que a mi importa, pues quedaré seguro que los detractores no osen mordér en lo que ha sido censurádo por tan primo júyzio y entendimiento, que no por la glória o vtilidád que dello se podra seguir a v. m. ultra de que con esto satisfaga en parte la deuda de agradecimiento, que dévo a quien contanta voluntád favorece a mi professión, ofício verdaderamente próprio de hom∣bres sábios y discrétos, ansi como es de ygnorantes y poco menos que béstias, el impe∣dir semejantes exercicios lo qual no cabe sino en hombres gruessos de en∣tendimiento, y de conciéncias, Suplíco a.v.m. se sirva de recebír esso pequeño servício, aunque con grande voluntád ofrecido, y ponér lo debaxo de su protectión y ampáro, pues con esto, la obra queder á segura, y yo tambien lo esta∣ré, de que está bien empleáda: y tomaré á∣las para emprendér mayóres cosas en nombre de v.m. Cuya muy ilu∣stre persona, nuestro señ∣or guarde con acre∣centamiento de mayóres estados. Bésa las manos de v.m. su servidór, IOHN MINSHEU.
Diálogo priméro para levantárse por la mañana y las cosas a ello pertenecién∣tes, entre un hidálgo llamádo don Pedro y su criádo Alonso, y un su amigo llamádo don Iuan, y úna áma. The first Dialogue of rising in the morning, and of those things thereunto appertaining: betweene a Gentleman named M. Peter, and his seruant Alonso, & another friend of his called M. Iohn, and a nurse of the house. D.P. OYes moço? P. YOuth, doest thou heare? A. Señór. A. Sir. d.P. Que óra es? P. What is it of the clocke? A. Las cinco son dádas. A. It hath strooken fiue. d.P. Levántate y abre aquélla ventána a vér si es de dia. P. Rise, and open that window, to see if it be day. A. Aun no es bien amenecído. A. It is not yet breake of the day. d.P. Pues asno, como dixíste que ha da∣do las çinco? P. Why then assehead, why saidst thou that it had strooke fiue a clocke. A. Señór las çinco yo las conté, peró el relóx y la mañána no ándan a úna. A. Sir, I told you fiue, but the clocke and the morning goe not together. d.P. O tu miéntes o el relóx miénte, que el sol no puede mentír. P. Either thou liest, or the clocke lieth, for the sunne cannot lie. A. Mas vale que miénto yo, que no el año. A. It is better that I lie, then the yeere prooue out ill. d.P. Que día haze? P. What weather is it? A. Señór nubládo. A. Sir cloudie weather. d.P. En los ojos déves tu de tenér las núbes que el cielo yo le véo cláro. P. Belike thine eies be cloudie, for I see the skie cleere. A. Pues no estóy çiégo. A. Yet am I not blinde. d.P. Antes créo que estas durmiéndo toda vía. P. Rather I beleeue thou standest slee∣ping. A. Sé, que no soy elefante que tengo de dormírme en pie. A. I knowe, I am not elephant to sleepe standing. d.P. Haze frío? P. Is it cold weather? A. Vn cerceganíllo éntra por la ven∣tána que córta las narízes. A. Here comes in such a colde northerly winde at the windowe, that it bites off my nose. d.P. Dáme de vestír que me quiéro le∣vantár. P. Giue me my clothes, for I will rise. A. A que, tan de mañana? A. What to doe so early? d.P. A negociár, que téngo mucho que hazér oy. P. To goe about busines, for I haue much to doe to day. A. Aun no estará nádie en pie. A. No bodie will be yet stirring. d.P. Tu adevínas a tu provécho. P. Thou doest prophesie for thine owne be∣hoofe. A. Que vestído se quiere ponér vue∣stra mercéd? A. What apparell will you weare to day Sir? d.P. El de velárte, que dízen que es hónray provécho. P. That of the fine blacke cloth, for it is of estimation and profitable. A. Que jubón? A. What doublet? d.P. El de ráso pespuntádo. P. That of stitched satten. A. He le aquí. A. Here it is. d.P. ❀ Majadéro, pues el jubon me trá∣es,
ántes que la camísa, quiéres me motejár de açotádo.
P. Blocke head, doest thou bring me my
doublet before my shirt, wilt thou scoffe me as though I had beeneThose that be whipped, put on their doublets in haste before their shirts, to saue them from another lash. whipped? A. Aun no ha traýdo las camíças la labandéra. A. The laundresse hath not yet brought home the shirts. d.P. Pues, hide púta ýd por éllas. P. Whoorsonne knaue, go then for them. A. ❀ Al Ruyn de Róma, quando le nómbran, luégo asoma, aquí viéne ya la labandera. A. Lupus est in fabula, as soone as one names him presently he appeares, here comes the laundresse. d.P. Está enxúta? P. Is it drie? A. Como vn cuerno. A. As drie as a horne. d.P. No os he dícho, que no me tray∣gáys éssas comparaciónes. P. Haue I not told thee, that thou bring me no such comparisons. A. ❀ Esso fuéra, Si fuéra, v.m. persóna Sospechósa que no se a de men∣tár la sóga, en casa del ahor∣cádo. A. That is true, if you were a person suspec∣ted, for a man ought not to make mention of a halter in the house of a man that was hanged. d.P. Dáme las cálças de terciopélo a∣cuchilládas. P. Giue me my paned veluet hose. A. Aqui están señór. A. Here they are sir. d.P. Están limpias? mira bien si tiénen algun púnto suelto las médias. P. Be they made cleane? Looke well if the stockings haue any stitches bro∣ken in them. A. E'ssa es vna de las tres cosas que Ganása dezía, que el hombre busca con gran cuydádo, y quando las ha halládo le pésa. A. This is one of the three things which Ganasa saide a man seekes dili∣gently after, and when he hath found them it grieues him. d.P. Y quales son las de mas? P. And what are the other two? A. Vna suziedád en la cáma, y los cu∣érnos, si su mugér se los póne, peró éstas sánas están. A, Filth in the bed one lieth in, and hornes if they be of his owne wiues graf∣ting, but these stockings are whole. d.P. Cálçamelas, dáme el sáyo de ve∣lárte, quel de ráxa es muy del∣gádo para éste frío que háze. P. Pull them on, giue me that ierkin of blacke cloth, for that of thin cloth rash is very thin for this cold wea∣ther. A. Quiére, v. m. ponérse borzeguí∣es? A. Will you weare buskins? d.P. No sino çapátos y pantúflos, por amór del lódo: Dáme priméro aguamános. P. No, but pumpes and pantofles because of the durt: Giue me first water to wash my hands. A. Señor el água está eláda en el jár∣ro. A. Sir, the water is frozen in the pot. d.P. Buéna señál. A. De que señór? d.P. de Caránbanos. P. A good signe. A. Of what sir? P. Of ice. A. Y aun de que házefrío. A. And also that it is cold. d.P. Derrítelo en el braséro, dáme en∣tre tánto el espéjo y v'nas tixé∣ras que quiéro adereçárme la bárva. P. Thaw it in the pan of coales, in the meane while giue me the looking glasse and scissers, for I will trim my beard. A. Aquí está el estúche donde está tó do, y tambien el péyne. A. Here is the case where all are in it, and likewise the combe. d.P. O que de cánas téngo, ya me voy
parándo véjo.
P. O what hoare haires I haue, I begin to
waxe olde. A. Señor, las navidádes no se van en bálde. A. Sir, yeeres passe not ouer ones head in vaine. d.P. Por ciérto no téngo muchas, sino ❀ como dízen en mi tiérra, cá∣nas y cuérnos no viénen por días. P. Truely, I haue not many yeeres on my backe, but as they say in my coun∣trie, Hoare haires, & hornes come not by age. A. Ya está buéna ésta água, bien se puede vuéstra mercéd lavár. A. This water is now well, you may now wel wash Sir. d.P. Pues dacá la fuénte, y la toalla. P. Then giue heere the basen and yewer, and the towell. A. Quiére. v.m. Llevér capa y górra o herreruélo y sombréro? A. Will you weare a short cloake and cap, or long cloake and hat? d.P. No es aóra tiémpo de górra, dame el ferreruélo lárgo, y vn som∣bréro de fiéltro. P. It is no weather now for a cap, giue me a long cloake and a felt hat. A. Que espáda? Dorada, plateáda o Pavonáda? A. What rapier, gilt, siluered, or sangui∣ned? d.P. No la quiéro, sino enbarnizáda por silloviére, Mira quien llama a sa puérta. P. None, but that varnist rapier, least it should raine: Go looke who knockes at the doore. A. El señór don Iuan es. A. It is master Iohn. d.P. Corre abre présto. P. Run, open the doore quickly. d.I. Muy buenos dias dé Dios. a v.m. Señór don Pédro. I. God giue you good morowe master Pe∣ter. d.P. O señór don Iuan. v.m. séa tan bien ❀ venído como los buenos anos: como está v.m? P. Oh master Iohn, you are as well wel∣come as good fortune: how do you Sir? d.I. Muy al servício de v. m. v.m. está buéno? I. Readie to do you seruice, and are you well Sir? d.P. Al servício de v. m. como estuvié∣re, aunque algo achacóso. P. Howsoeuer Sir, at your command al∣though now I am not halfe well. d.I. Pues porque madrúga tanto sino ánda bueno? I. Why then do you rise so earely, if you be not well? d.P. Porque dízen los médicos que pa∣ra la salúd, es bueno levantár de mañána. P. Bicause Phisitions saie, that for ones health it is good to rise earelie in the morning. d.I. Essa salúd ténganse la éllos, que pa∣ra mi éstos son los dias que de∣vémos metér en casa cómo dí∣ze el Refrán, o que los tengá∣mos en la cama, dixéra mejór. I. That health let them haue themselues for me, these be the good daies (as the Prouerbe saith) which wee ought to locke vp within our dores, nay (I should say) within our beds. d.P. Para dezír la verdád, yo mas lo há∣go, por entendér en mis negó∣cios. P. To tell you the truth, I do it chiefely to follow my busines. d.I. Como le va a v.m. dellos? I. How goeth it with you in your busines? d.P. Señor al serv ício de v.m. mal ben∣díto sea Dios. P. Sir at your command, but ill inough God be thanked. d.I. Como ansi no despáchan a v.m? I. How, do they not dispatch you? d.P. Si Señór despéchan me. Mucácho tráe nos de almorzár antes que salgámos. P. Yea Sir, they despite me. Boie, giue vs somewhat to breakefast before we go foorth.
d.I. Ya yo he bevido vna véz. I. I haue alreadie eaten a bit. d.P. Beverá. v. m. ótra que no le hará mal. P. One bit more will doe you no harme. d.I. ❀ No, que no soy tan delicádo co∣mo judio en viernes. I. No, for I am not so curious as the Iewe on a friday. A. Que quieren vs. ms. almorzár. A. What will your worships breake your fast withall? d.P. Tráe vnos pastéles y vn quartillo de cabríto assado. P. Bring a pie, and a quarter of a rosted kidde. d.I. Que bien adereçádo tiene. v. m. éste aposénto señór don P? I. Oh how well in order haue you this lod∣ging M. Peter? d.P. Señór Razonáble como para vn hidálgo póbre. P. Sir reasonable for a poore gentleman. d.I. De donde úvo. v.m. ésta tapicería? I. From whence had you this tapestrie hangings? d.P. Señór; de Flandes víno. P. Sir it came from Flaunders. d.I. Tambien déven deser de alla los liénços o pintúras o Retratos? I. And from thence also came these pic∣tures and portraitures? d.P. Algúnos déllos, otros son de Ytália. P. Some of them did, others came from I∣talie. d.I. De gentíl máno son por cierto: quanto le costó. a v. m. éste escritório? I. Truely they are of a fine workmans do∣ing. What cost this deske or caske? d.P. Mas que vale, quarenta ducádos. P. More then it is worth, fortie ducates. d.I. De que madéra es? I. Of what wood is it? d.P. La colorada es caóba de la Havána y ésta négra es évano, la blánca es marfíl. P. The red isCaóba, a fine red wood in the Indies, of which they make chec∣ker worke and other curious works in cup∣boords, &c. Caóba of Havána, and this blacke is Ebonie, and the white is Iuorie. d.I. Cierto que está muy curióso, y muy bien asentáda la taraçéa. I. Truely it is very curious, and the inlay∣ing of the wood most finely set in. d.P. Aquí verá. v. m. vn buféte mejór labrádo. P. Here may you see a standing table, bet∣ter wrought. d.I. Adonde fue hécho? I. Where was it made? d.P. El y las síllas viniéron de Sala∣mánca. P. That and the chaires came from Sala∣manca. d.I. Lo mejór le falta a.v.m. en este a∣posento. I. The best thing is yet wanting in this lodging. d.P. Que es, por vída del Señór don Iuan? P. What is it I praie you hartelie master Iohn? d.I. Por lo que dezía don juan manu∣el, un sonezíto de chapín. I. That which don Iohn Manuel saide, the gentle sound of a womans shoe. d.P. Ya entiendo, por la mugér lo díze v.m. P. Now I vnderstande you meane a wife? d.I. Por la misma. I. Euen the selfe same. d.P. Ami me pareçe que lo mejór que tiene es estár sin ella. P. It seemes vnto me, that the best thing my lodging hath is to be without hir. d.I. ❀ O Señór no diga. v.m. esso que es triste cosa la soledád. I. Oh Sir, saie not so, solitarines is vnplea∣sant. d.P. ❀ A tengo me al que díze, que Va∣le mas solo que mal acom∣pañádo. P. Ah Sir, I stande to that old saying, bet∣ter alone then euill accompanied.
d.I. Pues no se entiende que a de ser mala. I. But you must not vnderstande of a bad wife. d.P. Y adónde le hallarémos que sea buena? P. And where shall we finde hir that is good? d.I. Muchas ay muy buenas. I. There are many very good. d.P. Es verdad, las que están enterrá∣das. P. It is true, they which are dead and bu∣ried. d.I. De suerte que quiere. v. m. dezír que la mujér estonçes es buena quando está muerta. I. So that you will say, that a woman is then good, when she is dead. d.P. Digo señór que cada loco con su tema, yo he dado a ora en esta. P. I say Sir, that euery foole hath his wil∣fulnesse, and I haue lighted now vpon this. d.I. ❀ Y se saldrá. v.m. con ella, como el Rey con sus alcaválas. I. And you shall as easily carrie it away as theWithout con∣troulment. king doth his subsidies. d.P. ❀ Se díze que úna buena múla, y vna buena cabra, y vna buena mugér son tres, malas cúcas. P. It is said, that a good mule, a good goat, and a good woman are three vn∣happie creatures. Al. La mesa está puesta bien se pueden sentar. vs. ms. a almorzar. A. The table is couered, your worships may well sit downe to breakefast. d.P. Señór don Iuan tome. vs. ms. aquel∣la cabeçera. P. M. Iohn, sit you downe at the vpper end of the table. d.I. Bueno sería, esso es per motejar∣me de viejo. I. It should doe well in deede, that is a floute because I am olde. d.P. No, si no por cumplír con la razón P. Not so, but to doe you right. d.I. V.m. tome su lugár que yo toma∣ré el mio. I. Take you your place and I will take mine. d.P. Bueno es que venga a mi casa, quien mande en ella mas que yo. P. It is very good, that I should haue such a guest as should command more in my house then my selfe. d.I. O si por ay lo echa. v.m. yo obedes∣co en su casa y fuera. I. Oh Sir if you take it so, I not onely obey you in your house, but abroad also. d.P. Yo soy el que tengo de servír como la razon me oblíga. Muchacho dacá platos. P. Sir I am to be at your seruice, as reason bindeth mee. Boie giue mee dishes heere. Al. Aqui estan Señór. A. Heere they are Sir. d.P. De adonde truxiste estos pastéles? P. From whence didst thou fetch these pies? Al. De la mas límpia pastelera que ay en la ciudad. A. From the cleanliest piewife, that is in the citie. d.P. Son de nuestra vezína la hermosa? P. What from our faire neighbour? Al. Si Señór. A. Yea Sir. d.P. Bien los puede. v.m. comér sin asco que ne mujer límpia son. P. Well may you eate Sir of them without loathing, for they are from a clen∣ly woman. d.I. Mas que nunca lo fueran, nunca yo miro en misérias. I. And if they were not, I neuer sticke for small matters. d.P. Pues menos mirára, si fuera tan amigo de ellos como yo. P. Lesse woulde you stande vpon it, if you did loue them as I doe. d.I. Muy bien me sáben, y lo mejór que yo les hallo es ser comída
tan acorrída, que a qual quier, ora, 'que el hombre la quiera la halla guisada.
I. They please my taste well, and the best is that I alwaies finde them to bee a
meate so in readines, that at what soeuer hower a man will haue it he may finde it ready drest. d.P. Muchácho da nos de bevér que pí∣ca la pimienta. P. Boy giue vs drinke, for the pepper bites. Al. Que quiere, v.m. blanco o tinto? A. Which will you haue sir, sacke orTinto is a wine in Spaine red & blackish. tin∣to? d.P. Echa de lo blanco, que es mas cali∣ente para por la mañána. P. Fill out of the sacke, for it is more hea∣ting, chiefly for the morning. d.I. Yaun es mas saludáble que lo tinto. I. And also is more wholesome then the red. d.P. Brindo a v.m. Señór don Iuán. P. I drinke to you master Iohn. d.I. Beso, a, v. m. las manos, haré la ra∣zon. I. I thanke you sir, I will pledge you. Al. Por qual táça quiere, v. m. bevér, por la Llana o por esta hon∣dilla. A. In which cup will your worship drinke, in the plaine bowle, or in the little deepe one. d.I. Alonso amigo, avéis de fabér que yo soy muy buen borrácho y se muy bien lo que me bévo, por esso echaldme por aquella taça llana. I. Friend Alonso you must knowe, that I am a very good drinker, and know how much I vse to drinke, where∣fore fill me that plaine bowle. d.P. Yo gusto mas de bevér por esta co∣pa de vídrio que no por ningu∣na de las taças. P. I like better to drinke out of this drin∣king glasse then out of any other of the cups. d.I. ❀ Señór, contra gustos no ay dis∣púta. I. Sir, against ones liking there is no dis∣puting. d.P. Ansi es verdád, con esta pierna de cabríto beverá, v.m. otra véz, y trae vnas aceitúnas para la terçera. P. It is so Sir: this leg of kid will make you once againe haue a quarrell to the cup. Bring vs some oliues for the third course. d.I. Essa ya se llamará comída y no al∣muérzo. I. This is to be called a dinner and not a breakefast. d.P. Porque? P. Why? d.I. Porque dizen a buen coméro mal comér, tres vézes se a de bevér. I. Because to a good meale or a bad, three draughts onely are to be had. d.P. Ay dize nuestra madre çelestína ❀ que está corrúpta la letra que por dezír tréze dixo tres. P. Alas saith our mother Celestine, the letter is corrupted, for whereas he should haue said thirteene, he set downe three. d.I. Aora señór bien está lo hecho, no mas que perderémos la gana de el comér. I. Well Sir, it sufficeth, we haue eaten well, no more, for we shall loose our sto∣macks to eate at dinner. d.P. den nos a bevér otras sendas de la calabriáda. P. Let them giue to each of vs once againe of theCalabriáda: a mixed wine, halfe one wine and halfe ano∣ther. Calabriáda. d.I. Adonde yrémos? I. Whither shall we goe? d.P, Lo priméro a la yglésia, y enco∣mendár nos a Dios. P. First to the Church, to commend our selues to God. d.I. ❀ Está muy bien, que por yr a la yglésia ni dar çevada, no se pierde jornada. I. It is very good, for neither in going to the Church, nor in giuing prouen∣der to thy horse, was there euer iourney hindered or lost.
d.P. çierra aquel cofre, pon en cobro essas baratíjas, llama al áma que barra y componga este a∣posento. P. Shut that chest, put vp safe this house∣hold stuffe, call the nurse that shee sweepe and dresse this lodging. Al. Tengo de yr acompañando a v.m? A. Shall I waite on your sir? d.P. No, sino quédate en casa, ayúda al áma y limpia todos mis vestí∣dos y ponedla en órden y a las onze llevame el cavallo a pa∣lácio. P. No, but tarie in the house, helpe the nurse and brush all my apparel and set the house in order, and at ele∣uen of the clocke bring my horse to the court. Al. Está muy bien Señór, yo lo haré ansi. A. Verie well sir, I will doe it. d.P. ❀ éste mi criádo Señór don juan, es como malilla que hago de ello que quiero. P. This my seruant master Iohn is as theMalilla a card agreed vpon, that he that hath him may make of him, king, queene, knaue, ace, nine, ten, or whatsoeuer other carde. Malilla, for I make of him what I will. d.I. Yaun and a. v. m. en lo çierto para sér bien servido, que quando hombre tiene muchos criádos, unos por otros nunca házen cósa a deréchas. I. And thereby you are sure to be well serued, for when a man hath many seruants, one by reason of the other neuer doe that they ought. d.P. El me sirve de mayordómo, de re∣postéro, de maestre sala, de guarda ropa, de paje, y de la∣cáyo, y a vézes de despenséro. P. He serueth me for steward of my house, for a keeper of my plate, for a gen∣man-usher, wardrop keeper, page, and for lacquey, and sometimes for cater. d.I. El paréce buen hijo. I. He seemes to be an honest fellow, a good fellow or good seruant. d.P. Bueno señor es tan bueno que a ser mas, no valiéra nada, sola vna falta tiene. P. Good Sir, so good he is, that if he were better, he were worth nothing, on∣ly one fault he hath. d.I. Qual es? I. What is that? d.P. ❀ Que es grandíssimo enemígo de el água. P. That he loues no water by no meanes. d.I. E'sso hará lo, por el bien que le sábe el vino, peró essa no se puede llamár falta, si no sóbra. I. That is for the good he findes in wine, but this cannot be called a want in him, but a superfluitie. d.P. Muchácho cierra la puérta, con la ❀ llave, que a puérta çerráda el Diablo se buelue. P. Boy, locke the doore with the key, for at a locked doore, the diuell himselfe goeth his way. Al. Ama, tráyga vn caldéro de água y vna escoba, regarémos y barra∣rémos éste aposénto. A. Nurse, bring a kettle of water and a broome, we will cast water on, and sweepe this chamber. Ama. Toma priméro esta rópa blanca que tráxo la labandéra. N. Take first this cleane linnen which the laundresse brought home. Al. Aguarde, sacaré la memória para vér si falta algo. A. Stay a little, I will take out the note to see if any thing be wanting. Am. Adonde la tienes? N. Where is it? Al. Aquí está en mi faltriquéra. A. Heere it is in my pocket. Am. Lee la pues. N. Reade it then. Al. Memória de la ropa de mi ámo que llevó la lavandéra en diez de março de 1599. primera∣ménte quatro camisas con sus
euellos de lechuguilla.
A. A note of my masters clothes which the laundresse had the tenth of March, 1599. First fower shirts, with their ruffe bands
to them. Am. Aqui están A. dos sábanas, dos al∣mohá das de cama, dos pares de çalçones de lienco, tres de cal∣çétas. N. Heere they are. Al. a paire of sheetes, two pillowes, two paire of linnen breeches next the skin, three paire of linnen hose vnder the stockings: A. Aqui están. N. Heere they are. Al. Vna dozena de pares de escarpí∣nes. A. A dosen paire of sockes. Am. No ay aquí mas que ocho. N. There are but eight heere. Al. Pues quatro fáltan a la labandéra pedírle he que de quenta del∣los, y si ella los perdio que los págue. A. Then fower wants, I will require of the laundresse that she giue ac∣count of them, and if she hath lost them that she paie for them. Am. Anda, que válen quatro escarpínes viejos y rótos? N. Go, what are fower old broken sockes woorth? Al. Yten mas dos escofitas y quatro tocadóres, media dozena de pañizuelos de narizes. A. Also more, two night coifes and fower night kerchiefes, halfe a doosen of handkerchiefes. Am. Aqui está todo. N. Here is all. Al. Dos mesas de mantéles, y diez ser∣villétas. A. Two table clothes and ten table nap∣kins. Am. Aqui están. N. Here they are. Al. Tres toallas, y vn frutéro, y dos cu∣ellos de encáje con sus puños. A. Three towels, and oneFruit cloth to couer the fruite when it is car∣ried to the ta∣ble. fruite cloth and two ruffe bandes wrought with their ruffes at hand. Am. Todo está aqui que nada falta. N. All is here, nothing is wanting. Al. Pues doblémos lo, y pongámos lo en el árca. A. Then let vs fold it, and let vs put it in the chest. Am. Como me Llamáys para que os ayúde a ésto, no me Llamárades para que os ayudára al almu∣érzo. N. Wherefore call you me, that I should helpe you to do this, & would not cal me that I should helpe you to eate your breakefast? Al. Alli tengo guardados vnos esca∣móchos que sobraran a mi ámo. A. There haue I saued certaine fragments which my Master left. Am. Quiero primero barrér ésta sala y adereçárla. N. I will first sweepe this hall and dresse it. Al. Entre tanto limpiaré yo la ropa, save de la escobilla? A. In the meane while will I brush the clothes: doe you knowe where the brush is? Am. Vesla alli colgada de aquel clávo, que si fuéra pérro ya te uviéra mordido. N. See there hanged vpon that naile, that if it were a beare it would now haue bit thee. Al. O quanto polvo tiene esta capa? A. Oh what a deale of dust hath this cloke? Am. Sacude la primero con vna vára. N. Beate it out first with a wand. Al. Ama, mas que bien hechos están estos calçónes? A. Nurse, how exceeding well are these breeches made. Am. Tanbien entiendo yo de ésso, como puerca de freno. N. I haue as good knowledge therein as a sowe in a bridle. Al. Pues que entiende? A. What haue you knowledge in then? Am. Al lo que a mi me importa si tu
preguntáras por una basquiña, una sáya entera, una ropa, un manto, o un cuerpo, una gor∣guéra, de una toca, y cosas seme∣jantes, supiéra te yo respondér.
N. In that which belongeth vnto me, if
thou hadst asked of a peticoate, a womans cassocke, a womans gowne a mantell, a paire of bodies, a gor∣get, or a womans head attire, and like matters, I could haue answe∣red thee. Al. De manera que no sabe léer, mas de por el libro de su aldéa. A. So then the priest cannot say masse but in his owne booke. Am. Quieres tu, que sea yo, como el ymbidióso, que su cuidado es en lo que no le va ni le viéne. N. Wilt thou, that I should be as the enui∣ous person which setteth his minde on that which belongs not vnto him. Al. Siempre es virtúd savér, aunque se∣an cósas que pareçe que no nos ympórtan. A. Yet alwaies it is a vertue to know, al∣though they be things which seem not to appertaine vnto vs. Am. Bien sé yo, que tu sabrás hazér una bellaquería, y ésta no es virtúd. N. I know well, that thou knowest well how to play the knaue, and that I am sure is no vertue. Al. El savérla hazér no es malo, el usár∣la si. A. To know how to doe it is not euill, but to vse it it is euill. Am. ❀ Siempre oy dezír que quien las sábe las táñe. N. I alwaies haue heard say, he that can play, plaieth. Al. ❀ No sino que quien ha las he chas ha las sospéchas. A. No but whosoeuer is bad, hath suspiti∣on of another to be bad. Am. Pues velláco que he hecho yo? N. Why knaue what haue I done? Al. No mas de hazérme regañái algu∣nas vézes. A. Nothing else, but make me fret and vexe my selfe sometimes. Ama. No me des tu ocasión. N. Doe not thou giue me occasion? Al. Estonces muchas merçédes, quan∣do le doy ocasion, es menestér que me perdóne, que quando no se la doy, poca amistád me haze. A. Then I thanke you hartily, when I giue you occasion it is necessarie that you pardon me, that when I giue you no occasion, you doe mee littleMeaning then she doth not for∣giue him any thing, seeing he maketh no of∣fence vnto her. curtesie. Ama. A ora hermáno dexate de retóri∣cas y has lo que tu ámo te man∣dó. N. Now brother, leaue your rhetoricke, and doe that thy M. commanded thee. Al. Si haré aun que bien créo que no por ésso me tengo de asentár con el ala mesa. A. So will I doe, although I beleeue, for all that I am not to sit at table with him. Ama. A lomenos escusarás de que el no te asiénte en el rábo. N. Thou must needes beare with that, for that he doth not set it on your bum. Al. Yo voy a ensillár el cavállo, a dios paredes hasta la buelta. A. I goe to saddle the horse, farewell wals till my returne.
Diálogo segúndo, en el qual, se tráta de compràr y vendér jóyas y otras cosas entre un Hidálgo llamado Thomas, y su mugér Margaríta, y un Mercadér y un Platéro. The second Dialogue, wherin is hand∣led to buie and sell iewels and other things, betweene a gentleman called Thomas and his wife Margaret, and a Mer∣chant, and a goldsmith. Th. A Donde queréis que vamos Señóra? Th. WHither will you that wee goe Ladie? Ma. Vámos a la platería, y compraré∣mos algunas piéças de plata. Ma. Let vs go to the goldsmithes shops, and we will buie some peeces of plate. Th. Y de alli? Th. And from thence whither? Ma. Yrémos a la lonja para comprár al∣gunas cósas. Ma. We will go to the Exchange to buy som things. Th. En el nombre de Dios, entrémos en ésta tiénda. Th. In the name of God let vs go into this shop. Ma. Plegue a el, sea con pie derecho. Ma. I praie God it be in good time, luckely. Th. A Señor guarde Dios a v.m. Th. Oh master goldsmith, God saue you. Pl. Y venga con vuéstras merçédes. Go. And God be in your companie. Th. Mande nos mostrár, algunas buénas piéças. Th. Cause one to shew vs some good peeces. Pl. Que géneros quiere v.m. táças, co∣pas o jarros, fuentes, platos, y escudillas, es lo mas necessário. Go. What kinds will your worships see, plain cups, deep cups, or pots, ewers, plat∣ters, or dishes, all these are the most necessarie. Th. Y tanbien copas de salvo, y saléros, vinagéras. Th. And also cups with couers, and salt∣sellers, and bottles for vineger and oyle. Pl. Ola móço, saca aqui toda essa plata de el arca. Go. Ho sirra, take out heere all this plate out of this chest. Ma. Veamos aquellos candeléros y des∣paviladéras. Ma. Let vs see these candlestickes and snuffers. Th. Si estos braserillos de mésa estuvié∣ran Sinceládos fuéran mejóres. T. If those chafindishes for the table were engrauen they were better. Pl. Otros dízen, que la sinceladúra es allegadéro de miérda, hablando con perdón de vuestras mer∣çédes. G. Others say, that the grauing is a gathe∣ring of filth, speaking with reue∣rence of your worships. Ma. No véo aquí agua maníl ningúno. M. I see no basen here. Pl. Aqui está vno sobre dorádo y sinçe∣ládo con su fuente de la misma labór. G. Here is one gilt ouer, and graued with his ewer of the same worke. Th. Yo quisiéra toda la baxilla de una misma labór que no diferençiá∣ran vnas pieças de otras. T. I would haue all a cupboord of plate all of one worke, that there might not differ one peece from another. Pl. Por esso dízen, que tantas opinió∣nes ay como cabeças: otros dí∣zen que la variedád es la que agráda. G. Therefore they say, so many men so ma∣ny mindes, others say varietie breedes delight. Th. Es verdád, peró la variedád ha de ser de cosas entéras, y por que hazér vna capa de remiéndos, no puede agradár a nádie. T. It is true, but that varietie is to be of whole entire things by themselues, for to make a cloake with patches can please no bodie.
Pl. Conçierte se v.m. conmígo en el préçio, que yo se la daré acabá∣da dentro de pocas días de la hechura que la quisiére. Go. Agree with me for the price, and I wil make it vp for you within these few daies, of what fashion you will haue it. Ma. Siempre en las tardanças ay pelí∣gro, y vale mas páxaro en mano que bueytre bolándo. M. Alwaies delaies breede danger, and better a birde in hand then a vul∣ture flying. Th. Pues escoja de ay v.m. les pieças que mas le agradáren. T. Then choose you out those peeces which best shall like you. Ma. Este salpimentéro y ésta copa con su sobre copa, y éste pichél, y ésta calderéta, y ésta porcelána sean las priméras. M. This salt and pepper boxe, and this cup with his couer, and this pot made ewer wise, and this kettle of siluer, and this broad cup to drinke in are the best. Th. A como hémos de dár porMarco de pla∣to is worth xxxij.s. Eng∣lish beside the fashion. el mar∣co de estas pieças? Th. What are we to paie for the halfe pound of these peeces? Pl. Por el marco de las llanas me ha de dár. v.m. a çien reáles por las sinçeládas, a quinze ducádos y por las doradas a treynta du∣cados. Go. For the halfe pounde of these plaine peeces your worship is to giue mee fiftie shillings, for the engrauing fifteene ducates, and for the gilt thirtie ducates. Th. Si el pedír fuera dár, no se avía he∣cho mala haziénda oy, peró de ❀ el dicho a el hécho ay gran trecho. Th. If asking were giuing you had not made an ill match to day, but there is a great distance betwixt the worde and the deede. Pl Al de menos no lo daré yo por lo, que. v.m. me ha o freçído hasta agora. Go. At least I will not giue it for that you haue offered me as yet. Th. Está tan caro, que yo no sé que le o∣frézca si no es vnaA daunce so called. Also an abatement. báxa. Th. You are so deere that I know not what I may offer for it, if there bee no abatement. Pl. Essa yo la dançaré despues que. v. m. aya tañído su álta. Go. That will I daunce after your worship hath strooke the treble. Th. Mi mas alta Señór, es a seis duca∣dos la llána, y a çien reales, la sinçeláda, y la doráda, a veinte ducádos. Th. My highest is sixe ducates the plaine, and fiftie shillings the engrauen, and the gilt twentie ducates. Pl. Muy bien despachádo yva yo, mas me tiénen ami de cósta. Go. This busines is wel dispatched now, they cost me more. Th. Pues Señór torne a dançár a vér en que pára. Th. But sir, come backe and daunce againe, to see vpon what you sticke. Pl. En cada género, le quitaré a. v.m. dos ducádos y no mas. Go. In euery kinde of them I will abate two ducates and no more. Th. Muy mal dançó. v.m. no le tóco mas. Th. You daunce very ill, I plaie no more. Pl. Pues yo le asegúro a. v.m. que no lo halle mas varáto en la calle. Go. But I assure your worship that you can∣not finde better cheape in the streete. Th. Calle que si hallare, que donde vna ❀ puerta se cierra ciento se á∣bren. Th. Holde your peace, for I will finde: for where one dore shuts a hundred do open. Ma. Si ha de valér mi voto, dezír le he. Ma. If my voice may preuaile, ile strike the stroke.
Pl. Diga le v.m. que le soy muy devóto. Go. Let your worship speake on, for I am much deuoted. Ma. Pues otro tanto como baxó el pla∣téro, suba el señor Tómas y no se hable mas. Ma. Then so much as the goldsmith hath abated, so much let master Tho∣mas rise, and let there be no more wordes. Pl. Porque su palabra de v.m. no buel∣va atrás, &c. Go. For that your worships worde may bee taken, &c. Th. No quería v.m. mas, ora peselo, pe∣sár malo le dé dios a el diablo. Th. You can desire no more, now waigh it, God giue ill waight to the diuell. Pl. Lleven lo a cása que allá lo pesaré∣mos. Go. Carrie it to your house, there we will waigh it. Th. Móço carga con todo y Lleva lo a casa. Th. Sirra, take vp all this and carrie it home. Pl. Han de bolvér se luego vuestras merçédes? Go. Are your worships to come backe a∣gaine this way by and by? Th. No hasta de aquí a dos oras, que y'mos a comprár otras cosas. Th. Not till within this two howers, for we goe to buy other things. Pl. Si v. m. es servído de que le acom∣pañe, hazér lo he. Go. If it please you, that I go with you, I will. Ma. Guarde Dios a v.m. que no queré∣mos mas compañía. Ma. God keepe you, we will no more compa∣nie. Th. En ninguna cosa gasto el dinero, de mejor gána que en pláta. Th. In nothing I spend money with a better will then in plate. Ma. Lo que se gasta en plata no es ga∣stár, si no trocár pieças chicas por pieças grandes. Ma. That which is laide out in plate is not wasted, but to change small peeces for great peeces. Th. Y tanbien por que cabe en ella lo que dízen que no cabe en un saco que es honra y provecho. Th. And also there is contayned in it that they say is not contained in a sacke, which isHonor and profit is not held together in one bagge. i. the fine di∣shes of earth painted such as are brought from Venice. honor and profit. Ma. Si, por que si hombre se quiere ser∣vír con vídrio o china, o bárro, mas cuesta lo que se quiebra entre año que la hechura de la plata. Ma. Yea, for if a man will serue his turne with glasse, or ❀ China mettall, or earth, that which is broken there∣of, costs more in a yeere then the fashion of the plate. Th. Y con vna baxilla que hombre cómpra vna vez, tiene para hijos, niétos, y visniétos. Th. And for a cupboord that a man buieth once, he is furnished for his chil∣dren, nephewes, and nephewes chil∣dren. Ma. Aora vámos a la joyería. Ma. Now let vs goe to the place where they sell iewels. Th. Esse es vn camíno que yo hago de muy mala gana. Th. This is a way that I goe vnwillingly. Ma. Por que razón? Ma. What is the reason? Th. Por que éstas joyas son como las donzéllas, que miéntras están ençerrádasson de mucho valór, y en sacando las fuéra, le pier∣den todo y no válen nada. Th. Because these iewels are as maidens, that while they are maides and kept in, they are of much value, and in taking them abroad they loose all, and are worth nothing. Ma. Si peró, lo que se vsa no se escúsa. Ma. Yea, but that which is a custome can∣not be shunned, custome needes no excuse.
Th. Al mal vso quebrár le la pierna. Th. But it is good to breake the legs of an ill custome. Ma. No queráis señor ponér vos puer∣tas a el campo ni coregír el mundo, que ansi le hallástes y ansi le havéis de dexár. Ma. I would not haue you Siri. to do things impossible. make doores for the fields, and correct the whole world: for so you found it, and so shall you leaue it. Th. Ora pues corra ol rio por do suele, pues se arendo la renta con éstas condiçiones. Th. Why then let the riuer run where it was wont, seeing the thing was hi∣red with these conditions. Ma. Entrémos en esta tiénda que es la mas ríca. Ma. Let vs goe into this shop, for it is the richest. Me. Que manda v.m. señór caualléro, que ha menestér? Me. What doth your worship command, what haue you neede of? Th. Yo ninguna cosa, ésta señóra, mu∣chas. Th. I of nothing, this gentlewoman of many things. Me. Pues pida su merçéd, que tódo se le dará aquí a muy buen précio. Me. Then let her require what, and all shall be giuen her very good cheape. Ma. Muestre me acá algunos tocádos, guirnaldíllas, rapósos, randas, deshilados, tocas de todas suer∣tes, y tan bien venga la olanda delgada, cambray, y otras suer∣tes de liéncos. Ma. Shew me some womens head attire, garland head attire, wires of siluer, bone worke or bone lace, stitched worke, head attire of all sorts, and also bring fine holland, cambrecke, and other sorts of linnen. Me. Entre v.m. que todo lo verá aquí. Me. May it please your worship come in, for you shall see all heere. Ma. Todo esto es obra tosca masPrima. i. chief, principall or a shee cosen ger∣man. prima la quiéro. Ma. All this is grosse worke, I woulde see more principall. Th. Para prima Señora no es buena la hija de vuestro tío? Th. Will not your vncles daughter serue you for a cosen? Ma. Es muy gorda aquella, y por esso queria otra mas delgáda. Ma. This is very course, and therfore would I haue other finer. Me. Pues en esta caxa verá. v.m. el pri∣mór del mundo, todo es obra de Milán. Me. Then in this chest shal your worship see the principallest that is, all is worke of Milan. Th. Obra de Milán veeme y no me tangas. Th. Worke of MilanBicause they are toies, if you touch them they breake in peeces. see me but touch me not. Ma. Nada de esto me conténta. Ma. None of these pleaseth me. Me. Espanto me como se casó v.m. si∣endo tan mal contentadíza. Me. I woonder how your worship married being so diuers to please your fancy. Th. Fue por que vído a el nóbio de no∣che, y como dizen entonçes to∣dos los gatos son párdos. Th. It was bicause she saw the bridegroome by night, and as they saie, then all cats are grey eied. Ma. Muestre me otra mejór obra si tie∣ne, y dexese de preguntár quan∣tos años tengo. Ma. Shewe me some better worke, if you haue any, and leaue of to aske how old I am. Me. Aora ésta es la última pruéva, ve aquí v.m. óbra de argentería ve allí de aljófar, estótra de abaló∣rio, y ésta de pérlas, escoja como peras en tabáque. Me. Now is the last triall, see heere worke of siluer, there of small pearle, this other of blacke bugles, and this of pearle, choose out as peares in a basket. Ma. Por cierto en ruin háto, poco ay que escojér. Ma. Verily in a bad flocke, this is but a smal choise.
Me. A esto llama v. m. ruín, reo que es de peór condición que el phi∣lósopho Demócrito, que no hallo cosa en el mundo que no tubiésse fálta. Me. Call you this bad, I beleeue that you are of a woorse condition then the Philosopher Democritus, which found nothing in the world, which had not a fault. Th. Esso sin Democrito lo dígo yo, que no ay cosa perfecta en el mundo. Th. I say this without Democritus, that there is nothing perfect in the world. Me. Esso verificárse ha, en cosas natura∣les, que en las de el arte puede aver perfecçión cada vna en su género. Me. This is to be verified in natural things, for in those things of arte, there may be perfection, euery thing in his kinde. Th. Pues que pensais vos que es el arte, sino ymitadór de la natura, y si en la natura no ay perfeçión menos la avrá en el arte su imi∣tadór. Th. Why what thinke you that arte is anie thing else but a follower of nature, and if nature hath not her perfec∣tion, much lesse shall there be anie in arte hir follower. Me. Yo señor no soy philósopho, ni qui∣ero contender con v. m. mis mercaderías querría que tubi∣éssen su perfeçión en el préçio. Me. Sir I am not a Philosopher, neither will I contende with your worship, I would my merchandizes had their perfection in the price. Ma. Si no le tiénen en su valór, no le pu∣éden tenér en el préçio. Ma. If they haue it not in their woorth, they cannot haue it in their price: Me. Aora señora véa v.m. lo que mas le conténta, y tome lo que no ten∣go otra cosa mejór. Me. Nowe ladie, see that which best likes you, and take it, for I haue no bet∣ter. Ma. Este tocádo, este cuéllo, ésta gar∣gantílla de perlas, este regalil∣lo, y este avanillo, esta dos pa∣res deguentes de flores, y esta pretína, me paréçen bien, todo lo de más no. Ma. This kerchiefe, this bande, this necke∣lace of pearle, this muffe, andBut not of feathers, for they vse no fea∣ther fans in Spaine. this fanne, these two paire of gloues per∣fumed, and this girdle likes me, all the rest I care not for. Th. Quanto monta todo esso? Th. How much comes all this to? Me. Todo monta tres çientos reáles. Me. All comes toi. Seauen pound ten shil∣lings. three hundred rials, or sixe pences. Th. Tres çientos áños esté de vn lado quien tal diére. Th. Let him lie three hundred yeeres on one side that should giue so much. Me. Pues por que no le alcançe a v.m. essa maldiçión dos çientos, y ochénta. Me. Then bicause this curse may not light vpon you, giue two hundred and fower score. Th. No entiendo bien essa cuenta. Th. I vnderstand not well this reckoning. Me. Dos vezes, se refiére a ci∣ento y tam∣bien al qua∣renta.Dos vézes ciento y quarenta. Me. Twise a hundred, and twise fortie. Ma. Buena está la copla, no han de sér mas que dos çiéntos y cin∣quenta en todo. Ma. This copla is well, it should be no more then two hundred and fiftie in all. Me. Con v. m. el perdér es ganár, pues manda que se a ansi, yo no ha∣blaré mas palábra. Me. With your worship to lose is gaine, see∣ing you commaund so, I will not speake a word more. Th. Para que quiere hablár mas, si con las habládas ha hecho su agósto. Th. Why would you speake any more, if with that which is spoken you haue made your haruest. Me. Por çierto señor de este agósto, po∣ca
cose cha he cogído.
Me. Truely sir, of this haruest I haue got∣ten
but a little fruit. Th. Señor si hiziéra buena sementéra cogíera mas. Th. If you had made your seede time bet∣ter, you had reaped more. Me. Aun tengo aquí otras muchas mer∣caderías muy curiosas que v.m. no ha visto. Me. Yet haue I many other merchandizes very fine, that your worship hath not seene yet. Ma. Que son? Ma. What are they? Me. Sartíllas, joyéles, cintas de resplan∣dór, brocadétes, rodétes cofias de oro, arandélas, alcacuéllos, gor∣gueras de réd, camísas labradas, gargantillas de pérlas, y ám∣bar, todo género de aféite y de perfúmes, véa v. m. si le con∣tenta algo. Me. Chaines of ieat amber, or such like, tablet iewels, girdles faire to see to, cloth of gold the woorser sort, head rolles, coifes of gold, suppor∣ters, gorgets of net worke, wrought shirts or smockes, necke laces of pearles and amber, all kinde of painting, and perfumes, see if you like any. Ma. Otro dia vernémos mas de espácio para ver todo esso. Ma. We will come another day, more at lea∣sure to see all this. Th. Pareçeme señór que es vuestro ofí∣cio, como el de los torneros en∣gaña mucháchos y saca dine∣ros. Th. It seemes to me sir, that your trade is as that of thei. Make tops for children. turners, which de∣ceiues boies and gets money. Me. Pues es mi señóra Margaríta mu∣chácho? Me. Why is my Lady Margaret a boy? Th. Basta que sea engañáda. Th. It sufficeth that she be deceiued. Me. A fee que no ha de savér poco quien la ha de engñár. Me. In faith, he is not to know a little that must deceiue her. Th. Engañárse ha ella mesma a si mis∣ma. Th. She her selfe will deceiue her selfe. Me. Como? Me. How? Sh. Dando dinéros por estas bugerías que relúzen yno es óro todo, y quando váya a casa, se hallará con no nada entre dos plátos. Th. In giuing money for these childish toies, which shine and yet are not all gold, and when she goes home, it will be founde nothing betweene two platters. Me. Para que es el dinero si no para lu∣zírse con ello. Me. Why is money made, but to make shew therewith? Th. Se que esto aunque relúze no lúze. Th. I knowe that this, although it glitter double, it shines not. Ma. Ya os he dicho señór, que os vais al coriénte de la de mas génte, y pues os casástes como los ótros pássa por donde los ótros, no andeis por los estrémos que to∣do hombre estremádo no está vn dedo de loco, éstas son car∣gas de el casamiénto. Ma. I haue alreadie told you sir, that you goe the common course of the most, & seeing you haue married as other men haue, passe that way as other men doe, go not by extremities, for euerie man that is in his extremi∣ties, is not a fingers breadth from a foole, these be the charges of ma∣riage. Th. La ayuda de el escaravájo que de∣xa la carga quanto le ayúdan. Th. The helpe of mariageThe nature of the beetle in the cow-turd when another comes to help him, leaues all: so in mari∣age, when ano∣ther comes to helpe to main∣taine his wife, he forsakes her. like the helpe of the beetle vnder the cow-turd, which forsakes the burden as soone as they helpe him.
Ma. Aora señór éssas son pendénçias que se han de reñir en casa vámo∣nos. Ma. Sir, these are quarrels to be chidden out at home. Let vs goe. Th. Vámos señóra, toma vuéstro dine∣ro Señór mercadér. Th. Let vs goe, take your money Master Merchant. Me. Yo quedo muy conténto y beso a v.m. las manos y veá si me man∣da ótra cosa. Me. I am very well content, and kisse your hands, and see if you commaund any thing els. Th. Que con salúd que tengamos, nun∣ca mas nos veámos. Th. Sowe may haue health that we neuer see one an other more. Me. Por çierto Señór, yo no soy tan yn∣gráto, que cada dia quería vér a v.m. por mi cása. Me. Truely sir I am not so ingratefull, but that euerie day I would see your worship by my house. Th. Yo créo que queríades vér mi bólsa mas no a mi. Th. I beleeue you would see my purse rather then me. Me. No soy tan codiçióso como a v. m. le parézco. Me. I am not so couetous as I seeme vnto you. Th. No digo yo que lo soys, pero aposta∣ré que quercis mas un real de a quatro, que uno de a dos. Th. I say not that you are, but I will lay a wager, that you had rather haue two shillings than one. Me. Por adivino le podrían a v. m. ca∣stigár. Me. They might well punish you for a sooth∣sayer. Th. Lo que con los ojos véo con el dédo lo adivíno. Th. That which with the eies I see, I con∣iecture with my finger. Ma. A Dios mercadér. Ma. God be with you merchant. Me. Beso a v.m. las manos mi Señóra. Me. Ladie I kisse your hands. Ma. Vámos a ora a la lonja a comprár sédas. Ma. Let vs goe now to the exchaunge to buy silkes. Th. Que queréis comprár Señora? Th. What would you buy? Ma. Que terciopélo, raso, damásco, ta∣fetán, riço, gorgarán, chameló∣te, laníllas para vestíros a vos y ami. Ma. What, plaine veluet, damaske, tafata, vncut veluet, gogram, chamlet, sarge, to cloath you and my selfe. Th. Para esso es menestér otro dia y a es tarde vamos a comér que mañá∣na yrémos a comprár esso. Th. For all this another day will serue, it is late now let vs goe to dinner, for to morrow we will goe to buy this. Ma. Vamos pues aunque yo mas quisié∣ra que quedára oy todo hecho, que no tenér que salír mañana otra buelta. Ma. Let vs goe then, although I would ra∣ther that al were done to day, then to come foorth another turne to morrow. Th. Anda, que bien os holgáis depasseár un rato, para que me queréis ha∣zér entendér de el çiélo ceból∣la? Th. Goe, for you take good pleasure to walke a while, wherfore you would make me beleeue the moone is made of a greene cheese? Ma. No seáis maliçióso que no medra∣réis. Ma. Be not malitious, for you shall thriue neuer the sooner. Th. Muchácho corre, llama a el platé∣ro que venga a pesár la plata y por su dinéro. Th. Boy, run cal the goldsmith, that he come to waigh the plate and fetch his money:
Diálogo tercéro, de un combíte, entre çinco cavalléros amígos, llamádos, Guz∣man, Rodrígo, don Lorénço, Mendoça, y Osório, un maestre sala, y un paje, en el qual, se trata, de cosas pertene∣çièntes a un combíte con otras pláticas, y di∣chos agúdos. The thirde Dialogue of a banquet be∣tweene fiue gentlemen friendes, called Gusman, Rodricke, sir Lorenço, Mendoça, Osorio, a gentleman vsher, and a Page, in which are handled things belon∣ging to a banquet with other speeches and wittie sayings. G. OLa, está ay algun paje? G. HOe, is there any Page there? P. Señor. P. Sir. G. Sáues a cása de don Rodrigo? G. Dost thou knowe master Rodrick his house? P. Si Señór. P. Yea sir. G. Pues vée allá, dile que le béso las mános, y que si le paréce óra de que nos veámos. G. Then go thither and tell him that I com∣mend me to him, and if he thinke good now, that we may meete to∣gither. P. Aquí está un criádo de el Señor don Lorénço. P. Heere is a seruant of sir Lorenço. G. Entre. G. Let him come in. Cr. Don Lorénço mi Señór, bésa a v.m. las mános y embía a sabér si está en casa, por que tiene un negó∣cio que tratar con. v. m. S. Sir Lorenço my master commends him vnto your worship, and sendes me to know whether you be at home, for hee hath a busines to entreate of with you. G. Que beso a su merçed las manos, y que yo fuera a la Suya, a besárse las si no tuviéra una ocupación forçósa que esperár, la qual tanbien toca a su merçéd que si viniére, será el bien venído y se tratará de todo. G. I thanke him, and I woulde haue come vnto his house to haue saluted him, if I had not tarried heere about a busines of importance, the which also concernes him, if hee come he shall be welcome, and wee will talke at large. Cr. Beso a v.m. las manos. S. I take my leaue of your worship. G. Anda con Dios, ola Dezíd a el ma∣estre sala que hága ponér éssas mésas, que vernán ya los con∣vidádos. G. God be with you. Ho tel the gentleman-usher that he make the tables to be couered, for the guests wil come by and by. M. Señór v.m. como se quiére servír oy, ala Ytaliana, o ala Françéza, o a la Ynglesa, o a la Flaménca, o a la Todésca? V. Sir will your worship haue your seruice today, after the Italian, after the French, after the English, after the Flemish, or after the Dutch manner? G. De todos essos estrémos me sacád vn médio, no quiero tantas çe∣rimònias, como el Ytaliáno, ni quiero tanta curiosidád, como el Françés, ni quiero tanta a∣bundáncia, como el Yngles, ni quiero que la comída sea tan larga, como el Flaménco ni tan
úmida como el tudésco, mas de todos estos estremos, compo∣néme vn médio a la Española.
G. Of all these extremes take me out one meane, I will not haue so many ce∣remonies as the Italian, neither will I so much curiositie as the French, neither such abundan∣dance as the English, neither will I that the meale be so long as the Flemmings, nor so moist as the
Dutch, but of all these extremes, compound me a meane after the Spanish fashion. M. Ansi se hará como v.m. lo mánda. V. So shall it be as your worship comman∣deth. G. Vuestro mayór cuidádo séa que la comidá sea caliénte y la bevída fría. G. Let your chiefest care be that the meat be hot, andIn Spaine they coole their wine by setting the flagons in snow water. the drinke coole. M. Que vinos quiere v.m. V. What wines will your worship haue? G. De todos géneros, bláncos, tinto, halóque, claréte, cándia, riba∣dáuia, san Martín, tóro, y sidra, porque aya de todo. G. Of all sortes, white sacke, deepe red brackish wine, hallocke, claret, candie,Ribadáuia a whitish sacke growing in Ga∣licia about a village called Ribadáuia. Ribadavia,Wine of S. Martin the most delicate wine of Spaine growing about S. Martina towne in the kingdome of Toledo in Spaine. S. Mar∣tin, Toro, and Cider, for that there may be of euery sorte. P. Aquí viéne el señór don Rodrígo. P. Heere commeth master Roderick. G. O señór. v.m. y las buenos áños. G. Oh sir you are as welcome as the good yeere. R. Beso a.v.m. las manos. R. Sir I thanke you hartely. G. Como está. v.m. paréçe que coxéa. G. How do you sir, it seemes you halt. R. Díme vn golpe a el apeár de el ca∣vállo en esta espinilla. R. I hit my selfe a blowe in lighting from my horse, in this shin bone. G. En ora mala séa, veámos si es algo. G. In ill time, let vs see if it be any thing. R. ❀ No señór, si no que es como dí∣zen dolór de cobdo, dolor de espóso, duele mucho y dúra poco. R. No sir, it is (as they say) like the paine of a blow on the elbow, or the sorrowe of a bridegrome,Bicause they haue had small conuersation togither to in∣crease loue. it greeueth much and is quickly done. G. Mas vale ansi. G. It is the better. R. Como tiene. v.m. a mi señóra doña Maria y a toda su casa? R. How doth my lady Mary your wife, and all your familie. G. A servíçio de. v.m. aunque ella por no avér me ynbídia díxo, que pues yo comía con mis amí∣gos, ella se quería yr a comér con sus amígas. G. At your seruice, although she saies (not bicause she enuies me) that since I banquet with my friendes, she would go to dinner to hir friends. R. Hízo su merçéd muy discretamén∣te, en pagár le a. v.m. en la mis- ❀ ma monéda. R. She dealt very discreetely to paie you with the same money. M. Todos estos señóres conbidádos e∣stán aqui, y la comída a púnto quando vuessas merçedes fué∣ren servídos, se podran asentár. V. All the gentlemen that are inuited are heere, and dinner is readie, when your worships please, you may sit downe. G. ❀ Señór don Lorénço. v.m. tiéne las mañas de el Rey que adonde no está no le hállan. G. Sir Lorenço you haue the propertie of a king, that where he is not, there they finde him not. L. Y v. m. quiere pareçérse Alçina de quien dize Orlando que por engáño, tray'alos hombres a gozár de sus regálos. L. And you will be like Alcina of whom Orlando maketh mention, which brought men to take pleasure in her dainties to entrap them. G. Pero, no serán vuessas merçédes convertídos en animáles como ella hazía. G. But you shall not be turned into beastes as she turned them. L. ❀ No me asegúro, que dexe de bol∣verse
vérse alguno en çórra.
L. I am not assured of that, for some of vs
may suffer himselfe to bei. To be drunk turned into a foxe. R. ❀ De buen vino quien quiera se caça vna en el áño. R. Whosoeuer loues good wine,i. Whips the cat, or is drunke once a yeere. hunts the foxe once a yeere. G. Cada vno su alma en su palma, qual el tiempo tal sea el tiénto. Ea Señores tómen sillas v. s. mer∣cedes y sienten se. G. Euery one holdes free will in his hands, as the time requires so frame thy desires. Go to gentlemen betake your selues to your chaires and sit downe. L. Déxenos v. m. ante todas cosas con∣tenplár vn rato la curiosidád de la mésa. L. Suffer vs I praie aboue all things to be∣holde a while the curiousnes of this table. R. ❀ No tiene mas pieças vn juego de mastre corál, que están hechas de las servillétas. R. A iuglar hath no more inuentions and peeces then are made in theseTable nap∣kins at a ban∣quet or inuiting in Spaine set out with diuers fa∣shions, as of beastes, birds, &c. this the Maestresala alwaies doth. ta∣ble napkins. O. Yo aqui véo vna galéra, que no le fálta mas, que la chúsma y pala∣ménta. O. I see heere a gally, there wants nothing but the gallie slaues and the oares. M. Pues acá está vn cavalloque no sé yo, si el cavallo de Tróya éra tan bien hécho. M. And here is a horse, that I know not if the horse of Troy were so wel made. L. A mi me ha caído ensuerte el escudo de Hércules. L. And heere hath fallen to my lot Her∣cules shielde. R. Y este que está aqui, que es? R. And this which is heere what is it? M. A mi me paréçe, ques vna pirámida de las de Egípto. M. It seemes to me to be one of theThere were many Pirami∣des, but two of them were rec∣koned one of the seuen wonders of the world. Pira∣mides of Egypt. O. O es el sepulcro de máusalo, o la torre de babel. O. Or it is MausalusWhich for the magnificence thereof was ac∣compted one of the woonders of the world, and was built by his wife Queene Artemisia. Tombe, or the to∣wer of Babell. G. Aóra déxen esso vuessas marçédes y siéntense, si, son servídos. G. Now leaue off this, and sit downe if it please you. R. No se ipuede dexár de mirár el ca∣stillo de la ensaláda. R. One cannot choose but looke vpon the sallet made like a castle. L. Por mi vida, que no tiéne mejór vi∣sta el de Milán. L. In faith the castle of Milan is no bet∣ter to see to. G. Si cada cosa se ha de mirár de por si, yr se nos ha el dia en flóres. Cada vna tire su silla, que ésta no es mésa de cumplimiéntos. G. If we must stand to behold euery thing by it selfe, the time will be gone without doing any thing. Euerie one draw his chaire, for this is not a table of complements. O. No los déve avér entre amigos. O. They ought not to be among friends. G. Yo soy ynimiçíssimo de çerimó∣nias. G. I am the greatest enemie in the worlde to ceremonies. R. ❀ A mi no me paréçen bien ningu∣nas, si no son las que haze la y∣glésia. R. None of them seeme good vnto me, ex∣cept it be those which the church makes. G. Ola, plátos, tome v. m. esse señór don Lorénço. G. Hola,They eate in little dishes their meate & not vpon tren∣chers in Spaine. dishes. Take this sir Lorenso. L. Haga v.m. parasi, que lo mismo hará cada vno. L. Make a dish for your selfe, for euerie one will do the like. R. No se qual sea mejór v'so este que vsamos en Espáña o el que se v'sa en ynglatérra. R. I knowe not which is the better custome which we vse in Spaine, or that which is vsed in England.
G. Que es el v'so de ynglatérra? G. What is the maner of England? R. Comér priméro lo cozído, que lo as∣sádo, nos ótros hazémos a el re∣vés. R. To eate their sodde meate first be∣fore their roast, we doe quite con∣trarie. L. Segun réglas de mediçína primero se déven comér los manjáres que son mas duros de digestión L. According to the rules of Phisicke, men ought first to eate those meates which are most hard of digestion. G. Y está esso en razón para que se venga a hazér la digestión en vn tiempo. G. And that stands with reason, bicause digestion may be made togither. L. Pues que séa mas duro de digestión, lo asádo que lo cozído, es cosa clára. L. Then that roastmeate is more hard of digestion then the sodde, it is a thing out of doubt. O. Yo como soy mas golóso, hallo ótra razón. O. I that am a great eater, finde another reason. L. Qual es? L. What is it? O. Que toda cosa assada, es mas sabró∣sa que la cozída, y ássi, yo lo querría a el princípio por que sobre buen cimiénto buen edi∣ficio se háze. O. That euery thing roasted is more sweet to the taste then the sodde, and so therefore woulde I haue it at the first, for vpon a good foundation, a good building is made. Me. Pues yo aunque cállo, piédras a∣paño. M. He that is si∣lent gathereth reasons to con∣fute his aduer∣sarie.Although I hold my peace, I gather vp stones. R. Anda v. m. discréto, que obéja que bála bocado piérde. R. You saie very right, for that sheepe that bleateth looseth a bit. G. A mi me paréçe que ándan ya en seco éstos molinos. G. Me thinkes these milles go now drie. L. De la boca me lo quitó v.m. L. You tooke it out of my mouth. G. Pues si yo lo quité, jústo es que yo lo pónga. Ola, dad nos de bevér, cada vno pida lo que mas gusto le diére, que de todo ay. G. If I tooke it out, it is reason I shoulde put it in. Hola giue vs drinke, euerie one aske for that which he likes best, for there is of euery sorte. R. Páje yo soy muy devóto de a quel santo que partió la capa con el pobre. R. Page, I haue great deuotion to thatSaint Martin gaue a peece of his cloake to a poore man, and wine of Saint Martin the most daintie of all Spaine. Saint which departed with a peece of his cloake to a poore man. P. A buen entendedór pocas palabras, de lo de sant Martin quiére v.m. P. To a good vnderstander a worde is enough, you woulde haue that of Saint Martin. R. O como éres discréto, Dios me de siempre contienda, conquien me entiénda. R. O how you are in the right, God send me to dispute alway with him that vn∣derstandeth what I say. L. Pues yo vn tiempo fui toréro, y me holgáva siempre conHe alludes to wine of Toro, wines called vino de Toro, which is a Bull, as also a townes name. toros bravos. L. I was once a courser of buls, and I al∣waies tooke pleasure in fierceHe alludes to wine of Toro, wines called vino de Toro, which is a Bull, as also a townes name. buls. G. Señores yo brindo a quien tossiére. G. Gentlemen, I drinke to him that shall cough. O. ❀ Vala me Dios y que resfriádos que estámos todos, no se tósse mas en vn sermón de quarés∣ma. O. God blesse me, and what coldes we haue all taken, there is not more cough∣ing in a lenten sermon. R. Essa gráçia, dízen que tenémos los Españóles que sómos como
mónas amígos de hazér lo que vémos hazér a otros.
R. This fashion (they say) that we Span∣yards haue, that we are as apes,
which doe that which they see o∣thers to doe. L. ❀ Ansi dize vn refrán, si no hago lo que véo, todo me méo. L. So saith the prouerbe, If I doe not what I see, I all to bepisse me. G. Cada vno asga de su perdíz, y la aderéçe como mejór le pareçi∣ére, ay astán limónes, limas, na∣ránjas, pimiénta, y todo lo de∣más. G. Euery one fasten on his partridge and order him as best shall seeme good vnto him, there are limons and orenges, pepper, and all things else. R. ❀ La perdiz, dízen los médicos, que se a de comér entre tres com∣pañéros paraque no haga mál. R. A partridge, as phisitions say, is to be eaten betweene three companions, that he may doe no harme. L. Tiénen razón que han de ser el hombre, vn gato, y vn pérro. L. They say true, that is, betweene a man, a cat and a dog. O. Vuéstras mercédes no han notado la variedád de assádos que aqui nos han traído. O. You haue not marked the varietie of the roast, which here they haue brought vs. R. Que está debaxo de aquella enra∣máda? R. What is vnder those greene boughes? G. Vna cabéça de javalí. G. The head of a wilde boare. R. Estónçes rámos de tavérna son a∣quellos. R. Then it is the bush of a tauerne. L. Antes a el contrário que el ramo en la tabérna llama a los borrachos a el vino, y aquellos lláman a el mismo vino, asi como la piédra ymán el azéro. L. Rather the contrarie, for the tauerne bush inuites those that loue drinke to the wine, and these boughes in∣uites or drawes vnto it wine it selfe, euen as the loadstone draw∣eth to it steele. O. A Señór Mendóza partí de esse Xigóte con vuestros amígos. O. A master Mendoza, part this roast leg of mutton with your friends. M. ❀ Señór el mio murió súpito. M. Sir mine died suddenly. R. Paréçe que havéis respondído, un gran A defésio .i. disparate. R. It seemes you haue answered with a speech quite beside the purpose. O. Pues aunque lo paréçe, no lo es, que a sú provecho ha habládo el señ∣ór Mendóza. O. Although it seeme, it is not so, for ma∣ster Mendoza hath spoken it for his aduantage. R. Pues, si no nos lo declara, no saldré∣mos de dúbda. R. But if he do not expound it, we shall not know what it meanes. M. Señór, es el caso, que dos compañ∣éros llegáron a una vénta y co∣mo no uviésse otra cosa que çe∣nár, que una gallína assáda, el uno de ellos que tenía buena hambre, y éra hombre astúto, díxo a el otro compañero, en∣tanto que yo apáro ésta gallina, contáme de que murió vue∣stro padre: el otro se començó a enternecér, y con lágrimas le relató un proçéso bien largo de la enfermedád de su padre, y como avía muerto, en lo qual
tardó tanto, que quando acor∣dó ya el otro se avía comído, casi toda la gallina, el hallando se burládo, quíso esquitárse y díxo le compañéro, pues yo os he contádo la muerte de mi pa∣dre, contáme vos, la, de el vue∣stro, el compañero, por no per∣dér La parte que le quedáva y concluír presto razónes, re∣spondió, Señor, el mio murió súpito: con la qual Repuésta el otro quedó muy burládo y el le ayudó a despachár lo que faltáva.
M. Sir, this it is, that two companions came to an Inne, vpon the high way, and as there was nothing else to suppe withall, but one hen roasted: one of them which was well hungrie & a craftie fellow, saide to the other companion, in the meane while that I breake vp and order this hen, re∣count vnto me whereof your father died. The other began to be tender harted, and with teares related vn∣to him a long processe of the sicknes of his father, & how he died, wher∣in he stood so long, that when he re∣membred
himselfe, the other had alreadie eaten almost all the hen, he finding himselfe mocked, would quite himselfe, and saide vnto him, companion, seeing I haue tolde you the death of my father, doe you tell me now the death of your father: his companion for that hee would not loose that part which remained, and because he would be short an∣swered, Sir, my father died sudden∣ly, with which answere he gaue his fellow a scoffe, and himselfe time to dispatch the rest. R. Pues aquí no corre ese riésgo. R. But here is not the like danger. M. No, pero yo soy como el cuclíllo que no canto bien hasta que tengo el estómago lléno. M. Although not, I am like the cuckow, which sing not vntill I haue my stomacke full. L. Con liçençia de el señór Guzman quiéro ymbiár esta pella de manjár blanco a un amigo. L. With leaue of Master Guzman, I will send this round ball ofA meat made of breasts of hens, milke, su∣gar, rice beaten, and spices mi∣xed withall, one of the daintiest meates vsed. Manjár blanco to a friend. G. Con mi liçénçia no yrá sola si no la acompáña v. m. con aquel pá∣vo, o este faisan o el francolín. G. With my leaue it shall not goe alone, but that you accompanie with it, this peacock, this feasant, or this fran∣colin bird. R. Por vida de don Lorénço es amigo o amiga? R. I pray you hartily Sir Lorenço, is it a he friend or she friend? L. ❀ Quereis que confiesse sin tor∣mento. L. Will you that I confesse without the racke? G. ❀ Y quando os le den antes mártir que confessor. G. And when they doe racke you, rather prooue a martyr then a confessor. O. ❀ O que reverenda que viéne nu∣estra madre la olla. O. O what a reuerend person comes here, our mother the meate. R. Y bien adornáda de todas sus per∣tenénçias. R. And well adorned with all her appur∣tenances. M. Yo deséo savér, donde o porque le llamaron olla podrída? M. I desire to knowe, from whence or why they called itA rotten or putrified pot. Also a hotch-potch of many meates togither Olla podrida. L. Metaforicaménte, porque assí co∣mo en vn muladár se púdren muchas cósas diferéntes, y de todas se haze la basúra assí la olla que es conpuésta de mu∣chas cosas se viéne a hazér vn guizádo o potáje. L. Metaphorically, because euen as in a dung hill many different things rot together, and of all these they make dung for the field: euen so the pot which is compounded of many things is made one iellie or potage. M. Tan buena metáfora fue essa como el que llamó Rey a el que guarda los puercos. M. This was as good a metaphor as that of him, which called the king the kee∣per of hogs. O. Por mi passatiempo yo me quiero poner acontár de quantas cosas está compuésta su mercéd de nuestra olla, carnero, váca, to∣çino. O. For my recreation I will set my selfe to reckon, of how many things this worshipfull the pot, is com∣pounded, first mutton, beefe, and bacon.
d.L. ❀ Essas son las tres poténcias de la olla como las de la alma, me∣mória, entendimiénto, volun∣tád. L. These are the three powers of the pot, as the three powers of the soule, me∣morie, vnderstanding, will. O. Luego se sigue repóllo, návos, çe∣vollas, ajos. O. Now followe cabbage, turneps, onyons, garlicke. d.L. ❀ Essas son las quatro virtúdes cardináles. L. These be the fower cardinall vertues. O. Cavéças y pies de áves, culantro verde, alcarabéa, comínos, to∣das espécias, las de mas yér∣vas, y no las conósco, otro las quénte. O. The heades and feete of birdes, the herbe carobes or S. Iohns herbe, comines, all sortes of spices, the most part of herbes, I knowe them not, let another speake of them. d.R. Lo que yo contaré despues, será lo bien que me ha sabído. R. That which I will saie of it shall be the good I haue tasted in it. d.L. De el marques chapin vitélo Yta∣liáno, que fue uno de los mas valiéntes soldados que ha teni∣do aquella naçión, se quenta que quando fue a Espáña le di∣éron tanto gusto estas ollas, que nunca querría comér en su casa, si no que y endo por la calle olía en casa de algun labradór rico, adonde se comía alguna olla de éstas, y se entráva allá y se a sen∣táua a comér con el. L. Of marques Chapin Vitelo, an Italian, which was one of the most valiant souldiers, which that nation hath had, it is saide, that when he went to Spaine, these hodgpots liked his taste so well, that he neuer woulde dine in his owne house, but that going in the streete, where hee smelt in the house of any rich far∣mer, where any of these hodgpots were eaten, there he entred, and sate downe to diner with him. d.R. Devíalo de hazérpor comér a co∣sta agéna. R. Belike hee did that to dine at another mans charges. L. No, que antes que saliésse mandáva a su mayordómo pagásse toda la costa de la olla. L. No, for before he went out of dores hee commanded his steward to pai all the cost of the hodgepot. M. Pare, mira como pónes esse plato no deribes el saléro. M. Staie, looke howe thou puttest this plat∣ter, do not throwe downe the salt-seller. L. Si, si, guarda, que es el aguéro de los mendózas. L. Yea, yea, take heede, for it is the Men∣dozas malum omen. R. Ya todos somos Mendózas en esso. R. We are all Mendozas in this. L. Essa rastra nos quedó de la gentili∣dád. L. This trace doth remaine to vs from the Gentiles. M. Hemos visto esperiéncias muy ver∣dadéras. M. Wee haue seene many true examples heereof. O. ❀ Créo en Dios y no en putas viéjas. O. I beleeue in God, and not in olde wiues tales. M. Essas son de las que yo me procúro siempre guardár. M. Those are they from which I alwaies seeke to keepe my selfe. R. O señor Guzman para que es esto que se trae agora? R. O master Guzman, wherefore is this that they bring now? G. Dízen que pará comér. G. They saie for to eate. R. Si, peró éra menestér hazér nuévos estómagos, en que e chállo. R. Yea, but it were need to make stomacks to receiue it. O. Mandárlos hazér de barro a truéco
de poco dinéro.
O. Cause them to bee made of claie, for a
small price of money. M. Estas tortas reáles, son como cuer∣po que no ocúpa lugár. M. These riall tartes are as the bodie which filleth no place. L. Yo tengo de provár esta pepitória. L. I will prooue thisMade of the heades, liuers, harts, breastes, feete, of duckes geese, or other birds, &c. Pepitório or galli∣maufrie. R. Yo conelOf paste of almondes and sugar, egges, breasts of hens, milke, cynamon, and diuers sorts of spices verie like Manjar blanco. manjár reál me acomó∣do. R. I do applie my selfe to this riall dish of meate. G. No ay quien pruéve esótros guisa∣dos, éstos torresnos lampreá∣dos, aquel adobado, el carnéro verde, las albóndigas, ni lo de mas. G. Is there no bodie to prooue these other meates, these hogs liuers with the hogs caule fried with the fat, that hodgepot of mutton, mutton stuffed with parsly, the chopped meat made into round bals, neither the rest. T. ❀ Todo ésso es como Pedro por de mas. L. All this is as Peter too much. O. O como alla voy no hago mengua. O. Oh as I goe there I neuer faile. G. Alçalo pues muchacho desembará∣ça y trae aquella fruta de sar∣tén. G. Take off boy, rid the table, and bring these fritters. P. Aqui está señor, y la melója y tódo. P. Here it is Sir, and theWine sodden to the third part for a sauce for the fritters. Melója and all. R. Esso allá a los aguados, que la borra∣cha no quiere pássa. R. That there is for those that drinke wa∣ter, for one that loues wine loues not to eateBut salt meats to make them drinke. raisins. G. Traé pues la fruta de póstre, camué∣ças, péras, azeitúnas, nuézes, a∣vellánas, y la cája de merme∣láda. G. Bring fruit for the last seruice, pippins, peares, oliues, wallnuts, small nuts, and the boxe of marmalade. L. Hasta quando hemos de comér? L. Till when shall we eate? R. ❀ Hasta enfermár, como dize el re∣frán. R. Vntill we be sicke, as saith the prouerbe. L. Y despues ayunár hasta sanár. L. And afterward to fast till wee bee in health. O. Levánta esta mésa paje, que es ya gula tanto comér. O. Take away this table, Page, for it is gluttonie to eate so much. M. ❀ Yo he perdido la gana, como si me la quitáran con la mano. M. I haue lost my stomack, as though they had taken it from me with ones hand. L. El mejór remédio, que halláron los filósofos, contra la hambre, fue este. L. The best remedie that euer philoso∣phers found against hunger, was this. R. ❀ Esa filosofía algo es gruéssa de hi∣láça. R. This philosophie is somewhat of a grosse threed. O. Mejór se podrá dezír verdád apurá∣da que ya saveís lo que es. O. Better may you say a refined truth, you know what I meane. L. ❀ Ya se que verdádes apurádas son neçedádes. L. I knowe that refined truthes are foole∣ries. O. Mas pulído lo quería yo dezír. O. I would giue it a better terme. R. Como? R. How? O. Yndiscreçiónes. O. Indiscretions. d.L. Tanto monta cortár, como desa∣tár,
como díxo Alexandre.
L. It comes all to one, to cut it off or vntie
it, as Alexander said. d.R. Ola paje, tráe unos náipes entre∣tengámos el tiempo. R. Hola page, bring cardes, let vs passe a∣way the time. M. Esso me conténta, vengan que des∣séo esquitár me de un escudo que perdí estótro día. M. That pleaseth me well, let them come, for I desire to quit my selfe of a crowne, that I lost this other day. d.L. ❀ No me pésa ami de que mi híjo juégue, sino de que se quiere esquitár. L. It greeues me not that my sonne is a gamester, but that he will goe to quit himselfe. M. El tahur, chica ocasión ha menestér para bolvér a el juégo. M. The gamester requireth but small oc∣casion to returne to plaie. d.L. A mi me pareçe que sola una. L. It seemes to me but one onely. M. Qual es? M. What is it? d.L. Tenér dinéros. L. That he haue money to doe it. M. Ni al tahúr faltó que jugár, ni al go∣lóso que comér, ni al enduradór que endurár, ni al borácho que bevér. M. Neither hath the gamester euer wan∣ted money to play, nor the glutto∣nous to eate, nor the patient to suf∣fer, nor the louer of drinke to drinke. d.R. Aqui están los náipes, que jugaré∣mos? R. Here are the cards, what shall we play at? d.L. Iuguémos gana piérde. L. Let vs play at loadam. M. Es juego de mucha fléma. M. It is a plaie of much patience. d.L. Pues séa a el triúnfo. L. Then let it be at trumpe. M. Quéde para los viéjos. M. Let that be for old men. d.L. A los çientos. L. At mount sant. M. Desvanéçe se me la cabéça, de estár siempre contándo. M. It makes my head to be in a swoune, to be alwaies counting. d.L. Menos os agradará el chilindrón. L. Lesse will the play of Chilindron like you. M. E'sse para las mugéres de tras de los tiçónes. M. That is for women by the fire side. d.L. No es, si no que vos no queréis ju∣ego de virtúd, si no de arrebá∣ta cápas. L. It is not, but that you will not haue any game of vertue but sweepe stake play. M. Para que hemos de estár gastándo ❀ tiempo, sino lo que se a de em∣peñár, venda se, como dízen. M. Wherefore should we waste time, but that which we must pawne, let vs sell our right as they say. d.R. Si, por que haziénda hécha, no da priéssa. R. Yea, but ones substance made vp, let there be no haste to lose ones mo∣ney. d.L. ❀ Y mas quando le gánan a el hom∣bre su dinero, le quitan presto decuidá do. L. And moreouer, when they win a mans money from him, they straightway take him out of care. M. He aqui están los naipes juguémos treínta por fuérça, o los albúres que todos éstos son buenos ju∣egos. M. Behold here are the cardes, let vs play at thirtie perforce or Albures, for these are good plaies. d.R. Yo no soy amigo de ellos, si no de juegos de primór, como el Rey∣nádo, el tres dos y as, triunfo calládo y ótros semejantes. R. I loue not these but games of chiefest price, as the Reynádo, the three, two and ace, still trumpe, and other the like.
O. Ora por quitár todos de contiénda yo quiéro dar vn médio y sea este la priméra. O. Now to take away all occasion of strife, I will giue a meane, and let it be Primera. M. Muy bien avéis dicho que es médio entre los estrémos. M. You haue saide very well, for it is a meane betweene extremes. d.L. Yo entiéndo que se llamó priméra, porque tiene el priméro lugár entre los juegos de náypes. L. I take it that it is called Primera, be∣cause it hath the first place at the play at cardes. d.R. Alto, que ha de ser el tanto? R. Let vs goe, what is the summe that we play for? M. Quatro reáles y dies y seis de saca. M. Two shillings stake, and eight shillings rest. d.L. Pues barajá essos naipes bien. L. Then shuffle the cardes well. O. Yo álço por mano, figura úvo de sér, no querría yo yr hecho figura sin blanca. O. I lift to see who shall deale, it must be a coate card, I would not be a coat with neuer a blanke in my purse. d.R. Yo un ás alçé. R. I did lift an ace. d.L. Yo un quátro. L. I a fower. M. Yo vn se is, con que soy mano. M. I a sixe, whereby I am the eldest hand. O. Véngan las cartas que yo las doy una, dos, tres, quatro. Vna, dos, tres, quatro. O. Let the cardes come to me, for I deale them, one, two, three, fower, one, two, three, fower. M. Paso. M. Passe. d.R. Paso. R. Passe. d.L. Paso. L. Passe. O. Enbído un tanto. O. I set so much. M. No le quiero. M. I will none. d.R. No le quiero. R. Ile none. d.L. Yo por fuérça avré de querér, echád cartas. L. I must of force see it, deale the cards. M. Echad me quatro cartas he aqui mi tanto. M. Giue me fower cards, Ile see as much as he sets. d.R. He aqui el mio, cada uno meta el suyo. R. See heere my rest, let euery one be in. M. Buelvo a pasár. M. I am come to passe againe. d.R. Yo tanbien. R. And I too. d.L. Yo hago lo própio. L. I do the selfe same. O. Yo enbído mi resto. O. I set my rest. M. Quiero le. M. Ile see it. d.R. Yo tanbien. R. I also. b.L. Pues yo no me puedo echár. L. I cannot giue it ouer. M. Yo híze una primerilla. M. I was a small prime. d.L. Yo voy a flux. L. I am flush. M. No querría yo que le hiziéssedes. M. I would you were not. d.L. Es éssa buena promixidád? L. Is this good neighbourhood? M. ❀ La caridád bien ordenáda comi∣énça de si mísmo. M. Charitie well placed, doth first beginne with ones selfe. O. Yo he hecho cinquénta y çinco con que máto su priméra. O. I made fiue and fiftie, with which I win his prime. d.L. Yo flux con que tíro. L. I flush whereby I draw. d.R. No juégo masa éste juégo. R. I play no more at this play. M. Ni yo a ótro ninguno que voy a vn
negócio que me ympórta.
M. Neither I at any other, for I must goe
about a busines that concernes me. d.L. Pajes toma cada quatro reáles de baráto. L. Pages take euerie one two shillings a peece of the winnings. Pa. Centuplum acipias. P. I pray God you may receiue it a hun∣dred fold. Pa. En el çielo lo halle v.m. colgádo de vn garaváto. P. In heauen I pray God you may finde it hanged on a hooke. Diálogo quarto, entre dos amígos lla∣mádos el uno Mora, el otro Aguilàr y un moço de mulas y una Ventéra, trátan se en el de las cósas tocántes a el camíno con muy gra∣ciósos dichos y chístes. The fourth Dialogue betweene two friendes, the one called Mora, the other Aguilar and a mulettier and a woman Inkee∣per: Heerein are handled things pertai∣ning to the way with very pleasant sayings, and gracious speeches. M. OLa Pedro havéis traído mi mu∣la? M. HO Peter haue you brought my mule? P. Señór si, aquí está la mohína. P. Yea sir, heere is theMohína, sig∣nifieth anger, passion, disqui∣etnes, churlish∣nes. Also a shee mule with a blacke face or mussell, alwaies hauing iadish trickes. Mohina. M. Mohina es nunca buéna. M. Mohina is neuer good. P. Por que, Señor? P. Why sir? M. ❀ Por que ni mula mohína, ni moça marína, ni moço Pedro en cása, ni Abád por Vezíno, ni poyo a la puerta, no es bueno. M. Bicause neither a mule with a blacke mussell, nor a maide that hath pas∣sed the sea, nor a seruanti. A knauish seruant. Peter in ones house, nor a neighbour ab∣bot, nor a Well at the dore, is euer good. P. Yo le prométo a v. m. que es mejór ésta, que la que arastró a el cura quando dezía Dominus provi∣debit. P. I promise your worship that she is better then that which dragged alongA curate fal∣ling off his mule hanging in the stirrup was dragged so a long, till a labo∣rer in the fielde tooke him out. the curate when he said, Domi∣nus prouidebit. M. Es vieja? M. Is she old? P. Nunca la vi naçér, mas yo créo que mas viéja éra su madre. P. I sawe hir not foaled, but I beleeue that hir dame was elder. M. Tira cozes? M. Doth she kicke? P. Nunca una sola. P. Shee neuer giues one alone. M. Siempre son a pares, camína bien? M. They are alwaies by couples, doth shee trauell well? P. Todo lo que ánda se dexa atrás. P. She neuer trauels but shee leaues the way behinde her. M. Tan buenas grácias tiéne a fee que me va enamorándo. M. She hath so good tricks in faith, that I am in loue with her. P. Vna tiene sobre todas que es gran∣de Ostróloga. P. One she hath aboue all, for she is a great Astronomer. M. Como ansi? M. How so? P. Conoçe mejór que vn relóx quan∣do es médio dia, y luego pide çebáda, y si no se la dan dize
lunes y no ay passár de allí. P. She knowes better then a clocke when it is noone, and foorthwith she lookes for prouender, and if they
giue her none, then she saiesLunes, mea∣ning heere the grunting voice of a mule or horse, but Lu∣nes properly signifieth Mon∣daie. lu∣nes, and stirres not a foote from the place. M. Búen remédio para esso rogár se lo con la espuéla. M. A good remedie for this to intreat her with the spurre. P. Es flaquíssima de memória. P. She is most weake of memorie. M. Como? M. How? P. Aunque le hínguen vn palmo de espuéla a dos passos que da, se le ha ya oluidádo. P. Although you strike into her a hands breadth of the spurre, within two steps after she hath forgotten it. M. ❀ Traélda, no se me da náda, que to∣pado ha Sancho con su Roçíno y si ella es traydora yo soy ale∣bóso, y nos entenderémos a coplas. M. Bring her, I care not, for Sancho hath met with his palfrey, and if she be aA scabbed horse fit for a scalde squier. knauish iade I am as knauish a rider, and we shall vnderstand one another by couples. P. ❀ En yendo v.m. con cuydádo hará de ella çéra y Pávilo que ella con quien se descuyda úsa sus tretas. P. You trauelling with hir, with good heed, you may agree like theThe waxe of the candle, and the weeke of the candle, i al in al waxe and the weeke, but shee with one that is not aware of hir will plaie hir part like a fencer. M. Echalde la silla, apretálde bien la síncha ponélde gurupéra ata∣hárre y pretál, acorta essos estri∣bos que yo me averné con ella. M. Set on the saddle, girde hir harde with the girts, put on the crooper and poitrell, make shorter these stir∣rups, for I will make agreement with hir. P. Quiero ponér, vnas aciónes nuévas por mas seguridád. P. I will put on newe stirrup leathers for more securitie. M. Echálde el freno, ponéd le bien el bocádo y acortád la cabeçáda mirád si está bien herráda de to∣dos quatro pies. M. Put on the bridle, make the bit fast, make shorter the headstall, looke if she be well shod of all fower feete. P. Manos, i. the forefeete. En las mános, buenas herradúras y clávos tiene, de los pies de suyo gasta. P. On the forefeete she hath good shooes and nailes, on the hinder feete sheWith kicking. weares out hir owne hoofe. M. Echáldo el coxín y porta mantéo. M. Put the cushion on the saddle and the portemanteau. A. Ea compañero hémos ya de acabár de salír oy de aqui? A. How now companion, shall we make an end that we may get hence to day? M. Ya vos venís cavalgando? M. What are you come already, and a hors∣backe? A. ❀ Vos tardáis mas en componér os que vna nóbia. A. You tarrie longer in setting your selfe in order then a bride. M. Vuestra mula es mansa? M. Is your mule gentle? A. Como vna borrega no lo veis que sufre maléta. A. As gentle as a lambe, do you not see he beares a maile. M. ❀ De el água mánza me libre dios, que de la braba yo me guardaré. M. From the stilwater, God keepe me, from the raging, I will keepe my selfe. A. Ala vuestra, basta le ser mohína. A. For your mule, it is sufficient, that she is a mule with a blacke muzzle. M. Mal conocéys vos aquien nunca vi∣stes, pues a fee que está gran∣duáda por zalamánca. M. You hardly know him whom you neuer saw, but in faith this mule hath ta∣ken degree in Zalamanca.
A. En que facultád? A. In what arte? M. En la de la vellaqueriá, bachilléra en ártes de tirár cózes, licenciáda en léyes de véntasy de mesó∣nes, y doctóra es en astrología y matemáticas. M. In the arte of villanie, Bachelor of the kicking art, Licentiat of lawes in Innes, and doctor in Astrologie, and the Mathematikes. A. Por esso está siempre mirando a el çielo. A. For this cause, shee lookes alwaies to∣wards heauen. M. Es por contemplár los ástros y plané∣tas y signos y sus cúrsus. M. It is to contemplate the stars, planets, and signes, and their courses. A. Vámos de aquí que tenémos larga la jornada. A. Let vs go, for we haue a long iourney. M. Quantas leguas pensáys caminár oy? M. How many leagues do you thinke to tra∣uell to day? A. Yo querría que doze. A. I would willingly go twelue. M. Pues ala mano de dios Pedro ten esse estríbo. M. Then in the name of God, Peter holde this stirrup. A. Pedro of Llamáys compañéro? A. Friend are you called Peter? P. A servício de v.m. M. At your seruice sir. A. Pues no le hága Dios mas mal a Pe∣dro de el que se le alcánça. A. Then God do no more mischiefe to Pe∣ter, then that he knowes himselfe how to practise. P. No ay porque Dios de salúd a su merçéd. P. There is no cause why God giue you health sir. A. Sé que las pullas no se han de echár a los amígos. A. I know that men ought not to flout their friends. M. ❀ De amígo a amígo chínche en el ójo. M. One friend to another friend, aChinche, a little rounde creature with many feete, in hot countries, breeding in beds, bites worse then a louse, and stinketh filthily. Cinche in the eie. A. Yo no quiero pléito con vos Pédro que sabéis mucho. A. I will not go to law with you Peter, for that you know so much. P. MasSabér i. To know. Also to sauor well in taste, as meate, drinke. Sábe vn torézno. P. A rasher of bacon sauers more. A. Moço de mulas vn punto sáve mas que el diáblo. P. A mulitter knowes one point more then the diuell. M. Pues que pensáis vos que le falta a Pedro para diablo? M. Why what thinke you, what wants Pe∣ter to become a diuell? P. No mas que vn año de aprendiz y vn garaváto. P. No more but a yeeres apprentiship, and a flesh-hooke. A. Para que el garaváto? A. Why a flesh-hooke? P. Para sacár a vuestras merçédes de la caldéra quando allá váyan. P. To pull out your worships out of the caulderne when you go thither. M. Nosotros no hémos de ýr a el ynfiérno M. We are not to go to hell. P. No se yrán mas lleváros hán. P. You are not to go, but they are to carrie you thither. M. Are dro váyas malo, ergo maledicte diabole. M. Come behinde me therefore euill spirit, Maledicte diabole. A. Pedro amigo de que se haze la puta viéja? A. Friend Peter, of what is an old whore made of? P. De la puta móça. P. Of a yoong whoore. M. No se haze si no de seldo y eneldo y de el cagaxón mordéldo y de el polvo de laséras, hath two significations, one for the floore where they thresh their corne, and also thou art. éras. M. It is not made but of thy selfe and the herb dill, & of shitting eate thy fill, & of the dust of barn floore, or of the dust of which thou art thy selfe.
A. De cara me le véo y tiéne alpargá∣tes, y va a pié. A. I see him iust ouer against me, and he hathShooes of packthred made for footemen or lackeies to tra∣uell a foote. shooes of packthred, and hee goes a foote. M. Pedro mira que te dize no respón∣des? M. Peter, harke what he saith vnto thee, doest thou not answere? P. ❀ No óygo que soy sordo de vna muéla. P. I heare not, for I am deafe of one of my chocke teeth. M. ❀ Pues a el maestro Cuchilláda? M. What hath the master of Fence a blowe or venie? P. No me lastíma mucho esta Herída que es dáda vñas arríba, peró guarde se de el rebés que yo ti∣raré vñas abájo. P. This wound hurts me not much, for it is giuen with the hand vpward, but beware of the swash blow, for I will draw it with the hand downwards. A. Pedro yo entiendo que soys vos aquel que Llamávan de vrde malas. A. Peter I vnderstande that you are hee which they called a plotter of kna∣ueries? P. Pues todo el mundo ojo alerta que alguna téngo de vrdír en éste camíno. P. Euery one looke to himselfe, for I must plot somthing this iourney. A. Pedro alli viéne vn, caminánte échale vna pulla. A. Peter there commeth a traueller, be∣stowe a quip on him. P. Ola hermano por donde van? P. Hola brother, which way go they? C. A do? T. Whither? P. En casa de la puta que os parió. P. To the house of the queane thy mother. A. Buena a fee otra a el compañéro que quéda atrás. A. Good in faith, another to his compani∣on, which remaines behind. P. A señór es suyo el mulo? P. Ho sir, is the mule yours? C. Qual mulo? T. What mule? P. Aquel que beséis en el cúlo. P. That whose arse kisse you. A. Este cavalléro que viene muy brábo no baya sin la suya. A. This gentleman which goeth so bodily, let him not passe without his flout. P. A senor v.m. a caso va a londres? P. Ho sir goes your worship to London? C. Si voy porque lo dezís. T. Yea, I go for that you saie it. P. Pues cagaxón para quien va a Lon∣dres. P. Then a turd for him that goeth to Lon∣don. M. Que boníto es Pedro si se lavasse. M. Oh how proper a man were Peter, if he were washed and painted. P. Antes despues de lavado no valgo nada. P. Nay after I am washed I am worth no∣thing. A. Quanto avrémos andádo Pedro? A. How far haue we iourneyed Peter? P. ❀ Nunca buelvo a mirár atrás, por no ser como la mugér de Lot. P. I neuer turne to looke backe, because I would not be as Lots wife. A. Quanto nos falta de aqui a el primer Puéblo? A. How far haue we from hence to the next towne? P. Legua y miérda. P. A league and a turd. M. La legua andarémos nosotros, esotra vos la pasaréis. M. The league we will goe, the other thou shalt passe. A. Pues por que se passe sin sentír quen∣ta vn quento Pedro. A. That we may passe ouer this iourney without wearisomnes, tell vs a tale Peter. P. De dinéros para mi le contára yo de buena gana. P. For my part, I would tell money with a better will.
A. No, si no algun acaeçído que te avíno por essos camínos. A. Not so, but some chaunce that hath fal∣len out to thee on these waies. P. Estonces contár les hé vno que me subçedío el viáje passádo hazi∣endo este camíno con vn hi∣dálgo. P. Then I will tell you one which happened vnto me the last voyage I came this way with a gentleman. M. No sea muy largo que me dormiré. M. Let it not be too long, for I will sleepe. P. Sise durmiére la mohína tendrá cuy∣dádo de despertár le. P. If you sleepe, the she mule will be care∣full to wake you. M. Vos le havéis levantádo mil falsos testimónios, mira quan bien ca∣mína y quan mansa va? M. You haue raised a thousand false testi∣monies against her, behold how wel she trauelleth, and how well she go∣eth. P. ❀ A el freír lo verá. P. A collier sold coales to a wo∣man and put∣ting downe his coales put vp her frying pan, the woman as∣king if they were good coales, he an∣swered, A freýr lo verá, i. by the frying she should see.By the frying you shall see. A. Ea dexémos esso vaya el quento. A. Well let vs leaue this, forward with the tale. P. Pocos dias ha, yo víne este camíno con vno de los mayores habla∣dóres que he conoçido en mi vi∣da y como el hablár mucho, y el mentír son tan pariéntes, dezía las mas terríbles mentíras que se pueden ymaginár, pues como el me preguntásse vn dia que me parecía de su buena conversaçi∣ón, yo le respondí que muy bien, peró que quando contásse algun quento, se Alargasse y pasásse tanto, que dava que mormurar a quantos le oýan, el me díxo pues sea esta la manera quando llegue∣emos a las posádas, sienta se tu apar de mi, y si me viéres contár álgo que te parézca que voy fue∣ra de camino, tira me de la halda, estonçes yo entenderé, y me de∣terné, con este con çierto llega∣mos aquella noche a vna venta, donde a caso avían llegado tan∣bien muchos cavalléros, y como se asentassen a çenár y mi ámo entre ellos, yo me púse a su lado conforme a el conciérto, y como es costumbre cada vno començó a contár las maravíllas que avía visto por el mundo, llegó la bez a el bueno de mi amo el qual dixo que avia estado en tierra de ja∣pón, y que entre otras cosas ma∣ravillosas que alli avia visto fue vna yglézia que tenía mil pies de largo, a esté tiémpo yo que le
vide yr tan desmandádo y como estava a lerta tíro le rézio de la halda, el luego me entendió, y díxo; y vno en ancho: los cavalle∣ros se començáron a mirár vnos a otros y a son-reýr se hásta que vno dellos díxo, vala me Dios señór, y para que servía essa y glé∣zia tan larga y angosta, de mill pies de largo? y vno en ancho, el replicó agradez can vuestras mer çedes que me tiráron de la falda atiempo, que si no, yo les boto a Dios que yo la quadrára, fue estonçes tanta la risa de todos que a mi amo le convino aquella noche salirse de la venta, por que entre todos quedó por refrán quando alguno contáva algo que pareçia mentira ❀ Le dezia el terçero quadre la v. m. que harto larga está.
P. A little while since, I came this way with one of the greatest babblers that I knew in my life, and as much prating and lying are neere of kinne, hee tolde the most horri∣ble lies that could be imagined, af∣terward as he asked me one daie, what I thought of his good beha∣uiour, I made him answere, that I thought well, but that when hee did tell any tale, hee passed the bounds so much, that he gaue occasion to as many as did heare him, to speake ill of him behinde his backe: he tolde me, seeing it is so, when we come to our Innes, sit thou next vnto me, and if thou shalt see me tell any thing that seemes vnto thee that I goe out of the way, pluck me by the skirt, then will I vnder∣stand and stay my selfe, with this a∣greement we came that night to a lodging on the high waie, whither by chaunce also many gentlemen were arriued, and as they sate them downe to supper, and my master among them, I set my selfe close by his side, according to our agreement, and as the manner is, euery one began to tell of the maruels which hee had seene in the world, the turne came to the good man my master, who saide that hee had beene in the lande of Iaptha, and among other mauellous things that there he had seene was a church, which was a thousand foote
long: then I seeing him so far out of order, as I was readie prepared, pluckt him by the skirt, he presently vnderstood me, and said; and one foot in breadth: the gentlemen began to looke one vpon another, and to smile, vntill one of them saide, In the name of God sir, and for what vse serued this church so long & nar∣row, of a thousand foot in length, and but one in breadth? he replied, thanke him, that pulled me by the skirt of the garment so soone, which if he had not done, I vow to God, I had made it fower square: then was there such a laughter among all, that my ma∣ster was faine that night to get him out of the Inne, for that among them all, it remained as a prouerbe, when any one did tell any thing which did seeme a lie, the third man said vnto him, make it square, for it is long enough. M. De vna cosa me espanto yo Pedro. M. Of one thing I woonder Peter. P. Qual es? P. What is it? M. Como pudíste durár tan largo tiem∣po con tu competidor en la fa∣cultád. M. How thou couldest endure so long time, with thy competitor in thine owne facultie? A. ❀ Si, por que esse es tu enemígo el que es de tu ofiçio. A. Yea, for he is thy enimie which is of thy owne profession. P. Es verdád que muchas vezes le quí se dexár por esso, y se lo dezía que no quería mas caminár con el, por que era tocádo de mi própria enfermedád y no me dexava hazér bása. P. It is true, for many times I would leaue him for this cause, and did tel him, that I would not trauell no more with him, because he was infected with my disease, and did not suffer me to take vpAs at cards. a trcke. A. Y que respondió a ésso? A. And what answere made he to this? P. Luego me prometía con juraménto, que callaría tóda vna jornada para que yo hablásse. P. Foorthwith he promised me with an oth, that he woulde hold his peace all one iourney, that I might speake. A. Y cumplía lo? A. And did he performe it? P. Tan ynposible le éra a el podér lo ❀ cumplír cómo a v. m. dijerír esse pelo de asno, queha comi∣do. P. It was as impossible for him to haue power to accomplish it, as for your worship to digest thisi. Calling him asse by craft or the gudgeons, or fooleries to day you haue swal∣lowed. asses haire which you haue eaten. M. Compañero pagado os han vuestro travájo. M. Companion, you are paid home for your labour. A. No tenéis razon Pedro ansiyo os vea zarco a podér de núbes. A. You mistake Peter, I see you dimne sigh∣ted, by reason of cloudes. P. Antes ciegue, que mal véa. P. Rather wish I you blinde, then that I see ill. A. ❀ Ansi yo os vea arçobíspo con mi∣tra
de siéte palmas.
A. Nay rather that I may haue my sight
to see you an Archbishop withi. Caróça, which is a high hat of paper set on the head of a bawde, riding on an asse tho∣row the streetes for a punish∣ment. a miter of seuen hand bredths high. P. Ansi yo le véa a el, Pápa higos de su múla. P. Nay not so, but that I might also see you eat the shittings of your mule. A. ❀ Echo te vna pullaPulla a flout. con su pullon∣çillo que tu mugér te haga çiér∣vo y te llámen tódos cuquíllo. A. I cast thee a bone, with his yong one to gnawe vpon, thy wife makes thee a hart, and they call thee cuckolde euery one. P. ❀ Echo te vna pulla venida sobre mar, que los dientes se te cáy∣gan y no puedas meár. P. I cast the bone to gnaw vpon at sea, thy teeth fall out, and thy water hold in. M. Piquémos compañéro que se va ha∣ziendo tarde. M. Let vs spurre on companion, for it wax∣eth late. A. Que hora será Pedro? A. What is it a clocke Peter? P. La de ayer a estas oras puntual∣ménte. P. Iust the same, as it was yesterday at this time. A. Esso tanbien lo dixéra mi mula si supiéra hablár. A. This could my mule tell me, if she could speake? P. Soy yo Relóx, que me pregúnta que óra es? P. Am I a clocke, that you aske me what it is a clocke? A. ❀ A lo menosBadájo, a clapper of a bell by a metaphor a ioulthead. badájo, que monta tanto. A. At least thou art a clapper, which is all one. P. Y si doy adonde daré? P. And if I do strike where shall I hit? A. En la cabeça de el puto de tu pa∣dre. A. Vpon the head of the buggerer thy fa∣ther. P. Mas çerca está la suya y sonará bien, pues esta huéca. P. Your head is neere vnto me, and it will sound well seeing it is hollow. M. Bien camina de andadúra vuestra mula. M. Your mule doth go a swift easie pase. A. Yla vuestra ha bien deportánte. A. And yours ambles well. M. Si no la convirtiésse algunas vezes en tróte que pareçe a el de la madre. M. If she did not change it, sometimes into a trot, which seemes like the trot of hir dam. A. Entrémos en esta vénta a dár çeva∣da y comér vn vocádo. A. Let vs go in into this Inne, to baite and eate a bitte. P. Vn bocádo no mas, mas piénso yo comér de vn çiento. P. What one bit and no more, I thinke to eate more then a hundred. M. No os sabréis passár un dia sin comér Pedro? M. Can you not passe one daie Peter without eating? P. ❀ Par dios nuéstro amo, como díze el viz caíno, trípas llévan a pies que no pies a trípas. P. By God our master as theA Biskaine trauelling a foote fainte for want of foode, filled his belly, afterward went lustely, & said, the belly carri∣eth the feete, & not the feete the bellie. Biskaine saith, the bellie carrieth the feete and not the feete the bellie. A. ❀ Yo tambien digo que pan y víno ánden camíno que no moço garrído. A. I also say,The lustie youth without eating or drin∣king must needs faint, and giue him that, al∣though he be faint he goeth forward. that bread and wine are trauellers, and not the lustie fro∣like youth. P. Paz sea en ésta casa quien está acá huéspeda? P. Peace be in this house, who is heere hostesse? V. Quien está alla quien lláma? H. Who is there, who cals? P. Ay posáda señora? P. Haue you lodging mistris? V. Si señór, éntren y séan muy bien ve∣nídos que todo recádo ay. H. Yes Sir, come in, and be very well wel∣come, for all good entertainment is here to be had.
P. Que aurá que comér? P. What shall we haue to dinner? V. Ay conéjos ay perdíçes, ay pollos, ay gallinas, ay ganços, ay ánades, ay carnero, ay vaca, ay cabrito, ay menudo de puerco. H. There are conies, there are partridges, there are chickens, hennes, geese, ducks, there is mutton, there is beefe, kid, and hogs inwards. P. Bien dixe yo que en su casa de v.m. no podia faltár puerco. P. Well saide I, that in your house there could not want hogs flesh. V. Ni en la suya faltará vellaco, mien∣tras el estuviére dentro. H. Nor in your house shall there want a knaue while you are within. P. No en verdád señora, si no que me dixéron que los diás passádos avía v.m. reñido bravaménte con la limpiéça. P. No in truth mistris, but they told me that a while agoe you and cleanli∣nes had been at bate. V. Tambien me dixeron a mi que avía el desterrádo la Verguença de su casa. H. And they told me, that you had banish∣ed shamefastnes from your house. M. Huelgo me Pedro que as topado con lo que avías menestér. M. I am glad Peter that thou hast mette with that thou haddest need of. P. Yaun ella me ha menestér a mi. A. And also she hath need of me. V. ❀ Yo por çierto, si no es para poner le en peralvillo con doze y la maestra, no se para que? H. I haue neede of him truly, if it be but to put him inPeralvíllo, a mount in Spaine where they shoote malefactors to death. Peralvillo to shoote twelue arrowes at him with thei. That arrow which hitteth on the hart. mistris, I know not for what els? P. Aora Señóra no nos digámos mas calláte, y callémos que sendas nos tenemos. P. Now mistris, let vs saie no more, holde your peace and let vs be still, for we haue a quip a peece. V. Ea acábe habladór de Ventája, pi∣da lo que ha menestér. H. Go to, make an end babbler in graine, & demand that you haue need of. P. Deme héno, y paja, y çebáda, para las mulas. P. Giue me haie, and straw, and prouender for the mules. V. Quanto quiere? H. How much will you haue? P. Dos harnéros de héno y un zelemín de çebáda. P. Two sieues full of haie, and a pecke of barley. V. Muy poco es para tres véstias. H. It is very little for three beastes. P. Aquí no ay mas que dos qual es la ótra? P. Heere are no more then two, which is the other? V. La otra sóys vos y mas tragóna que essótras dos. H. The other are you, and more deuouring then the other two. P. Si soy mas, no de paxa ni çebada porque es muy dúra de dige∣stión. P. If I be more, it is not of straw nor barley, for it is very hard of digestion. V. Mas duro es vn garróte y suele ablandár las costíllas a vn vel∣láco. H. Harder is a cudgell, and yet it vseth to soften the ribs of a knaue. M. Bien está no passe mas adelante señ∣ora Huéspeda quanto pónen de aquí a la çiudád? M. It is well, passe no further forward mi∣stresse hostesse, how far doe they count it from hence to the ci∣tie? V. Señor çinco leguas. H. Sir fiue leagues. M. Podrémos los caminár de a quia la noche? M. May we ride them betwixt this and night? V. Como picáren? H. As you shal hasten.
M. Ay algun río en el camíno o algun mal passo? M. Is there any riuer in the way, or any euill passage? V. Por do quiera, ay vna legua de mal camíno. H. Which way soeuer you goe, there is a league of euill waie. M. Ay adonde herrár? M. Is there any placeTo misse or erre. Also to shooe a horse or mule. herrár? V. El camino no señór, las mulas si señ∣or, vuéstras merçédes mil par∣tes ay donde pueden herrár. H. The way, no Sir, the mules, yes Sir, a thousand passages where you may erre. M. ❀ Si son los yerros por amores, dig∣nos son de perdonár. M. If they be errors for loue, they are wor∣thie to be pardoned. A. Señora huéspeda cuya es ésta venta? A. Mistresse hostesse, whose is this inne? V. De vn cavallero de la çiudád. H. A gentlemans of the citie. A. Quanto págan por ella de arrenda∣miénto en vn año? A. How much doe you pay for the hire of it by the yeere? V. Mas que ella vale, quinientos duca∣dos. H. More then it is woorth, fiue hundred ducats. M. De essa suerte, buena maña se an me∣nestér dar a hurtár para sa cár la costa. M. By this meanes they had neede good skill to steale to get out their charge. P. Essa no fálta, el gáto por liebre, la carne de mula por váca, el ví∣no passádo por água todo va de ésta manera. P. That skill wants not, a cat for hare flesh, the flesh of a mule for beefe, wine mixed with water, all goes in this manner. V. ❀ Mala pasqua de Dios a el vellaco y mal san Iuán. quando ha visto el, esso en mi venta? H. God send the knaue an ill Easter, and an ill Midsommer, when haue you seene this in my Inne? P. Visto lo no, gustádo lo si. P. I haue not seene, but I haue tasted it? V. Vos mentis como velláco, que nun∣ca tal. H. You lie like a knaue, there was neuer any such matter. P. ❀ Aora estémos a quenta huéspeda no demos de comér a el Diablo, venga acá no se acherda el otro día quando yo vine por aquí con un cavallero, que le pidió le dies∣se un pedáço de carne de aquéllo que le avía dádo otro dia antes quando avía passádo por aquí, porque dezía que le avía savído muy bien, lo qual oyendo aquel niño chiquíto, díxo caro nos co∣staría, si cada dia se nos avía de morír un Roçín. P. Hostesse we are vpon the reckoning now,Let vs not braule and fall out, and so go to law vpon words and so make the diuell dine. let vs not giue the diuell his din∣ner, come hither, doe you not re∣member the other daie, when I came this way with a gentleman which requested you to giue him a peece of meate, of that you had gi∣uen him the other day before, when he passed this waie, bicause he said it liked his taste very well, the which the little childe hea∣ring, saide, it would be deare flesh vnto vs, if euery day there shoulde die a nagge. V. Es Verdád que aquello fue aquel Roçín que se nos murió, peró estáva tan górdo y tan líndo que éra mejór que carne de váca. H. It is true, that there was a nagge which died, but hee was so fat and so faire, that hee was better then beefe. M. Señóra huéspeda aunque mas líndo sea, no nos dee de el agóra. M. Mistres hostesse, although he might be more fine, giue vs not of that nowe. V. No Señór que ya se acabó, hasta ao∣ra avia de durár? H. No sir, for he is already made an end of, what think you it could last til now?
M. Veámos el víno que tal es. M. Let vs see the wine that is so good. V. El vino es tal, que básta a llevár al cielo a el, que acostumbráre a bevér lo. H. The wine is such, that it is sufficient to bring a man to heauen that shall vse to drinke it. P. Ola nuestra áma no basta ventéra si no eréje? P. What now Mistresse, is it not ynough to be a keeper of an Inne, except you be an heretike too? V. Lo que yo dígo es verdád y lo pro∣varé que el buen víno, lleva los hombres a el çielo. H. That which I say is true, and I will prooue it, that good wine carrieth men vp to heauen. M. De que manera? M. How so? V. Elbuen vino cría buena sangre, la buena sangre engéndra buena condición, la buena condiçión pára buenas óbras, las buenas obras, llévan a los hombres a el cielo. H. Good wine makes good blood▪ good blood doth engender good condition, good condition doth ende in good works, good works carrie men to heauen. M. Ella ha aprovado su yntención ba∣stanteménte. M. She hath prooued her intent very suffi∣ciently. A. Peró no se podrá dezír esso por éste víno. A. But this cannot bee verified in this wine. V. Por que? H. Why? A. ❀ Por que esto mas paréçe vinágre y água. A. Because this seemes rather vineger and water. V. Agua, no por vida de mi ánima, que tiene mas de la, que le echo el de lo alto. H. Water, by the life of my soule, it hath no more water in it, then he from aboue put in it. M. Pues Dios no le vino a echár água, que sin agua lo crio. M. God neuer came to put water into wine, but without water he created it. P. Bien, no está v.m. en el quénto, el de lo alto es su marído, que está en lo alto de la casa, y desde allí, é∣cha água en el vino, por una ce∣bratána. P. Well, you vnderstand not the matter a right. He from aboue is hir hus∣band, which is in the top of the house, and from thence puts water into the wine with a long tunnell. A. Con vos me entiérren Pedro que sa∣béys de quenta. A. I will die and liue with thee Peter, for thou knowest fashions. M. Yo entendía que llamáva a Dios, el de lo alto. M. I vnderstoode that she had called God, him that was from aboue. A. En todas las cosas ay engáño. A. In euery thing there is deceit. P. Si no es en la ropa vieja. P. Except it be in an old garment. V. Por ciérto que tienen razón, que está ya el mundo muy perdído, por esso nos hémos recogído mi marído y yo a ésta vénta, por acabár en buena vida. H. Truely they haue reason, for the worlde is very badde, for this cause haue my husbande and I withdrawen our selues into this Inne to make an end in good life. M. Esta llamáys buena vida huéspeda? M. Call you this a good life hostesse? P. Si Señór, que peor éra la de los de Sodóma y Gomórra. P. Yea sir, for that of Sodom and Gomorra was woorse. V. No le paréçe a v.m. que es buena vida estár hechos hermitaños en este disyerto, que mas hizi∣éron los padres de el yermo? H. Do you not thinke that it is a good life to be made Hermites in this desart, what did the fathers in the wil∣dernes more then this?
P. Y tan virtuósos, que de limósna, a quantos passan les quítan lo que llévan. P. And so holie that of pure almes, of, as many as passe they take away that they carie. V. Quitár, nunca Dios tal quiera, reçe∣bír lo que nos dan con corte∣sía, esso si. H. Take away, God forbid, receiue that they giue vs with curtesie that we doe. P. Es el cáso, que llaman cortesía a la gançúa, con que ábren las vi∣çáças. P. Thus it is, they call the picklocke curte∣sie, with which they open the mailes. V. El diablo trúxo a éste moço a mi casa, vete con todos los diáblos, espíritu de contradiçión. M. The diuell brought this seruant to my house, get thee hence in the diuels name, thou spirit of contradiction. P. ❀ Mal me quieren mis comádres, por que les dígo las verdádes. P. My gossips cannot abide me, because I speake truth vnto them truely. M. Aóra Pedro, haze quenta con la hu∣éspeda, y vamos de aquí, que es tarde. M. Now Peter reckon with the hostesse and let vs begon hence, for it is late. P. Que se deve de todo huéspeda? P. Hostesse what is owing in the whole? V. Espérese, contaré, dos de paja, y de paja dos, tres de çebada, çinco de víno, vno de carne y dos de toçíno, veynte reales entodo. H. Tarie I little, I will reckon, two of straw, and of straw two, three of barley, fiue of wine, one of flesh, and two of bacon, ten shillings in the whole. P. ❀ Quénta hecha, mula muerta, escu∣déro ýos a pie, pues a mi me qui∣ére dar papilla señora huéspeda, ❀ no save, que quando élla na∣çió, ya yo comía pan con corté∣ça: espére haré yo la mia. P. The reckoning made, the mule dead, seruing man get your way a foote why the mistresse hostesse will giue me pap, doth she not knowe, that when she was borne, then did I eat bread with hard crust, tarrie ile make my reckoning. V. Haze, veámos. H. Make it, let vs see. P. ❀ Tres y dos son çinco, dos de blan∣co y tres de tinto, y otros tres de estópas y pez, vno de la ólla y dos de la chólla, y mé∣dio de la çebólla, ochoson en todos. P. Three and two are siue, two of sacke & three of wine somewhat blacke, and other three of the hurdes of flaxe and pitch, one of the pot, and two of theThe hinder part of the head nowle, and a halfe of the chibbowle, they are eight in the whole. V. Malos años para vos, págame aquí, si no, por el siglo de mi padre que os arañe éssa cára. H. What with a mischiefe to you, paie mee heere; if not, by my fathers soule ile put out thine eies. P. ❀ Quitádo se ha el gáto la rópa de la ypocrasía, señóra hermi∣táña, tenga paciénçia y no tan∣ta codícia. P. The cat hath cast off theThe cat fai∣ning hir selfe a Hermite, put on a Hermits weed and many beasts and creatures came to hir for ghostly counsell, at last came the mice, which when she spied, flong off the garment and to them. garment of hypocrisie, mistris Hermite haue patience, and be not so couetous. V. ❀ No me quente mortuórios, si no pagué me, si no, las bárbas le sa∣caré vna a vna. H. Do not reckon vp mortuaries vnto me, but paie me, if not I will pull off the haires of thy beard one by one. M. Da le, lo que pidiére, la huéspeda Pedro no riñas con ella. M. Giue that which the Hostesse doth re∣quire Peter & braul not with hir. P. En vna náo cargáda de plata, no ay hárto para contentárla. P. In a ship loaden with siluer there is not enough to content hir. V. No pído si no lo justo, paga me her∣máno
y déxate de palabras.
H. I require nothing but my right, pay me
brother and leaue of words. P. Ansi dize la picáza, tome señóra ve ay dóze reáles, los seis son de buéno, y los seis de mal prové∣cho le hágan. P. So saith theAll in one song. chattering Pie, holde mi∣stres, see heere sixe shillings, three of them be much good doe it you with them, and the other three the diuell choake you with them. V. Mas no, si no los seis, son de bien ve∣nídos séan, y los seys de en óra mala váys. H. Not so, but the one three are of wel∣come vnto me, and the other three the diuell go with thee. P. ❀ Maldiciónes de putas viéjas, ora∣çiónes son de salúd. P. Cursinges of old whoores are praiers of health. M. Quéde se con Dios Señora huéspe∣da. M. God be with you mistres Hostesse. V. El váya con vuestras merçédes, a∣qui está ésta pobre posáda pa∣ra todas las vézes que viniéren este camíno, les suplico se sirvan délla. H. God conduct your worships, heere is this poore Inne, for as often as you shall come this way, I entreate you to vse it at your command. P. ❀ Sobre buen haz de pája tía. P. i. Their mo∣ney.Aunt you do it vpon a good sheafe of strawe. V. No, sino por sus ojos bellídos lo ha∣rán. H. No, but onely for your faire lookes sir. P. Quede con dios tía, y el la hága bue∣na hermitáña. P. Aunt God be with you, and make you a good hermite. V. Anda con dios híjo, y el os hága me jór de lo que soys. H. Farewell sonne, and God make thee bet∣ter then that thou art. Diálogo quinto, entre tres Pájes, lla∣mados el uno Iuan, el otro Francisco, el otro Guzman, en el qual se contienen, las ordinárias plàticas que los pájes suelen tenér unos con otros. The fift Dialogue betweene three Pages, called the one of them Iohn, the other Frances, the other Guzman, wherein are conteined the ordinarie speeches which pages are wont to haue one with the other. I. DE donde viénes Francisco? I. FRom whence come you Frances? F. De la corte Iuan. F. From the court Iohn. I. Que ay por allá de nuevo? I. What is the newes there? F. El rollo se está adonde solía, el Rey ha mandádo que quien tuviére que comér, que cóme, y el otro que ayúne. F. The gallowes is where it was wont to be, the king hath commanded that hee that hath any thing to dinner, that he eate it, and he that hath not that he fast. I. Viste a la Réyna? I. Haue you seene the Queene? F. Ala de diamantes con que híze el postrer flux. F. The Queene of Diamonds with which I made the last flush. I. Luego jugado has? I. Hast thou now beene at gaming? F. Yo no, mis dineros jugáron al tro∣cádo, y trocáron me por otro dueño. F. Not I, my money plaied at exchange, and changed me for another master. I. Ganáste o perdíste? I. Hast thou won or lost?
F. Gané y perdí. F. I haue woon and I haue lost. I. Como púdo sér? I. How could that be? F. Perdí mis dinéros, y gané escarmi∣énto para no jugár mas. F. I lost my money, and got a warning to play no more. I. No sería pérdida la del dinero, si tu llevasses adelante esse propó∣sito, peró yo dígo, que quien hízo, hará. I. The losse of money should be no losse, if thou didst go forward in this pur∣pose, but I say, that he that hath once plaied will play againe. F. A lo menos mientras me durare el Escozór, no jugaré mas. F. At the least, while the smarting shall last I will play no more. I. Esse no te durare mas que hasta lle∣gár de aquí a tu casa, o hasta que tengas mas dinéros. I. That will not last with thee longer, then till thou commest home, or vntill thou hast more money. F. Pues yo para que quiero el dinero, tengo de comprár casas, o viñas con ello. F. What should I doe with money, am I to buy houses or vinyards with it? I. Para embiár a tus pariéntes, o para luzírte con ello. I. To send it to thy friends and kinred, or to make thy selfe trim with it. F. Luzírme o que? malos años, Lúz∣game el puto de mi ámo pues se sirve de mi. F. To make my selfe trim? a plague take it, let the buggerer my master trim me seeing he serues himselfe of me. I. Pues piensas que te ha de durár tu ámo toda la vída? I. Why thinkest thou thy master is to liue with thee for euer? F. Dure lo que duráre, como cuchár de pan, que quando éste me fal∣te, no faltará otro tan ruyn co∣mo el. F. Let him last as long as a spoone of bread, when he is wanting to me, there will not faile another as bad as hee. I. Y quando séas grande? I. And when thou art better growen in yeeres? F. Estonces ya sabémos el paradéro de los pajes, o ala guérra, o a un monastério, o a la hórca. F. Then we know the end of Pages, either to the warre, or to a monasterie, or to the gallowes. I. Esso postrero lo le renuncio en ti. I. This last I leaue to thee. F. Pues pensais vos esca páros por y pó∣crita? F. Why thinke you to scape because you are an Hypocrite? I. Hermáno, en mi lináje nunca úvo ningun ahorcádo, no quiero estrenárlo yo. I. Brother, in my kinred neuer was there any hanged, I will not hansell the gallowes. F. Estrenada os darán la soga, no os penseys por esso. F. They will giue you a halter for hansell, take you no care for that. I. Piensa el ladrón que todós son de su condición, yo hermano no pién∣so hazér obras por donde la me∣résca. I. Well thinkes the theefe, that all are as himselfe, I brother do not thinke to doe any thing that I may de∣serue the gallowes. F. Pues no as oýdo dezír, que el pensár no es sabér, esso sin pensár se verná antes que vn colongía. F. But hast thou not heard saie, that opinion is no knowledge, this without thin∣king will come sooner then a ca∣nonship. I. Yo bien c réo, que si yo trato mucho contígo, que tu me procure∣rás pegár la tiña, porque vn
puerco encenagádo, siempre procúra encenagár a ótro. I. I well beleeue, that if I deale much with thee, thou wilt infect me with mangines, for one hog that hath
wallowed in the mire will beray another. F. Dizes verdád, que fi el ladrón an∣da con el hermitáño, o el la∣drón será hermitaño, o el her∣mitaño ladrón, peró tu nunca juegas? F. Thou sayest true, for if a theefe keepe companie with a hermit, either a theefe shall become a hermit, or a hermit a theefe, but dost thou ne∣uer play? I. Yo no en mi vída. I. I, neuer in my life. F. Pues tente bien no cáygas, porque a fee que si cáes, que as de ser co∣mo los borráchos que comien∣çan tarde a ser lo, que por es∣quitárse de lo que han dexádo de bevér, nunca salen de cue∣ros. F. Then hold fast, fall not, for in faith if thou fallest, thou art like to be as drunken men, which beginne at length so to be, which to quit them∣selues of that they haue left to drinke, they neuer get out of drun∣kennes. I. Si Dios me guarde mi júyzio, yo me guardaré desse vicio. I. If God keepe me in my right minde, I wil keepe my selfe from this vice. F. Mas fuerte éra Tróya, y fue destru∣yda. F. Troy was more strong, and yet was ouer∣come. I. Dexémos ésso agóra, y díme como te va con tu ámo? I. Let vs leaue this now, and tell me how your master and you agree? F. A mi muy bien, porque como es mo∣ço, galán, y enamorádo, son tres cosas que sácan de harón al mas cuerdo, y ansi todo se nos va en fiestas, vna libréa oy, ótra mañá∣na, siempre en saráos, músicas, y dánças, siempre en combites, que mal año para Lançarote quando de Bretaña víno, si éra tan bien tratádo como noso∣tros. F. I like very well of him, for he is yoong, gallant, and in loue, they are three things which busie the wisest man, & so we are altogither in feastings, one liuery to day, another to mor∣row, neuer without good cheere, musicke, daunces, and banquets, that the diuell take Lançarote when he came from Brittaine if he were so well entreated as we are. I. Si peró a fée que créo, que tras buen bocádo, dais buen grito. I. Yea, but in faith I beleeue that after a good morsell, you paie well for it. F. Porque dízes ésso? F. Why saiest thou so? I. Porque me parece que si vuestro ámo dánça de la manera, voso∣tros no avéys d'estár ociósos, sino que avéys de çapateár, porque en casa del músico, to∣dos los criádos son dançántes. I. For I thinke, that if your master daunce in such sort, you are not altogether idle, but that you foote it too, for in a musitions house all the seruants are dauncers. F. Es verdád que esso a cosadíllos, nos trae de dia con recaudos, y de noche con rondas, peró con el buen pesebre, todo se passa y no como tu que estás servién∣do a vn pelón, que te deve ma∣tár de hambre. F. It is true, that by reason of this loue small occasions driue vs in the day time with letters, and in the night we round the street, but with good fare we passe ouer all this, and not as thou dost which seruest a mise∣rable wretch, which killeth thee with hunger. I. No mata, porque yo nunca túve vi∣da, despues que estoy con el. I. He kils me not, for I neuer had life since I came to him. F. No tiéne buen ordinário? F. Hath he not a good ordinarie table?
I. La lazéria es ordinaria en cása. I. Wretchednesse it selfe is his ordinarie prouision in house. F. Que os da a comér? F. What diet doth he giue you? I. Esperanças y folias. I. Hopes and songs. F. Con ésso estás tan gordo? F. And with this art thou so fat? I. De los Tovillos si estoy. I. If I be fat, it is in my ankle bones. F. Dalle cantonáda. F. Run away from him. I. Temo de encontrár otro peór, y no querría por huýr de la llama dár en las brásas. I. I am afraid to meete with a woorse, and I would not leape out of the frying pan, and fall into the fire. F. Haz te cuchillo de melonéro, provár muchos hasta hallár uno buéno. F. Make of thy selfe a knife to cut pumpi∣ons, prooue many vntill you finde one good. I. Luégo cobra hombre mala fama, y le ❀ dízen Piédra movedíza no la cobre móho, y todo el mundo le da del cobdo. I. Straightway a man gets an ill name, and they say a rolling stone gathereth no mosse, and euery one iustleth him a side. F. No sino dexáos secár como palo en sarmentéra. F. No but suffer your selfe to drie as stickes on a pile or heape. I. Adonde vas tu agóra? I. Whither goest thou now? F. A buscár mi ámo, y témo que no le tengo de podér hallár. F. To seeke my master, and I feare that I shall not finde him. I. Adonde le perdiste? I. Where didst thou lose him? F. Yo no le perdí, el se perdió muchas dias ha. F. I lost him not, he lost himselfe a great while agoe. I. Ansi yrá un perdído a buscár otro perdído, como un duelo búsca otro duélo, y una necedád a otra, porque Pares cum paribus facillimè congregantur. I. So one that is lost himselfe, goeth to seeke another that is lost, as one greefe seekes another greefe, and one folly another: for like will to like. F. Bendito sea Dios, que por tres blan∣cas de gramática que studió, ya no se cabe en el cuérpo, y no vée la ora que desembuchár lo. F. God be blessed, that forA blancke halfe a Mara∣vedí, a Mara∣vedí 34. of them to sixe pence. three blanckes of Grammar which he hath stu∣died, now he cannot keepe it in his belly, and he thinkes euerie hower ten, till he hath vttered his whole minde. I. Dígo hermano que cada obéja con su paréja, y vn semijante busca a ótro. I. I say brother, euerie sheepe with his e∣quall, and like will to like. F. Ansi tu ámo como es miseráble pe∣lón, busca vn ypócrita como tu, a quien con dezílle que es me∣nestér ayunár para yr al ciélo, te tiene en diéta perpétua, y ca∣noníza por virtúd, lo que es mi∣séria fina. F. So thy master as he is a miserable wretch seeks out an hypocrite like thy selfe, and by telling thee how requisite it is to fast for the winning of hea∣uen doth holde thee in continuall diet, and extols that for a vertue, which is pure miserablenes. I. No tienes razón, que el no es avari∣énto, peró como dízen Pobré∣za no es viléza. I. You saie not well, for he is not couetous, but as it is saide, Pouertie is not vilenes. F. No, mas es maestra que enseña co∣mo se ha de hazér. F. No, but it is a mistris which doth teach vs how we should become nigardly. I. Yo se, que si mi ámo tuviére la rénta
del tuyo que gastára mas que el, lo qual el nos díze que hará muy complidaménte si dios le mejóra d'estádo.
I. I know, if my master had reunues as thy
master hath, that hee would spend more then he doth, which hee tel∣leth vs he will performe with the best, if it please God to better his estate. F. De manéra que éssas son las esperán∣ças que coméis. F. So then these bee the hopes which you feede on. I. Mas vale que agua, como dezía la véja que mojáva el sarmiénto en el río y le chupáva. I. It is better then water, as the olde wo∣man saide, which dipped a dry sticke in the riuer and sucked it. F. Con essa comída no dubdo dexéis de salír buénos girifáltes al ca∣bo del año. F. With this diet I doubt not but at the yeeres end you may prooue goodi. With this diet you may be light enough to flie. Gerfalcons to flie. I. Si peró, si bolamos tan alto, llevárnos ha el viento, como haze a todos los que se susténtan de seme∣jánte manjár. I. Yea but if we flie so high, the winde will carie vs away, as it doth all those which do feede on such diet. F. Por vida de tu madre, que renta tié∣ne tu ámo? F. By the life of thy mother, what reuenewe hath thy master? I. Yo te lo diré vn quento de mentíras, y otro de necessidádes, y vn millón de necedádes, y todo ésto se gasta cada año, de suerte, que viéne a salír a rata por can∣tidád. I. I will tell thee, a thousand thousandes of lies, and another of needs, a milli∣on of fooleries, and all this is spent euery yeere in such sort, that hee spends as much as comes in to him. F. Quantos cavállos tiene? F. How many horses hath he? I. Dize que cinco con quatro que se le an muerto. I. He saith fiue, with those fower which are dead. F. Quantos críados? F. How many seruants? I. Nones son, y no llégan a tres. I. They are odde, and yet they mount not to three. F. De suerte que tu solo le sirves. F. So then thou alone seruest him. I. Y aun me podrían açotár por vaga∣múndo. I. i. In going vp and downe shif∣ting for my self, and not liuing on my master. And yet might they whip me for a va∣gabond. F. Pues como siendo solo, no tiénes mu∣cho en que entendér. F. How so, seeing thou art alone thou hast not much to imploy thy selfe on. I. Si tengo, en contár lástimas y cala∣midádes. I. But I haue much to do to reckon greefes and calamities. F. Quando tiempo ha que bives con el? F. How long hast thou liued with him? I. Que muéro con el muchos dias ha. I. I haue beeni. of hunger. dying with him long since. F. Hermáno hermáno, quien si mude Dios le ayude. F. Brother, brother, Godwil him helpe, that seekes for it himselfe. I. Si, mas adonde yrá el buey que no áre, por donde quiera veo cien leguas de mal camíno. I. Yea, but where shall the oxe goe that he shall not labour, which way soeuer I see a hundred leagues of ill way. F. Aquí viene Guzmanillo, veámos que nuevas trae, a Guzman que ay de nuevo? F. Heere comes little Guzman, let vs see what newes hee brings. Hoe Guzman what newes? G. Muchas cosas, el Turco (dizen que) se ha tornado Moro, que Venécia nada en agua, y que Ytália está llena de hombres, que en Frán∣cia
ay mas de cien mil hombres de guerra, y tambien se dize de secreto que el conde de Flan∣des a dormido con la Reyna de España.
G. Many things, the Turke (as they say) is become a Moore or infidell,i. Stands built vpon the sea, the sea compassing it round about. Venice swims in water, & Italie is full of people, and that in France
there are more then a hundred thousand men of armes, and also they say in secret, that theThe king of Spaine in his title Earle of Flaunders. Earle of Flaunders hath lien with the Queene of Spaine. F. Todo esso ay de nuevo? F. Is there all this newes? G. Aora viniéron con este corréo éstas nuévas. G. These newes came now with this poste. F. De luengas vías luengas mentíras suelen venír. F. Farre fetched lies come from farre. G. Lo que yo os he dícho, todo estan verdád, como ser aora de día. G. That which I haue told you is as true as it is now day light. F. Luego grandes guérras se aparéjan éste veráno. F. Then great warres are like to bee this sommer. G. Los pronósticos dízen, quéste verá∣no los que biviéren, verán gran∣des maravíllas. G. The Prognostications say, those that shall liue this sommer shall see great woonders. F. Que maravíllas serán, cuenta nos las. F. What shall those woonders be, I pray thee tell them vs. G. Dízen que el sol será mayór que to∣da la tiérra. G. They say the sun shall be bigger then all the earth. F. Santo Dios, y esso ha de sér verdád? F. Blessed God, and will this prooue true? G. Y que la lúna cada noche aparéce de su manéra, que las estrellas sino fuesse por el sol no ternán re∣splandór ningúno, que los ríos corren a la már, que arderán mu∣chos montes, que avrá grande mortandád de todo género de ganados, y en todas las ciudádas avrá unos mónstruos que echa∣rán llamas por la boca, y los hom∣bres que no comiéron lo que éstos vomitáren, morirán. G. And that the moone euery night doth appeere after hir old fashion, that thei. Starres re∣ceiue their light of the sunne. starres if it were not for the sunne, should haue no light, that all riuers run into the sea, that manieAs mount AEtna in Sici∣lie and others which continu∣ally cast out fire and brimstone, &c. mountains shall burne, that there shall be a great slaughter of al kind ofFor mans meate to eate. cattell, and in all cities there shall be monsters which shall casti. Ouens wher∣in they bake breade. out fire at the mouth, and those men which shal not eat that which these monsters shall vomite, they die. F. Vala me Dios, yo pienso que todo ésso es mentíra. F. God helpe me, I thinke al this to be a lie. G. Los Pronósticos dízen, que el sol y la luna faltarán, antes que to∣das éssas cosas fálten. G. The Prognostications say that the sun and the moone shall faile of their courses rather then these thinges to faile. F. Dessa manéra, todos los hómbres morirán, porque quien ha de comér lo que vomitáren los monstruos? F. By this meanes, all men shall die, for who can eat that which these monsters shall vomit? G. Pues as tu comído vn asno enté∣ro, y no comerás de aquello? G. Why hast thou swallowed downe anMade a gull. asse whole, and wilt not eat of it? F. Si yo soy asno, vos soys mula. F. If I be an asse thou art a mule. G. Xo que te estriégo que lárgas le na∣ciéron a v.m. G. Hoc, a voice that carters vse to make their horses stand still. Ho I do rub thee, for they are sprung vp veriei. Long eares, calling him thereby asse. long to your worship.Calling of him by this a Iewe, which for the most part haue long noses. F. Tan lárgas como sus narízes. F. So long as your nose. G. Va a vér a tu tía Hermáno? G. Go you to see your aunt brother? F. No que ya ví a tu madre, en la pel∣lejería. F. Not so, for I saw thy mother in a brothel
house.
G. Ha & Ral∣láme, then it is Grate me, and Harra allá then it is haight that way as one saieth to an asse.Harrallame esse quéso. G. Grate me this cheese. F. Harralláme esse asno. F. Haight that way this asse. G. Toda la vida has de comér sin pláto? G. What art thou to eate thy meate all thy life without a platter? F. Toda la vída has de comér tu ca∣brón? F. Art thou to eate all thy life of goates flesh? G. O Dios te bendíga la bella alimaña. G. O God blesse thee faire beast. F. O Dios te despache déste mundo para el otro. F. O God rid thee out of this world into the other. G. Dízen me que es v.m. gran come∣dór de huévos assádos. G. They tell me that you are a great eater of hard egges. F. Tambien me han dícho a mi que v. m. come muy bien bacaláo. F. Also they tell mee that you eate verie well poore Iohn. G. O si todos los ásnos truxéran albár∣das, que buen ofício era el, de los albardéros. G. O if all asses should carrie pack-saddles, what a good trade should the pack-sadler haue. F. Si esso fuere ansi, vna mas tenía de costa vuestro ámo cada més. F. If it were so, your master shoulde bee at the charge of one packe-saddle more euery moneth. G. Si del nécio se uviéra de pagár alca∣vála, quanto ganáran los Alca∣valéros con v.m? G. If there shoulde bee subsidie gathered vp of euery foole, how much would the gatherers of the subsidies put into their purse with your wor∣ship? F. En éssa hazienda nádie podria tra∣tár, porque dizque es patrimó∣nio de v.m. F. In this goods none could meddle, bicause it is saide it is your patrimonie. G. Todo es de vn pedáço v.m. G. All your worship is one peece. F. Si, peró es de aguijón para picár a v.m. F. Yea, but it is a pricke to spurre you fore∣warde. G. Mas no créo que es sino de atun de yjáda. G. But I beleeue it not but that is a peece of a Tunnie fish of the bellie side. F. Si de atun fuéra ya v.m. uviéra arre∣metido a la pieça, como el as∣no a la ceváda. F. If it were of a Tunnie fish you had set vpon a peece of it as greedilie as an asse on the prouender. G. Paréce me hermáno que aunque tu entráste en la corte, nunca la corte entró en ti. G. It seemes to me brother, although thou entredst into the court, the court neuer entred vnto thee. F. En la de los puércos concédo, por∣que como es tu juridición, no se háze en ella, sino lo que tu or∣dénas. F. In that of hogs I graunt, for as it is thy iurisdiction, there is nothing done therein but that thou doest ap∣point. G. Por vída tuya que me digas, quan∣tos cursos tienes de nécio. G. I pray thee tell me how many degrees of a foole hast thou? F. Los mismos que vos de majadéro. F. As many as thou hast of a ioulthead. G. Yo pienso, que éras ya doctór en ynsensato. G. I thinke thou wast doctor in sencelesse∣nes. F. Y vos estáys graduádo por cavalle∣ríza. F. And you taken degree in the stable. G. A Dios hermáno, y roe bien éssos grançónes. G. Farewell brother, and gnaw well these huskes.
F. Y rumiád vos como buen cabrón esótros. F. And brouse you as a good he-goat these others. I. Par diez, bueno te ha parado el a∣mígo. I. By ten, thy friend hath brought thee to a good passe. F. Amígo será el de v'na taça de vino. F. He will rather prooue a friend to a cup of wine. I. E'ste es de los que aconcejáva el ósso, que hiziessemos poco caso. I. This is such a friend that the beare counselled that we should make but little reckoning of. F. Como es esse quento? F. How is that tale? I. Quenta ysópo, que vna véz dos amígos ván camíno a pie, por vn monte, y salió a ellos vn ósso, el vno echando mano a su espada, se quíso defendér a si y a su com∣pañéro, al qual díxo que hiziésse lo mismo, para que ni el vno ni el ótro muriéssen, el compañero que tenía mas cuenta con su sa∣lúd, que con el del ótro, a trevió∣se ántes a sus pies, que a sus má∣nos, y no curando del compañé∣ro, dio a huýr a vn árbol álto que allí vido, y se subió en el, donde estuvo segúro del pelígro. El compañéro visto que el solo no se podía defendérse del ósso, se de∣xó caér en tiérra haziéndo mu∣éstras de que estáva muerto, te∣nía el huélgo y no resolláva mi∣éntras el ósso llegó y le olió to∣do, las narízes y la boca, y los oý∣dos, y pensando que estáva mu∣érto, se fue de allí, sin hazérle nin∣gun daño. El que estáva en el árbol, vísto que el ósso era ýdo, baxó del, y pregunto a su com∣pañéro, que éra aquello que el os∣so le avía dicho al oýdo: El otro respondió, dezíame que con tan ruynes compañeros como vos, nunca hiziésse camíno otra vez. I. Aesope tels, that on a time two friendes trauelled a foote together, and go∣ing by a wood, a beare came out to them, the one laying hand on his sword meant to defend himselfe, and his companion whom he willed that he should doe the like, that neither one of them nor the other might not miscarrie; his companion which made more account of his owne safetie then his fellowes, was more bolde vpon his feete then vpon his hands, and not respecting his fellow, betooke himselfe to fly to a high tree which there he sawe, and climed vp the same, where he was safe from the danger. His companion seeing that alone he could not defend him∣selfe from the beare, cast himselfe downe on the ground, making shewes that he was dead, he held his breath, and did not once blowe while the beare came and smelt him round, his nose and his mouth, and his eares, thinking he had been dead went his way, without doing him any harme. He that was in the tree, seeing that the beare was gone, came downe the tree, and asked his fellow what was that that the beare had told him in his eare: The other answered, he told me that with such bad compa∣nions as your selfe I neuer shoulde trauell againe. F. Respondió muy discretaménte, y si yo lo supiéra ántes, uviéra le contádo esse quénto a estotro mierda en palíllo, que piensa que sábe mas que Bártulo ni Baldo. F. He answered verie well, and if I had knowne it before, I would haue told this tale to this turd vpon a sticke, which thinkes hee knowes more then Bartulus or Baldus. I. Por cierto el túvo demasiada razón, amotejarte de nécio pues estu∣víste
tan torpe que no enten∣díste sus pronósticos y adivi∣nánças. I. Truely hee had to too much cause to scoffe at thee for a foole, seeing
thou wert so dull that thou vnder∣stoodest not his prognostications and diuinings. F. Pues tu entiéndes las mejór? F. Doest thou then vnderstand them bet∣ter? I. Yo entiendo las como el las díxo. I. I vnderstand them as he spake them? F. Pues yo bien créo que entiéndo Ro∣mançe, y el en Romance hablá∣va que no en algaravia. F. But I beleeue well that I vnderstand Spanish, and he spake in Spanish and not in the Moores toong. I. Pues quieres vér como debáxo del sayál ay al: y que aun que te habló en español, es algaravía de allende para ti. I. But wilt thou see, how vnder course at∣tire is some wisedome, & although he spake Spanish it is the Moores toong to thee. F. Ya lo desséo vér como es. F. I desire to see how it is. I. Pues lo priméro que díxo que el Turco se ha tornádo móro, es lo el de professión y de ley, y suelo siempre: tódos síguen la seta de Mahóma. Que Venécia náda en água, es verdád que está fundada en la már, que Ytália está lléna de hómbres, tambien es verdád co∣mo Ynglatiérra lo está, Tambien que en Fráncia, ay mas de cien mil hombres de guerra, quien no lo sábe que quando el Rey quie∣ra, podrá sacár della mas de do∣zientos mil. I. The first then that hee saide, that the Turke is become a Moore or an In∣fidell, he is so by his profession and law, and alwaies hath beene: all fol∣low the sect of Mahomet. That Ve∣nice doth swim in water, it is true, for it is built in the sea: that Italy is full of men, also it is true as Eng∣land is: also that in France are more then a hundred thousand men of armes, who knowes it not, that when the king will, hee may drawe out thereof more then two hundred thousand. F. Todo ésso bien lo entiendo yo, peró lo de más, como se puede en∣tendér, que el conde de Flan∣des aya dormído con la Réyna despaña y no se anda el mundo en guerras. F. All this I vnderstand well, but the rest how is it to be vnderstoode, that the earle of Flaunders hath lien with the Queene of Spain, and the world not to be vp in armes. I. Pues bobo no sábes tu, que el conde de flandes y el rey despana es todo una própria persona. I. Why foole dost not know, that the earle of Flaunders and the king of Spaine is all one person. F. Iuro a tal, que tiene razón, que no avía yo caýdo en ello. F. I sweare by such a one, hee saith true that I did not light vpon. I. Pues lo demas que díze que el sol es mayor que toda la tierra, es muy gran verdád, segun demonstra∣ciónes astrológicas, que yo con sabér poco te las pudiéra dár a entendér, si uviéra lugár. Que la luna aparecerá cada noche de su manera, esso tu lo vées cada dia con sus cresciéntes y menguan∣tes, nunca está una noche, como estúvo otra: pues que arderán muchos móntes, tambien es ver∣dád, que ay en el mundo muchos
que lláman Bolcánes, como el de Sicília, que siempre está ardien∣do. Que morirá mucho ganado, quien lo ygnóra que lo han de matár los hombres para comér. I. But the rest, which he saith, that the sun is bigger then the whole earth, is very true, according to astrological demonstrations, which I in knowing but a little coulde easilie make thee vnderstand, if there were time and place, that the moone will appeere as it was wont, that thou seest continually with hir waxing and waning, she is neuer one night as she was the other night, then that many mountaines shall burne, also it is true, for there bee
many in the worlde, as mount Aet∣na in Sicilie, which alwaies burnes, &c. that there shall bee a great slaughter of cattell who is ignorant thereof, for men are to kill them for to eate them. F. Todo esso entiendo bien, peró aquel∣lo de aquéllos mónstruos, que echarán llamas por la boca, y que hémos de comér lo que el∣los vomitáren, no puédo y pen∣sár que séa. F. All this I vnderstande well, but that of those monsters, which shall cast out flames out of their mouthes, and that we shall eate of that they shall vomite, I cannot thinke what it maybe. I. Esso es mas fácil que esótro, porque a∣quellos monstruos, son los hór∣nos ado se cueze el pan, que échan llámas, y por la boca vo∣mítan el pán que comémos. I. This is more easie then the other, for those monsters are ouens, where they bake bread which cast out fire, and by the mouth of it, it vomiteth the bread which we eate. F. Aora dígo que tiénes razón, y que yo estáva en bábia, y que puede vn nécio con vna necedád for∣jáda en su ymaginación dár en que entendér a cien sábios. F. Now I say you say true, and that I was in foolerie, and that a foole with his foo∣lishnes framed in his owne imagi∣nation may giue to a hundred wise men matter to picke out. I. Assi le a aconteció al poéta Oméro, que como con la vejéz estuvi∣esse ciégo y se anduviésse passe∣ando por la orilla de la már, y oyó hablár a ceirtos pescádo∣res, que en aquel punto se está∣van espulgando, y come les preguntásse que pésca hazían, éllos entendiendo por los pió∣jos, respondiéron los que tené∣mos buscámos y los que no te∣nemos hallámos, pues como el buen Oméro no viésse lo que ellos hazían, y por esta causa no entendiésse la Enígma, fue tanto lo que fatigó su ymagi∣nación y entendimiénto, por entendér la y alcançár el se∣creto dello, que fue bastante ésta pesadumbre a hazer le morír. I. So it happened to the Poet Homer, that as he was with age blinde and went walking by the sea shoare, and heard certaine fishermen talking, that at that time were a lowsing themselus, & as he asked them, what fish they caught, they vnderstanding that he had meant their lice, they answered, those that wei. Haue in their clothes, i. lice. haue, we seeke for, and those that wei. Haue not in hand. haue not we find, but as the good Homer, could not see what they did, and for this cause could not vnderstand the riddle, it did so greeue his vnderstanding to obtaine the secret of this matter, which was a sufficient greefe to cause his death. F. El lo hízo no como sábio, sino como muy gran nécio, en martarse por lo, que no podía alcançar. F. He did that not as a wise man, but as a very great foole, in casting awaie himselfe for that he coulde not reach vnto. I. Yo bien créo que no morirás tu des∣se acháque. I. I well beleeue thou wouldst not die for such a matter. F. No hermáno, que no páre ya mi ma∣dre, y yo conténto me con lo que buenaménte y sin mucho
trabájo puedo alcançár. F. No brother, for my mother is past childe bearing, and I content my selfe with that I may well and without
much labour reach vnto. I. ❀ Pues quien no es mas de otro, no meréce mas que ótro, y quien no sáve no vále, y quien ruyn es en su villa, ruýn es en Sevílla, y qui∣en adelante no míra atras se hál∣la. I. But hee that is not more then another doth deserue no more then ano∣ther, and hee that hath not know∣ledge, is of no woorth, and he that in his owne towne is vile, and is al∣so bad and naught in Seuile, and he that lookes not before he leape may fall into the ditch. F. Yo hermáno, quiero andár por do anda el buey, y asentár el pie lla∣no, no tomár de las cósas mas de aquéllo que me diéron, y porque quiero del mundo gozár, quiero oy'r, y vér y callár. F. Brother, I wil go where the oxe hath tro∣den, and set downe my foote softe and faire, not to take more mat∣ters then that they shall giue mee, and bicause I will liue in rest I will heare and see and hold my peace. Diálogo sexto, que passó entre dos amígos Yngléses y dos Españóles, que se juntaron en la lónja de Lóndres, en el qual, se trátan muchas cosas curiósas, y de gústo, son los Yngleses Egídio y Guillérmo, los Españo∣les Diego y A∣lónso. The sixt Dialogue which passed between two friendes Englishmen, and two Spaniards, which met vpon the Exchange in London: wherein are handled many cu∣rious matters, and delightful: the English men are named Giles and William, the Spaniardes Iames and Alonso. E. QVe hazéis Guillermo? G. WHat do you William? G. Ya lo veis Exídio. W. You euen see Giles. E. Como estáys tan oçióso? G. Why are you so idle? G. ❀ Quia nemo me conduxit. W. Bicause no man hath hired me. E. Pues yo os conbído aun ráto de buena converçaçión. G. Then I inuite you for a while into good companie? G. Adónde? W. Whither? E. Veníd os comígo, no yréys adonde yo os lleváre? G. Come with me, will you not go whither I shall leade you? G. Si me lo dezís priméro, por que ýr hombre, sin savér adonde, sería neçedád. W. If you tell me first, for it were follie for a man to go hee knowes not whi∣ther. E. Luego no hazéis confiánça de mi? G. Do you not now trust me? G. Si hágo, mas no sabéis que no todos los umóres son unos, y que po∣drá ser, lo que a vos os da gusto, enfadár me a mi. W. Yes I do trust you, but do you not knowe, that all humours are not one, and it may be, that which likes you may very much displease me. E. Si, peró yo conózco ya'vuestro u∣mór, y me acomódo con el. G. Yea, but I know your humour, and I do applie my selfe vnto it. G. Con todo ésso, dezídme adonde me lleváys. W. But for all this, tell me whither you ca∣rie me. E. Vámos a la lónja, adonde me están esperando dos amígos Españ∣óles, muy discretos, gustaréis de su buena conversación. G. Let vs goe to the Exchange where two Spanyards very discreete men my friends are tarrying for me, you shall haue a taste of their good conuersation.
G. Háblan ynglés? W. Speake they English? E. Vn poquíto, peró pues vos enten∣déis bien el Español, y yo tan∣bien no ympórta. G. A very little, but seeing you vnderstand well the Spanish and I also, it makes no matter. G. Huelgo me de ýr, aunque no séa, mas de por aprendér algunas buenas frásis Españólas. W. I am glad to goe, though it be but to learne some good Spanish phrases. E. Essas sé yo que las tiénen buenas, porque son de Tolédo donde es la príma de la lengua Es∣pañóla. G. Those I knowe they haue and good ones, bicause they are of Toledo where is the prime of the Spanish toong. G. Son por ventúra aquéllos, que se ándan alli passeándo. W. They are peraduenture those which goe there walking. E. Los própios, vámos allá, Dios guar∣de a vuestas mercédes. G. The very same, let vs goe meete them, God saue your worships. D. Y venga con vuestas merçédes. I. And welcome in Gods name. E. Passe adelante la conversación de que se tratáva aóra. G. Proceede in that conference which pas∣sed betwixt you. D. No pareze sino que la entendístes, que respondístes a élla sin daros el pie. I. It seemes that you vnderstood it, that you made answere to it without gi∣uingAs in plaies one takes the last word of anothers speech, and by that knowes when to speake. you the qu. A. Tratávamos de las salutaciónes, que se úsan en Ynglatérra, y de las que se úsan in Espáña. A. We entreated of the salutations which are vsed in England, and of those which are vsed in Spaine. G. Quales son mejóres? W. Which are better? A. Cierto en esto, adonde quiera, ay abúsos, quando dize el español Dios os guarde, en ora buéna estéys, Dios os de salúd, y el Yn∣gles buénas tárdes y ótras se∣mejantes yo apruévola por buena salutación. A. Truely in that matter, there are abuses on both parts, when the Spaniard saith God keepe you, a good houre haue you, God giue you health: and the Englishman Godden, or good euen, and the other like, I al∣low it for good salutation. G. Pues el mundo la repruéva, y tie∣nen por tóscos a los que la úsan. W. But generally it is disallowed, and they hold them rude that vse it. A. Y aun por esso se díze, que anda el mundo a el rebéz, y no ay me∣jór señál de que ello es buéno, de vér que el mundo lo repru∣éba. A. And therefore it is saide, the world goes quite contrarie, and there is no better signe that it is good, then to see it disallowed in the world. G. De las demas salutaciónes que os paréce? W. And of the other salutations what think you? A. De las de mas dígo, que quando el Yngles pregúnta a el ótro, co∣mo estáys, dize una gran neçe∣dád, y quando el Españól dize béso os las manos, dize una gran mentíra. A. Of the rest I saie, that when the Eng∣lishman doth aske the other, howThe Spaniard alloweth not how do you, but how doth your worship or ma∣stership. he doth, he vtters his owne sim∣plicitie, and when the Spaniard saith, I kisse your handes, hee tel∣leth a great lie. G. Menestér es que déys razón, de vuestra nueva opinión. W. You must giue a reason of your newe opi∣nion. A. Aóra dezíme por vuéstra vída, no os pareçe neçedad a el que vos veys bueno preguntár le como está? A. Now tell me I pray you, doth it not seeme vnto you a simplicitie, to aske a man whom you see well, how he doth?
G. Tenéys razón, peró podría tenér algun mal secréto que no se le eche de vér. G. You saie well, but he may haue some in∣ward griefe, which appeereth not outwardely. A. Estónçes que remedáis vos, con preguntár le como está, No se∣ría mejor, rogár a Diós, que le de salúd, como haze el ótro. A. Then what remedie do you giue him in asking him how he doth, were it not better to pray to God to send him helth as the other doth. G. Aóra dezíd lo de el Españól. W. Now tell that of the Spaniard. A. El Españól dígo, que dizé mas mentiras entre año en este cáso, que reáles da por Dios, porque dezir a el que encuéntra, vso las mános a v. m. si habla de presen∣te, bien vémos, que miente, pues no se las besa, si de futuro tanbien porque bien sabemos, que quan∣do el otro quisiésse dar se las por muy amígo que fuesse no se las querría el vesar. A. The Spaniard I say in this case telleth more lies within the yeere, then he giues sixpences for God sake, for to say to one, that he meeteth I kisse the handes of your worship, if he speake of the time present, we well see that he lieth seeing he doth not kisse them: if of the time to come, in like manner; for we well know when the other would giue him his hands to kisse, if he were neuer so great a friend, yet he would not kisse them. G. Si peró paréçe que es vna manera de reconosimiénto de superioridád a el que díze. W. Yea but it seemeth that it is a manner of acknowledging of superioritie to him, to whom it is spoken. A. Assí es, peró ésse reconosimiénto no ésta mas que en la lengua por ❀ que el refran dize, manos bé∣za hombre que querría vér cor∣tádas. A. So it is, but this acknowledging is no more, but in the toong: for the pro∣uerbe saith, A man kisseth those hands that he would see cut off. G. Yo os dire lo que subcedió al propó∣sito, a vn cavalléro viéjo españól, con otro móço y fue, que como el moço por buena criánça, le dixo a el viejo suplíco a v.m. me de las mános, que se las quiero besar el viéjo confiádo en su ançianía, las alargó para que se las besasse, el otro ya arrepentído se las asió con las suy as y con muy buen do∣náire le díxo senór yo y v. m. a otros dos. I. I will tell you that which happened fit for this matter, to an auncient gen∣tleman, a Spaniard, with another yoong man; and it was, as the yoong man for manners sake saide to the old man, I entreate your worship that you will giue me your hands, for I will kisse them: the olde man presuming vpon his yeeres, put them out that he might kisse them, the other repenting, tooke him fast by the hands with his owne hands, and with very good pleasantnes, said vnto him, Sir, I and your wor∣ship against other two. G. El moço andúvo discréto en hazér lo ansí, y el viéjo néçio, porque bien savémos, que palábras de buena criánça no oblígan. W. The yoong man was wise in so doing, and the olde man simple, for well wee knowe that wordes of compliment binde not. D. Ansi es verdád, que essa çerimónia de besár la mano, solo la deve el vasállo a el señor. I. It is true, this ceremonie of kissing the hand onely the vassall oweth vnto his Lord. A. E'ssa sola sálua guarda tiene nuestra
costumbre que con dezír, béso a v.m. las mános, paréçe que es dezír, reconosco a v. m. por mi Señór, y yo por vuestro vasállo.
A. This safegard hath our custome, that
with saying, I kisse the hands of your worship, it seemes it is to saie, I ac∣knowledge your worship for my lord, and my selfe for your vassall. E. Y que os paréçe de ésta costumbre, que tenémos en ynglatérra de asír nos las manos vnos otros? G. And what is your opinion of this cu∣stome, which wee haue in Eng∣land to shake hands one with ano∣ther? A. Dos manos asídas, siempre fue sím∣bolo de amistád, peró dár los tirónes, que aqui se dán vno a ótro, tengo lo por poca grave∣dád, y no sé si diga por livian∣dád. A. Two handes fastened togither, alwaies hath beene a token of friendship, but to shake and plucke them, as here they do one to another, I hold it for small grauitie, and I knowe not whether I may call it lightnes. E. Antes paréçe que aquello es por mas confirmación de la ami∣stád. G. Rather it seemeth that it is for the grea∣ter confirmation of friendship. A. E'ssa confirmación ha de ser con óbras, y no con ademánes ni ti∣rónes, quanto mas que deve avér muchos que con la máno asída y tirando, le deven de estár con el coraçón matando le. A. This confirmation ought to bee with workes, and not with gestures, nor shaking of the hands, and so much the rather, bicause there are ma∣ny which with hand in hand shake hands, and in hart would kill each other. G. Que dizís de la otra de besár los hombres a las mugéres publi∣camente. W. What say you of that custome of kissing between men and women and that openly? A. Essa costúmbre túvo su princípio en Róma, en el tiempo que ella floreçia, aunque se ynventó a diferente propósito de el que aóra se úsa. A. This custome first began in Rome, in the time it most flourished, although it were inuented for a different pur∣pose, then it is now vsed. G. A que fin la ynbentáron? W. For what purpose was it inuented? A. Los Romanos aboreçían tanto el ví∣no en las mugéres, que tenián ley, en que condenáva a muérte ala que lo bevía, y porque no lo pudiessen hazer ascōdidamen∣te, tenian liçénçia sus parientes de besár la, para que por el ol∣fáto conoçiessen, si lo avía be∣vido. A. The Romanes did so much detest wine in women, that they had a law, in which they did condemne to death that wo∣man which did drinke wine, and be∣cause they might not drinke it with∣out being knowen, their kinsfolkes had leaue to kisse the women, that they might knowe by their breath whether they had dronke wine or no. G. Si aóra se vbiessen de matár todas las que lo beven, yo veo que quedáramos sin mugéres, W. If nowe they should kill all those women which drinke wine, I see we should be quite without women. E. No créo, que fuera muy gran pérdida, segun nos son causa de males. G. I beleeue that it were not any great losse, seeing they are cause of many euils vnto vs. G. Yo para mi tengo, que la mayor cau∣sa de la desoluçion en algunas mugeres de Ynglaterra es esta costumbre de besallos en pub∣lico, por que con ésto pierden
la verguença y a el tocamiénto del béso, les entra vn veneno que las ynficióna.
W. I holde that the greatest cause of disso∣lutenes in some women in Eng∣land is this custome of kissing pub∣likely, for that by this meanes they
lose their shamefastnes, and at the very touch of the kisse, there entreth into them a poison which doth infect them. A. Antes que se yntroduxésse ésta co∣stumbre en Roma, cuenta Tito Lívio, que desterráron de ella a vn senadór, persona de mucha quénta, sólo por que besó a su mugér delante de vna híja súya A. Before this custome was brought into Rome, Titus Liuius telleth that they banished out of the citie a senator, a person of great account, onely bi∣cause he kissed his wife before one of his owne daughters. G. De vn estrémo viniéron a dár en otro estrémo. W. They fell from one extremitie into an∣other. E. En España no se vsa besár los hom∣bres a las mugéres? G. In Spaine do not men vse to kisse wo∣men? D. Si bésan los marídos a sus mugéres, y esto allá detrás de siete pare∣des, donde aun la luz no los pu∣éda vér. I. Yes the husbands kisse their wiues, but as if it were behinde seuen wals, where the very light cannot see them. G. Es por que los Españóles son dema∣sidaménte celozos. W. It is because the Spaniards are too iea∣lous. A. No, si no, per que sómos tan trabies∣sos, que no hémos menestér ésse apetito, para hazér mil malos recaudos que sería si tubiesse∣mos esse Ocaçión. A. No not so, but because we are so wan∣ton, that we neede nothing to helpe our appetite, to make a thousand ill matches which would fall out if we should haue this occasion. G. Yo créo, que antes causaría hastío, y no andarían los hombres, tan golósos, por que vedamiento es causa del apetito. G. I do rather beleeue, that it would cause satiètie, and that men would not seeke it so greedily, because forbid∣ding is cause of desire. A. No es fuego el de la concupisçiénçia, que se ahóga por echarle mu∣cha materia, antes es como la y dropesía, que mientras mas el enfermo béue mas sed tiéne. A. The fire of concupiscence, is not such as is extinguished by casting on much matter, but like the dropsie, that the more the sicke person drinketh the more thirst still he hath. D. Especialmente entre los Españóles que por sér de complexión co∣léricos, está Venus en su punto. I. Especially among Spaniards, which are of a cholerick complexion, Venus is in her full force. G. Yo entiéndo ésso al contrário, por que Venus consiste mas en vmedád que en calór, por lo qual entiendo que mas aptos son para semejante exercíçio los v'medos de complexión, que los coléricos que con de su naturaléza sécos. G. I take that quite contrarie, because Venus cōsisteth more in moisture then in heat, whereby it seemes to me that the moist of complexion are more apt to such matters, then the cholericke which are by na∣ture drie. A. Si peró la humidád sin calor, seriá como la tiérra sin el sol, que no es sufiçiénte de mísma a produ∣zír cosa algúna. A. Yea but moisture without heate, would be as the earth without the sunne, which is not sufficient of it selfe to bring foorth any thing. D. Por ésse, los poetas, casáron a Venus con Bulcáno Dios pe el fuégo. I. For this cause the Poets married Venus with Vulcan God of fire. E. Mas Bulcáno ni Venus sin Ceres y
Baco no valen vnCáco, a fruit in the Indies or a small peece of money there. caco.
G. But neither Venus nor Vulcan, without
Ceres and Bacchus are worth a cherrie stone. G. Pues yo para mi tengo, que en las tierras mas frías, está mas re∣conçentrádo el calór naturál, y por ésso con mayór àptitúd, en los que biven en las tales regi∣ónes. W. But I for my part thinke, that in coun∣tries most cold, the naturall heate is more vnited in his center, and therfore is there greater desire in those that liue in those countries. A. No es esse calór reconçentrádo que está enel coraçon el que es causa de este fuégo, sino el que está en la sangre y partes exte∣rióres. A. It is not that heate, which is setled a∣bout the hart, which is the cause of this fire, but that which is in the blood and exteriour parts. G. Si peró no me negaréis, que el calór de la sangre no proçéde de el, de el hígado. W. Yea but you will not denie, but that the heate of the blood doth proceede from the heate of the liuer. A. Assi es verdád, peró no óbra éste efécto en su orígen y fuente, si no quando se ha derramádo por las. venas, y como la virtúd esparzí∣da, es mas fláca que quando está vñida, si quando lo esta es acome∣tído el calór de su contrário el frío, y ésto confuérça y. vehe∣ménçia vénse y resfría de suerte que no puede obrár ni hazér su efecto. A. It is true, but it doth not worke this effect in the originall and fountaine, except when it hath spred it selfe by all the vaines, and as the vertue dis∣persed is more feeble then when it is vnited; so when it is so, the heate is set vpon by his contrarie the colde, and this cold with force and vehe∣mencie doth ouercome and coole in such manner, that it cannot worke his effect. D. Assi es, y la esperiéncia de ésto se vée en los cabrónes, que es ani∣mál luxuriosíssimo, y en lle∣vándo le a tiérras frías, o no puede bivír, o pierde mucho de su poténcia. I. So it is, and the experience of this is seene in great hee-goats, which is a most luxurious beast, and in car∣rying him to cold countries, either he cannot liue, or he loseth much of his naturall strength. G. Los Faunos o semicápras, que los antiguos llamávan médios di∣óses cuentan los autóres, y po∣etas, que éran en estrémo luxu∣riósos. W. The Faunes or halfe goates which the auncient writers called halfe gods, authors and poets tell that they were woonderfully luxurious. E. Es verdád, que úvo o ay táles hom∣bres en en mundo llamados faunos? G. Is it true, that there were and are such men the world called Faunes? A. En la vida de Sant Páblo primér hermitaño se quenta, que en a∣quel desiérto donde el hazía su penitençia, la hazía tanbien san∣to Antonio, el qual como por re∣belacion supiésse como estáva allí cérca san Pablo, le fue aviçitár y en el camíno encontro con uno, el qual de la çinta para arriba, te∣nía forma perfecta de hombre, salvo que la cabeça tenia lléna de
corneçuélos pequéños, y de mé∣dio para abajo éra cabrón con muy largas vedíjas, y pies de lo mísmo.
A. In the life of saint Paull the first Her∣mit, they say, that in that desart where he made his repentance, Saint Anthonie likewise made his, who by reuelation knowing he was neere Saint Paull, went to visit him, and in the way met with one, which from the girdle vpward had the perfect forme of a man, except that he had his head full of little hornes, & from
the middle downeward he was a he-goate with very long shagge haire, and feete of the same. E. Hablava alguna cosa? G. Spake he any thing? A. Si que el sancto le habló, y le pre∣guntó quien éra y el en un len∣guáje muy bárvaro, pero tal que el sancto le púdo enten∣dér, le respondió, que era vno de los avitadóres de aquél desiérto, a quien la çiega gentilidád ado∣ráva por dióses, peró que éran criatúras mortáles, y díxo mas a el santo, que su grey y génte le enbiáva a el por embaxador a rogar le a el Sancto, que róga se por todos a el comun Dios de todas las gentes, que bien savían que avia baxádo de el çielo y he∣cho se hombre por redimír a los hombres, y con esto se fue por a∣quel desiérto, con tanta ligeréza que en muy breve espáçio, le perdió de vísta el sancto. A. Yea for Saint Anthonie spake vnto him, and asked him who he was, and he in a language verie barbarous, yet notwithstanding such a lan∣guage that the holy man could vn∣derstand, he answered him, that he was one of the inhabitants of that desert, whom the blinde Gentiles worshipped for Gods, but that they were mortall creatures, and saide moreouer to the Saint, that his peo∣ple & nation sent him to him for an ambassador to entreat the holy mā, that he should pray for all of them, to the common God of all nations, for wel they knew, that he was come down from heauen, and being made man to redeeme mankinde, and herewithall he went thorow the desert with such swiftnes, that in short space the holy man lost the sight of him. D. Yo he leýdo tanbien, que a el em∣peradór Constantíno magno, le traxéron de essos desiértos, otro bíbo, y lo estúbo muchos dias, y despues de muérto salá∣do, le traxéron por muchas partes de el mundo, para que todos le biéssen. I. Also haue I read, that they brought to the Emperour Constantine the great, out of these deserts, another aliue, & there he was many daies, and afterward being dead and salted, they carried him thorow many parts of the world, that all men might see him. G. Bolviéndo a nuestra primera plá∣tica, que os pareçe de esta ciu∣dád de Londres? W. Turning to our first speech, what do you thinke of the citie of London? A. A mi me paréçe, en verano tienda, y en inviérno contienda. A. It seemes to me in sommer a shop, and in winter a contention. G. Como se entiende ésso? W. How is this to be vnderstood? A. Digo que paréçe, en veráno tien∣da, por que en aquel tiempo, todos los Señóres, cavalléros, y hidálgos, se salen fuera de el∣la, y se ván a sus aldéas a passár el veráno, quedando en ella solos los oficiáles con sus tién∣das abiértas. A. I say it seemes in sommer a shop, for that in that time, all the noble men, knights, and gentlemen, do goe out of the citie, and they goe to coun∣trey villages to passe ouer the som∣mer, onely artificers remaining in it, with their shops open. G. Y por que lo de mas? W. And why the other? A. En ynviérno son los términos y, co∣mo acúden de todo el réyno a
élla a sus pléitos está, hecha to∣da contiénda o pléito, peró vl∣tra de esto es vna de las me∣jores ciudádes de elmundo a lo que yo en tiendo.
A. In winter are the termes, and out of eue∣rie place of the kingdom, they come
to it to their pleadings, and so it is made nothing but contention and wrangling in lawe, but besides this it is one of the best cities in the worlde as farre as I perceiue. G. Que dezís de toda la tierra en ge∣nerál? W. What say you of the whole land in gene∣rall? A. Que es fertilíssima y abundante, de todas las cosas que ella prodú∣ze, espeçíal de ganádos, déven de ser los mas gruessos y mejó∣res de el mundo. A. That it is most fruitfull, and abounding of all things, which it doth bring foorth, especially flockes of sheepe, which are the greatest and best of the worlde. G. Y tanbien de semíllas es muy fértil. W. And also of seedes it is very fertill. A. Ansi es verdád, peró como no pue∣de avér cosa perfecta en este mundo, ya que en esso es abun∣dante, le fáltan otras cosas ne∣çessárias, a la vida vmána, que ella por la frialdád de su sítio, no puede produzir, y ansi tiéne ne∣çeçidád, de comunicatión con otros réinos. A. It is very true, but as there cannot be any thing perfect in this worlde, so al∣though in this it abounds, yet other necessarie things are wanting in it, which are required to humane life, which thorow the coldnes of the sci∣tuation, it cannot bring foorth, and so it hath neede of commerce with other nations. G. Que cosas son essas, que dezís que le fáltan, que yo créo que no ay cosa en el mundo, que en ella no se halle. W. What things are those which you saie, that are wanting in it, for I be∣leeue that there is not anie thing in the world that in it is not found. A. Es ássi verdád, peró es comunicádo de otros réynos, que bien véys vos, que en ella no se cría óro ni pláta, no se coje vino, ni azéi∣te, açúcar, séda, espeçiería, ni frútas de las regaládas, como son çídras, limónes, límas, narán∣jas, granádas, alméndras, y otros mil géneros de ellas, muy neçessarios para el regálo de las gentes, y como dígo de éstas pocas cosas, pudiéra dezír de otras muchas que déxo. A. It is true, but it is brought from other countries, for well you see that in it, neither groweth gold nor siluer, nor wine, oyle, sugar, silk, spice nor fruits of the finest sorte, as are citrons, ly∣mons, orenges, pomegranats, al∣monds, & a thousand other kindes of them, verie necessarie for the dayntie feeding of men, & as I spake of these fewe things, I could say of many others which I leaue. G. Si, peró te némos otras, que sírven en lugár de essas cósas, y ansi no las echámos menos, como çer∣véza por víno, mantéca por a∣zéite, y otras semejántes. W. Yea but wee haue others, which serue in steed of these things, & so we want them not, as beere for wine, butter for oyle, & others the like. A. Con todo ésso, sería inposíble podér passár éste réyno sin comunica∣çión con otro, lo que no tiene Espáña, que sola entre todaslas provínçias de el mundo, podría passár sin comunicación con otra, por produzír, dentro de si
todas las cosas necessárias, a la vida vmána.
A. Notwithstanding all this, it were impos∣sible this kingdome could endure without commerce with others, which Spaine standeth in no neede of, for that alone among all the countries in the world might en∣dure without communicating with
any other countrey, bringing foorth within it self all those necessarie things for mans life. G. Pues, bien os podré yo dezír v'na cósa, que Espáña no prodúze. W. But well may I tell you one thing which Spaine affoords not. A. Qual es? A. What is it? G. Especiería, que al fin lo trá eis de la ýndia. W. Spice, which you fetch from the Indies. A. Tenéys razón, que éssa fóla le fálta a Espáña, peró, como vos dixí∣stes, tanbien se cría en élla, con que se podria suplír éssa fálta. A. You say true, for Spaine onely wants this, but as you haue said also, there growes in it that which may sup∣ply this want. G. Que es? W. What is it? A. En lugár de pimiénta, se cría vna yérua que llamámos pimiénto, cuya simiénte es de tanta fuér∣ça, y de el própio efécto que la pimiénta, que viene de yndias, en lugár de clávos, vsan múchos de los ajos, y si no fuesse por vn mal olorzíllo que tienen, son mas sabrósos que esótros, de açafrán gran cantidad se coje en Espáña, genxibre de pocos dias aca, se a començádo a plan∣tár en élla, y se da bien. A. In steede of pepper there growes an herbe which we call pepper herbe, whose seede is of such strength, and of the very same effect the pepper is which comes from the Indies. In steede of cloues, many vse garlicke, and if it were not for a little ill smell which it hath, they are more sauorie then the other. Great quantitie of saffron is had in Spaine. Ginger not long since is begun to bee planted therein, and it prospereth well. G. A loménos no me negaréis, ser mas fértil tiérra en general Yngla∣terra que España. W. At least you will not denie me, Eng∣land generally to be a more fer∣tile countrie then Spaine. A. Digo que es verdád, y lo conçédo, peró tanbien os se dezír, que de éssa fertilidád, viene la floxedád en las cárnes, y mantenimiéntos de ella, que son de poco nutri∣miénto y sustancia, y ésta es la cáusa, de que los yngléses nos notáys a los Españoles por mi∣serables en el comér, por que las carnes de Espáña, como de tierra mas estéril, son de tanto nutrimiénto que si comiésse de éllas vn hombre tanto como en ynglaterra come, sin dúbda ninguna, reventaria. A. I say it is true, and I doe graunt it, but also I can tell you that of this fer∣tilitie proceedes the faintnesse of the flesh there, and the substance of it, which is of small nourishment and sustenance, and this is the cause why the English men doe marke the Spaniards for pinching in their diet, for that the flesh of Spaine as of a countrie more bar∣ren, is of such nourishment, that if a man should eate of it so much as in England they eat, without doubt he should burst. D. Por ésso, ay uno manéra de dezír, comun en España, tu padre ❀ çenó carnéro assádo, y aco∣stó se, y murió se pues, no pre∣guntes, de que murió. I. For this cause there is a common saying in Spaine, thy father supped with mutton rosted, and went to bed and died, do not now aske whereof he died. A. En la própia Espáña tenémos la isperiéncia de ésto que la An∣daluzía que es tiérra mas fértil
que Estremadúra, las carnes de ella, no son con mucho de tan∣to nutrimiénto, ni tan buen sa∣vor, como estas otras.
A. In Spain we haue the experience of this, that in Andeluzai which is a country more fertile thenA prouince in Spaine. Estre∣madura,
the flesh is not by oddes of such nourishment nor of so good taste as that of Estremadura. E. Tanbien se vée ésso en los yngléses, que van a Espáña, que dízen que no puéden comér tanta carne allá, como comían acá. G. Also it may bee seene in Englishmen, which go into Spaine, which saie that they cannot eate so much flesh there, as they did eate heere. G. Dezíme a óra, que os paréce, de el trato de nuestra génte? W. Tell me now, what you thinke of the En∣glish manner? A. Generalménte hablándo, toda la gente ynglésa, es benína, y amo∣rósa, afáble, alégre, y amígos de regozíjos, y fiestas, agénos de to∣da melancolía, como a quellos, en quien predomína el humór san∣guino, peró fuera de ésto, he no∣tádo en todos en generál tan yn∣satiáble avarícia, que desdóra tó∣das sus virtudes. A. Speaking generally, al the English people are courteous and louing, affable, and merrie, and louers of sportes and feastes, free from all melan∣cholie, as those in whome doth pre∣dominate the sanguine complexi∣on: but besides this I haue noted in generall, such an insatiable coue∣tousnes, as doth deface all their vertues. G. Y de las mugéres que dezís? W. And what say you of the women? A. Las mugeres generalménte hablán∣do, piénso que són las mas her∣mósas de el mundo, por que tie∣nen todas tres grácias particulá∣res, para ser lo, que son en estré∣mo bláncas, coloradas, y rúbias, y la que con éstas grácias que son generáles a todas, aciérta a tenér buenas faiciónes, es acabada en hermosúra: peró tanbien os dígo con la misma generalidád, que tienen tres faltas. A. The women generally, I thinke they are the most faire of the world, for they haue all the three speciall graces which make thē so, they are woon∣derfully white & red, & that with these graces which are generall to all, there happeneth for them to haue such good fauour, whereby they are most beautifull: but also I tell you with the same generali∣tie, that they haue three faults. G. Quales son por vida vuestra? W. I pray you what are they? A. No las quisiéra dezír, por no caér, en desgrácia con éllas. A. I would not willingly tell them least I fall into disgrace with them. G. Yo salgo por fiadór que no cairéis. W. I will be your suretie you shall not. A. ❀ Teneis razón, que quien nunca subió, no puede caer, peró las tres faltas son, pequeños ojos, grandes bócas, no buena tez en los rostros, y de esto es la cáusa el áyre tan frío y sutíl, que corre en estas partes, que se les cúrte y por esto es buena la ynbinçión la, de las mas caríllas, aunque yo enti∣éndo que no deve de bastár. A. You say true, he that neuer gat vp, can neuer fall, but the three wants are little eies, great mouthes, and not very smooth skinne in the face, and heereof the cause is for that the aire is so colde and subtill in these parts, which doth tan them, and therefore maskes were well inuented, although as I perceiue they helpe not. G. Vos lo avéys disputádo muy bien, y yo os quédo muy aficionádo ser∣vidór, y assi os suplíco, que el tiempo que estubiéredes en esta tiérra os sirváis de mi. W. You haue disputed very well, and I re∣maine your affectionate seruant, and so I entreat you that the time you are in this countrey you so vse me.
A. Yo os doy muchas grácias, por el o∣freçimiénto, y quedo yo no ménos a vuestro serviçio, y por que se va haziéndo tarde, nos vamos recojéndo alas posádas que ya es óra. A. I giue you many thankes, for your offer, and I remaine no lesse at your ser∣uice, and because it waxeth late, let vs betake our selues to our lod∣gings, for it is time. G. Beso a vuestas merçédes las manos. W. I kisse your hands. D. Yo las de vuéstas merçédes. I. And I yours. Diálogo séptimo, entre un sargénto y un cavo de esquadra, y un Soldado, en el qual se trata, de las cosas perteneciéntes a la milíçia, y de las calidádes que deve tenér un buen Soldado, con mu∣chos dichos graçiósos y buenas quén∣tos. The seuenth Dialogue betweene a Serge∣geant of a band, and a corporall, and a Souldier, in which are handled matters pertaining to warfare, and the parts that a good soldier ought to haue, with many fine sayings & good speeches. Sa. A Donde camina señór soldádo? Sa. WHither walke you soldier? So. O señor Sargento házia la ta∣bla, si v.m. no manda otra cósa. So. O sergeant towards the di∣cing place, if you command no other matter. Sa. Lleva muchos dinéros que jugár? Sa. Do you carry with you much money to play? So. Mi paga enteríta como la reçebí, que no he osádo gastár vn reál, por no quirár se lo a el juégo. So. My whole pay as I receiued it, for I durst not spende one sixe pence thereof, least I should take away so much from play. Sa. Esso es de buenos cofrádes, antes falte para el cuerpo que para él juego. Sa. This is the part of good companions, let there be wanting for the body, ra∣ther then for play. So. A que féria puedo yo ýr, en que mas gane, pues aventúro con quatro ducados ganár quatro-cientos. So. To what faire may I goe, wherein I may gaine more, seeing I venture with fower duckates, to gaine fower hundred. Sa. Y si el dado díze mal, allá ván roçín y mançánas. Sa. If the die turne ill, thereA horse la∣den with apples passing a riuer was carried a∣way, and so both lost. goes horse and apples. So. Señor o rico pijádo, o muerto des calabrádo. So. Sir, either hangedrich, or dead with head broken. Sa. Essa es la quénta de los perdídos. Sa. This is the reckoning of cast awaies. So. Cuerpo de tal señor, que hijos o mugér tengo yo que mantenér? So. Bodie of me, what children or wife haue I to keepe? Sa. Si pero ne fuera mejor vestír se que jugár el dinero? Sa. Yea but were it not better to apparell your selfe, then to play away your money? So. Yo he hecho mi quenta, y he mene∣stér camisas, jubón, sayo, calço∣nes, médias, y çapátos, y sonbré∣ro, y en quatro ducados, no ay para todo, pues conprár vno nu∣évo,
y traér lo otro viéjo, no pa∣reçe bien, quiero jugár, quiça ga∣naré para comprár lo todo.
So. I haue reckoned with my selfe, I haue neede of shirts, doublet, cassocke, breeches, stockings, shooes, & hat, and in fower ducats there is not for all this, for to buy one thing
new and weare another old, seemes not well, I will play, peraduenture I shall get so much to buy all new. Sa. Y si los pierde, quedar se ha sin lo vno y lo otro. Sa. If you loose, you must go without one and the other. So. Señor, préso por mil, préso por mil y quiniéntos, todo es estár preso, diré estonçes desnudo naçí, y desnúdo me hallo y desnudo moriré. So. Sir, arrested for a thousand, taken for a thousand fiue hundred, all is but to be arrested, I will then saie I was borne naked, and naked I finde my selfe, and naked shall I die. Sa. Digame, sáve quando entramos de guárdia? Sa. Tell me, do you knowe when we watch? So. Esta nóche le toca a la compañiá. So. This night it fals to the companie. Sa. Con que armas sirve con pica, o ar∣cabúz? Sa. What armes serue you with, a pike or shot? So. Con vn mosquéte de siete palmos. So. With a musket of seauen handfuls. Sa. Pues como díze, que no sacó mas que quatro ducadas tieniendo siete depaga. Sa. How then saide you, that you had but fower ducats, hauing seauen for your paie? So. Vno me descontáron de pólvora y cuerda los contadores, otro he dado a mi camarada para la de∣spensa de esta semána, y otro que se me quitó de losSuccors or lendings which they giue soul∣diers when there is no paie and when the paie comes they take it off. socorros. So. One ducate defalked for powder and match, the other haue I giuen to my comerade for the charges of this weeke, and the other was taken out for lendings. Sa. justa está la quenta. Sa. The reckoning is very right. So. Es como la de el trillo, cada piedra en su agujéro. So. It is euen as a threshing floore, euerie stone in his hole. Sa. Quantos son de camaráda? Sa. How many cabbin mates are you togi∣ther? So. Tres y con migo quatro. So. Three, and with me fower. Sa. Tantos pies tiene vn gato. Sa. So many feete hath a cat. So. çinco con el rábo. So. He hath fiue with the taile. Sa. Tienen buen aloxámiénto? Sa. Haue all you good lodging? So. Tal sea la salud de el aposentador que nos le dió. So. I would to God such were the health of the Furriel which gaue it vs. Sa. Como no es bueno? Sa. How so, is it not good good? So. Peór es vna çahurda de lechónes. So. A pigstie is woorse. Sa. Tienen huéspeda hermosa? Sa. Haue you a faire Hostesse? So. Hermósa señór sarjénto, yo pienso que los diablos son serafines en su comparaçión. So. Faire master Sergeant, I thinke the di∣uels are Seraphines in respect of her. Sa. Bueno es el encareçimiénto, que talle tiene? Sa. You giue her good commendations, what handsomnes is in her? So. Ella es mas viéja que Metusalen, mas arugada que vna pása, mas súzia que vna mosca, mas seca, que vnpalo, diente y muela, co∣mo por la mano, la boca su-mí∣da, como ojo de culo, los ojos el vno tuerto, y el otro que no se le sacaran con vn garavá∣to finalmente, toda ella es vn
retráto de la ynbídia.
So. She is more olde then Methusalem, more wrinkled thē a dried grape, or raisin, more filthie thenWhich goeth and sucketh eue∣rie filthy wound or carrion. a flie, more drie then a sticke: teeth and chock teeth as in ones hand, the mouth sunke in as the hole of the taile, the eies one quite out, and the other so sunke into her head that it cannot be pluckt out with a hooke. In fine, all of
her togither is the very picture of Enuie. Sa. Essa tal será v'nico remédio contra luxúria. Sa. She must needes be the onely remedie against lust. So. Pues es lo bueno que con todas estas gráçias se afeita y repíca. So. But this is the best of her, which with all these good graces is painted out and spoken of. Sa. Y v.m. no le haze el amór? Sa. And do you not make loue to her? So. Amór, o que boto a tal, no la aco∣méta vn Tigre. So. Loue, I sweare by such a one, a Tiger would not set vpon her. Sá. A'nde, quae para vn lava dientes no será mala. Sa. Goe foole she is good enough to wash ones mouth, and spet out againe. So. Mas me los quiero traér súzios que no mal lavállos. So. I had rather they should bring my cloathes fowle then ill washed. Sa. Mas yo créo, que es como dízen, ❀ quién díze mal de la yégua, esse la lléva. Sa. But I beleeue, it is as they say, he that dispraiseth the mare carrieth her away. So. Par diez, no soy si no como la zór∣ra que quando no púdo alcan∣çár las v'bas, díxo vbas de par∣ra, ansi como ássi no las aviá gana. So. By this ten bones I am no otherwise then the foxe, that when he could not reach the grapes, said grape of the vine, so euen so that he had no stomacke to eate them. Sa. Aqui viene el cávo de esquadra, ve∣ámos que nuevas tráe. de don∣de viéne señor cávo de es es∣quadra? Sa. Here comes the corporall, let vs see what newes hee brings. From whence come you Corporall? Ca. De la bandéra. Co. From the colours. Sa. Queda alli el alférez? Sa. Is the Ancient there? C. No señor, que está en cása de el ca∣pitan. Co. No sir, he is at the captaines house. So. A el capitan y alférez déxo yo aóra en cása de el maestre de cam∣po. So. The captaine and Ensigne I left euen now in the camp-masters house. Sa. Que nuévas ay por alla? Sa. What newes there about? Ca. Nuévas ciertas pocas, mentíras yn∣finitas. Co. Certaine newes verie fewe, lies infinite many. Sa. Que se dize aóra en el cuerpo de∣guardia? Sa. What say they now vpon the guarde? Ca. Vnos dízen, que nos enbarcaré∣mos para corrér la cósta, otros que que darémos aquí de pre∣çídio, otros que yrémos a Yr∣landa, no ay quien lo entiénda. Co. One saies, we shall embarke our selues to skowre the coast, others that we shall remaine heere in garrison, others that we shall goe for Ire∣land, none can tell what. Sa. Todo esso es adivinár, cada vno lo∣que deséa o le está bien. Sa. All this is, euery one to gesse at that which hee doth himselfe desire, or liketh well of. Ca. Como dezia el otro capitán los sol∣dados son profétas de el diáblo. Co. As another captaine saide, Souldiers are prophets of the diuell. Sa. Y tenía razón, porque assi como el diablo no sáve lo por venír, si no que lo conjetúra assi házen ellos: y entre mil conjectúras
que házen, alguna han de açer∣tár.
Sa. And he said well, for as the diuell doth not know, that which is to come, but by coniecture, so do they: & among a thousand coniectures which they
make, they are to hit vpon one. Ca. Tanbien se suena que el rey de Es∣paña, árma para venír contra Ynglaterra. Co. In like sorte, the rumor goeth that the king of Spaine makes preparation to come against England. Sa. Venga en óra buena, si tráe mu∣chos dinéros que dexárnos. Sa. Let him come, if he bring good store of crownes to leaue vs. S. Yo con vna cadéna de óro que valga cien libras me conténto. So. I woulde content my selfe with a chaine of golde, that were woorth a hun∣dred pound. Ca. Pues afee que no las suelen vendér muy baratas los Españóles. Co. But in faith the Spaniards are not wont to sell them very good cheape. So. Y yo con vna onça de plomo la piénso comprár. So. And I hope to buie one with an ounce of lead. Ca. E'sso es hazér quenta sin la hués∣peda: y quiça yréis por lána, y bolveréis tresquiládo: que a∣donde las dan las tóman. Co. That is to reckon without the Hostesse, and peraduenture you will goe for wooll, and returne home shorne, for where men giue there they re∣ceiue. So. Señór, si me matáren, tal dia hízo vn año, tanbien murió mi a∣guélo, ya está oluidado a ésso jugámos, oy por mi, mañana por ti, no tengo hijos que dexár huérfanos ni padre ni madre, ni perro que me ladre ❀ muera Marta y muera hárta. So. Sir, if they kill me, that daie made vp iust a yeere, in like manner died my grandfather, and nowe is for∣gotten, at this we play, to daie for me, to morrow for thee, I haue no children to leaue orphanes, neither father, nor mother, nor dogge that barketh at mee,A man ha∣uing a wife na∣med Marta which he often beate for too much drinking, at last almost killing her she said, Muera Marta, y mu∣era harta. let Marta die, yet let her die full. Ca. Plegue a dios que quando llegue la ocaçión no se calçe vnas calças de vílla Diego. Co. I pray God that when triall shall bee made, that you doe noti. Run away. put on the hose of the towne Diégo. Sa. Señor tan buenos hombres ay por los pies como por las manos. Sa. Sir there are as good men of their feet as of their hands. So. Por ser mis oficiáles, vuéstras mer∣cédes me pueden dezír esso, peró si otro me lo dixéra, ma∣tára me con el. So. In that you are my officers, you may say this vnto me, but if another should say so, I would fight with him. Ca. No dezímos aquí, que lo hará, peró podriá aconteçér. Co. We do not say heere, that you would doe so, but it might happen. So. Tanbien se podría caér el çielo y nos cogería debaxo. So. As well mightEl cielo, the skie. Also the tester of a bed. el Cielo fall, and then it would catch vs vnder. Sa. Demanéra que tanta dificultád ay en huýr v.m. como en caérse el cielo. Sa. So then it is as hard a matter for you to run away as for the skie to fall. Ca. El de la cama dize este soldádo. Co. This soldier speaketh of thei. Testerne of the bed. Cielo of his bed. So. No soy menór de edád que he me∣nestér curadór, señor cavo de esquadra, yo sabré responder por mi. So. I am not in my nonage, that I neede one to care for me, master Corporall I shall know how to answere for my selfe. Ca. Siempre oy dezír, que vna buena obra sepaga con vna mala. Co. I haue alwaies heard, that one good worke is requited with an euill.
So. ❀ No sabe v. m. que está vna higa en Róma para el que da consejo a quien no se le pide. So. Do you not know, that there is a floute for him in Rome, that giues coun∣sell to him that requires it not at his hands. Sa. No se enoje señor soldádo que se hará viéjo antes de tiempo. Sa. Be not angrie master soldier, for it wil make you old before your time. So. ❀ No puede ya sér mas negro el cuérvo que sus álas. So It cannot be woorse then it is, or nothing can exceede the highest degree.The crow cannot be blacker then her feathers. Sa. Señor cavo de esquadra, vaya di∣gale a el atambór que toque a recojer la guárdia. Sa. Corporall goe and tell the drum that he sound to set the watch. Ca. Yo voy aguarde me aqui v.m. Co. I goe, tarrie for me here. So. Señór sargento déxeme yr a jugár vn ráto antes que se meta la guárdia. So. Sergeant, let me go plaie at dice a lit∣tle before the watch be set. Sa. Tanto le pesa esse dinero, que tal priessa tiene por echárlo de si. Sa. So troublesome is his money to him, that he hasteth to throwe it from him. So. Yo mas querría doblállo. So. I woulde rather double it. Sa. ❀ No save como díze vn refrán, si quieres tenér dineros tenéllos. Sa. Do you not knowe what the prouerbe saith, if you will haue money keepe it. So. De que sírve tenér pocos o Caesar o náda. So. What good will a little do one? either an Emperour or nothing. Sa. Vaya con Dios, y pare lo a buen punto. Sa. Go in Gods name, and rest when you are well. So. Dios me libre de vn azár. So. God keepe me from a hazard. Sa. ❀ Y ami de vellácos en quadrilla, y villá nos en gavílla, de mo∣ça adivína, y de vieja latína, de lodos a el caminár, y de larga enfermedád, de párrafo de le∣gista, de ynfra de canonista, de eçetera de escrivano, y de réçipe de médico, de razón de diz que peró y si no, y de senténçia de conque. Sa. And me from knaues in my squadrō, & clownesi. Multitudes togither. in shocks together, from a maide that is a prophetesse; and an old woman a latinist; from durt in iourneies; and from long sicknes; from the paragraffe of the lawyer; from the infra of the Canonist; from the et cetera of the Scriue∣nour; from the recipe of the Phi∣sition; from that reason that saith, He saith that, but, if not; and from the sentence of with which. Ca. Ya toca la caja a recojér. Co. Now sounds the drum to set the watch. Sa. Vamos entre tanto a buscár a el Sarjento mayór, para que me de el nombre. Sa. In the meane while let vs go seeke the Sergeant major, that he may giue me the worde. Ca. El estará en casa de el generál. Co. He will be at the generals house. Sa. Vamos allá, que todo es camíno, es menestér que ésta noche aya muy buena guárdia. Sa. Let vs go thither, for it is all in our waie, it is needfull to night that there be a good guard. Ca. Por que ay alguna sospecha? Co. Why, is there any suspition of anie thing? Sa. Ay nuévas de enemigos, y assi es neçessário doblár las postas y reforçarlas, y ponér dos otres
çentinelas perdidas y que la ronda y contra ronda visíten amenúdo.
Sa. There is newes of the enimie, and ther∣fore needful to double the set men to watch, & to make them strong,
and to put two or threeThose that lie close vnder the enimie to heare that they saie and do. lost cen∣tinels, and that the round & coun∣terround may go very thicke. Ca. Pida v.m. a el sargento mayór, que nos den leña harta, para que aya buena lumbre en el cuer∣po de guárdia. Co. Require of the Sergeant maior, that hee giue vs woode enough, that there be a good fire vpon the body of the garde. Sa. Ansi será, y todas las armas estarán ❀ muy apunto que hombre aperçevído, médio combatído. Sa. So it shall be, and all the armes to be very readie, for a man well war∣ned halfe armed. Ca. Me nestér será dar a los soldados pólvora, cuérda, y balas. Co. It will be needfull to giue to the soul∣diers powder, match, bullets. Sa. Todo se les dará y órden a los cose∣létes que no les falte piéça. Sa. All shall be giuen them, and order for the corflets that they want no piece. Ca. Qual es la mejór árma de las que vsámos en la guerra? Co. Which is the best weapon, of those wee vse in warre? Sa. La pica es la réyna de las ármas. Sa. The pike is the queene of weapons. Ca. Poco valdrián las pícas, sino se guar nesiéssen con la arcabuçería, que dáña a el enemígo desde a fuera. Co. Of little auaile were pikes, if they were not lined with shot, which hurteth the enimie a farre off. Sa. Menos valdría la arcabuzería, si despues de dadala carga, no tuvi∣ésse adonde repararse de la ca∣valleriá enemíga, y de todos los demás que le procuráren dañár. Sa. Of lesse auaile were the shot, after they had discharged, if they had no place to defend themselues from the eni∣mies horsemen, & all the rest which should endeuor to offend them. Ca. Si, peró bien vemos que mayór da∣ño se le haze a el enimigo con la arcabuzería, y mosquetería, que con las picas. Co. Yea, but we well see, that greater dam∣mage is made to the enimie, by small shot and musket, then with pikes. Sa. Todo ésse daño es poco en compara∣çión de el que se reçibe a el des∣barate de vn esquadrón o exér∣çito, el qual se siguiría luego con la cavallería, si las pícas que es vna murállafuerte, no se pusies∣sen ala defensa. S. All this dammage is little in compari∣son of that is receiued at the ouerthrow of a squadron or ar∣mie, the which woulde followe straight with the horse, if the pikes, which is a strong wall, did not put themselues in defence thereof. Ca. Por ésso compáran a vn esquadrón bien formado, a el cuerpo vmáno donde los braços, y piernas, que son los que óbran son los arcabu∣zéros y las picas que están siem∣pre firmes, y es de dó viene vir∣túd, a todas las partes de el esqua∣drón, el cuerpo y coraçón. C. Hereby they compare a squadron well in order, to a mans bodie, where the armes and legs which are those that worke, as the shot and the pikes which stande alwaies firme, and from whence proceede force to all the parts of the squa∣dron, to the bodie and hart. Sa. Assi es, y aunsi miráis la forma de vn esquadrón de los ordinários for∣mado, con sus mángas, hallaréis en el, la misma forma de el cuer∣po vmáno. S. So it is, and also if you marke well the fashion of a squadron of the ordi∣narie squadrons made with his wings, you shall finde in it the ve∣ry fashion of a mans bodie. Ca. Que partes se requiére que tenga vn buen soldádo. C. What parts are required in a good sol∣dier?
Sa. Muchas, y muchos escriviéron de és∣sa matéria, peró las mas neçes∣sárias y ordinárias, yo las diré. El soldádo, quanto a lo prime∣ro, deue ser muy honróso, por∣que soldádo sin hónra sería de ningun provécho, pues ella es la espuela que le ha de hazér obrár lo, que no bástan prémi∣os, ni ruégos, ni amenázas de sus oficiáles. S. Many, and many haue written of this matter, but the most necessarie & ordinarie I will tell you. The soldier touching the first point, ought to be honorable, for a soldier without honor would profit little, because it is the spur which driues him on to effect that, which re∣wards are not sufficient to doe, nor intreaties, nor threatnings of his officers. Ca. Por esso, deve el soldado traér, siem∣pre escrita en la frénte aquella ❀ coplilla que díze, por la hon∣ra pon la vida, y pon las dos, honra y vida por tu Dios. C. Therefore the soldier should carrie al∣waies written in his forehead this verse, which saith, For thy honor hazard thy life, and hazard them both, honor and life for thy God. S. Lo segundo deve sér el soldado va∣liente no temeróso ni covarde. Sa. The second, the soldier ought to be va∣liant, and not fearful nor coward. C. ❀ El soldado couarde mas propia∣ménte se podría llamár espan∣tájo, al qual quando los páxa∣ros le pierden una vez el mié∣do, se asientan ençíma de el, o como el Rey de las ránas. Co A cowardly soldier may better be cal∣led, a thing made to feare away crowes, that when the birdes doe once cast off their feare of the same, they sit on the top of it, or as the king of frogs. S. Como es ésso de el Rey de las ránas? Sa. How is that of the king of frogs? C. Dizen, que en tiempo de mari ca∣stáña, las ránas desseáron tenér Rey como todas las demas na∣çiones, y pidiéron a Iupiter que era Rey de los dióces que les di∣ésse Rey el qual viéndo su neçe∣dád quiso burlár de ellas, y díxo les que para un dia señaládo les daría Rey, ellas le esperávan con grande alegría, y venído aquel diá, saliéron todas, de sus casas, muy compuestas, como conve∣nía para reçebír a su réy y pusié∣ron se en la superfiçie de el água esperando; en este tiempo Iupi∣ter arrojó desde el çielo, vn gran madéro, que dió con el, en la la∣guna donde, ellas estávā, tan grā golpe, y hízo tan gran ruído que ellas fuéron todas turbadas, y a∣sombradas, y unas por aquí, y otras por alli, cada una huyó a su casa, sin osár llegár, a hazér a su rey el devído acatamiénto, ni sa∣lír fuera en muchos dias quedó se el madéro nadándo ençima de el agua, y ellas con tanto te∣mór
de vér cosa tan grande, que ninguna osáva salír fuera de su casa, y alli morían de hambre, ha∣sta que poco apoco fue saliéndo la mas esforçada, y siguiéndo la las demas, cada dia y'van perdi∣éndo mas el temór, y se y'van lle∣gando çerca de su rey, viendo le a el tan manso y que no se movía, ni les dezía mala palábra, al fin tanto continuáron y (como la mucha conversación es causa de menosprécio) se llegáron a su rey y viendo todas lo que éra, saltá∣ron ençíma de el, y començáron a cheriár y dar grandes risádas, haziéndo burla de su Rey, y de su temor passádo bolviéron pues, a ynsistír a Iupiter que en todo cáso les diésse Rey no tan mánso, si no que fuésse justiciéro, Iupiter viendo su neçia porfía les ymbió por Rey a la çigueña, la qual réy∣na hasta oy entre ellas, çebando se y comiendolas cada dia en pe∣na de su loca petiçión, pues pu∣diendo bivír libres quisiéron mas hazér se esclávas y mas vn Rey cruél, que mánso y benígno.
Co. They say, in olde time, when beastes could speake, the frogs desired to haue a king, as other nations had, and they requested Iupiter, which was king of the Gods, that he would giue them a king, which seeing their simplicitie, would needs mock them a little, and told them that by a day appointed, he would giue them a king: they waited for it, with great ioy, and the day being come, all of them came foorth out of their houses, well attired, as was fit for the receiuing of a king, and put themselues vpon the vpper part of the water waiting: then Iupiter casteth downe from heauen a great blocke, which lighted in the lake where they were: it gaue such a blow, and made such a noise, that they were all troubled, & amased; some this way, others that way, euery one ranne home to his house without daring to come neere, to make their due reuerence to their king, nor to come foorth a doores in many daies. The beame remai∣ned
there swimming vpon the water, & they with such feare, to see a thing so great, that none of them durst once go out of his dores, & therin they died with hunger, vntill that by little and little, the most hardiest of them went out, and the rest following, euery day they went more & more, loosing their fear, & they went neerer to their king seeing him so gentle, and that he moo∣ued not, nor said neuer an ill worde to them, in the end they cōtinued so long, and (as much familiaritie oftentimes breedes contempt) they approched to their king, & seeing all of thē what he was, they leaped vpon him, & they be∣gan to crook & to break out into great laughters, making a iest of their king, and of their own passed feare: they re∣turned afterward to importune Iupi∣ter, that by al meanes he woulde giue them a king, but not so still and quiet, but that he should be a iusticer; Iupi∣ter seeing their foolish importunitie, sent the Stork to them for a king, the which raigneth til this day among thē, fatting himselfe, and eating them vp euery day, as a punishment for their fonde request, when they might haue liued at libertie they woulde make themselues slaues, and rather set vp a cruell king, then a benigne and gentle. Sa. No ha estádo malo el quento, y me∣jór es la moralidád. Sa. The tale hath not beene ill, yet better is the morall thereof. Ca. Dexémos ésso aóra, y prosíga v.m. adelánte con su plática de el buen soldádo. Co. Let vs leaue this, and goe forward with your speech of the good souldier. Sa. Lo tercero que ha de tenér ha de ser gran sufridór de travájos, y para esto deve ser de rézia complexion. Sa. The third that he is to haue, is to be a great endurer of trauels, and for this he should be of a strong com∣plexion. Ca. Ya el que esso no tuviére, el diáblo ❀ le trúxo a la guérra, como dízen de el moço vergonçóso, que el diablo le trájo a paláçio. Co. And he that hath not this, the Diuell brought him to the warre, as it is said he brought the blushfaced yong man to the court. Sa. Deve tanbien ser muy obediénte a sus oficiáles, y que haga de bue∣na gana y sin mostrár mal Ro∣stro lo que le ordenáren siendo de el servício de la Réyna. Sa. He ought also to be very obedient to his officers, and that he performe that obedience with a good will, & with∣out shewing an ill countenance to that they shall ordaine, being for the Queenes seruice. Ca. Quiten le a la milicia la obedién∣çia
en los soldados, y bolver se ha en confusión Babilónica.
Co. Let them take away obedience in sol∣diers
in war, and it will turne to a Bablonicall confusion. Sa. Otras muchas particularidádes, ha de tenér el buen soldádo, que yo no quiero tratár aora, quien las qui siére vér, léa quatro o çinco tratádos que andan de ello en lengua Española vno de el capi∣tán Martin de Eguilúz y otro de Escalánte otro de don Fernando de Cordua, y otro de don Bernar∣dino de Mendóza, que alli lo verá bien pintádo. Sa. The good soldier is to haue many other particulars, which I will not nowe handle, whosoeuer will see them, let him reade fower or fiue treatises, which handle it in the Spanish toong, one of captaine Martin E∣guiluz, another of Escalante, ano∣ther of Don Fernando de Cor∣dua, and another of Don Bernar∣din Mendoza, there may it bee seene well set out. Ca. A qui buelve nuestro mosquetéro muy cabizbájo viéne, perdido deve de avér. Co. Here comes backe againe our musket∣tier, he comes hanging downe his head, it is likely he hath lost. Sa. A señór soldádo vna palabra. Sa. Ho Soldier a word with you. So. Dexe me v.m. señor Sarjento, basta me mi mala ventura. So. Let me alone Sergeant, it is enough that I haue ill lucke. Sa. Que ha sido, perdióse toda el ar∣mada? Sa. What hath happened, is all the fleete lost? So. No topára yo aqui aóra con el vel∣láco que este juego ynventó. So. I would not meete now with that vil∣laine that inuented this play. Sa. Que le quería dezír? Sa. What would you say to him? So. Reniego del diablo, si no le avía de hazér mas tajádas que púntos se han echádo en los dados des pues que el los ynventó. So. I renounce the deuill if I woulde not giue him more slashes then hath set pricks on dice, since he inuented them. Sa. ❀ Esso me parece echár la culpa de el asno a la aluárda quien le mandó a v.m. jugár? Sa. This seemes to me, to put the fault of the asse on the packesaddle. Who commanded you to play? So. El Diablo que no duerme, y anda tras hazérme desesperar para llevárme. So. The diuell which sleepes not, and fol∣lowes after mee to driue me into despaire, that he might carrie me away. Sa. Pues mire no le crea, sino quando venga, diga le que por aora no puede y'r, que está ocupado en serviçio de su magestad, que se buelva otro día, y si no quisiére deshagale la horquílla en la ca∣béça. Sa. Then marke what I say, do not beleeue him, but when he commeth tell him, that for this time you cannot goe, that you are imployed in her Ma∣iesties seruice, that he come another day, and if he will not, clap your mus∣ket staffe on his pate. So. Muy bueno va esso, estóy yo rabián∣do y esta se v.m. burlando de mi. So. This goes well, I stand raging, and you mocking. Sa. Mire, yo le daré un buen remédio tomo dos onças de jaráve de pa∣çiénçia, y quatro de unguénto de oluído y beualo todo, y con ello purgará éssa malenconía y que∣dará luego buéno. Sa. Behold, I will giue you a good remedie, Take two ounces of the sirrupe of patience, and fower ounces of the oile of forgetfulnesse, and drinke it off, and with this you shall purge this melancholy, and foorthwith you shall be well. So. Serán dos purgas una tras otra des∣pues
de purgada la bolsa pur∣gár el cuérpo.
So. That will be two purges one after ano∣other,
after the purse is purged to purge the bodie. Sa. Pues nunca ha oydo dezír, que un clavo sáca otro, y una máno la∣va otra y entrambas la cara. Sa. Haue you neuer heard, that one naile dri∣ueth out another, one hand washeth another, and both of them the face. Ca. Pues como se dió tan presto fin ala triste tragédia. Co. But how made you such a quicke ende of the sad tragedie? So. Yo les diré a vuestras merçédes co∣mo fue, el me dió a parár a on∣ze, paré le quatro reales, echó∣me un enquentro, y tirómelos. So. I will tell you how it was, he chaunced me a eleuen, I set him two shillings, he cast and drew them. Sa. Mal prinçipio. Sa. An ill beginning. So. Antes suelen dezír, que es buen pronóstico perdér la primer a mano. So. Rather they are woont to say, it is a good signe to loose the first hand. Ca. No ay regla tan generál que no tenga eçepçión. Co. There is no rule so generall which hath not some exception. So. Dióme a parar luego a doze, que es mi suerte, paréle ocho reá∣les, écho un azár, díxe repáro∣los, o torgó me el repáro, lançó el dádo, y echó otro azár. So. He chanced me forthwith twelue which is my chance, I set him fower shil∣lings, he cast a hazard, I said I set againe, he allowes of it, he throwes the dice, & casts another hazard. Sa. Pues pecadór, para que queríades mas de avér ganádo con quaren∣ta otros quarenta, que mercadér ay que gane a çiento por çien∣to? Sa. Why wretched sinner, what would you more then to gaine with fortie other fortie, what marchant is there which doth gaine a hundred for a hundred? So. Señor, yo no me contenté sino quí∣se arrancár las clavos de la mesa como dízen, y díxe siete y lle∣var, dixo me, digole, Relança y echa su suerte, y arrebuja cō todo ❀ ami dexóme del agalla, sin blanca como el diablo se apare∣cio a san Benito. So. I was not content but would pull in pee∣ces the nailes of the table as they say, and I saide I set seuen times so much as he drew, he said content, I saie content. He throwes againe the dice, & he drew vp al, and so he left meAs a fish. hanging on the gill, with∣out a farthing, as the diuell ap∣peared to Saint Benit. Ca. ❀ Siempre lo verá, que quien todo lo quiere todo lo pierde. Co. You shall alwaies see, he that all coue∣teth, all looseth. So. ❀Mas siempre despues de ydo el conéjo viene el consejo. So. But after the steede stollen, shut the stable doore. Sa. ❀ Aóra bien quien érra y se enmi∣énda a Dios se encomienda. Sa. Now he that erres and amends, to God himselfe commends. So. La enmiénda será empeñár el ca∣potíllo, para bolvérme a esqui∣tár si puedo. So. The mends wil be to pawne the cassock, to go again to quit my selfe if I can. Sa. Essa no será enmiénda sino obsti∣naçión. Sa. This will not be an amends but obsti∣nacie. So. ❀ Aqui perdí vna agúja, aqui la tengo de hallár. So. Heere lost I a needle, and heere hope I to finde it againe. Sa. No veis pecadór que se os cayó en la mar essa agúja, como la que∣reis hallár? Sa. Do you not see, that this needle fell into the sea, how will you now finde it?
So. Yo me tengo de yr a vna hechizéra, que me de vna sóga de ahorcá∣do, que dízen que es buena pa∣ra hazér ganár. So. I am to go to a witch that she may giue me a rope of a hanged man, which they say is good to make one winne. Ca. ❀ Castiga me mi madre y yo tróm∣pose las. Co. My mother doth chastice me, and I mocke and mewe at it. Sa. A ora señór vamos por aóra a me∣tér la guárdia, que despues se tratara de esso. Sa. Now sir, let vs go euen now to set the watch, for afterwards we will talke heereof. Ca. Vaya a llamar sus camarádas. Co. Go and call your Cameradoes. So. Yo voy, béso a vuéstras merçedes las manos. So. I go, I take my leaue of you. Ca. Yo tanbien quiero yr por mis ar∣mas. Co. I will also go for my armes. Sa. Yo me voy a la vandéra, alli espe∣raré. Sa. I goe to the colours, there will I tar∣rie. FINIS.
