20538 99846088 11029
AN ELEGIE VPON THE TRVELY LAMENTED Death of the Right Honorable Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knt. Master of the Rolles, And of Snt Katherins: AND One of His Majesties most Honorable Privy Counsell. Wept. by FRA: QVA. —Micat inter omnes, Iulium sidus, velut inter ignes Luna minores. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Marriot. 1636.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MOST WOR∣THY OF DOUBLE HONOR, The Lady CAESAR, Wife to the Right Honorable Sir JVLIVS CAESAR Knt: Late Mr. of the Rolles: AND One of His Majesties most Honora∣ble Privy Counsell. WEE are all prisoners for a debt we owe to Nature, commit∣ted to the Gaole of this tran∣sitory world: Some pay soo∣ner: Some later: All must pay. As yesterday, our Blessed Saviour paid it: To day your deare Husband paid it: A bitter example sweetly followed: He fol∣lowed
Him in his life: He followed Him in his death: and so close in both, that as in life, he was assuredly His by Grace, so in death he is most certainly His in Glo∣ry. Madam, my most entire affection hath performed this last service to his deare Remembrance, which I present to your Noble hands, beseeching Almigh∣ty God to comfort you, and hereafter to raise you to the same pitch of Glory where he is. Madam, Your Lav faithfull servant, FRA: QUARLES.
TO MY HONO∣RABLE FRIENDS, Sir CHARLES CaeSAR Knight, Sir IOHN CaeSAR Knight, ROBERT CaeSAR Esquire. You Noble Brothers, GIve me leave to make you Partners in my Dedica∣tion with this honoura∣ble Lady, as she is Part∣ner in your Losse: How much I am bound to this service, I appeale to you: How much my expressions come short of his merit, I appeale to the world. His worth and my grief, require stupifaction rather then lan∣guage: Leves loquuntur; ingentes stu∣pent.
He hath left you the rich Inhe∣ritance of a rare example, which if you truely follow, shall follow you to that glory which hee enjoyes, whose gray hairs you have brought in peace and honor to the ground. The servant of his memory, and your vertues, FRA: QVA.
An Elegie. LEt such invoke the Muses that have Art, To broach their studied tears, & get by heart Their ill-weigh'd sorrows; that can scrue their brains To any tuneing; from Threnodian straines, To love-sick Sonets; and from thence, can call Their fancies to a light-foot Madrigall: Let those invoke, whose mercenary' Affections Are dry, and cannot give, without directions From moist Melpomenè, but stick the Herse With a faire texted lamentable verse, More sorry then the Makers, trickt with flowers Of bare Invention, which the twilight showers Of Nature ne'r bedew'd; Let such as they Invoke the Muses, whilst we cut our way
Through these our Alpine griefes, and sadly rise With the sharp vinegre of suffused eyes: Our high spring-tides are full, no need to borrow A dropt' encrease the deluge of our sorrow. O were the triviall subject of our Tears A private losse, where one dull Mourner beares His single load, ingenious Grief might find A golden Meane, and meanes to be confin'd: A privat sorrow gains a soone reliefe, And griefe not Common, is a common griefe: But where a sad calamity shall presse The publique shoulders, what, ô what redresse Can full complaints expect? What Member, first, Shall help to binde, when every Member's burst? Such are our sorrows; such disasters now Enforce our melting souls to overflow The banks of swelling Passion, which appeares A troubled Sea of Epidemick teares.
O that the hearts of men had equall scales, To weigh that losse which my sad heart bewailes! Tis not a Father, or a Friend, or One, Whose death soft Nature bids us to bemone, Which we lament; that sorrow would extend But to our selves, and with our selves would end: Such losse is load enough; but may be borne On well prepared shoulders, and outworne: But this, ô this exceeds; where every brest, Which hates not Vertue, hath a Interest. The Church hath lost a Patron; and the State Bewailes an honourable Potentate; The King, a Counsellour; the Court Of Conscience, a just Iudge; the greater Sort, A sweet familiar; what the Poore has lost, Reader, the Poore shall tell thee to their cost. He was the Cripples Staffe; the blind mans Eye, The Lawyers Curb, the Clients Chauncery.
He priz'd the world, with things that had no price A Paul to vertue, and a Saul to vice; A painfull Planter, for the poore to gather; The Widows Husband and the Orphans Father. 'Tis He, 'tis He, whose honorable Dust Our eyes embalme, and tender to the trust Of thanklesse earth, whose relamented death Estates our griefe, and lends a secret breath To our faint Quill. 'Tis He, whose righteous Balance did while-ere Deale Iustice so, as if Astraea were Return'd from heav'n, or Saturns conqu'ring hand Had new regain'd his long usurp'd Command From his deposed Son: His heart was Stone To pleading Vice, and Wax to every Grone: His Wisdome, Bounty, Love, and Zeale did rise, Like those foure Springs, that watred Paradise, And with their fruitfull Tides did overflow
This glorious Island, on whose banks doe grow Faire Grifit of Honor, fragrant Flow'rs of Peace, Full Crops of plenty, laden with increase. Who shares not in our griefe? what eye forbeares To be a willing Partner in our teares? What friend of Goodnesse will not claime a part In our great losse? or not entaile his heart To plenteous Passion so, that Babes unborne May hold our Lordships with a Clause to mourne: But stay! what need, what need we presse a teare, When every eye becomes a Volunteire? Thus wrapt in shades of night, in sheets of Lead, See, see, our noble Senator lies dead; Whom Art and Nature, and diviner Grace, Made far more honourable then his place: His earth-transcending thoughts, thought scorn to take Joy in earths Honor, where few years could make So flat a Period: His aspiring mind
Was free of heav'n, disdain'd to be confin'd; Who finding earth accustom'd to deprive Of Honor giv'n (not having more to give) He bid Goodnight, and sweetly fell asleep, So left the world, so left us here to weep. Thus dy'd our noble Caesar, whose high story Of earths Advancement prov'd his step to Glory; Our joys goe with him, whilst sad we return To lay his Ashes in his peacefull Vrne. Rest glorious Soule, (whose now untwisted Cable Has past the Needles eye) whilst we bedable Our cheeks in Brine, that ev'n almost repine At those eternall joyes which now are thine; O pardon those, whose floods of nature would Ev'n waft thee from thy Glory, if they could, And land thee in this Vale of Teares, to tast That bitter Potion that thy soule has past. But we have done; our whining breath shall cease
Longer to vi'late thy invi'late peace. Now blessed Saint, enjoy the free Reward Of all thy works; Possesse those Ioyes prepar'd For thy faire Soule; put on th'eternall Wreath Of glory, promis'd to thy faithfull death, Repleat thy self with everlasting Manna, And let thy voice exchange her late Hosanna For joyfull Allelujahs, now a Guest Call'd to the Lambs perpetuall Mariage feast. FINIS.
